The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Geometry-Disentangled Representation for Complementary
Understanding of 3D Object Point Cloud
Mutian Xu 1 2∗ , Junhao Zhang 1∗ , Zhipeng Zhou 1 , Mingye Xu 1 3 ,
Xiaojuan Qi 2 , Yu Qiao 1†
1

Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
The University of Hong Kong
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
mino1018@outlook.com, {zhangjh, zp.zhou, my.xu}@siat.ac.cn, xjqi@eee.hku.hk, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
Abstract
In 2D image processing, some attempts decompose images
into high and low frequency components for describing edge
and smooth parts respectively. Similarly, the contour and flat
area of 3D objects, such as the boundary and seat area of
a chair, describe different but also complementary geometries. However, such investigation is lost in previous deep
networks that understand point clouds by directly treating all
points or local patches equally. To solve this problem, we propose Geometry-Disentangled Attention Network (GDANet).
GDANet introduces Geometry-Disentangle Module to dynamically disentangle point clouds into the contour and flat
part of 3D objects, respectively denoted by sharp and gentle
variation components. Then GDANet exploits Sharp-Gentle
Complementary Attention Module that regards the features
from sharp and gentle variation components as two holistic
representations, and pays different attentions to them while
fusing them respectively with original point cloud features.
In this way, our method captures and refines the holistic
and complementary 3D geometric semantics from two distinct disentangled components to supplement the local information. Extensive experiments on 3D object classification and segmentation benchmarks demonstrate that GDANet
achieves the state-of-the-arts with fewer parameters. Code is
released on https://github.com/mutianxu/GDANet.

1

Figure 1: Examples of 3D objects, where sharp-variation
component describes the contour areas, and gentle-variation
component denotes the flat areas. Our method regards the
features from these two disentangled components as two
holistic representations, i.e., each point of the original point
cloud is linked with all points of sharp and gentle variation
components. This operation integrates complementary geometric information from two disentangled components.

1991), whose main idea is to learn a spatial encoding of each
point and then aggregate all point features to a global point
cloud signature. PointNet++ (Qi et al. 2017b) adopts a hierarchical encoder-decoder structure to consider local regions,
which downsamples point clouds in layers and gradually interpolates them to the original resolution. From another perspective, some recent efforts extend regular grid convolution
(Xu et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Thomas et al. 2019) on irregular 3D point cloud configuration.
To fully utilize geometric information, some attempts
(Wang et al. 2019b; Lan et al. 2019) capture local geometric
relations among center points and its neighbors. However,
these works treat all points or local patches equally, which
are entangled together with large redundancy, making it hard
to capture the most related and key geometric interest to the
network. Moreover, previous operations only capture the geometric information in local areas.
To remedy these defects, we need to disentangle point
clouds into distinct components and learn the few-redundant
information represented by these holistic components. In
image processing, some attempts collect and combine the
high-frequency (edge) and low-frequency (smooth) components with distinct characteristics filtered through digital signal processing. Similarly, the contour areas of 3D objects
delineating skeletons provide basic structural information,

Introduction

The capacity to analyze and comprehend 3D point clouds
receives interests in computer vision community due to its
wide applications in autonomous driving and robotics (Rusu
et al. 2008; Qi et al. 2018). Recent studies explore deep
learning methods to understand 3D point clouds inspired by
their great success in computer vision applications (He et al.
2015, 2016). Deep networks (Guo et al. 2016) can extract
effective semantics of 3D point clouds with layered operations, in contrast to low-level handcrafted shape descriptors.
The pioneer work PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) directly processes 3D points by Multi-layer Perceptrons(MLPs) (Hornik
∗

M. Xu and J. Zhang contribute equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3056

