The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Goten: GPU-Outsourcing Trusted Execution of Neural Network Training
Lucien K. L. Ng,1 Sherman S. M. Chow,1 Anna P. Y. Woo,1 Donald P. H. Wong,1 Yongjun Zhao2
1

2

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
Strategic Centre for Research in Privacy-Preserving Technologies & Systems, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{luciengkl, sherman, wpy018, wph019}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, yongjun.zhao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

image analysis (cf., decision-tree classifiers (Tai et al. 2017;
Ma et al. 2021)), and child exploitation imagery (CEI) detection (cf., PhotoDNA1 by Microsoft, which simply compares
the hashes of the images) (Wagh et al. 2021). Their success
requires voluminous data, but stringent privacy regulations
are curbing data collection. This motivates a flurry of research in privacy-preserving machine-learning algorithms in
recent years, such as private inference (Chandran et al. 2019;
Wong et al. 2020; Ng and Chow 2021). Private training is
much more complicated, as indirectly reflected by the fact
that recent solutions (e.g., (Mohassel and Rindal 2018)) resort to the secure multi-server computation model, requiring the servers (up to four (Chaudhari, Rachuri, and Suresh
2020)) to not collude with each other. This model enables
processing private data via lightweight techniques, such
as secret sharing, in contrast to single-server approaches
(that often use homomorphic encryption). Nevertheless, it is
still orders of magnitude slower than plaintext computation.
Falcon (Wagh et al. 2021), the state-of-the-art using three
servers, takes weeks to train a neural network for classifying
CIFAR-10, a medium-level image classification dataset.
We note that no existing private training approaches can
leverage GPU, albeit being a usual practice in (plaintext)
DNN training. Meanwhile, we see a trend in using trusted
execution environments (TEEs) to minimize the use of cryptography in processing private data (Shaon et al. 2017;
Hynes, Cheng, and Song 2018). We are thus intrigued to ask:

Deep learning unlocks applications with societal impacts,
e.g., detecting child exploitation imagery and genomic analysis of rare diseases. Deployment, however, needs compliance
with stringent privacy regulations. Training algorithms that
preserve the privacy of training data are in pressing need.
Purely cryptographic approaches can protect privacy, but they
are still costly, even when they rely on two or more noncolluding servers. Seemingly-“trivial” operations in plaintext quickly become prohibitively inefficient when a series
of them are “crypto-processed,” e.g., (dynamic) quantization
for ensuring the intermediate values would not overflow.
Slalom, recently proposed by Tramèr and Boneh, is the first
solution that leverages both GPU (for efficient batch computation) and a trusted execution environment (TEE) (for minimizing the use of cryptography). Roughly, it works by a lot
of pre-computation over known and fixed weights, and hence
it only supports private inference. Five related problems for
private training are left unaddressed.
Goten, our privacy-preserving training and prediction framework, tackles all five problems simultaneously via our careful design over the “mismatched” cryptographic and GPU
data types (due to the tension between precision and efficiency) and our round-optimal GPU-outsourcing protocol
(hence minimizing the communication cost between servers).
It 1) stochastically trains a low-bitwidth yet accurate model,
2) supports dynamic quantization (a challenge left by
Slalom), 3) minimizes the memory-swapping overhead of the
memory-limited TEE and its communication with GPU, 4)
crypto-protects the (dynamic) model weight from untrusted
GPU, and 5) outperforms a pure-TEE system, even without
pre-computation (needed by Slalom). As a baseline, we build
CaffeScone that secures Caffe using TEE but not GPU; Goten
shows a 6.84× speed-up of the whole VGG-11. Goten also
outperforms Falcon proposed by Wagh et al., the latest secure multi-server cryptographic solution, by 132.64× using
VGG-11. Lastly, we demonstrate Goten’s efficacy in training
models for breast cancer diagnosis over sensitive images.

Can we support DNN training (and prediction) by using
TEE and untrusted GPU while preserving the privacy
of all stakeholders? How much speedup can we gain?
The security guarantee of TEE is bounded within the CPU
and its fixed memory. It is non-trivial to use GPU for processing private data efficiently. Specifically, GPU does not
natively support cryptographic operations over a finite field.

Solving Five (Open) Problems in One Scheme

Introduction

To better understand the challenges in solving the above
problems, we revisit how Slalom (Tramèr and Boneh 2019),
the state-of-the-art TEE+GPU solution, performs private
prediction, and why it fails to support private training. The
core idea of Slalom can be described in simple terms. Firstly,

Advances in data science are undoubtedly changing our
lives. In particular, deep neural networks (DNN) show unprecedented performance in many life-changing applications, such as genomic analysis of rare diseases, medical
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14876

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/photodna

