The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Modulated Loss for Rotated Object Detection
Wen Qian 1,2 , Xue Yang3,4 , Silong Peng1,2, * , Junchi Yan3,4 , Yue Guo1,2
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{qianwen2018, silong.peng, guoyue2013}@ia.ac.cn, {yangxue-2019-sjtu, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Popular rotated detection methods usually use five parameters (coordinates of the central point, width, height, and rotation angle) or eight parameters (coordinates of four vertices) to describe the rotated bounding box and `1 loss as
the loss function. In this paper, we argue that the aforementioned integration can cause training instability and performance degeneration. The main reason is the discontinuity of
loss which is caused by the contradiction between the definition of the rotated bounding box and the loss function. We
refer to the above issues as rotation sensitivity error (RSE)
and propose a modulated rotation loss to dismiss the discontinuity of loss. The modulated rotation loss can achieve
consistent improvement on the five parameter methods and
the eight parameter methods. Experimental results using one
stage and two stages detectors demonstrate the effectiveness of our loss. The integrated network achieves competitive performances on several benchmarks including DOTA
and UCAS AOD. The code is available at https://github.com/
yangxue0827/RotationDetection.

(a) RetinaNet-H (baseline)

(b) The proposed RSDet

Figure 1: Detection results before and after solving the RSE
problem with RSDet. The red rectangles in (a) represent
failed examples due to the discontinuity of loss.

these two kinds of detectors both suffer from the loss discontinuity.
Firstly, the discontinuity of loss in five-parameter methods is mainly caused by the angle parameter. The loss value
jumps when the angle reaches its range boundary, as shown
in Fig. 2: a horizontal rectangle is respectively rotated one
degree clockwise and counterclockwise to get the ground
truth and the prediction box. The location of the reference
rectangle has only been slightly moved, but its angle changes
a lot due to the angular periodicity. Moreover, the height and
width are also exchanged according to the five-parameter
definition method commonly used by OpenCV. Moreover,
in the five-parameter system, parameters i.e. angle, width,
height, and center point have different measurement units,
and show rather different relations against the Intersection
over Union (IoU) (see Fig. 5). Simply adding them up for
inconsistent regression can hurt performance.
Secondly, the discontinuity of loss also exists in the eightparameter methods, although parameters in this method denote coordinate value with no ambiguity. The discontinuity of loss in eight-parameter can be seen in Fig. 2: Starting
from the most left corner, points are clockwise defined. then
we can get a → b → c → d and d → a → b → c to
describe the red rectangle and green rectangle respectively.
If the loss is calculated directly based on the corresponding
order of the points, the loss is huge when the ground-truth

Introduction
Object detection approaches can generally be divided into
horizontal object detectors and rotated object detectors according to the description of the bounding box. Specifically, horizontal detectors, by which all the bounding boxes
are set in the horizontal direction, are often more suitable
for general natural scene images such as COCO (Lin et al.
2014) and Pascal VOC (Everingham et al. 2010). In contrast, more accurate detection is often needed on occasions
such as scene text, aerial imagery, face, and license plate.
Until now, many rotated object detection benchmarks such
as aerial dataset (DOTA (Xia et al. 2018), DIOR (Li et al.
2019b), HRSC2016 (Liu et al. 2017)), scene text dataset (ICDAR2015 (Karatzas et al. 2015), ICDAR2017 (Gomez et al.
2017)) have been published. The existing region-based rotated object detectors usually regress five parameters (Yang
et al. 2019b, 2018b; Jiang et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2018) or
eight parameters (Xu et al. 2020; Liao et al. 2018; Zhou et al.
2017; Zhang et al. 2019; He et al. 2017) to describe rotated
bounding boxes and use `1 -loss as loss functions. However,
* Corresponding author is Silong Peng.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2458

