The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Co-GAT: A Co-Interactive Graph Attention Network for Joint Dialog Act
Recognition and Sentiment Classification
Libo Qin, Zhouyang Li, Wanxiang Che,∗ Minheng Ni, Ting Liu
Research Center for Social Computing and Information Retrieval,
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
{lbqin, zhouyangli, car, mhni, tliu}@ir.hit.edu.cn

Abstract

s1

d3

In a dialog system, dialog act recognition and sentiment classification are two correlative tasks to capture speakers’ intentions, where dialog act and sentiment can indicate the explicit
and the implicit intentions separately. The dialog context information (contextual information) and the mutual interaction
information are two key factors that contribute to the two related tasks. Unfortunately, none of the existing approaches
consider the two important sources of information simultaneously. In this paper, we propose a Co-Interactive Graph
Attention Network (Co-GAT) to jointly perform the two tasks.
The core module is a proposed co-interactive graph interaction
layer where a cross-utterances connection and a cross-tasks
connection are constructed and iteratively updated with each
other, achieving to consider the two types of information simultaneously. Experimental results on two public datasets
show that our model successfully captures the two sources of
information and achieve the state-of-the-art performance. In
addition, we find that the contributions from the contextual
and mutual interaction information do not fully overlap with
contextualized word representations (BERT, Roberta, XLNet).

s2

d4
d1

s3
s4

d2
(a)

s1

s1

d3

s2

d4
d1

d3
s3
s4

d2
(b)

s2

d4
d1

s3
s4

d2
(c)

Figure 1: Methods for Joint DAR and SC. Previous work
either incorporate the mutual information (a), or leverage the
contextual information (b). Our co-interactive graph interaction method can leverage both the two sources of information
(c). s denotes sentiment representation and d denotes dialog
act representation.

Introduction
Dialog act recognition (DAR) and sentiment classification
(SC) are two correlative tasks to correctly understand speakers’ utterances in a dialog system (Cerisara et al. 2018; Lin,
Xu, and Zhang 2020; Qin et al. 2020a). DAR aims to attach
semantic labels to each utterance in a dialog which represent the underlying intentions. Meanwhile, SC can detect the
sentiments in utterances which can help to capture speakers’
implicit intentions. More specifically, DAR can be treated
as a sequence classification task that maps the utterances
sequence (u1 , u2 ..., uN ) to the corresponding utterances sed
quence DA label (y1d , y2d , ..., yN
), where N is the number of
utterances in dialog. Similarly, SC can be also seen as an
utterance-level sequence classification problem to predict the
s
).
corresponding utterances sentiment label (y1s , y2s , ..., yN
Intuitively, there are two key factors that contribute to the
dialog act recognition and sentiment prediction. One is the
mutual interaction information across two tasks and the other
is the contextual information across utterances in a dialogue.
∗

corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13709

As illustrated in Figure 2, to predict the sentiment label of
User B, annotated with Negative, its mutual interaction
information (i.e. Agreement DA label) and contextual information (i.e. sentiment label of User A) contribute a lot
to the final prediction. The reason is Agreement means
the User B agrees with previous User A and hence the
User B sentiment label tends to be Negative, the same
with the User A sentiment label (Negative). Similarly,
knowing the mutual sentiment interaction information and
the contextual information also contributes to the DA prediction. Thus, it’s critical to take the two sources of information
into account.
To this end, Cerisara et al. (2018) proposes a multi-task
framework to jointly model the two tasks, which can implicitly extract the shared mutual interaction information, but fail
to effectively capture the contextual information, which is
shown in Figure 1(a). Kim and Kim (2018) explicitly leverage the previous act information to guide the current DA
prediction, which captures the contextual information, which
is shown in Figure 1(b). However, the model ignores the
mutual interaction information, which can be used for promoting the two tasks. Recently, Qin et al. (2020a) propose a
pipeline method (DCR-Net) to incorporate the two types of
information. In DCR-Net, a hierarchical encoder is proposed
to capture the contextual information, followed then by a
relation layer to consider the mutual interaction information.
Although DCR-Net has achieved good performance, we argue that the pipeline method suffers from one major issue:

