The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-type Disentanglement without Adversarial Training
Lei Sha, Thomas Lukasiewicz
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{lei.sha, thomas.lukasiewicz} @cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

well as the pose of human face 3D-rendered images by maximizing the mutual information between the latent variable
and the generator. Furthermore, there is previous research
that tends to completely separate the latent space into disentangled components. For example, John et al. (2019) use
multiple adversarial optimizers to decrease the dependency
between the latent vectors of style and content.
A severe limitation in previous works is adversarial training, which is always difficult to train and usually requires
many resources. Especially when we are extracting multiple
style vectors and each of them represents a specific feature,
then for each kind of feature, there needs to be a discriminator, according to John et al. (2019). Therefore, a generator
with so many discriminators will make the training process
extremely complicated.
In this paper, we distinguish the concepts of style type
and value: (1) a style type is a style class that represents a
specific feature of text or an image, e.g., sentiment, tense, or
face direction; and (2) a style value is one of the different values within a style type, e.g., sentiment (positive/negative), or
tense (past/now/future). We propose a unified distributioncontrolling method that gives a unique representation to each
style value in each style type. We assume that the representations of each style value are sampled from separate Gaussian
distributions. Then, we generate multiple style vectors (for
different style types) and a content vector using the input
text, and force the style vectors to be close to the groundtruth style-value distributions. To ensure that the semantic
information is not lost, we sample a style vector from the
ground-truth style-value distribution for each style type, and
combine all the style vectors and the content vector into
one vector. Then, we force the combined vector to reconstruct the original sentence. To avoid adversarial training, we
propose a loss function for style-content disentanglement to
make it more efficient, which is applicable to both vanilla
and variational autoencoders. We further propose loss functions for the disentanglement among multiple style types. In
addition, we point out a severe problem in multi-type disentanglement, which is called training bias. We prove mathematically that our multi-type disentanglement loss function
can alleviate the training bias problem.
We conducted experiments on two datasets: Yelp Service Reviews (Shen et al. 2017) and Amazon Product Reviews (Fu et al. 2018). The experimental results show that

Controlling the style of natural language by disentangling the
latent space is an important step towards interpretable machine learning. After the latent space is disentangled, the style
of a sentence can be transformed by tuning the style representation without affecting other features of the sentence. Previous works usually use adversarial training to guarantee that
disentangled vectors do not affect each other. However, adversarial methods are difficult to train. Especially when there
are multiple features (e.g., sentiment, or tense, which we call
style types in this paper), each feature requires a separate
discriminator for extracting a disentangled style vector corresponding to that feature. In this paper, we propose a unified
distribution-controlling method, which provides each specific
style value (the value of style types, e.g., positive sentiment,
or past tense) with a unique representation. This method contributes a solid theoretical basis to avoid adversarial training
in multi-type disentanglement. We also propose multiple loss
functions to achieve a style-content disentanglement as well
as a disentanglement among multiple style types. In addition, we observe that if two different style types always have
some specific style values that occur together in the dataset,
they will affect each other when transferring the style values. We call this phenomenon training bias , and we propose
a loss function to alleviate such training bias while disentangling multiple types. We conduct experiments on two datasets
(Yelp service reviews and Amazon product reviews) to evaluate the style-disentangling effect and the unsupervised styletransfer performance on two style types: sentiment and tense.
The experimental results show the effectiveness of our model.

1

Introduction

Changing some specific features (such as sentiment, tense,
or human face pose) of a given text or image is very important in many applications. These features are usually embedded in the weights of “black-box” deep neural networks.
Hence, disentangling the latent space of the neural network
becomes a valuable step of such tasks.
In the early years, researchers tried to use some disentangled latent variables to control latent features of images and
text. For example, Chen et al. (2016) use scalar latent variables to control the writing style for handwritten digits as
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9515

