The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Physarum Powered Differentiable Linear Programming Layers and Applications
Zihang Meng, 1 Sathya N. Ravi, 2 Vikas Singh 1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Illinois at Chicago
zihangm@cs.wisc.edu, sathya@uic.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
2

Abstract

settings (e.g., in vision), there are also numerous instances
where LP duality inspired schemes (such as primal-dual
methods) have led to competitive and/or more general solution schemes.

Consider a learning algorithm, which involves an internal call
to an optimization routine such as a generalized eigenvalue
problem, a cone programming problem or even sorting. Integrating such a method as a layer(s) within a trainable deep
neural network (DNN) in an efficient and numerically stable
way is not straightforward – for instance, only recently, strategies have emerged for eigendecomposition and differentiable
sorting. We propose an efficient and differentiable solver for
general linear programming problems which can be used in a
plug and play manner within DNNs as a layer. Our development is inspired by a fascinating but not widely used link between dynamics of slime mold (physarum) and optimization
schemes such as steepest descent. We describe our development and show the use of our solver in a video segmentation
task and meta-learning for few-shot learning. We review the
existing results and provide a technical analysis describing its
applicability for our use cases. Our solver performs comparably with a customized projected gradient descent method on
the first task and outperforms the differentiable CVXPY-SCS
solver on the second task. Experiments show that our solver
converges quickly without the need for a feasible initial point.
Our proposal is easy to implement and can easily serve as layers whenever a learning procedure needs a fast approximate
solution to a LP, within a larger network.

1

Are LPs needed in modern learning problems? Within
the last decade, deep neural networks have come to dominate
many AI problems. So, an LP (or other well-studied numerical algorithms/methods) will rarely provide an end-to-end
model for a practical problem. Nonetheless, similar to how
various linear algebra routines such as eigendecomposition
still play a key role as a sub-routine in modern learning tasks,
LP type models are still prevalent in numerous pipelines
in machine learning. For instance, consider a representation
learner defined by taking our favorite off-the-shelf architecture where the representations are used to setup the cost for
a “matching” problem (commonly written as a LP). Then,
once a matching problem is solved, we route that output to
pass through downstream layers and finally the loss is evaluated. Alternatively, consider the case where we must reason
about (or group) a set of low-level primitives, via solving
an assignment problem, to define a higher order semantic
construct as is often the case in capsule networks (Sabour,
Frosst, and Hinton 2017). Or, our architecture involves estimating the Optimal transport distance (Salimans et al. 2018;
Bousquet et al. 2017; Sanjabi et al. 2018) where the cost
matrix depends on the outputs of previous layers in a network. Such a module (rather, its approximations) lie at the
heart of many popular methods for training generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou
2017). Separately, confidence calibration is becoming an important issue in deep learning (Guo et al. 2017; Nixon et al.
2019);several forms of calibration involve solutions to LPs.
One approach for dealing with such a “in the loop” algorithmic procedure (Amos and Kolter 2017) is to treat it as a
general two-level optimization. When the feasible set of the
LP is a box/simplex or can be represented using ratio type
functions (Ravi et al. 2020), it is possible to unroll the optimization with some careful modifications of existing subroutines such as projections. This is not as straightforward
in general where one must also concurrently perform projections on to the feasible set. An ideal solution would be a
LP module that could be used anywhere in our architecture:
one which takes its inputs from the previous layers and feeds
into subsequent layers in the network.

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning can be expressed as,
or otherwise involve as a sub-routine, the minimization of a
linear function constrained by a set of linear equality and inequality constraints, also known as a Linear Program (LP).
LPs can be solved efficiently even when the problem sizes
are large, and industrial strength solvers are readily available. Over the last twenty years, direct applications of LPs in
machine learning and computer vision include image reconstruction (Tsuda and Rätsch 2004), denoising (Tavakoli and
Pourmohammad 2012), deconvolution (Ahmed, Recht, and
Romberg 2013) surface reconstruction (Grady 2008), graphical models (Ravikumar and Lafferty 2006), scene/view
understanding (Mauro et al. 2014), and numerous others.
While the use of specialized solvers based on combinatorial optimization rather than the direct use of a simplex or
interior point method has been more common in large scale
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8939

