The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inferring Emotion from Large-scale Internet Voice Data: A Semi-supervised
Curriculum Augmentation based Deep Learning Approach
Suping Zhou1 , Jia Jia12 * , Zhiyong Wu12 , Zhihan Yang12 , Yanfeng Wang3 ,
Wei Chen3 , Fanbo Meng3 , Shuo Huang1 , Jialie Shen4 , Xiaochuan Wang3
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
The Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University
2
Tsinghua-CUHK Joint Research Center for Media Sciences, Technologies and Systems,
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China
3
Sogou Corporation, Beijing, China, 4 Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, U.K
jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Effective emotion inference from user queries helps to give
a more personified response for Voice Dialogue Applications(VDAs). The tremendous amounts of VDA users bring in
diverse emotion expressions. How to achieve a high emotion
inferring performance from large-scale Internet Voice Data
in VDAs? Traditionally, researches on speech emotion recognition are based on acted voice datasets, which have limited speakers but strong and clear emotion expressions. Inspired by this, in this paper, we propose a novel approach
to leverage acted voice data with strong emotion expressions
to enhance large-scale unlabeled internet voice data with diverse emotion expressions for emotion inferring. Specifically,
we propose a novel semi-supervised multi-modal curriculum
augmentation deep learning framework. First, to learn more
general emotion cues, we adopt a curriculum learning based
epoch-wise training strategy, which trains our model guided
by strong and balanced emotion samples from acted voice
data and sub-sequently leverages weak and unbalanced emotion samples from internet voice data.Second, to employ more
diverse emotion expressions, we design a Multi-path Mixmatch Multimodal Deep Neural Network(MMMD), which
effectively learns feature representations for multiple modalities and trains labeled and unlabeled data in hybrid semisupervised methods for superior generalisation and robustness. Experiments on an internet voice dataset with 500,000
utterances show our method outperforms (+10.09% in terms
of F1) several alternative baselines, while an acted corpus
with 2,397 utterances contributes 4.35%. To further compare
our method with state-of-the-art techniques in traditionally
acted voice datasets, we also conduct experiments on public
dataset IEMOCAP. The results reveal the effectiveness of the
proposed approach.

Figure 1: The logical workflow of our framework.

user queries can be very helpful to understand users’ real
meanings and intents, and subsequently provide anthropomorphic answers. While the tremendous amounts of uncertain speakers with a great diversity of dialects, expression
preferences in VDAs benefit training in the deep learning
framework, it is still very difficult to accurately and comprehensively infer emotion due to the weak and unbalanced
emotion expressions. As reported by related works, the state
of the art techniques always suffer from low and instable performance when facing large-scale internet voice data from
VDAs(Wu et al. 2016) (Zhou et al. 2018b).
Driven by demand from real applications, considerable research development in speech emotion recognition has been
witnessed in previous decades. (Aguilar et al. 2019) propose
a hierarchical multimodal model including Modality-based
attention for multimodal emotion recognition. (Zhang et al.
2019) propose a f-Similarity Preservation Loss for deep metric learning with soft labels, and apply the proposed methods on the task of cross-corpus speech emotion recognition.
While these works based on acted voice data achieve good
performances inner dataset due to strong and clear emotion
expressions, they have limited generalization and robustness

Introduction
Driven by fast development of deep learning techniques,
smart Voice Dialogue Application (VDAs) brings great convenience to our daily life. Effective emotion inference from
* Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6039

