The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How to Train Your Agent to Read and Write
Li Liu,1,2∗ Mengge He,1∗ Guanghui Xu,1 Mingkui Tan,1,4† Qi Wu3
1

School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology,
2
Pazhou Laboratory, 3 University of Adelaide,
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{seliushiya, semenggehe, sexuguanghui}@mail.scut.edu.cn, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Reading and writing research papers is one of the most privileged abilities that a qualified researcher should master. However, it is difficult for new researchers (e.g., students) to fully
grasp this ability. It would be fascinating if we could train
an intelligent agent to help people read and summarize papers, and perhaps even discover and exploit the potential
knowledge clues to write novel papers. Although there have
been existing works focusing on summarizing (i.e., reading)
the knowledge in a given text or generating (i.e., writing) a
text based on the given knowledge, the ability of simultaneously reading and writing is still under development. Typically, this requires an agent to fully understand the knowledge
from the given text materials and generate correct and fluent novel paragraphs, which is very challenging in practice.
In this paper, we propose a Deep ReAder-Writer (DRAW)
network, which consists of a Reader that can extract knowledge graphs (KGs) from input paragraphs and discover potential knowledge, a graph-to-text Writer that generates a novel
paragraph, and a Reviewer that reviews the generated paragraph from three different aspects. Extensive experiments
show that our DRAW network outperforms considered baselines and several state-of-the-art methods on AGENDA and
M-AGENDA datasets. Our code and supplementary are released at https://github.com/menggehe/DRAW.

1

Knowledge Graph

Write

New Paragraph

Related Works

Scores

Figure 1: An intuitive understanding of our DRAW network.
First, the DRAW network reads multiple related works and
discovers potential knowledge among them. And then, it
writes a new paragraph based on knowledge graph. Last, it
reviews the output and uses feedback rewards to improve the
quality of writing.

Introduction

Currently, hundreds of papers are published online every day
even on small topics. However, a study (Wang et al. 2019)
shows that US scientists can only read 264 papers per year
on average. Thus, researchers are exhausted by following
the sharply increased numbers of papers, much less to understanding the research and coming up with new ideas to write
novel papers (Gopen and Ja 1990; Buenz 2019). In practice,
writing novel papers requires not only the abilities of reading
and reasoning but also the ability of creative thinking, which
is nontrivial for most fresh researchers (Xiao et al. 2020). It
would be fantastic if an agent could help people, especially
∗

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13397

new researchers, to read and write. However, building such
an agent encounters several challenges.
First, to understand multiple related works, the agent needs
to capture complex logic in the related works, which is nontrivial. Several knowledge extraction methods (Min et al.
2006; Gerber and Chai 2010; Yoshikawa et al. 2010) achieve
it by identifying entities in the texts, extracting the relationships between these entities, and representing them as a
knowledge graph (KG). However, they have trouble in discovering potential connections among these entities, which
hampers a comprehensive understanding of related works.
Second, after generating a KG, the agent is then required
to decode a fluent novel paragraph from the KG. In practice,
however, how to evaluate the quality of the generated texts
accurately is still an open problem. Existing methods (KoncelKedziorski et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019) adopt the teacherforcing scheme that aims to match the tokens in the generated
texts to the tokens in the target texts. However, these methods

