The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Policy Optimization as Online Learning with Mediator Feedback
Alberto Maria Metelli* , Matteo Papini* , Pierluca D’Oro, Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
{albertomaria.metelli, matteo.papini, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it, pierluca.doro@mail.polimi.it

feedback, i.e., observing the effects of the chosen actions.
The dilemma is addressed by minimizing the cumulative regret of the online performance w.r.t. the optimal one. The
most popular exploration strategies are based on the Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU, Lai and Robbins
1985), of which UCB1 (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer
2002) is the prototypical algorithm, and on Thompson Sampling (TS, Thompson 1933). Both suffer only sublinear regret (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002; Agrawal and
Goyal 2012; Kaufmann, Korda, and Munos 2012). TS typically performs better in practice (Chapelle and Li 2011),
but it is only computationally efficient in artificial settings (Kveton et al. 2019b). More recent randomized algorithms such as PHE (Perturbed History Exploration) (Kveton et al. 2019a) are able to match the theoretical and practical advantages of TS without the computational burden, and
with no assumptions on the payoff distribution.

Abstract
Policy Optimization (PO) is a widely used approach to address continuous control tasks. In this paper, we introduce
the notion of mediator feedback that frames PO as an online
learning problem over the policy space. The additional available information, compared to the standard bandit feedback,
allows reusing samples generated by one policy to estimate
the performance of other policies. Based on this observation,
we propose an algorithm, RANDomized-exploration policy
Optimization via Multiple Importance Sampling with Truncation (RANDOMIST), for regret minimization in PO, that
employs a randomized exploration strategy, differently from
the existing optimistic approaches. When the policy space is
finite, we show that under certain circumstances, it is possible
to achieve constant regret, while always enjoying logarithmic regret. We also derive problem-dependent regret lower
bounds. Then, we extend RANDOMIST to compact policy
spaces. Finally, we provide numerical simulations on finite
and compact policy spaces, in comparison with PO and bandit baselines.

1

The OFU principle has been applied to RL (Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer 2010) and recently also to PO (Chowdhury
and Gopalan 2019; Efroni et al. 2020), at the level of action selection. These methods are promising but limited to
finite actions. A different perspective is proposed by Papini et al. (2019), where the decision problem is not defined
over the agent’s actions but over the policy parameters. This
change of viewpoint allows exploiting the special structure
of the PO problem: for each policy, a sequence of states
and actions performed by the agent is collected, constituting,
alongside the rewards, a vastly richer signal than the simple
bandit feedback. In this paper, we call it mediator feedback
since this extra information acts as a mediator variable between the policy parameters and the return. OPTIMIST (Papini et al. 2019) is an OFU algorithm that uses Multiple Importance Sampling (MIS, Veach and Guibas 1995) to exploit
the mediator feedback, so that the results of one policy provide information on all the others. This allows, in principle, to optimize over an infinite policy space with only finite samples and no regularity assumptions on the underlying process. There are two important limitations in Papini
et al. (2019). First, the advantages of the mediator feedback
over the bandit feedback are not clear from a theoretical perspective since the regret of OPTIMIST is comparable with
that of UCB1 with finite policy space. Second, the policy
selection of OPTIMIST requires maximizing a non-convex
and non-differentiable index. In the continuous setting, this

Introduction

Policy Optimization (PO, Deisenroth, Neumann, and Peters
2013) is a family of Reinforcement Learning (RL, Sutton
and Barto 2018) algorithms based on the explicit optimization of the policy parameters. It represents the most promising approach for learning large-scale continuous control
tasks and has already achieved marvelous results in video
games (e.g., Vinyals et al. 2019) and robotics (e.g., Peng
et al. 2020). These achievements, however, rely on massive
amounts of simulation rollouts. The efficient use of experience data is essential both to reduce computational costs
and to make learning online from real interaction possible.
This is still largely an open problem and calls for better theoretical understanding. Any online-learning agent must face
the exploration-exploitation dilemma: whether to leverage
on its current knowledge to maximize performance or consider new alternatives. Fortunately, the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) literature (Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi 2012; Lattimore and Szepesvári 2018) provides a theoretical framework for the problem of efficient exploration under bandit
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8958

