The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PenDer: Incorporating Shape Constraints via Penalized Derivatives
Akhil Gupta,1 Lavanya Marla,1 Ruoyu Sun,1
Naman Shukla,2 Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson3
1

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA
2
Deepair LLC, Dallas, TX, USA
3
Imperial College London, London, UK
{akhilg3, lavanyam, ruoyus}@illinois.edu, naman@deepair.io, ak711@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract

properties (Groeneboom and Jongbloed 2014). In particular,
1-D shapes (Johnson and Jiang 2018) including monotonicity, convexity or concavity, diminishing or accelerating returns are fairly common in practice.
Shape behavior matching common beliefs improves
users’ trust and confidence in the AI-driven system and
increases interpretability. For example, an ML model for
screening loan applicants is expected to favor people with
higher credit score, all other features remaining same: leading to accountability on the part of financial institutions
while being fair to applicants. From a system designer’s perspective, shape constraints lead to effective regularization
and enhanced generalization to test data (Dugas et al. 2000).
They make the model resilient to noisy data by virtue of control over model behavior (Gupta et al. 2018).
To facilitate the discussion, we call an input feature k an
intended feature if the system designer requires the output
to follow a specified shape with respect to this feature. Like
Gupta et al. (2018), our notion of shape constraints is ceteris
paribus, i.e. the shape holds for changes in a single feature k
given other features remain constant. While constraints can
be defined on pairs of features that complement each other
(Cotter et al. 2019) giving rise to 2-D shape information, we
focus on 1-D shape constraints in this work (Fig. 1).
In this work, we show how 1-D shape constraints can
be incorporated via a simple regularization term without
significantly compromising the predictive power of neural
networks. More specifically, we propose a new approach
that consists of two steps: first, we introduce a new formulation that includes constraints on the derivatives (of different orders) of the objective function; second, we solve
this constrained problem by Augmented Lagrangian method
(ALM). We call it PenDer (Penalizing Derivatives), since
the resulting algorithm essentially penalizes the derivatives.
We present experimental results on two open-source datasets
and a real-world airline dataset, illustrating the effectiveness
of PenDer in the following aspects:

When deploying machine learning models in the real-world,
system designers may wish that models exhibit certain shape
behavior, i.e., model outputs follow a particular shape with
respect to input features. Trends such as monotonicity, convexity, diminishing or accelerating returns are some of the desired shapes. Presence of these shapes makes the model more
interpretable for the system designers, and adequately fair for
the customers. We notice that many such common shapes
are related to derivatives, and propose a new approach, PenDer (Penalizing Derivatives), which incorporates these shape
constraints by penalizing the derivatives. We further present
an Augmented Lagrangian Method (ALM) to solve this constrained optimization problem. Experiments on three realworld datasets illustrate that even though both PenDer and
state-of-the-art Lattice models achieve similar conformance
to shape, PenDer captures better sensitivity of prediction with
respect to intended features. We also demonstrate that PenDer
achieves better test performance than Lattice while enforcing
more desirable shape behavior.

Introduction
Questions around trust and interpretability in machine learning models are becoming increasingly relevant (Lipton
2016; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Doshi-Velez and
Kim 2017) as these tools are being widely used for highstakes decisions. Specifically, neural networks have shown
tremendous success across critical domains such as healthcare (Shahid, Rappon, and Berta 2019), finance (Guresen,
Kayakutlu, and Daim 2011; Nelson, Pereira, and de Oliveira
2017), pricing (Chiarazzo et al. 2014; Shukla et al. 2019),
and law systems (Aikenhead 1996). Due to the significant
societal implications involved, conformance to prior domain
knowledge (Feelders 2000) and ethical notions, compatibility with business regulations, and model interpretability are
actively desired by system designers. Meanwhile, users desire that the system is fair to their interests.
Even though real-world data has highly interactive features (Hall and Xue 2014), it is natural to possess a priori
intuition about shape trends between a subset of input features and the output. Shape constraints are a classic way to
characterize a function by whether its shape obeys certain

• First, we show PenDer learns neural networks that achieve
test performance close to standard neural nets while exhibiting desired shape behavior. In particular, our test performance is better than the state-of-the-art Lattice models
(Gupta et al. 2018; Fard et al. 2016).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Second, we demonstrate that Lattice models can be insen11536

