The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Complexity-Theoretic Analysis of Green Pickup-and-Delivery Problems
Xing Tan and Jimmy Xiangji Huang
Information Retrieval and Knowledge Management Research Lab
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
{xtan, jhuang}@yorku.ca

Abstract

However, due to the limited fuel capabilities of green vehicles, and the lack of the refueling infrastructures for these
vehicles, the practice of modern transport planning calls for
effective green-specific adaptation and mitigation.
A Green Pickup-and-Delivery problem (GPD) extends
PD, addressing in particular the constraints on driving range
of vehicles, and on the availability of refueling infrastructure for vehicles [Erdoğan and Miller-Hooks 2012; Demir,
Bektaş, and Laporte 2014]. Computationally, GPD adds
an additional, green, dimension of complexity to PD/VRP,
which are already NP-hard. Reasonably so, most current approaches solving GPD problems work on special application
cases [Eisner, Funke, and Storandt 2011; Lau et al. 2013;
Xiong et al. 2015], or are based on certain heuristics for approximate solutions [Ángel Felipe et al. 2014]. Examples
include using genetic algorithms [Xiao and Konak 2017],
evolutionary algorithms [Jemai, Zekri, and Mellouli 2012],
simulated annealing [Çağrı Koç and Karaoglan 2016], sampling [Montoya et al. 2016], and abstraction [Schönfelder
and Leucker 2015].
Despite the algorithmic progress, we ought to know at
the outset whether the green constraints themselves actually create another dimension of computational intractability. In this paper, we first cast GPD into its simplest form.
To be precise, the pickup-and-delivery part is reduced into
a polytime solvable Euler Tour. Accordingly the only possible source of computational intractability comes from the
green components, i.e., from the constraint that a vehicle
might need to get refilled before finishing its tour for accomplishing tasks. Next we consider applications of further constraints, on the total number of depots and fuel stations available, on bounded value of in-degree and out-degree of cities,
and on topological structure of tasks, attempting to construct
boundary intractable GPD subproblems. We report that the
green part in GPD is inherently intractable – all the nontrivially restricted subproblems considered are, either strongly
or weakly, NP-complete. When the topology of the task
graph in a GPD is a ring (so-called), a pseudo-polynomial
time algorithm solving the problem exists. Insight obtained
from this complexity-theoretic analysis would shed light for
a deeper understanding of GPD, and for better practice of
GPD heuristics development, an active research area with
many important applications in real world, potentially creating environmental, economic, and social impacts.

In a Green Pickup-and-Delivery problem (GPD), vehicles traveling in a transport network achieving pickup-anddelivery tasks are in particular subject to the two green constraints: limited vehicle fuel capacity thus short vehicle traveling range, and limited availability of refueling infrastructure
for the vehicles. GPD adds additional but probably insignificant computational complexity to the classic and already
NP-hard Pickup-and-Delivery problem and Vehicle Routing
Problem. Nevertheless, we demonstrate in this paper an inherent intractability of these green components themselves.
More precisely, we show that GPD problems whose total constraints are reduced to almost the green ones only, remain to
be NP-complete in the strong sense. We figure out a specifically constrained variant of GPD that, however, is weakly
NP-complete – a practical pseudo-polynomial time algorithm
solving the variant problem is identified. Insight obtained
from this complexity-theoretic analysis would shed light for a
deeper understanding of GPDs, and on better development of
heuristics for solving these problems, leading to promisingly
many real-world applications.

Introduction and Motivation
Pickup-and-Delivery problem (PD) is an important variant
of the classic Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) [Toth and
Vigo 2014; Savelsbergh and Sol 1995]. PD concerns construction of vehicle routes in a transportation network to satisfy requests in terms of picking up and delivering loads
(e.g., goods, packages, or passengers) between origin and
destination locations [Savelsbergh and Sol 1995]. The problem is closely related to several areas in AI including, for
example, planning and scheduling [Beck, Prosser, and Selensky 2003; Coltin and Veloso 2014], robotics [Gini 2017],
multi-agent systems [Vokřı́nek, Komenda, and Pěchouček
2010; Zhang and Shah 2016], and intelligent transportation
[Bistaffa, Farinelli, and Ramchurn 2015].
A lot of recent studies in VRP and PD have focused on
routing with vehicles powered by alternative energy sources
such as electricity, hydrogen, or natural gas. Road transport
with a more prevalent use of these so-called green vehicles
in partial replacement of fossil-fuel powered conventional
vehicles, reduces greenhouse gas emission, and creates positive impacts for environment, economy, and human health.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11990

