The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

District-Fair Participatory Budgeting
D Ellis Hershkowitz,1 Anson Kahng,1 Dominik Peters,2 Ariel D. Procaccia2
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
Harvard University

dhershko@cs.cmu.edu, akahng@cs.cmu.edu, dpeters@seas.harvard.edu, arielpro@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract

using some version of approval voting. Then, the district’s
budget is spent according to these votes. For instance, in
Paris a participatory budget is split between 20 districts (a.k.a.
arrondissements), constituents vote and then each district runs
a greedy algorithm to maximize the total social welfare — i.e.,
the total number of votes — of the funded projects.1
Having separate elections for each district leads to several
problems. Foremost, projects that are not local to a single
district cannot be accommodated. For this reason, Paris must
run an additional election for city-wide projects. However,
this splits the available budget for participatory budgeting
between district-level and city-wide elections in an ad hoc
manner, which is not informed by votes.2 Further, people
may have interests in multiple districts, such as those who
live and work in different districts. For this reason, Paris has
to allow residents to choose the district in which they vote.
Lastly, a project that only benefits voters at the edge of a
district may receive a number of votes that is not proportional
to the number of potential beneficiaries.
A simple solution to these problems is a single city-wide
election. However, such a voting scheme may result in unfair
outcomes. For instance, if votes are aggregated to maximize
social welfare (i.e., as is presently done in Paris on the district
level) then it is possible that some districts might have none
of their preferred projects funded despite deserving a large
proportion of the budget. Such outcomes are likely when
some districts are much more populous than others, in which
case projects local to small districts cannot gather sufficiently
many votes. Ideally, we would like a system that balances
the tradeoff between social welfare and fairness without an
arbitrary, pre-determined split between district-specific and
city-wide funding. This motivates our central research question:

Participatory budgeting is a method used by city governments
to select public projects to fund based on residents’ votes.
Many cities use participatory budgeting at a district level.
Typically, a budget is divided among districts proportionally
to their population, and each district holds an election over
local projects and then uses its budget to fund the projects
most preferred by its voters. However, district-level participatory budgeting can yield poor social welfare because it
does not necessarily fund projects supported across multiple
districts. On the other hand, decision making that only takes
global social welfare into account can be unfair to districts:
A social-welfare-maximizing solution might not fund any of
the projects preferred by a district, despite the fact that its
constituents pay taxes to the city. Thus, we study how to fairly
maximize social welfare in a participatory budgeting setting
with a single city-wide election. We propose a notion of fairness that guarantees each district at least as much welfare as it
would have received in a district-level election. We show that,
although optimizing social welfare subject to this notion of
fairness is NP-hard, we can efficiently construct a lottery over
welfare-optimal outcomes that is fair in expectation. Moreover, we show that, when we are allowed to slightly relax
fairness, we can efficiently compute a fair solution that is
welfare-maximizing, but which may overspend the budget.

Introduction
Participatory budgeting is a democratic approach to the
allocation of public funds. In the participatory budgeting
paradigm, city governments fund public projects based
on constituents’ votes. In contrast to budget committees,
which operate behind closed doors, participatory budgeting
promises to directly take the voices of the community into
account. Since 2014, Paris has allocated more than e100
million per year using constituents’ votes. Many other cities
around the globe — including Porto Alegre, New York City,
Boston, Chicago, San Francisco, Lisbon, Madrid, Seoul,
Chengdu, and Toronto — employ participatory budgeting
(Cabannes 2004, 2014; Aziz and Shah 2020).
Typically, participatory budgeting is used at a district-level.
Each district of the city is allotted a budget proportional to its
size. Constituents living in a given district vote on projects
such as park, road or school improvements local to the district,

How can we maximize social welfare in a way that is
fair to all districts?
Intuitively, a solution that is fair to all districts should
somehow represent each districts’ constituents. One way to
formalize this intuition is to stipulate that no district should
be able to obtain higher utility by purchasing projects with its
1

More specifically, projects are selected in descending order of
vote count until the budget runs out.
2
In 2016, this split in Paris was e64.3 million for district elections and e30 million for city-wide elections (Cabannes 2017).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5464

