The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contrastive Transformation for Self-supervised Correspondence Learning
Ning Wang1 , Wengang Zhou1,2 , Houqiang Li1,2
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
wn6149@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Unlabeled Videos

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the self-supervised learning of visual correspondence using unlabeled videos in the wild. Our
method simultaneously considers intra- and inter-video representation associations for reliable correspondence estimation.
The intra-video learning transforms the image contents across
frames within a single video via the frame pair-wise affinity.
To obtain the discriminative representation for instance-level
separation, we go beyond the intra-video analysis and construct the inter-video affinity to facilitate the contrastive transformation across different videos. By forcing the transformation consistency between intra- and inter-video levels, the
fine-grained correspondence associations are well preserved
and the instance-level feature discrimination is effectively reinforced. Our simple framework outperforms the recent selfsupervised correspondence methods on a range of visual tasks
including video object tracking (VOT), video object segmentation (VOS), pose keypoint tracking, etc. It is worth mentioning that our method also surpasses the fully-supervised
affinity representation (e.g., ResNet) and performs competitively against the recent fully-supervised algorithms designed
for the specific tasks (e.g., VOT and VOS).

Bi-directional
Transformation

Embedding
Space

......
Intra-video Transformation

Inter-video Transformation

Figure 1: The proposed approach targets at learning correspondence using unlabeled videos. Previous works mainly
focus on the content transformation within each video clip.
Our framework simultaneously tracks (intra-video level) and
spreads (inter-video level) the feature embeddings to preserve the fine-grained matching capability while encouraging the contrastive embedding learning.

Introduction
in both forward and backward tracking trajectories. The bidirectional matching is realized via a frame-level affinity
matrix, which represents the pixel pair-wise similarity between two frames. In (Vondrick et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019),
this affinity is also utilized to achieve the content transformation between two frames for self-supervision. A straightforward transformation within videos is the color/RGB information. More specifically, the pixel colors in a target
frame can be “copied” (or transformed) from the pixels in
a reference frame. By minimizing the differences between
the transformed and the true colors of the target frame, the
backbone network is forced to learn robust feature embeddings for identifying correspondence across frames in a selfsupervised manner.
In spite of the impressive performance, existing unsupervised correspondence algorithms put all the emphasis on
the intra-video analysis. Since the scenario in one video is
generally stable and changeless, establishing the correspondence within the same videos is less challenging and inevitably hinders the discrimination potential of learned fea-

Learning representations for visual correspondence is a
long-standing problem in computer vision, which is closely
related to many vision tasks including video object tracking,
keypoint tracking, and optical flow estimation, etc. This task
is challenging due to the factors such as viewpoint change,
distractors, and background clutter.
Correspondence estimation generally requires human annotations for model training. Collecting dense annotations,
especially for large-scale datasets, requires costly human efforts. To leverage the large volume of raw videos in the
wild, the recent advances focus on self-supervised correspondence learning by exploring the inherent relationships
within the unlabeled videos. In (Wang, Jabri, and Efros
2019), the temporal cycle-consistency is utilized to selfsupervise the feature representation learning. To be specific, the correct patch-level or pixel-wise associations between two successive frames should match bi-directionally
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10174

