The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Heads Hypothesis: A Unifying Statistical Approach Towards Understanding
Multi-Headed Attention in BERT
Madhura Pande, Aakriti Budhraja, Preksha Nema, Pratyush Kumar and Mitesh M. Khapra
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Madras, India
Robert Bosch Center for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence (RBC-DSAI) IIT Madras, India
{mpande, abudhra, preksha, pratyush, miteshk}@cse.iitm.ac.in

Abstract

pruning attention heads and dropping layers are performed
(Budhraja et al. 2020; Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019; Sajjad et al. 2020). Quite separate from these two questions,
the third question aims to analyze the intrinsic properties of
the attention heads, which are characteristic of Transformerbased models (Vaswani et al. 2017). Analysis and interpretation of attention patterns has been a matter of debate (Jain
and Wallace 2019; Wiegreffe and Pinter 2019). However, it
is agreed that studying a single attention head at a time enables us to structurally localize linguistic knowledge within
the model. In this work, we survey the current approaches
to analyze attention heads, identify some deficiencies, and
propose a unifying and statistically robust alternative.
Multi-headed self-attention is characterised by attention
weights which specify the weights of other tokens when
computing the representation of the current token. A natural
curiosity is if these attention weights encode patterns that are
linguistically or structurally meaningful. More specifically,
analysis aims to classify the role of an attention head into
functional roles such as local (attending to tokens in a small
neighbourhood of the current token), syntactic (attending to
tokens which are syntactically related to the current token),
delimiter (attending to delimiter tokens such as [CLS] and
[SEP]) and block (attending to tokens within the same sentence). Several methods have been proposed for such classification of functional roles of attention heads. However,
these methods vary significantly from one work to the other
and also amongst the different functional roles. For example, (Kovaleva et al. 2019) use the attention heatmap as an
image and a CNN-based classifier to determine whether the
image exhibits a local attention pattern. Contrast this with
the method used in (Voita et al. 2019) which classifies a
head as local if 90% of the attention of the head lies within
a small neighbourhood of the current token. Contrast this
further with the method used in the same work to identify a
syntactic role: A head is labeled as syntactic if the classification accuracy of this head on certain syntactic roles is higher
than baseline classifiers. The “higher than” assertion is itself
based on the subjectively chosen parameter of 10%.
Thus, existing studies present a diverse set of methods
for analysis with their respective parameters which impedes
systematic comparison and evolution of ideas. Furthermore,
existing studies have an additional challenge: statistical significance. Clearly, as we change the input sequence (one or

Multi-headed attention heads are a mainstay in transformerbased models. Different methods have been proposed to classify the role of each attention head based on the relations between tokens which have high pair-wise attention. These roles
include syntactic (tokens with some syntactic relation), local
(nearby tokens), block (tokens in the same sentence) and delimiter (the special [CLS], [SEP] tokens). There are two
main challenges with existing methods for classification: (a)
there are no standard scores across studies or across functional roles, and (b) these scores are often average quantities
measured across sentences without capturing statistical significance. In this work, we formalize a simple yet effective
score that generalizes to all the roles of attention heads and
employs hypothesis testing on this score for robust inference.
This provides us the right lens to systematically analyze attention heads and confidently comment on many commonly
posed questions on analyzing the BERT model. In particular,
we comment on the co-location of multiple functional roles
in the same attention head, the distribution of attention heads
across layers, and effect of fine-tuning for specific NLP tasks
on these functional roles. Code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/iitmnlp/heads-hypothesis

Introduction
In the short span of two years, the BERT model (Devlin et al.
2019) has become a top contender in many NLP tasks. This
success has led to a sub-field of research that tries to analyze why BERT works. This sub-field has become so prominent that it has even received its own name - BERTology.
The state of BERTology is well captured by the summary
in a recent survey paper: “while BERTology has come a
long way it is fair to say we still have more questions than
answers about how BERT works” (Rogers, Kovaleva, and
Rumshisky 2020). We see these questions as being broadly
classified into three types: (a) what does BERT know, (b)
what are BERT outputs sensitive to, and (c) what do the attention heads in BERT attend to? For identifying what BERT
knows, a typical strategy is to run probing experiments, for
instance by evaluating POS tagging with contextual embeddings from a specific layer of BERT (Liu et al. 2019). For understanding how BERT outputs vary, ablation studies such as
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13613

