The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Rewards from Linguistic Feedback
Theodore R. Sumers,1 Mark K. Ho,2 Robert D. Hawkins,2
Karthik Narasimhan,1 Thomas L. Griffiths1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
2
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ
{sumers, mho, rdhawkins, karthikn, tomg}@princeton.edu

Abstract

from such open-ended language differs from previous methods for interactive learning that use non-linguistic demonstrations (Abbeel and Ng 2004; Argall et al. 2009; Ho et al.
2016), rewards/punishments (Knox and Stone 2009; MacGlashan et al. 2017; Christiano et al. 2017), or language
commands (Tellex et al. 2011; Wang, Liang, and Manning
2016; Tellex et al. 2020). The agent’s learning challenge is
to interpret naturalistic feedback in the context of its behavior and environment to infer the teacher’s preferences.
We formalize this inference as linear regression over features of a Markov decision process (MDP). We first decompose linguistic feedback into a scalar sentiment and a target
subset of the MDP’s features, a form of aspect-based sentiment analysis (Hu and Liu 2004; Liu 2020). We then regress
the sentiment against the features to infer the teacher’s reward function. This enables learning rewards from arbitrary language. To extract target features, we first ground
utterances to elements of the MDP (Harnad 1990; Mooney
2008). For example, “Good job” refers to prior behavior,
whereas “You should have gone to the living room” refers to
an action. This grounding determines the relevant MDP features: intuitively, positive sentiment about an action implies
positive rewards on its features. We implement two versions
of this model: a “literal” learner using only the explicit sentiment and a “pragmatic” learner with additional inductive
biases (Grice 1975). Because these models rely on domainspecific lexical groundings, we develop a parallel and potentially more scalable approach: training an inference network
end-to-end to predict latent rewards from human-human interactions. In our live evaluation, all three models learn
from human feedback. The inference network and “literal”
sentiment models perform similarly, while the “pragmatic”
model approaches human performance. We outline related
work in Section 2, then introduce our sentiment model in
Section 3. Section 4 describes our task and experiment and
Section 5 details our model implementations. Finally, Section 6 discusses results and Section 7 concludes.1

We explore unconstrained natural language feedback as a
learning signal for artificial agents. Humans use rich and varied language to teach, yet most prior work on interactive
learning from language assumes a particular form of input
(e.g., commands). We propose a general framework which
does not make this assumption, instead using aspect-based
sentiment analysis to decompose feedback into sentiment
over the features of a Markov decision process. We then infer
the teacher’s reward function by regressing the sentiment on
the features, an analogue of inverse reinforcement learning.
To evaluate our approach, we first collect a corpus of teaching
behavior in a cooperative task where both teacher and learner
are human. We implement three artificial learners: sentimentbased “literal” and “pragmatic” models, and an inference network trained end-to-end to predict rewards. We then re-run
our initial experiment, pairing human teachers with these artificial learners. All three models successfully learn from interactive human feedback. The inference network approaches
the performance of the “literal” sentiment model, while the
“pragmatic” model nears human performance. Our work provides insight into the information structure of naturalistic linguistic feedback as well as methods to leverage it for reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

For autonomous agents to be widely usable, they must be responsive to human users’ natural modes of communication.
For instance, imagine designing a household cleaning robot.
Some behaviors can be pre-programmed (e.g., how to use an
outlet to recharge itself), while others must be learned (e.g.,
if a user wants it to charge in the living room or the kitchen).
But how should the robot infer what a person wants?
Here, we focus on unconstrained linguistic feedback as
a learning signal for autonomous agents. Humans use natural language flexibly to express their desires via commands,
counterfactuals, encouragement, explicit preferences, or
other forms of feedback. For example, if a human encounters the robot charging in the living room as desired, they
may provide feedback such as “Great job.” If they find it
charging in the kitchen, the human may respond with “You
should have gone to the living room” or “I don’t like seeing you in the kitchen.” Our approach of learning rewards

2

Background and Related Work

The work presented here complements existing methods that
enable artificial agents to learn from and interact with humans. For example, a large literature studies how agents

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6002

Code and data: github.com/tsumers/rewards.

