The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Cascade: Confidence Calibration for Improving the Accuracy and
Computational Cost of Cascade Inference Systems
Shohei Enomoto, Takeharu Eda
NTT Software Innovation Center
{shohei.enomoto.ab, takeharu.eda.bx}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract

cost inference by combining multiple deep learning models; it decides whether to terminate or continue inference
based on the confidence score. Recent deep neural networks
are known to be overconfident and require calibration of the
confidence score when applied to these critical systems (Guo
et al. 2017).
Several studies have been conducted on confidence calibration (Guo et al. 2017; Zhang, Dalca, and Sabuncu 2019;
Thulasidasan et al. 2019; Wan et al. 2018; Kull et al. 2019).
These studies have focused on decision-making systems, in
which humans decide whether or not to perform inference
based on the confidence score of the deep learning model.
It is assumed that humans are almost 100% accurate. If the
prediction of the model is correct, the prediction result is
employed. And if it is incorrect, humans perform manual inference. In this way, the system can perform inferences with
100% accuracy with a small number of human inferences.
To achieve such a best trade-off between accuracy and human effort, it is important to obtain a confidence score that
can accurately indicate whether the prediction result of the
model is correct or not.
To the best of our knowledge, no study has focused on
confidence calibration for cascade inference systems. Cascade inference is an important technique for performing
real-time and accurate inference given limited computing resources such as MEC servers. It combines more than two
models to perform inference: a highly-accurate but expensive model with a low-accuracy but fast model, and determines whether the expensive model should make a prediction or not based on the confidence score of the fast model.
Unlike humans, expensive models are less accurate than
100%. If the prediction of the fast model is correct, its result is employed. If it is incorrect, the expensive model is
used instead to make a prediction, but the expensive model
prediction may also be incorrect. At this time, the accuracy
of cascade inference does not change, but the computational
cost is increased due to the extra calculations incurred by the
expensive model. Therefore, it is important to have a confidence score that reflects not only the prediction result reliability of the fast model but also the prediction result of the
expensive model.
In this paper, we discuss confidence scores suitable for
cascade inference. We propose Learning to Cascade (LtC),
a confidence calibration method for cascade inference. LtC

Recently, deep neural networks have become to be used in
a variety of applications. While the accuracy of deep neural
networks is increasing, the confidence score, which indicates
the reliability of the prediction results, is becoming more important. Deep neural networks are seen as highly accurate but
known to be overconfident, making it important to calibrate
the confidence score. Many studies have been conducted on
confidence calibration. They calibrate the confidence score
of the model to match its accuracy, but it is not clear whether
these confidence scores can improve the performance of systems that use confidence scores. This paper focuses on cascade inference systems, one kind of systems using confidence
scores, and discusses the desired confidence score to improve
system performance in terms of inference accuracy and computational cost. Based on the discussion, we propose a new
confidence calibration method, Learning to Cascade. Learning to Cascade is a simple but novel method that optimizes
the loss term for confidence calibration simultaneously with
the original loss term. Experiments are conducted using two
datasets, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, in two system settings,
and show that naive application of existing calibration methods to cascade inference systems sometimes performs worse.
However, Learning to Cascade always achieves a better tradeoff between inference accuracy and computational cost. The
simplicity of Learning to Cascade allows it to be easily applied to improve the performance of existing systems.

Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has dramatically developed
and achieved state-of-the-art performance in a variety of
applications. While the accuracy of deep learning has improved over the years, the confidence score, which indicates
whether the prediction result is correct or not is becoming
more and more important. In critical decision-making systems such as automated driving (Levinson et al. 2011) and
medical diagnostics (Miotto et al. 2016), humans must make
the final decisions when deep neural networks are not confident in their predictive results to prevent serious accidents.
Cascade inference systems (Kang et al. 2017; Wang et al.
2018; Zhou, Gao, and Wu 2017; Panda, Sengupta, and Roy
2016; Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and Kung 2016; Huang
et al. 2018), achieve highly accurate and low computational
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7331

