The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimating the Number of Induced Subgraphs from Incomplete Data and
Neighborhood Queries
Dimitris Fotakis, 1 Thanasis Pittas, 2 Stratis Skoulakis 3
1

National Technical University of Athens, Greece
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
fotakis@cs.ntua.gr, pittas@wisc.edu, sskoul@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract

in order to accurately estimate the number of small complete
subgraphs of the actual network. Despite the fact that we focus on complete subgraphs (edges, triangles and k-cliques)
for simplicity and clarity, our approach can be directly generalized to any fixed small graphlet (in fact, the number of
k-cliques is the most difficult to estimate with our approach).

We consider a natural setting where network parameters are
estimated from noisy and incomplete information about the
network. More specifically, we investigate how we can efficiently estimate the number of small subgraphs (e.g., edges,
triangles, etc.) based on full access to one or two noisy and
incomplete samples of a large underlying network and on few
queries revealing the neighborhood of carefully selected vertices. After specifying a random generator which removes
edges from the underlying graph, we present estimators with
strong provable performance guarantees, which exploit information from the noisy network samples and query a constant number of the most important vertices for the estimation. Our experimental evaluation shows that, in practice, a
single noisy network sample and a couple of hundreds neighborhood queries suffice for accurately estimating the number
of triangles in networks with millions of vertices and edges.

1

Relation to Previous Work and Motivation. In our
network-related setting, (Hanneke and Xing 2009) observed
that reliable data collection is among the most difficult challenges in modern network analysis. Hence, (Hanneke and
Xing 2009; Kim and Leskovec 2011) introduced the network
completion problem, where one aims to recover the missing
vertices and edges of a partially observed network. They assume that the actual network comes from a known generative model (e.g., the stochastic block model in (Hanneke
and Xing 2009) or the Kronecker graphs model in (Kim and
Leskovec 2011)) and infer the parameters of the model (and
through them, the network’s unobserved part) using information from a randomly revealed part of the network.
To avoid the (often not adequately justified) assumption that the actual network comes from a known model,
(LaRock et al. 2018; Soundarajan et al. 2015, 2017) considered an orthogonal approach, called node probing. They
assume query access to the actual network and want to reveal as many vertices and edges of the unobserved network
as possible, using a fixed number of queries. The query strategy often follows an adaptive exploration-exploitation pattern and crucially depends on the subset of a node’s neighborhood revealed by the queries (see (Eliassi-Rad, Caceres,
and LaRock 2019, slide 67) for a summary).
In this work, we take a different approach, bringing together the most interesting and realistic features of network
completion and node probing (see also (Bliss, Danforth,
and Dodds 2014; Soundarajan et al. 2016) for similar approaches). Similarly to probing, we do not make any assumptions about the network’s model, consider an arbitrary
underlying network and assume query access to it. To keep
the model simple, we assume that each query reveals the entire neighborhood of the queried vertex. On the other hand,
we want the revealed part of the network to provide enough
information, in a statistical sense, about the underlying network. Thus, motivated by network completion, we assume
that the revealed part is a random sample of the underlying

Introduction

The readily available data for machine learning and network
parameter estimation tasks are often incomplete and noisy
to the extent that it does not allow for accurate parameter estimation (at least not with reasonable confidence). This can
happen for a variety of reasons, e.g., data may be hidden (or
massaged) due to privacy or business issues (Chierichetti,
Kleinberg, and Oren 2018), data logging may be inaccurate,
or the phenomenon represented by the data is only partially
observed (see e.g., (Hoogendoorn and Funk 2018, Chapter 3) and (Guptaa and Guptab 2019; Eliassi-Rad, Caceres,
and LaRock 2019) for discussion and concrete examples).
Additional “clean” data may be available, but at a significant cost (which can be monetary, e.g., (Provost, Melville,
and Saar-Tsechansky 2007; Saar-Tsechansky, Melville, and
Provost 2009), computational, e.g., (Hoogendoorn and Funk
2018, Chapter 3), or communication, e.g., (Eliassi-Rad, Caceres, and LaRock 2019; Hanneke and Xing 2009; Kim and
Leskovec 2011)).
In this work, we consider this very general problem in
the specific and important context of network parameter estimation. We show how to efficiently combine (one or two)
incomplete and noisy network samples, which are readily
available for “free”, with few vertex neihgborhood queries,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4045

