The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Filling the Gap of Utterance-aware and Speaker-aware Representation for
Multi-turn Dialogue
∗

Longxiang Liu1,2,3, , Zhuosheng Zhang1,2,3,* , Hai Zhao1,2,3,† , Xi Zhou4 , Xiang Zhou4
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Key Laboratory of Shanghai Education Commission for Intelligent Interaction
and Cognitive Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
4
CloudWalk Technology, Shanghai, China
com prehensive@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangzs@sjtu.edu.cn, zhaohai@cs.sjtu.edu.cn, zhouxi@cloudwalk.cn,
zhouxiang@cloudwalk.cn
Abstract
A multi-turn dialogue is composed of multiple utterances
from two or more different speaker roles. Thus utterance- and
speaker-aware clues are supposed to be well captured in models. However, in the existing retrieval-based multi-turn dialogue modeling, the pre-trained language models (PrLMs) as
encoder represent the dialogues coarsely by taking the pairwise dialogue history and candidate response as a whole, the
hierarchical information on either utterance interrelation or
speaker roles coupled in such representations is not well addressed. In this work, we propose a novel model to fill such
a gap by modeling the effective utterance-aware and speakeraware representations entailed in a dialogue history. In detail, we decouple the contextualized word representations by
masking mechanisms in Transformer-based PrLM, making
each word only focus on the words in current utterance, other
utterances, two speaker roles (i.e., utterances of sender and utterances of receiver), respectively. Experimental results show
that our method boosts the strong ELECTRA baseline substantially in four public benchmark datasets, and achieves
various new state-of-the-art performance over previous methods. A series of ablation studies are conducted to demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

1

Turn-ID

Speaker

utterance 1

F:

Excuse me, sir. This is a non smoking area.

utterance 2

M:

Oh, sorry. I will move to the smoking area.

utterance 3

F:

I’m afraid no table in the smoking area is
available now

response 1

M:

Sorry. I won’t smoke in the hospital again. 7

response 2

M:

OK. I won’t smoke. Could you please give me
a menu? X

response 3

M:

Could you please tell the customer over there
not to smoke? We can’t stand the smell 7

response 4

M:

Sorry. I will smoke when I get off the bus. 7

Utterance (Context)

Response Candidates

Table 1: An example of response-selection for multi-turn
dialogue in MuTual dataset.

2020; Shen and Feng 2020) directly generate a response using an encoder-decoder framework, which tends to be short
and less varied. Retrieval-based methods (Wu et al. 2017;
Tao et al. 2019a,b; Zhang et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2018; Yuan
et al. 2019; Li, Li, and Ji 2020; Hua et al. 2020) retrieve a list
of response candidates, then use a matching model to rerank
the candidates and select the best one as a reply. Since the responses of retrieval-based are generally more natural, fluent,
diverse, and syntactically correct, retrieval-based method,
which is our major focus in this work, is more mature for
producing multi-turn dialogue systems both in academia and
industry (Shum, He, and Li 2018; Zhu et al. 2018; Li et al.
2017). Table 1 shows an example from Multi-Turn Dialogue
Reasoning dataset (MuTual) (Cui et al. 2020). To choose the
right answer, machine should understand and infer from the
meaning of “table” and the coreference, indicating the requirement of reasoning ability instead of simple matching.
The core of previous mainstream work is to design a
matching network, which calculates matching matrices for
each utterance-response pair at different granularities. The
matching matrices will be fused to get a feature vector, then
the sequence of feature vectors will be further integrated by
RNNs to get the final representation for scoring. However,

Introduction

Building an intelligent chatbot that can understand human
conversations and give logically correct, fluent responses is
one of the eternal goals of artificial intelligence, especially in
the field of natural language processing (NLP). The methods
of building a chatbot which is capable of performing multiturn dialogue can be categorized into two lines: generationbased methods and retrieval-based methods. Generationbased methods (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015; Serban et al. 2016;
Su et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020b; Li et al. 2019b; Zhao et al.
∗
Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. This paper was
partially supported by National Key Research and Development
Program of China (No. 2017YFB0304100), Key Projects of
National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1836222 and
61733011), Huawei-SJTU long term AI project, Cutting-edge Machine reading comprehension and language model.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13406

