The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Relational Inference with Efficient Message Passing Mechanisms
Siyuan Chen, Jiahai Wang∗ , Guoqing Li
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{chensy47, ligq7}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wangjiah@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

infer

Many complex processes can be viewed as dynamical systems of interacting agents. In many cases, only the state sequences of individual agents are observed, while the interacting relations and the dynamical rules are unknown. The neural relational inference (NRI) model adopts graph neural networks that pass messages over a latent graph to jointly learn
the relations and the dynamics based on the observed data.
However, NRI infers the relations independently and suffers
from error accumulation in multi-step prediction at dynamics learning procedure. Besides, relation reconstruction without prior knowledge becomes more difficult in more complex systems. This paper introduces efficient message passing mechanisms to the graph neural networks with structural
prior knowledge to address these problems. A relation interaction mechanism is proposed to capture the coexistence of
all relations, and a spatio-temporal message passing mechanism is proposed to use historical information to alleviate
error accumulation. Additionally, the structural prior knowledge, symmetry as a special case, is introduced for better relation prediction in more complex systems. The experimental
results on simulated physics systems show that the proposed
method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods.

predict
State sequences

Interacting relations

Figure 1: A dynamical system consisting of 5 particles that
are linked by invisible springs. The interacting relations and
future states are to be predicted based on the observed state
sequences.
2017). Compared with modeling implicit interactions, modeling the explicit interactions offers a more interpretable way
to understand the dynamical systems. A motivating example
is shown in Fig. 1 (Kipf et al. 2018), where a dynamical system consists of 5 particles linked by invisible springs. It is
of interest to infer the relations among the particles and predict their future states. Kipf et al. (2018) propose the neural
relational inference (NRI) model, a variational auto-encoder
(VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014), to jointly learn explicit
interactions and dynamical rules in an unsupervised manner.
Currently, there are three main limitations of NRI. First,
the interacting relations are inferred independently, while
the coexistence of these relations is not considered. Alet et
al. (2019) tackle this problem by taking all relations as a
whole and iteratively improving the prediction through modular meta-learning. However, this method is computationally
costly and it is limited to small-scale systems. Second, NRI
predicts multiple steps into the future to emphasize the effect of the interactions, which leads to error accumulation
and prevents the model from reconstructing the dynamics
accurately. Third, as the scale and the complexity of systems increase, it is difficult to infer the interactions solely
based on the observed data, while incorporating some structural prior knowledge can help better explore the structural
space and promote the precision of relation recovery.
To address the problems above, this paper introduces efficient message passing mechanisms with structural prior
knowledge for neural relational inference. For relation re-

Introduction
Many complex processes in natural and social areas including multi-agent systems (Yang et al. 2018; Li et al. 2020),
swarm systems (Oliveira et al. 2020), physical systems (Ha
and Jeong 2020; Bapst et al. 2020) and social systems (Almaatouq et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020) can be viewed as
dynamical systems of interacting agents. Revealing the underlying interactions and dynamics can help us understand,
predict, and control the behavior of these systems. However,
in many cases, only the state sequences of individual agents
are observed, while the interacting relations and the dynamical rules are unknown.
A lot of works (Hoshen 2017; van Steenkiste et al. 2018;
Watters et al. 2017) use implicit interaction models to learn
the dynamics. These models can be regarded as graph neural
networks (GNNs) over a fully-connected graph, and the implicit interactions are modeled via message passing operations (Watters et al. 2017) or attention mechanisms (Hoshen
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7055

