The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Document-Level Relation Extraction with Adaptive Thresholding and Localized
Context Pooling
Wenxuan Zhou,1 * Kevin Huang,2 Tengyu Ma,3† Jing Huang 2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
2
JD AI Research, Mountain View, CA
3
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
zhouwenx@usc.edu, {kevin.huang, jing.huang}@jd.com, tengyuma@stanford.edu

John Stanistreet was an Australian politician. He was

Abstract

born in Bendigo to legal manager John Jepson

Document-level relation extraction (RE) poses new challenges
compared to its sentence-level counterpart. One document
commonly contains multiple entity pairs, and one entity pair
occurs multiple times in the document associated with multiple
possible relations. In this paper, we propose two novel techniques, adaptive thresholding and localized context pooling, to
solve the multi-label and multi-entity problems. The adaptive
thresholding replaces the global threshold for multi-label classification in the prior work with a learnable entities-dependent
threshold. The localized context pooling directly transfers attention from pre-trained language models to locate relevant
context that is useful to decide the relation. We experiment on
three document-level RE benchmark datasets: DocRED, a recently released large-scale RE dataset, and two datasets CDR
and GDA in the biomedical domain. Our ATLOP (Adaptive
Thresholding and Localized cOntext Pooling) model achieves
an F1 score of 63.4, and also significantly outperforms existing models on both CDR and GDA. We have released our
code at https://github.com/wzhouad/ATLOP.

Stanistreet and Maud McIlroy. (…4 sentences…) In 1955
John Stanistreet was elected to the Victorian Legislative
Assembly as the Liberal and Country Party member for
Bendigo. Stanistreet died in Bendigo in 1971.
Subject: John Stanistreet

Object: Bendigo

Relation: place of birth; place of death

Figure 1: An example of multi-entity and multi-label
problems from the DocRED dataset. Subject entity John
Stanistreet (in orange) and object entity Bendigo (in green)
express relations place of birth and place of death. The related entity mentions are connected by lines. Other entities
in the document are highlighted in grey.

Introduction
Relation extraction (RE) aims to identify the relationship
between two entities in a given text and plays an important role in information extraction. Existing work mainly
focuses on sentence-level relation extraction, i.e., predicting
the relationship between entities in a single sentence (Zeng
et al. 2014; Miwa and Bansal 2016; Zhang, Qi, and Manning 2018). However, large amounts of relationships, such
as relational facts from Wikipedia articles and biomedical
literature, are expressed by multiple sentences in real-world
applications (Verga, Strubell, and McCallum 2018; Yao et al.
2019). This problem, commonly referred to as documentlevel relation extraction, necessitates models that can capture
complex interactions among entities in the whole document.
* This work was conducted while the first author was doing an

internship at JD AI Research.
†
TM is also partially supported by the Google Faculty Award,
JD.com, Stanford Data Science Initiative, and the Stanford Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14612

Compared to sentence-level RE, document-level RE poses
unique challenges. For sentence-level RE datasets such as
TACRED (Zhang et al. 2017) and SemEval 2010 Task 8 (Hendrickx et al. 2009), a sentence only contains one entity pair
to classify. On the other hand, for document-level RE, one
document contains multiple entity pairs, and we need to classify the relations of them all at once. It requires the RE model
to identify and focus on the part of the document with relevant context for a particular entity pair. In addition, one
entity pair can occur many times in the document associated
with distinct relations for document-level RE, in contrast
to one relation per entity pair for sentence-level RE. This
multi-entity (multiple entity pairs to classify in a document)
and multi-label (multiple relation types for a particular entity
pair) properties of document-level relation extraction make
it harder than its sentence-level counterpart. Figure 1 shows
an example from the DocRED dataset (Yao et al. 2019). The
task is to classify the relation types of pairs of entities (highlighted in color). For a particular entity pair (John Stanistreet,
Bendigo), it expresses two relations place of birth and place
of death by the first two sentences and the last sentence. Other

