The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Transfer Tensor Decomposition with Orthogonal Constraint for
Recommender Systems
Zhengyu Chen1,2 , Ziqing Xu3 , Donglin Wang∗ 2
1

College of Computer Science & Technology, Zhejiang University
Machine Intelligence Lab (MiLAB), AI Division, School of Engineering, Westlake University
3
Department of Statistics, University of Chicago
chenzhengyu@zju.edu.cn, simonxu@uchicago.edu, {chenzhengyu,wangdonglin}@westlake.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is one of the most effective techniques
for multi-criteria recommendations. However, it suffers from
data sparsity when dealing with three-dimensional (3D) useritem-criterion ratings. To mitigate this issue, we consider effectively incorporating the side information and cross-domain
knowledge in tensor decomposition. A deep transfer tensor
decomposition (DTTD) method is proposed by integrating
deep structure and Tucker decomposition, where an orthogonal constrained stacked denoising autoencoder (OC-SDAE)
is proposed for alleviating the scale variation in learning effective latent representation, and the side information is incorporated as a compensation for tensor sparsity. Tucker decomposition generates users and items’ latent factors to connect with OC-SDAEs and creates a common core tensor to
bridge different domains. A cross-domain alignment algorithm (CDAA) is proposed to solve the rotation issue between
two core tensors in source and target domain. Experiments
show that DTTD outperforms state-of-the-art related works.

Figure 1: Multi-criteria ratings and the side information

approaches (Lakiotaki, Matsatsinis, and Tsoukias 2011),
aggregation-based approaches (Lakiotaki, Tsafarakis, and
Matsatsinis 2008), and model-based approaches (Sahoo
et al. 2012). Heuristic neighborhood-based approaches attempt to use various multi-criteria similarity metrics to collect the neighbors of a targeted user, and then estimate unknown ratings based on the known ratings of those neighbors (Mikeli, Apostolou, and Despotis 2013). Aggregationbased approaches aim to build a mapping to aggregate
multiple criterion-specific ratings by assuming that there
is a certain relation between the overall rating and other
criterion-specific ratings (Lakiotaki, Tsafarakis, and Matsatsinis 2008). Model-based approaches learn a model by
leveraging the observed multi-criteria ratings and then employing the model to execute prediction (Sahoo et al. 2012).
Tensor decomposition is a milestone of model-based techniques. Many related techniques have been developed for
multi-criteria recommendations (Bhargava et al. 2015; Yao
et al. 2015), but all these suffer from sparsity problem. Although single-criterion recommendations using matrix factorization consider to absorb the side information and the
knowledge from relevant domains to enrich priors and confront sparsity (Chen, Wang, and Yin 2021; Dong et al. 2017),
no prior work in multi-criteria recommendations incorporates such information into tensor decomposition.
In this paper, we integrate the side information and knowl-

Introduction
With the data explosion in recent years, recommendations are becoming increasingly attractive. Traditional
single-criterion recommendation typically operates on twodimensional (2D) user-item ratings (Gai et al. 2019; Xiao,
Liang, and Meng 2019a). In single-criterion recommendation, there are two primary categories of algorithms: contentbased methods and collaborative filtering (CF) based methods, where matrix factorization is effective in learning effective latent factors for users and items (Xiao, Liang, and
Meng 2019b; Xiao et al. 2019). However, they cannot work
well for multi-criteria recommendations that contain multiple criterion-specific ratings. With the emergence of multimodal data, multi-criteria recommendation becomes more
important(Lakiotaki, Matsatsinis, and Tsoukias 2011). Figure 1 shows an example in TripAdvisor: customers rate hotels using multiple criteria (in red) such as value, service,
atmosphere, food and overall, where the side information of
customers and hotels is provided (in blue).
Prior multi-criteria techniques can be briefly classified into three categories: heuristic neighborhood-based
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4010

