The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from Crowds by Modeling Common Confusions
Zhendong Chu, Jing Ma, Hongning Wang
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
{zc9uy, jm3mr, hw5x}@virginia.edu

Abstract

different label aggregation methods based on the DS model
(Venanzi et al. 2014; Zhang et al. 2014; Whitehill et al.
2009). Recent developments focus more on unified solutions, where variants of the Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm are proposed to integrate label aggregation and
classifier training (Albarqouni et al. 2016; Cao et al. 2019;
Raykar et al. 2010). Typically, such solutions treat the classifier’s predictions as latent variables, which are then mapped
to the observed crowdsourced labels using individual confusion matrices of annotators. Rodrigues and Pereira (2018)
further fuse label inference and classifier training in an endto-end approach using neural networks, where the gradient
from label aggregation is directly propagated to estimate the
annotators’ confusion matrices. Tanno et al. (2019) propose
a similar solution but encourage the annotator confusion matrix to be close to an identity matrix by trace regularization.
All existing DS-model-based solutions assume noise in
crowdsourced labels is only caused by individual annotators’ expertise. However, it is not uncommon that different
annotators would share common confusion about the labels.
For example, when a bird in an image is too small, every annotator has a chance to confuse it with an airplane because
of the background sky. We hypothesize that on an instance
the annotator is confident about, he/she is more likely to use
his/her expertise to provide a label (i.e., introducing individualized noise), while he/she would use common sense to
label those unconfident ones. We empirically evaluate this
hypothesis on two public crowdsourcing datasets, one for
image labeling and one for music genre classification (more
details of the datasets can be found in the Experiment Section), and visualize the results in Figure 1. On both datasets,
there are quite some commonly made mistakes across annotators. For example, on the image labeling dataset LabelMe, 61.0% annotators mistakenly labeled street as inside
city and 44.1% of them mislabeled open country as forest;
on the music classification dataset, 63.6% annotators mislabeled metal as rock and 38.6% of them mislabeled disco as
pop. The existence of such shared confusions across annotators directly affects label aggregation: the majority of annotators are not necessarily correct, as their mistakes are no
longer independent (e.g., those large off-diagonal entries in
Figure 1). This is against the fundamental assumption in the
DS model, and strongly urges new noise modeling to better
handle real-world crowdsourced data.
Moving beyond the independent noise assumption in the

Crowdsourcing provides a practical way to obtain large
amounts of labeled data at a low cost. However, the annotation quality of annotators varies considerably, which imposes new challenges in learning a high-quality model from
the crowdsourced annotations. In this work, we provide a
new perspective to decompose annotation noise into common noise and individual noise and differentiate the source
of confusion based on instance difficulty and annotator expertise on a per-instance-annotator basis. We realize this new
crowdsourcing model by an end-to-end learning solution with
two types of noise adaptation layers: one is shared across annotators to capture their commonly shared confusions, and
the other one is pertaining to each annotator to realize individual confusion. To recognize the source of noise in each
annotation, we use an auxiliary network to choose from the
two noise adaptation layers with respect to both instances and
annotators. Extensive experiments on both synthesized and
real-world benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed common noise adaptation solution.

Introduction
The availability of large amounts of labeled data is often
a prerequisite for applying supervised learning solutions in
practice. Crowdsourcing makes it possible to collect massive labeled data in both time- and cost-efficient manner
(Buecheler et al. 2010). However, because of varying and
unknown expertise of annotators, crowdsourced labels are
usually noisy, which naturally lead to an important research
problem: how to train an accurate learning model with only
crowdsourced annotations?
The first step to estimate an accurate learning model from
crowdsourced annotations is to properly model the generation of such data. In this work, we focus on the crowdsourced
classification problem. The seminal work from Dawid and
Skene (1979) (known as the DS model) assumes that each
annotator has his/her own class-dependent confusion when
providing annotations to instances. This is modeled by an
annotator-specific confusion matrix, whose entries are the
probability of flipping one class into another. The DS model
has become the cornerstone of most learning from crowds
solutions; and mainstream solutions perform label aggregation prior to classifier training: their key difference lies on
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5832

