The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Boosting Image-based Mutual Gaze Detection using Pseudo 3D Gaze
Bardia Doosti∗ ,1 Ching-Hui Chen† , 2 Raviteja Vemulapalli 2 ,
Xuhui Jia 2 , Yukun Zhu 2 , Bradley Green 2
1

Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University Bloomington
2
Google Research
bdoosti@indiana.edu, {chuichen,ravitejavemu,xhjia,yukun,brg}@google.com
Abstract

that directly predicts mutual gaze score for a pair of head
bounding boxes in an image. First, each head image patch
is converted into a compact feature representation using a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Then, the spatial relationship between the head bounding boxes is encoded using 2D and geometry-inspired 3D spatial features. Specifically, our 3D spatial feature is the direction of the relative
3D position vector between the two head bounding box centers. Finally, the head spatial and image encoded features
are concatenated and processed by a fully-connected neural
network that outputs mutual gaze score. This is our primary
mutual gaze detection branch.
We also use an auxiliary 3D gaze estimation branch
during training. This branch takes the head image embeddings as inputs and estimates the 3D gaze vectors of the
corresponding heads. The mutual gaze detection and 3D
gaze estimation branches are trained jointly with a shared
head image encoder in an end-to-end fashion to take advantage of multi-task learning. The auxiliary gaze estimation
branch helps in training a better head image encoder which
in turn leads to improved performance of the mutual gaze
detection branch. Though the proposed model has a 3D gaze
estimation branch, we do not use any 3D gaze ground truth
for training. Instead, we use the direction of the relative
3D head position vector as the pseudo 3D gaze label for
positive mutual gaze samples. We use these pseudo labels
for training and improve mutual gaze detection performance
without additional labeling cost. Our experimental results
on three mutual gaze image datasets show that the proposed
approach outperforms the state of the art.

Mutual gaze detection, i.e., predicting whether or not two
people are looking at each other, plays an important role in
understanding human interactions. In this work, we focus on
the task of image-based mutual gaze detection, and propose
a simple and effective approach to boost the performance by
using an auxiliary 3D gaze estimation task during the training
phase. We achieve the performance boost without additional
labeling cost by training the 3D gaze estimation branch using pseudo 3D gaze labels deduced from mutual gaze labels.
By sharing the head image encoder between the 3D gaze estimation and the mutual gaze detection branches, we achieve
better head features than learned by training the mutual gaze
detection branch alone. Experimental results on three image
datasets show that the proposed approach improves the detection performance significantly without additional annotations. This work also introduces a new image dataset that consists of 33.1K pairs of humans annotated with mutual gaze
labels in 29.2K images.

Introduction
With recent advances in the field of computer vision, social
relation discovery has received significant attention from
the research community (Ding and Yilmaz 2010, 2011; Liu
et al. 2019; Sapru and Bourlard 2015; Sun, Schiele, and Fritz
2017; Wang et al. 2010; Yu et al. 2009). Detecting interactions such as hugging, kissing, mutual gaze, etc., can aid machines in understanding people’s social behavior since such
cues often convey significant information about a person’s
social intentions. Among all verbal and non-verbal cues,
gaze is known to be one of the most informative cues about
social interactions. Existing works have shown that gaze can
be used as a reliable proxy for identifying the social relationships between people in a scene (Fan et al. 2018, 2019;
Marin-Jimenez et al. 2019). In particular, mutual eye contact between two people in an image often indicates social
connectivity, friendliness and intimacy (Abele 1986).
In this work, we focus on the task of image-based mutual
gaze detection and propose a deep learning-based approach

Major Contributions:
• We propose to use an auxiliary 3D gaze estimation task
along with the primary mutual gaze detection task. We
show that the mutual gaze detection performance can be
improved without additional labeling by training the auxiliary 3D gaze estimation branch using pseudo 3D gaze
labels generated for positive mutual gaze samples.
• We propose to use the direction of the relative 3D head
position vector both as pseudo 3D gaze label and as an
input feature for mutual gaze detection. We show how this
3D vector can be computed approximately without having
ground truth depth.

∗
This work was done when Bardia Doosti was interning at
Google.
†
Ching-Hui Chen is currently affiliated with Waymo.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1273

