The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Aggregated Multi-GANs for Controlled 3D Human Motion Prediction
Zhenguang Liu1 , Kedi Lyu2∗ , Shuang Wu3* , Haipeng Chen2* , Yanbin Hao4 , Shouling Ji5
1

Zhejiang Gongshang University
2
Jilin University
3
Nanyang Technological University
4
University of Science and Technology of China
5
Zhejiang University
liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com, lvkd19@mails.jlu.edu.cn, wushuang@outlook.sg, chenhp@jlu.edu.cn,
haoyanbin@hotmail.com, sji@zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Human motion prediction from historical pose sequence is at
the core of many applications in machine intelligence. However, in current state-of-the-art methods, the predicted future
motion is confined within the same activity. One can neither generate predictions that differ from the current activity, nor manipulate the body parts to explore various future
possibilities. Undoubtedly, this greatly limits the usefulness
and applicability of motion prediction. In this paper, we propose a generalization of the human motion prediction task
in which control parameters can be readily incorporated to
adjust the forecasted motion. Our method is compelling in
that it enables manipulable motion prediction across activity types and allows customization of the human movement
in a variety of fine-grained ways. To this aim, a simple yet
effective composite GAN structure, consisting of local GANs for different body parts and aggregated via a global GAN
is presented. The local GANs game in lower dimensions,
while the global GAN adjusts in high dimensional space to
avoid mode collapse. Extensive experiments show that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art. The codes are available
at https://github.com/herolvkd/AM-GAN.

Figure 1: Problem illustration. Mathematically, an observed
motion sequence traces out a trajectory on the skeletal pose
manifold. The problem of human motion prediction amounts
to extrapolating this trajectory in a smooth and coherent
manner. We are interested in tasks: 1) predicting the most
likely motion (e.g., continuation of the walking action); 2)
predicting the transition to another specified action (e.g.
transition from current action to eating); 3) fine-grained control over body parts, e.g., requiring the upper body performing eating action while the lower body engaging in walking.

Introduction
An important component of our capacity to interact with
the external world resides in the ability to predict the future (Martinez, Black, and Romero 2017), based on existing
cues and past experience. Having a mental representation of
how other humans are likely to act is crucial for us to avoid
dangers and make decisions. Likewise, the ability for machines to anticipate and model human motion dynamics is
very much coveted. Modeling and predicting human motion
is at the heart of many important applications in the computer vision domain such as video making, human posture
tracking (Taylor et al. 2010), as well as the robotics domain such as regulating a robot’s response and behaviour
in human-machine interactions (Koppula and Saxena 2013;
Koppula, Jain, and Saxena 2016).
Human motion prediction(HMP) is challenging since humans do not follow fixed laws of motion as is the case for

inanimate objects. The inherent stochastic nature of human
behaviour invokes complexity in the form of non-linearity
and high dimensionality. Earlier approaches have typically utilized shallow latent-variable models such as hidden
Markov models (Lehrmann, Gehler, and Nowozin 2014) or
Gaussian processes (Wang, Fleet, and Hertzmann 2005) to
represent the motion dynamics with hidden states. In recent years, many deep learning approaches were proposed and
have yielded improved results. A first class of work utilised
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) such as Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) (Fragkiadaki et al. 2015), Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Martinez, Black, and Romero 2017;
Pavllo et al. 2019) or refined RNN architectures tailored for
modeling motion dynamics. Another line of work built upon
the success of deep generative models including Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Habibie et al. 2017; Yan et al. 2018)
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Barsoum, K-

∗

Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2225

