The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

XraySyn: Realistic View Synthesis From a Single Radiograph Through CT Priors
Cheng Peng1∗ , Haofu Liao2∗ , Gina Wong 1 , Jiebo Luo2 , S. Kevin Zhou3,4 , Rama Chellappa1
1
Johns Hopkins University
2
University of Rochester
3
Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
{cpeng26,gwong15,rchella4}@jhu.edu, {haofu.liao, jluo}@rochester.edu, s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
A radiograph visualizes the internal anatomy of a patient
through the use of X-ray, which projects 3D information onto a
2D plane. Hence, radiograph analysis naturally requires physicians to relate their prior knowledge about 3D human anatomy
to 2D radiographs. Synthesizing novel radiographic views in
a small range can assist physicians in interpreting anatomy
more reliably; however, radiograph view synthesis is heavily
ill-posed, lacking in paired data, and lacking in differentiable
operations to leverage learning-based approaches. To address
these problems, we use Computed Tomography (CT) for radiograph simulation and design a differentiable projection
algorithm, which enables us to achieve geometrically consistent transformations between the radiography and CT domains.
Our method, XraySyn, can synthesize novel views on real radiographs through a combination of realistic simulation and
finetuning on real radiographs. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first work on radiograph view synthesis. We show
that by gaining an understanding of radiography in 3D space,
our method can be applied to radiograph bone extraction and
suppression without requiring groundtruth bone labels.

(a) Input Radiograph

(b) Synthesized Novel View

(c) Bone Estimation on Input

(d) Bone Suppression on Input

Introduction
Radiography, widely used for visualizing the internal human
anatomy, applies high-energy radiation, or X-ray, to pass
through the body, and measures the remaining radiation energy on a planar detector. Since different organs attenuate
X-ray to various degrees, the detected energy is visualized as
a 2D image or a radiograph, that reveals the internal structure
of the body and provides valuable diagnostic information.
Radiography is fast and economical; however, high energy
radiation can cause adverse health effects. Conventionally
only a single, frontal view radiograph is acquired per session,
e.g. for chest radiography. While physicians can intuitively
relate the different organs on a 2D radiograph in 3D space,
such intuition is implicit and varies in accuracy. As such, a

Figure 1: From (a) a real radiograph, XraySyn synthesizes
(b) a radiograph of novel view. As the view point rotate
clockwise in azimuth angle, observe that the heart and the
rib bones, as the blue arrows indicate, change accordingly.
Additionally, XraySyn obtains (c) the bone structure across
all views and can be used to perform (d) bone suppression.
Both synthesized views and bone estimation are generated
without direct supervision.
radiograph view synthesis algorithm can help provide additional information to assist in understanding a patient’s
internal structure. The ability to understand radiographs in
a 3D context is also essential beyond providing more visual
information. For example, since every pixel on a radiograph
represents an X-ray traversing in 3D, it is principally ambiguous to label a pixel as a specific anatomical structure, as
X-rays inevitably pass through multiple structures. By exploring 3D context, we can disentangle a pixel into values that
represent different structures, and lead to improved analysis
algorithms. Particularly, bone extraction on real radiographs

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Equal contribution. Cheng proposed and implemented the
XraySyn framework for view synthesis and bone suppression, incorporated DeepDRR, labeled data, and performed relevant experiments. Haofu initiated the project, proposed and implemented the
differentiable forward/backprojector module, and provided valuable
discussions.

436

