The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FIMAP: Feature Importance by Minimal Adversarial Perturbation
Matt Chapman-Rounds1 , Umang Bhatt2 , Erik Pazos3 , Marc-Andre Schulz4 , Konstantinos
Georgatzis3
1

Department of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge,
3
QuantumBlack,
4
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin
m.rounds@ed.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Instance-based model-agnostic feature importance explanations (LIME, SHAP, L2X) are a popular form of algorithmic transparency. These methods generally return either a
weighting or subset of input features as an explanation for the
classification of an instance. An alternative literature argues
instead that counterfactual instances, which alter the blackbox model’s classification, provide a more actionable form
of explanation. We present Feature Importance by Minimal
Adversarial Perturbation (FIMAP), a neural network based
approach that unifies feature importance and counterfactual
explanations. We show that this approach combines the two
paradigms, recovering the output of feature-weighting methods in continuous feature spaces, whilst indicating the direction in which the nearest counterfactuals can be found. Our
method provides an implicit confidence estimate in its own
explanations, something existing methods lack. Additionally,
FIMAP improves upon the speed of sampling-based methods,
such as LIME, by an order of magnitude, allowing for explanation deployment in time-critical applications. We extend
our approach to categorical features using a partitioned Gumbel layer and demonstrate its efficacy on standard datasets.

Chen et al. 2018) or a weighting of input features (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017) of the
instance to be explained. Another set of methods proposes
that counterfactual instances, or groups of instances, are a
useful proxy to ‘explanation,’ where the claim is that local
explanations are expected to contain both the outcome of a
prediction and how that prediction would change if the input
changed (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017; White and
Garcez 2019). Many such approaches use sampling procedures to either estimate local decision boundaries (and their
corresponding parameters) or to find proximate counterfactual instances: in both cases, they can be computationally
expensive (Bhatt, Weller, and Moura 2020). The computational cost of sampling local decision boundaries for each
explanation makes these methods slow to scale and of limited use in practice (Bhatt et al. 2019).
Herein, we propose FIMAP, Feature Importance by Minimal Adversarial Perturbation, a model that returns the direction that an instance would have to be perturbed the least
in order for the classification of the underlying model to
change. FIMAP’s contribution is threefold:

Introduction

• FIMAP combines elements of both feature importance
and counterfactual explanations, and is model-agnostic.

Recent interest in explaining the output of complex machine
learning (ML) models has been characterized by a wide
range of approaches (Lipton 2016; Montavon, Samek, and
Müller 2018). Many of these approaches are model specific;
for example, attempts to explain neural networks rely on interpreting the flow of gradients through the model (Karpathy, Johnson, and Fei-Fei 2015; Shrikumar, Greenside, and
Kundaje 2017; Olah, Mordvintsev, and Schubert 2017), or
decision trees, which might be considered directly interpretable, provide explanations as rules (Molnar 2019).
Model agnostic approaches, however, are attempts to formulate a general framework for per-instance explanation of
a model’s outputs regardless of the model class. This can be
beneficial when the choice of model may change over time
or where the original model is costly to query.
One group of model-agnostic explainers focuses on providing an explanation of a model’s output as either a subset of input features (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018;

• FIMAP is faster than alternative methods by 5 orders of
magnitude, once constant overheads are taken into account, allowing for model explanations in time-critical applications where sampling-based methods are infeasible.
• FIMAP naturally indicates regions of low classifier confidence as a consequence of its design.
The paper is structured as follows. We first provide an
summary of recent approaches to instance-wise modelagnostic explanation. We then show how our method unifies
counterfactual and feature importance explanations, justify
FIMAP’s approach, and describe how we handle continuous
and categorical input variables. Before concluding, we show
empirical results on synthetic and real-world experiments.

Related Work
One of the most widely-used feature weighting approaches
to per-instance explanation of a black box model’s outputs
is LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016), which learns
a local surrogate approximation to the black box model’s

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11433

