The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TransTailor: Pruning the Pre-trained Model for Improved Transfer Learning
Bingyan Liu1 , Yifeng Cai2 , Yao Guo1∗ , Xiangqun Chen1
1

MOE Key Lab of HCST, Dept of Computer Science, School of EECS, Peking University
2
School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
{lby cs, caiyifeng, yaoguo, cherry}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
match

The increasing of pre-trained models has significantly facilitated the performance on limited data tasks with transfer
learning. However, progress on transfer learning mainly focuses on optimizing the weights of pre-trained models, which
ignores the structure mismatch between the model and the
target task. This paper aims to improve the transfer performance from another angle - in addition to tuning the weights,
we tune the structure of pre-trained models, in order to better match the target task. To this end, we propose TransTailor,
targeting at pruning the pre-trained model for improved transfer learning. Different from traditional pruning pipelines, we
prune and fine-tune the pre-trained model according to the
target-aware weight importance, generating an optimal submodel tailored for a specific target task. In this way, we transfer a more suitable sub-structure that can be applied during
fine-tuning to benefit the final performance. Extensive experiments on multiple pre-trained models and datasets demonstrate that TransTailor outperforms the traditional pruning
methods and achieves competitive or even better performance
than other state-of-the-art transfer learning methods while using a smaller model. Notably, on the Stanford Dogs dataset,
TransTailor can achieve 2.7% accuracy improvement over
other transfer methods with 20% fewer FLOPs.

source data

pre-trained model

source domain

transfer
learning

weight
mismatch

target data

structure
mismatch

pre-trained model

target domain

Figure 1: Illustration of the two mismatches during transfer
learning.

tasks. A simple yet effective method called fine-tuning
(Yosinski et al. 2014) is the most widely used paradigm,
which starts with a pre-trained model and further tunes the
model weights with the limited target data to achieve transfer
learning. In addition, many other regularization methods designed new loss functions to optimize the weights of the pretrained model, seeking to achieve better knowledge transfer
(Li, Grandvalet, and Davoine 2018; Li et al. 2019).
However, these existing methods may still fail to deliver
an optimal solution for transfer learning because they only
tune the weights of the pre-trained model. The model structure, which is also of vital importance to the final task performance, is ignored since the structure of the pre-trained
model is always fixed either in fine-tuning or other transfer schemes. As shown in Figure 1, basically the pre-trained
model being transferred may contain two mismatches to the
target data: weight mismatch and structure mismatch. The
weight mismatch mostly comes from the feature divergence
between two tasks and the structure mismatch results from
the different data scale (i.e., the target task needs a different
structure since its data scale is smaller than the source). Previous methods focused on tuning the weights can only tackle
the weight mismatch issue while ignoring the structure mis-

Introduction
The remarkable performance achieved by deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) largely relies on the massive labeled data (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012).
However, in real-world scenarios where gaining sufficient
labeled data through manual labeling is time-consuming and
labor-exhausting, we are inevitably confronted with tasks
owning only limited labeled data. This situation has motivated the research on transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2009),
aiming at transferring the knowledge from a related and data
sufficient source domain to a resource-constrained (mainly
refer to data resource) target domain.
Recently, much effort has been made to tune the pretrained model to improve transfer learning. Typically, a pretrained model refers to a model that has been trained with a
large-scale dataset (e.g., ImageNet2012 (Deng et al. 2009))
and can serve as a good feature extractor for downstream
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8627

