The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PAC Learning of Causal Trees with Latent Variables
Prasad Tadepalli,1 Stuart J. Russell 2
1

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, 97331
2
Division of Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, California, 94720
tadepall@oregonstate.edu, russell@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract

2014). Other methods have explored the use of path queries
(Bello and Honorio 2017), experimental design (Kocaoglu,
Shanmugam, and Bareinboim 2017), and constraint satisfaction to learn the structure (Hyttinen et al. 2013).
In contrast with most prior work, we allow the learning algorithm to intervene only at the pre-specified input variables
and observe the conditional probability of the target variable. The remaining variables can neither be observed nor
manipulated. More specifically, we address the problem of
learning a tree-structured causal network with bounded indegree k. The root of the tree represents the target or output
variable, and the leaves represent the input variables, where
the causality flows from the inputs to the target. The objective is to model the probability of the target given the inputs.
We approach the problem of learning causal trees of
bounded degree from the perspective of probably approximately correct (PAC) learning of probabilistic concepts or pconcepts (Haussler 1992; Kearns and Schapire 1994). More
specifically, our objective is to efficiently learn, with high
probability, an approximate conditional distribution for the
target variable given the inputs drawn from an unknown
but fixed natural distribution. In the more relaxed setting of
PAC-prediction, the learner is allowed to express the target
function in any form that can be evaluated in polynomial
time. When all variables are Boolean and the model is deterministic, an SCM can encode a Boolean circuit. It is known
that PAC-prediction of Boolean circuits from random examples is cryptographically hard, i.e., as hard as solving cryptographic problems such as integer factoring (Pitt and Valiant
1988). Since probabilistic Boolean SCMs, where only the
inputs and the final output of the SCM are observed, generalize Boolean circuits, it follows that learning them from
random examples is as hard as factoring. As with Boolean
circuits, the hardness remains even when the SCM has a
known tree structure (Pitt and Warmuth 1990).
Despite the above negative results, it has been shown that
the functional formulas at the latent nodes of a deterministic Boolean circuit with known tree structure can be learned
from random examples and membership queries (Tadepalli
1993; Tadepalli and Russell 1998). A membership query
asks the output of the target function for any input desired by
the learning algorithm (Angluin 1987). In previous work, we
showed that the deterministic algorithm of Tadepalli (1993)
can be extended to causal trees of known structure (Tade-

Learning causal probabilistic models with latent variables
from observational and experimental data is an important
problem. In this paper we present a polynomial-time algorithm that PAC-learns the structure and parameters of a
rooted, tree-structured causal network of bounded degree
where the internal nodes of the tree cannot be observed or
manipulated. Our algorithm is the first of its kind to provably
learn the structure and parameters of tree-structured causal
models with latent internal variables from random examples
and active experiments.

Introduction
Structural Causal Models (SCMs) offer a probabilistic
model of causality with intuitive semantics (Pearl and
Mackenzie 2018; Pearl 2009). They support sound inference algorithms to answer a variety of causal queries (Pearl
2019). In this paper, we study the problem of efficiently
learning a causal model by interacting with a stochastic
black-box function through interventions and observations.
It is well-known that interventional experiments are often
needed to identify the true causal structure from its Markov
equivalence class (Reichenbach 1991). There has been a lot
of empirical research on learning causal models by combining observational and interventional data acquired offline
(Cooper and Yoo 1999; Peters, Bühlmann, and Meinshausen
2016; Silander and Myllymaki 2012; Eaton and Murphy
2007; He and Geng 2008). Previous work in active learning of Bayesian networks also explored the use of greedy
heuristics such as structure entropy and expected posterior
loss over the query distribution (Li and Leong 2009; Tong
and Koller 2001; He and Geng 2008). More theoretically
grounded approaches such as IC*, FCI, and RFCI are applicable in the presence of latent variables (Spirtes, Glymour,
and Scheines 2000; Colombo et al. 2012) and rely on conditional independence queries over sets of variables. There
are also other algorithmic approaches that actively design
optimal experiments to learn the structure and parameters of
causal network (He and Geng 2008). In recent work, optimal active learning strategies for identifying causal network
structures with minimal numbers of single-node and multinode interventions have been studied (Hauser and Bühlmann
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9774

