The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Class-Incremental Instance Segmentation via Multi-Teacher Networks
Yanan Gu, Cheng Deng∗ , and Kun Wei
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{yanangu.xd, chdeng.xd,weikunsk}@gmail.com

Abstract
Although deep neural networks have achieved amazing results on instance segmentation, they are still ill-equipped
when they are required to learn new tasks incrementally. Concretely, they suffer from “catastrophic forgetting”, an abrupt degradation of performance on old classes with the initial
training data missing. Moreover, they are subjected to a negative transfer problem on new classes, which renders the model
unable to update its knowledge while preserving the previous
knowledge. To address these problems, we propose an incremental instance segmentation method that consists of three
networks: Former Teacher Network (FTN), Current Student
Network (CSN) and Current Teacher Network (CTN). Specifically, FTN supervises CSN to preserve the previous knowledge, and CTN supervises CSN to adapt to new classes. The
supervision of two teacher networks is achieved by a distillation loss function for instances, bounding boxes, and classes. In addition, we adjust the supervision weights of different
teacher networks to balance between the knowledge preservation for former classes and the adaption to new classes. Extensive experimental results on PASCAL 2012 SBD and COCO
datasets show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Fine-Tuning

person

Incremental Learning
person

Figure 1: Comparison of incremental learning and finetuning. An instance segmentation model is firstly trained on
two classes, including car and bicycle. Then it is retrained
with images of the new class person.

continuously by absorbing knowledge from new tasks while
preserving initially learned capabilities. Therefore, there are
two main aspects to judge whether an incremental model is
good or not: the ability to maintain knowledge of the previous tasks and capture new knowledge from the current task.
For the first aspect, the critical challenge is catastrophic
forgetting, an abrupt degradation of performance on the original set of classes, when the training objective is adapted
to the new classes without access to previous training data.
For the second aspect, the critical challenge is the inability
of a model to update its knowledge while preserving the previous knowledge, which is a special negative transfer problem. Recently, many studies on incremental schemes (Li and
Hoiem 2017; Chaudhry et al. 2018; Shmelkov, Schmid, and
Alahari 2017; Yu et al. 2020) for image classification or
object detection have been proposed. However, catastrophic forgetting and negative transfer problem in incremental
instance segmentation algorithms are still ignored and unsolved.
Figure 1 shows an incremental situation. We first train an
instance segmentation model on two classes, including car
and bicycle. As shown in Figure 1(a), the model segments

Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision, which is challenging because it not only needs to detect all objects in an image correctly but also needs to segment each instance precisely. Thanks to the
development of deep learning, like other visual tasks (Wei
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Han et al. 2020; Feng et al.
2020), current instance segmentation methods (He et al.
2017; Bolya et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020) based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable
results. However, a fatal limitation of these methods lies in
assuming the training data for all categories are always available, making them unsuitable in some real-world situations.
In some real-world situations, training data are received
sequentially. The training data for the new task are available,
but the data for the previous task are often not accessible
due to various problems such as storage budget and privacy.
A well-qualified incremental system needs to be upgraded
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1478

