The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

F ILTER: An Enhanced Fusion Method for Cross-lingual
Language Understanding
Yuwei Fang∗ , Shuohang Wang∗ , Zhe Gan, Siqi Sun, Jingjing Liu
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{yuwfan,shuohang.wang,zhe.gan,siqi.sun,jingjl}@microsoft.com

Abstract

2019) have achieved strong performance on many crosslingual tasks by successfully transferring knowledge from
source language to a target one. (ii) Supervised training: to
enforce models insensitive to labeled data across different
languages, through teacher forcing (Wu et al. 2020) or adversarial learning (Cao, Liu, and Wan 2020). (iii) Translation: to translate either source language to the target one,
or vice versa (Cui et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Liang et al.
2020), so that training and inference can be performed in the
same language.
The translation approach has proven highly effective on
recent multilingual benchmarks. For example, the translatetrain method has achieved state of the art on XTREME (Hu
et al. 2020) and XGLUE (Liang et al. 2020). However,
translate-train is simple data augmentation, which doubles
training data by translating source text into target languages.
Thus, only single-language input is considered for finetuning with augmented data, leaving out cross-lingual alignment between languages unexplored. Dual BERT (Cui et al.
2019) is recently proposed to make use of the representations learned from source language to help target language
understanding. However, it only injects information from the
source language into the decoder of target language, without
scoping into the intrinsic relations between languages.
Motivated by this, we propose F ILTER,1 a generic and
flexible framework that leverages translated data to enforce
fusion between languages for better cross-lingual language
understanding. As illustrated in Figure 2(c), F ILTER first
(i) encodes a translated language pair separately in shallow
layers; then (ii) performs cross-lingual fusion between languages in the intermediate layers; and finally (iii) encodes
language-specific representations in deeper layers. Compared to the translate-train baseline (Figure 2(a)), F ILTER
learns additional cross-lingual alignment that is instrumental to cross-lingual representations. Furthermore, compared
to simply concatenating the language pair as the input of
XLM (Figure 2(b)), F ILTER strikes a well-measured balance
between cross-lingual fusion and individual language representation learning.
For classification tasks such as natural language inference, translated text in the target language shares the same
label as the source language. However, for question answer-

Large-scale cross-lingual language models (LM), such as
mBERT, Unicoder and XLM, have achieved great success
in cross-lingual representation learning. However, when applied to zero-shot cross-lingual transfer tasks, most existing
methods use only single-language input for LM finetuning,
without leveraging the intrinsic cross-lingual alignment between different languages that proves essential for multilingual tasks. In this paper, we propose F ILTER, an enhanced
fusion method that takes cross-lingual data as input for XLM
finetuning. Specifically, F ILTER first encodes text input in
the source language and its translation in the target language
independently in the shallow layers, then performs crosslanguage fusion to extract multilingual knowledge in the
intermediate layers, and finally performs further languagespecific encoding. During inference, the model makes predictions based on the text input in the target language and its
translation in the source language. For simple tasks such as
classification, translated text in the target language shares the
same label as the source language. However, this shared label becomes less accurate or even unavailable for more complex tasks such as question answering, NER and POS tagging. To tackle this issue, we further propose an additional
KL-divergence self-teaching loss for model training, based
on auto-generated soft pseudo-labels for translated text in the
target language. Extensive experiments demonstrate that F IL TER achieves new state of the art on two challenging multilingual multi-task benchmarks, XTREME and XGLUE.

Introduction
Cross-lingual low-resource adaptation has been a critical
and exigent problem in the NLP field, despite recent success in large-scale language models (mostly trained on English with abundant training corpora). How to adapt models trained in high-resource languages (e.g., English) to lowresource ones (most of the 6,900 languages in the world)
still remains challenging. To address the proverbial domain
gap between languages, three schools of approach have been
widely studied. (i) Unsupervised pre-training: to learn a universal encoder (cross-lingual language model) for different
languages. For example, mBERT (Devlin et al. 2019), Unicoder (Huang et al. 2019) and XLM (Lample and Conneau
∗

Equal Contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12776

Fusion in the Intermediate Layers of TransformER

