The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Open Domain Dialogue Generation with Latent Images
Ze Yang 1 , Wei Wu 2 , Huang Hu 3 , Can Xu 3 , Wei Wang 4 , Zhoujun Li 1 *
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Meituan, Beijing, China
3
Microsoft, Beijing, China
4
China Resources Group, Shenzhen, China
{tobey, lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {huahu, caxu}@microsoft.com
{wuwei19850318, ww.cs.tj}@gmail.com
Abstract
She needs to adjust the helmet.

We consider grounding open domain dialogues with images.
Existing work assumes that both an image and a textual
context are available, but image-grounded dialogues by nature are more difficult to obtain than textual dialogues. Thus,
we propose learning a response generation model with both
image-grounded dialogues and textual dialogues by assuming
that the visual scene information at the time of a conversation
can be represented by an image, and trying to recover the
latent images of the textual dialogues through text-to-image
generation techniques. The likelihood of the two types of dialogues is then formulated by a response generator and an
image reconstructor that are learned within a conditional variational auto-encoding framework. Empirical studies are conducted in both image-grounded conversation and text-based
conversation. In the first scenario, image-grounded dialogues,
especially under a low-resource setting, can be effectively
augmented by textual dialogues with latent images; while in
the second scenario, latent images can enrich the content of
responses and at the same time keep them relevant to contexts.

I want to try this,can you teach me?
It takes years to master horse-riding
skills. I can't just teach you.

Figure 1: An example of image-grounded dialogue from
Image-Chat.
We consider grounding open domain dialogues with their
visual scene information which could be represented by images. Existing work (Shuster et al. 2020; Huber et al. 2018)
formalizes the problem as response generation (or selection)
with both a given image and several turns of conversation
history as contexts, and focuses on benchmarking a combination of state-of-the-art neural structures in image modeling and dialogue modeling with either crowd-sourced data
(Shuster et al. 2020) or selected data from social media
(Huber et al. 2018). Figure 1 shows an example of imagegrounded dialogues used in the existing work (Shuster et al.
2020). While these works provide test beds for future studies, the scale of data (e.g., a few hundred thousand triples)
could hinder further progress, due to the expensive and exhausting nature of human effort and the fact that one has to
abandon the large-scale textual dialogue data as their background images have not been explicitly recorded or they are
naturally formed regardless of the visual scene. Motivated
by this, we propose leveraging both multimodal data (i.e.,
image-context-response triples) and large scale of unimodal
data (i.e., textual dialogues) for image-grounded response
generation. The key assumption is that the visual background behind a textual conversation can be represented by a
latent image, and we try to recover the latent image from text
to integrate the textual dialogue data into image-grounded
conversation. Advantages of our approach are two-fold: (1)
for image-grounded conversation where an image is given
first, textual dialogues with latent visual variables can augment the multimodal data, and help alleviate the data sparsity issue; and (2) for text-based conversation where only
textual dialogues are available, the latent variables can pro-

Introduction
Open domain dialogue generation, due to the successful application in socialbots such as Microsoft XiaoIce (Shum, He,
and Li 2018) and in virtual assistants such as Amazon Alexa
(Ram et al. 2018), is emerging as a prominent research direction in conversational AI. Benefiting from the advances of
neural sequence modeling (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Vaswani et al. 2017), existing work has achieved promising
results on response quality (Zhang et al. 2019, 2018a; Xu
et al. 2019), but often makes use of only textual contexts
in response generation. Human conversations, on the other
hand, could be grounded by more than one kind of perception. In addition to the context of conversation, people also
respond according to the scene information including what
they hear (e.g., voice or music) and what they see (e.g., images or videos). Hence, there is a clear trend in the research
of open domain dialogues that text-based unimodal conversation is moving to perceptually-grounded multimodal conversation (Mostafazadeh et al. 2017; Chu, Li, and Fidler
2018; Le et al. 2019; Hori et al. 2019).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14239

