The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Ensemble Robustness by Collaboratively
Promoting and Demoting Adversarial Robustness
Anh Tuan Bui1 , Trung Le1 , He Zhao1
Paul Montague2 , Olivier deVel2 , Tamas Abraham2 , Dinh Phung1
2

1
Monash University, Australia
Defence Science and Technology Group, Australia
tuananh.bui@monash.edu

Abstract

has shown that ensemble learning can strengthen robustness
significantly.
Despite initial success, key principles for ensemble-based
adversarial training (EAT) largely remain open. One crucial
challenge is to achieve minimum ‘transferability’ between
committee members to increase robustness for the overall ensemble model (Papernot, McDaniel, and Goodfellow
2016; Liu et al. 2016; Tramèr et al. 2018; Pang et al. 2019;
Kariyappa and Qureshi 2019). In (Kariyappa and Qureshi
2019), robustness was achieved by aligning the gradient of
committee members to be diametrically opposed, hence reducing the shared adversarial spaces (Tramèr et al. 2017),
or the transferability. However, the method in (Kariyappa
and Qureshi 2019) was designed for black-box attacks, thus
still vulnerable to white-box attacks. Furthermore, attempting to achieve gradient alignment is unreliable for highdimensional datasets and it is difficult to extend for ensemble with more than two committee members. More recently (Pang et al. 2019) proposed to promote the diversity
of non-maximal predictions of the committee members (i.e.,
the diversity among softmax probabilities except the highest
ones) to reduce the adversarial transferability among them.
Nonetheless, the central concept of transferability has not
been systematically addressed.
Our proposed work here will first make the concept of
adversarial transferability concrete via the definitions of secure and insecure sets. To reduce the adversarial transferability and increase the model diversity, we aim to make the
insecure sets of the committee models as disjoint as possible (i.e., lessening the overlapping of those regions) and
challenge those committee members with divergent sets of
adversarial examples. In addition, we observe that lessening
the adversarial transferability alone is not sufficient to ensure accurate predictions of the ensemble model because the
committee member that offers inaccurate predictions might
dominate the final decisions. With this in mind, we propose
to realize what we call a “transferring flow” by collaborating robustness promoting and demoting operations. Our key
principle to coordinate the promoting and demoting operations is to promote the prediction of one model on a given
adversarial example and to demote the prediction of another
model on this example so as to maximally lessen the negative impact of the wrong predictions and ensure the correct
predictions of the ensemble model. Moreover, different from

Ensemble-based adversarial training is a principled approach
to achieve robustness against adversarial attacks. An important technique of this approach is to control the transferability of adversarial examples among ensemble members. We
propose in this work a simple yet effective strategy to collaborate among committee models of an ensemble model. This
is achieved via the secure and insecure sets defined for each
model member on a given sample, hence help us to quantify
and regularize the transferability. Consequently, our proposed
framework provides the flexibility to reduce the adversarial
transferability as well as to promote the diversity of ensemble members, which are two crucial factors for better robustness in our ensemble approach. We conduct extensive and
comprehensive experiments to demonstrate that our proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art ensemble baselines,
at the same time can detect a wide range of adversarial examples with a nearly perfect accuracy. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/tuananhbui89/Crossing-CollaborativeEnsemble.

Introduction
Deep neural networks have experienced great success in
many disciplines (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016),
such as computer vision (He et al. 2016), natural language
processing and speech processing (Vaswani et al. 2017).
However, even the state-of-the-art models are reported to be
vulnerable to adversarial attacks (Biggio et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015; Szegedy et al. 2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Madry et al. 2018; Athalye, Carlini,
and Wagner 2018), which is of significant concern given the
large number of applications of deep learning in real-world
scenarios. It is thus urgent to develop deep learning models
that are robust against different types of adversarial attacks.
To this end, several adversarial defense methods have been
developed but typically addressing the robustness within a
single model (e.g., Papernot et al. 2016; Moosavi-Dezfooli,
Fawzi, and Frossard 2016; Madry et al. 2018; Qin et al.
2019; Shafahi et al. 2019). To cater for more diverse types of
attacks, recent work, notably (He et al. 2017; Tramèr et al.
2018; Strauss et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2018; Pang et al. 2019),
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6831

