The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Accurate and Robust Feature Importance Estimation under Distribution Shifts
Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan1 * , Vivek Narayanaswamy2 , Rushil Anirudh1 , Peer-Timo Bremer1 ,
Andreas Spanias2
1

Lawrence Livermore National Labs
2
Arizona State University
jjayaram@llnl.gov, vnaray29@asu.edu, anirudh1@llnl.gov, bremer5@llnl.gov, spanias@asu.edu

Abstract

and Karlen 2019) to constructing simpler explanation models (e.g. linear, tree- or rule-based) that mimic a black-box
model (Schwab and Hlavacs 2015; Lakkaraju et al. 2019).
Though sensitivity analysis techniques such as
LIME (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016) and
SHAP (Lundberg and Lee 2017) are routinely used to
explain individual predictions of any black-box classifier,
they are computationally expensive. This challenge is
typically handled in practice by constructing a global set of
explanations using a sub-modular pick procedure (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016). On the other hand, despite
being scalable, methods that construct simpler explanation
models (Lakkaraju et al. 2019) are not guaranteed to match
the behavior of the original model. While the recently
proposed CXPlain (Schwab and Karlen 2019) addresses
the scalability issue of feature masking methods, they are
specific to the type of masking (e.g., zero masking) and the
explainer needs to be re-trained if that changes (e.g., mean
masking). Finally, and most importantly, it has been well
documented that current approaches are highly sensitive to
distribution shifts (Lakkaraju, Arsov, and Bastani 2020) and
vulnerable to even small perturbations. Recently, Lakkaraju
et al. (Lakkaraju, Arsov, and Bastani 2020) formalized this
problem for the case of model mimicking approaches, and
showed how adversarial training can be used to produce
consistent explanations. In CXPlain, Schwab et al. proposed
an ensembling strategy to effectively augment explanations
with uncertainty estimates to better understand the explanation quality. However, they did not study the consistency of
inferred explanations under distribution shifts.
In this work, we propose PRoFILE (Producing Robust
Feature Importances using Loss Estimates), a novel feature
importance estimation method that is highly accurate, computationally efficient, consistent with the black-box model
being explained and robust under distribution shifts. The
key idea of our approach is to jointly train a loss estimator while building the predictive model, and generate posthoc explanations by measuring the influence of input features on the model output using a causal objective defined on
the loss estimates. Furthermore, we introduce two different
learning objectives to optimize the loss estimator, namely
contrastive training and dropout calibration. Note that, once
trained, the loss estimator can also be treated as a blackbox. Interestingly, we find that the loss estimator is easier

With increasing reliance on the outcomes of black-box models in critical applications, post-hoc explainability tools that
do not require access to the model internals are often used
to enable humans understand and trust these models. In particular, we focus on the class of methods that can reveal the
influence of input features on the predicted outputs. Despite
their wide-spread adoption, existing methods are known to
suffer from one or more of the following challenges: computational complexities, large uncertainties and most importantly, inability to handle real-world domain shifts. In this paper, we propose PRoFILE (Producing Robust Feature Importances using Loss Estimates), a novel feature importance estimation method that addresses all these challenges. Through
the use of a loss estimator jointly trained with the predictive model and a causal objective, PRoFILE can accurately
estimate the feature importance scores even under complex
distribution shifts, without any additional re-training. To this
end, we also develop learning strategies for training the loss
estimator, namely contrastive and dropout calibration, and
find that it can effectively detect distribution shifts. Using empirical studies on several benchmark image and non-image
data, we show significant improvements over state-of-the-art
approaches, both in terms of fidelity and robustness.

Introduction
With the increased adoption of machine learning (ML)
models in critical decision-making, post-hoc interpretability
techniques are often required to enable decision-makers understand and trust these models. The black-box nature of ML
models in most real-world settings (either due to their high
complexity or proprietary nature) makes it challenging to interrogate their functioning. Consequently, attribution methods, which estimate the influence of different input features
on the model output, are commonly utilized to explain decisions of such black-box models. Existing approaches for
attribution, or more popularly feature importance estimation, range from sensitivity analysis (Ribeiro, Singh, and
Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017), studying change in
model confidences through input feature masking (Schwab
* This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7891

