The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fooling Thermal Infrared Pedestrian Detectors in Real World Using Small Bulbs
Xiaopei Zhu1 , Xiao Li2 , Jianmin Li2 , Zheyao Wang1 * , Xiaolin Hu2*
1

Department of Microelectronics and Nanoelectronics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artificial Intelligence
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
{zxp18, lixiao20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {lijianmin, z.wang, xlhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Thermal infrared detection systems play an important role in
many areas such as night security, autonomous driving, and
body temperature detection. They have the unique advantages
of passive imaging, temperature sensitivity and penetration.
But the security of these systems themselves has not been
fully explored, which poses risks in applying these systems.
We propose a physical attack method with small bulbs on
a board against the state of-the-art pedestrian detectors. Our
goal is to make infrared pedestrian detectors unable to detect
real-world pedestrians. Towards this goal, we first showed
that it is possible to use two kinds of patches to attack the
infrared pedestrian detector based on YOLOv3. The average
precision (AP) dropped by 64.12% in the digital world, while
a blank board with the same size caused the AP to drop by
29.69% only. After that, we designed and manufactured a
physical board and successfully attacked YOLOv3 in the real
world. In recorded videos, the physical board caused AP of
the target detector to drop by 34.48%, while a blank board
with the same size caused the AP to drop by 14.91% only.
With the ensemble attack techniques, the designed physical
board had good transferability to unseen detectors.

Figure 1: An example of physical infrared attack and control
experiments

(2018) showed that a 3D printed turtle could be mistaken
for a rifle by a DNN. Simen et al. (2019) designed a printable patch that successfully attacked the pedestrian detection system and achieved an “invisibility” effect. Xu et al.
(2019) invented Adversarial T-shirts, which could attack the
person detectors even if it has non-rigid deformation due to
a moving person’s pose changes. The adversarial attack in
the physical world has attracted much attention as it poses
high risks to the widely deployed deep learning-based security systems. It urges researchers to re-evaluate the safety
and reliability of these systems.
Almost all current research on adversarial attacks focused
on the visible light field. There is a lack of research on the
safety of infrared (Thermal infrared in our paper) object detection systems, which have been widely deployed in our society with their unique advantages. First of all, the infrared
object detection systems can work at night. It implies that the
surveillance systems based on the infrared cameras do not
need environmental light and can save energy in certain scenarios. Some autonomous driving companies are currently
using infrared images as auxiliary input at night. Secondly,
they can detect objects behind certain obstacles. For example, a person can still be detected when hiding in bushes.
Thirdly, compared to visible light images, infrared images
not only contain the shape information of the object but also
contain the temperature information of the object. During
the pandemic caused by COVID-19, infrared pedestrian detection has received more and more attention. With the de-

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various
tasks such as classification (Karpathy et al. 2014), detection
(Redmon and Farhadi 2017), and segmentation (Yin et al.
2020). However, it is well known that deep neural networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, i.e., they can
be fooled by input examples with some deliberately designed small perturbations. Such examples are called adversarial examples. Since the findings of Szegedy et al. (2013),
there is increasing interest in the field of adversarial attacks.
For digital world attacks, many methods have been proposed
including the gradient-based attacks (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017;
Madry et al. 2018), optimization-based attacks (Carlini and
Wagner 2017; Szegedy et al. 2014; Eykholt et al. 2018), and
network-based attacks (Xiao et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019).
Annoyingly, adversarial examples not only exist in the digital world but also exist in the real world. Athalye et al.
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3616

