The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Agent Incentives: A Causal Perspective
Tom Everitt,*1 * Ryan Carey,*2 Eric D. Langlois,*1,3,4 Pedro A. Ortega,1 Shane Legg1
1

DeepMind, 2 University of Oxford, 3 University of Toronto, 4 Vector Institute
tomeveritt@google.com, ry.duff@gmail.com, edl@cs.toronto.edu, pedroortega@google.com

Abstract
We present a framework for analysing agent incentives using
causal influence diagrams. We establish that a well-known
criterion for value of information is complete. We propose a
new graphical criterion for value of control, establishing its
soundness and completeness. We also introduce two new concepts for incentive analysis: response incentives indicate which
changes in the environment affect an optimal decision, while
instrumental control incentives establish whether an agent can
influence its utility via a variable X. For both new concepts,
we provide sound and complete graphical criteria. We show by
example how these results can help with evaluating the safety
and fairness of an AI system.

Introduction
A recurring question in AI research is how to choose an
objective to induce safe and fair behaviour (O’Neil 2016;
Russell 2019). In a given setup, will an optimal policy depend
on a sensitive attribute, or seek to influence an important
variable? For example, consider the following two incentive
design problems, to which we will return throughout the
paper:
Example 1 (Grade prediction). To decide which applicants
to admit, a university uses a model to predict the grades of
new students. The university would like the system to predict
accurately, without treating students differently based on their
gender or race (see Figure 1a).
Example 2 (Content recommendation). An AI algorithm
has the task of recommending a series of posts to a user. The
designers want the algorithm to present content adapted to
each user’s interests to optimize clicks. However, they do not
want the algorithm to use polarising content to manipulate
the user into clicking more predictably (Figure 1b).
Contributions This paper provides a common language
for incentive analysis, based on influence diagrams (Howard
1990) and causal models (Pearl 2009). Traditionally, influence diagrams have been used to help decision-makers make
better decisions. Here, we invert the perspective, and use the
diagrams to understand and predict the behaviour of machine
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11487

learning systems trained to optimize an objective in a given
environment. To facilitate this analysis, we prove a number
of relevant theorems and introduce two new concepts:
• Value of Information (VoI): First defined by Howard
(1966), a graphical criterion for detecting positive VoI
in influence diagrams were proposed and proven sound
by Fagiuoli and Zaffalon (1998), Lauritzen and Nilsson
(2001), and Shachter (2016). Here we offer the first correct
completeness proof, showing that the graphical criterion is
unique and cannot be further improved upon.
• Value of Control (VoC): Defined by Shachter (1986), Matheson (1990), and Shachter and Heckerman (2010), an incomplete graphical criterion was discussed by Shachter
(1986). Here we provide a complete graphical criterion,
along with both soundness and completeness proofs.
• Instrumental Control incentive (ICI): We propose a refinement of VoC to nodes the agent can influence with
its decision. Conceptually, this is a hybrid of VoC and responsiveness (Shachter 2016). We offer a formal definition
of instrumental control incentives based on nested counterfactuals, and establish a sound and complete graphical
criterion.
• Response incentive (RI): Which changes in the environment does an optimal policy respond to? This is a central
problem in fairness and AI safety (e.g. Kusner et al. 2017;
Hadfield-Menell et al. 2017). Again, we give a formal
definition, and a sound and complete graphical criterion.
Our analysis focuses on influence diagrams with a singledecision. This single-decision setting is adequate to model
supervised learning, (contextual) bandits, and the choice of a
policy in an MDP. Previous work has also discussed ways to
transform a multi-decision setting into a single-decision setting by imputing policies to later decisions (Shachter 2016).
Applicability This paper combines material from two
preprints (Everitt et al. 2019c; Carey et al. 2020). Since the
release of these preprints, the unified language of causal influence diagrams have already aided in the understanding of
incentive problems such as an agent’s redirectability, ambition, tendency to tamper with reward, and other properties
(Armstrong et al. 2020; Holtman 2020; Cohen, Vellambi,
and Hutter 2020; Everitt et al. 2019a,b; Langlois and Everitt
2021).

