The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Recipe for Global Convergence Guarantee in Deep Neural Networks
Kenji Kawaguchi,1* Qingyun Sun,2*
1

Harvard University
Stanford University
kkawaguchi@fas.harvard.edu, qysun@stanford.edu
2

Abstract

and natural language, a major reason for the success of deep
learning in practice is its ability to learn representations with
multiple levels of abstraction during training, as explained
by LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton (2015). In contrast, special
types of neural networks studied in previous theories with
global convergence guarantees are not allowed to learn representation during training, as the neural tangent kernels are
approximately unchanged during training. Indeed, such special neural networks without the capability to learn representation are considered to have limitations compared to
those with the capability (Wei et al. 2019; Chizat, Oyallon,
and Bach 2019; Yehudai and Shamir 2019). Furthermore,
the set of neural networks studied by previous theories have
not yet practical deep neural networks used in practice with
good generalization performances (Kawaguchi, Kaelbling,
and Bengio 2017; Poggio et al. 2017).
In this work, we propose a two-phase method to modify
a base algorithm such that the modified algorithm enables
practical deep neural networks to learn representation while
having global convergence guarantees of all layers under
verifiable conditions. Our global convergence guarantees are
applicable to a wide range of practical deep neural networks,
including deep convolutional networks with skip connection
and batch normalization. For example, the verifiable conditions for global convergence guarantees are shown to be
satisfied by both fully connected deep neural networks and
deep residual neural networks (ResNets) with convolutional
layers. Our main contributions can be summarized as:

Existing global convergence guarantees of (stochastic) gradient descent do not apply to practical deep networks in
the practical regime of deep learning beyond the neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime. This paper proposes an algorithm,
which is ensured to have global convergence guarantees in
the practical regime beyond the NTK regime, under a verifiable condition called the expressivity condition. The expressivity condition is defined to be both data-dependent and
architecture-dependent, which is the key property that makes
our results applicable for practical settings beyond the NTK
regime. On the one hand, the expressivity condition is theoretically proven to hold data-independently for fully-connected
deep neural networks with narrow hidden layers and a single
wide layer. On the other hand, the expressivity condition is
numerically shown to hold data-dependently for deep (convolutional) ResNet with batch normalization with various standard image datasets. We also show that the the proposed algorithm has generalization performances comparable with those
of the heuristic algorithm, with the same hyper-parameters
and total number of iterations. Therefore, the proposed algorithm can be viewed as a step towards providing theoretical
guarantees for deep learning in the practical regime.

1

Introduction

The pursuit of global convergence guarantee has been one
of the important aspects of optimization theory. However,
ensuring global convergence is notoriously hard for firstorder optimization algorithms used to train deep neural networks (Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville 2016). Recently,
some progress has been made on understanding the optimization aspect of overparametrized neural networks. Overparametrized neural networks can be trained to have zero
training errors, interpolating all the training data points, and
are recently shown to have global convergence guarantees
in theoretical regimes (Li and Liang 2018; Soltanolkotabi,
Javanmard, and Lee 2018; Kawaguchi and Huang 2019;
Daniely 2019; Bresler and Nagaraj 2020; Montanari and
Zhong 2020; Bubeck et al. 2020). These studies open up
an insightful direction leading to the understanding of the
optimization aspect of deep learning.
However, there is still a significant gap between theory
and practice. In applications such as computer vision, speech

• We propose a novel algorithm that turns any given firstorder training algorithm into a two-phase training algorithm.
• We prove that the resulting two-phase training algorithms
find global minima for all layers of deep neural networks,
under the expressivity condition.
• The condition for global convergence is verified theoretically for fully connected networks with last hidden layer
being wide (as the number of training data points) and all
other hidden layers being narrow (as the input dimension).
• The condition for global convergence is verified numerically for the deep (convolutional) ResNet with bathnormalization on various standard datasets.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

*Equal contribution

8074

