The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cold-start Sequential Recommendation via Meta Learner
Yujia Zheng,1 Siyi Liu, 1 Zekun Li, 2, 3 Shu Wu 4, 5, *
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Institute of Automation and Artificial Intelligence Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yjzheng19, ssui.liu1022, lizekunlee}@gmail.com, shu.wu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2

Abstract

(Tang and Wang 2018), and graph neural network (GNN)
(Wu et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020). For example, NARM
(Li et al. 2017) employs RNNs with an attention mechanism
to capture the main purpose and sequential behavior, then
combines them as a representation for the recommendation.
SR-GNN (Wu et al. 2019) models the session data in the
graph structure and utilizes a gated GNN to model complex
transitions among item nodes.
These sequential recommendation models mainly rely on
user-item interactions to portray user preference and item
property. Therefore, the number of historical interactions
largely determines the model performance. However, new
items arrive frequently in those online services, and timely
recommending these items to the target users is of high practical value. As they rarely have enough known interactions
with users, existing models have trouble in recommendation
towards those items. Therefore, cold-start problem needs to
be solved in sequential recommendation scenarios.
The basic idea behind existing cold-start methods in the
general recommendation is to incorporate side information,
such as user and item attributes (e.g., user profile, item ratings or descriptions) (Barjasteh et al. 2016; Saveski and
Mantrach 2014) and knowledge from other domains (Hu,
Zhang, and Yang 2018). Recently, some meta-learning approaches have been proposed to tackle it (Vartak et al. 2017;
Yao et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2019; Du et al. 2019; Dong et al.
2020), but they still cannot get rid of these side information.
For example, s2 Meta (Du et al. 2019) relies on cross-domain
knowledge transferring. Vartak et al. (Vartak et al. 2017)
utilize item ratings to make the twitter recommendation.
MAMO (Dong et al. 2020) predicts the rating for new items
with the help of user profile and item descriptions. However,
because there is generally no side information in the setting of sequential recommendation task, previous cold-start
methods, including those based on meta-learning, cannot be
applied in these scenarios. Therefore, the cold-start problem
in sequential recommendation remains unexplored.
To alleviate the item cold-start problem in sequential
scenarios given only sparse interactions, we propose a
MEta-learning-based COld-start Sequential recommendation framework (Mecos). Our framework can be painlessly
integrated with neural network-based sequential recommendation models. We first design a sequence pair encoder to
effectively extract user preference. Then a matching net-

This paper explores meta-learning in sequential recommendation to alleviate the item cold-start problem. Sequential
recommendation aims to capture user’s dynamic preferences
based on historical behavior sequences and acts as a key component of most online recommendation scenarios. However,
most previous methods have trouble recommending coldstart items, which are prevalent in those scenarios. As there
is generally no side information in the setting of sequential
recommendation task, previous cold-start methods could not
be applied when only user-item interactions are available.
Thus, we propose a Meta-learning-based Cold-Start Sequential Recommendation Framework, namely Mecos, to mitigate
the item cold-start problem in sequential recommendation.
This task is non-trivial as it targets at an important problem in a novel and challenging context. Mecos effectively extracts user preference from limited interactions and learns to
match the target cold-start item with the potential user. Besides, our framework can be painlessly integrated with neural network-based models. Extensive experiments conducted
on three real-world datasets verify the superiority of Mecos,
with the average improvement up to 99%, 91%, and 70% in
HR@10 over state-of-the-art baseline methods.

Introduction
Increasing research interests have been attracted in sequential recommendation due to its highly practical value in online services (e.g., e-commerce), where users’ current interest are intrinsically dynamic as the evolving of their historical actions. Accurately recommending the user’s next action
based only on the sequential dynamic of historical interactions lies in the heart of sequential recommendation.
Markov Chains (MC) (Zimdars, Chickering, and Meek
2001) is a representation of traditional methods, which predicts the user’s next action based on the previous one. Recently, neural network-based methods have become popular due to their strong abilities to model sequential data,
such as the methods based on recurrent neural network
(RNN) (Hidasi et al. 2015; Tan, Xu, and Liu 2016; Li et al.
2017; Cui et al. 2018), Attention (Liu et al. 2018; Kang
and McAuley 2018), convolutional neural network (CNN)
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4706

