The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Defending against Contagious Attacks on a Network
with Resource Reallocation*
Rufan Bai1 , Haoxing Lin1 , Xinyu Yang1 , Xiaowei Wu1 , Minming Li†2 , Weijia Jia‡3
1

IoTSC, University of Macau,
City University of Hong Kong,
3
BNU (Zhuhai) & UIC,
{yb97439, starklin, mb95466, xiaoweiwu}@um.edu.mo, minming.li@cityu.edu.hk, jiawj@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Introduction

In classic network security games, the defender distributes
defending resources to the nodes of the network, and the attacker attacks a node, with the objective to maximize the damage caused. Existing models assume that the attack at node u
causes damage only at u. However, in many real-world security scenarios, the attack at a node u spreads to the neighbors
of u and can cause damage at multiple nodes, e.g., for the
outbreak of a virus. In this paper, we consider the network
defending problem against contagious attacks.
Existing works that study shared resources assume that the
resource allocated to a node can be shared or duplicated between neighboring nodes. However, in real world, sharing resource naturally leads to a decrease in defending power of the
source node, especially when defending against contagious
attacks. To this end, we study the model in which resources
allocated to a node can only be transferred to its neighboring
nodes, which we refer to as a reallocation process.
We show that this more general model is difficult in two aspects: (1) even for a fixed allocation of resources, we show
that computing the optimal reallocation is NP-hard; (2) for
the case when reallocation is not allowed, we show that computing the optimal allocation (against contagious attack) is
also NP-hard. For positive results, we give a mixed integer
linear program formulation for the problem and a bi-criteria
approximation algorithm. Our experimental results demonstrate that the allocation and reallocation strategies our algorithm computes perform well in terms of minimizing the
damage due to contagious attacks.

In recent years, security games have attracted much research attention within the artificial intelligence community and have been widely adopted for the computation of
optimal allocation of security resources in many areas of
the field (Letchford, Conitzer, and Munagala 2009; Tambe
2012; Yin and Tambe 2012; Sinha et al. 2018). A considerable portion of these works consider the security games
played within a network structure, i.e., the network security
games (Assimakopoulos 1987; Gan et al. 2017; Zhang et al.
2017; Schlenker et al. 2018). In a network security game,
there is an underlying graph, where each node of the graph
represents a target with a defending requirement and a value
to protect. The game is played between a defender who allocates defensive resources to the nodes of the graph and an
attacker who picks a node to attack, depending on how the
nodes are defended.
Many existing works consider the setting when the
allocated resource can be shared between neighboring
nodes (Yin et al. 2015). For example, Gan et al. (Gan, An,
and Vorobeychik 2015) considered a network security game
in which allocating one unit of resource to some target protects not only the target but also the neighboring targets. Li
et al. (Li, Tran-Thanh, and Wu 2020) studied the model in
which the defending power of each node u is determined
by the resource ru allocated to u, plus a linear function of
the resources allocated to its neighbors. These models are
mainly motivated by surveillance or patrolling applications,
in which when a node u shares resource with its neighbor,
we do not need to worry about the defending power of u.
However, for defending problems in which the attack is
contagious, it is necessary to take into account the decrease
in the defending power of node u, especially when u is at the
risk of being involved in the attack. Consider a contagious
attack, e.g., the spread of a virus, on a node v. Suppose the
attack spreads to the neighbors of v and can cause damage
at each of the nodes the attack spreads to, depending on how
well the node is defended. In this case, if we measure the
defending power of v by taking into account the resources
shared from its neighbor u, then naturally, we need to consider the decrease in the defending power of u.
Ideally, a node u can only transfer (a fraction of) the resource it owns to its neighbor v, which increases the defending power of the receiver v but decreases its own defending

* Funded by the Science and Technology Development Fund,
Macau SAR (File no. SKLIOTSC-2018-2020), the Start-up Research Grant of University of Macau (File no. SRG2020-00020IOTSC). This work was supported in part by the Science and
Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR under File no.
0060/2019/A1, and in part by Research Grant of University of
Macau under Grant MYRG2018-00237-FST.
†
City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute,
Shenzhen, P. R. China. The work described in this paper was partially sponsored by Project 11771365 supported by NSFC.
‡
BNU-UIC Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University (Zhuhai), Guangdong, China.
The work was partially supported by Chinese National Research Fund (NSFC) Key Project No. 61532013; NSFC grant No.
61872239; and Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of AI and Multimodal Data Processing at BNU-HKBU UIC.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5135

