The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Catch Me if I Can:
Detecting Strategic Behaviour in Peer Assessment
Ivan Stelmakh, Nihar B. Shah and Aarti Singh
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{stiv,nihars,aarti}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract

et al. 2019; Balietti, Goldstone, and Helbing 2016; Hassidim, Romm, and Shorrer 2018). Deviations from the truthful behaviour decrease the overall quality of the resulted
ranking and undermine fairness of the process. This issue
has led to a long line of work (Alon et al. 2009; Aziz et al.
2016; Kurokawa et al. 2015; Kahng et al. 2018; Xu et al.
2019) on designing “impartial” aggregation rules that can
eliminate the impact of the ranking returned by a reviewer
on the final position of their item.
While impartial methods remove the benefits of manipulations, such robustness may come at the cost of some
accuracy loss when reviewers do not engage in strategic
behaviour. This loss is caused by less efficient data usage (Kahng et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019) and reduction of
efforts put by reviewers (Kotturi et al. 2020). Implementation of such methods also introduces some additional logistical burden on the system designers; as a result, in many
critical applications (e.g., conference peer review) the nonimpartial mechanisms are employed. An important barrier
that prevents stakeholders from making an informed choice
to implement an impartial mechanism is a lack of tools to
detect strategic behaviour. Indeed, to evaluate the trade off
between the loss of accuracy due to manipulations and the
loss of accuracy due to impartiality, one needs to be able to
evaluate the extent of strategic behaviour in the system. With
this motivation, in this work we focus on detecting strategic
manipulations in peer-assessment processes.
Specifically, in this work we consider a setting where each
reviewer is asked to evaluate a subset of works submitted by
their counterparts. In a carefully designed randomized study
of strategic behaviour when evaluations take the form of ratings, Balietti, Goldstone, and Helbing (2016) were able to
detect manipulations by comparing the distribution of scores
given by target reviewers to some truthful reference. However, other works (Huang et al. 2019; Barroga 2014) suggest
that in more practical settings reviewers may strategically
decrease some scores and increase others in attempt to mask
their manipulations or intentionally promote weaker submissions, thereby keeping the distribution of output scores unchanged and making the distribution-based detection inapplicable. Inspired by this observation, we aim to design tools
to detect manipulations when the distributions of scores output by reviewers are fixed, that is, we assume that evaluations are collected in the form of rankings. Ranking-based

We consider the issue of strategic behaviour in various peerassessment tasks, including peer grading of exams or homeworks and peer review in hiring or promotions. When a peerassessment task is competitive (e.g., when students are graded
on a curve), agents may be incentivized to misreport evaluations in order to improve their own final standing. Our focus
is on designing methods for detection of such manipulations.
Specifically, we consider a setting in which agents evaluate a
subset of their peers and output rankings that are later aggregated to form a final ordering. In this paper, we investigate a
statistical framework for this problem and design a principled
test for detecting strategic behaviour. We prove that our test
has strong false alarm guarantees and evaluate its detection
ability in practical settings. For this, we design and conduct
an experiment that elicits strategic behaviour from subjects
and release a dataset of patterns of strategic behaviour that
may be of independent interest. We use this data to run a series of real and semi-synthetic evaluations that reveal a strong
detection power of our test.

1

Introduction

Ranking a set of items submitted by a group of people (or
ranking the people themselves) is a ubiquitous task that is
faced in many applications, including education, hiring, employee evaluation and promotion, and academic peer review.
Many of these applications have a large number of submissions, which makes obtaining an evaluation of each item
by a set of independent experts prohibitively expensive or
slow. Peer-assessment techniques offer an appealing alternative: instead of relying on independent judges, they distribute the evaluation task across the fellow applicants and
then aggregate the received reviews into the final ranking
of items. This paradigm has become popular for employee
evaluation (Edwards and Ewen 1996) and grading students’
homeworks (Topping 1998), and is now expanding to more
novel applications of massive open online courses (Kulkarni et al. 2013; Piech et al. 2013) and hiring at freelancing
platforms (Kotturi et al. 2020).
The downside of such methods, however, is that reviewers are incentivized to evaluate their counterparts strategically to ensure a better outcome of their own item (Huang
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4794

