The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Have We Solved The Hard Problem? It’s Not Easy!
Contextual Lexical Contrast as a Means to Probe Neural Coherence
Wenqiang Lei,1 Yisong Miao,1 Runpeng Xie,2 Bonnie Webber,3
Meichun Liu,4 Tat-Seng Chua,1 Nancy F. Chen5
1

National University of Singapore, 2 Fudan University, 3 University of Edinburgh
4
City University of Hong Kong, 5 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
wenqianglei@gmail.com, miaoyisong@gmail.com, runpeng.xie@outlook.com, bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk, meichliu@cityu.edu.hk,
dcscts@nus.edu.sg, nfychen@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract
Context 1 (Pos.): A positive attitude helps you relax and
ace the exams, and a negative mental status will however
make you nervous and sleepless.
Context 2 (Neg.): The reviewers are rather positive about
this paper. They are nominating it for the Best Paper for
its discovery of a negative finding that dispels conventional wisdom.

Lexical cohesion is a fundamental mechanism for text which
requires a pair of words to be interpreted as a certain type
of lexical relation (e.g., similarity) to understand a coherent
context; we refer to such relations as the contextual lexical
relation. However, work on lexical cohesion has not modeled
context comprehensively in considering lexical relations due
to the lack of linguistic resources. In this paper, we take initial
steps to address contextual lexical relations by focusing on
the contrast relation, as it is a well-known relation though it
is more subtle and relatively less resourced. We present a corpus named Cont2 Lex to make Contextual Lexical Contrast
Recognition a computationally feasible task. We benchmark
this task with widely-adopted semantic representations; we
discover that contextual embeddings (e.g. BERT) generally
outperform static embeddings (e.g. Glove), but barely go beyond 70% in accuracy performance. In addition, we find
that all embeddings perform better when CLC occurs within
the same sentence, suggesting possible limitations of current
computational coherence models. Another intriguing discovery is the improvement of BERT in CLC is largely attributed
to its modeling of CLC word pairs co-occurring with other
word repetitions. Such observations imply that the progress
made in lexical coherence modeling remains relatively primitive even for semantic representations such as BERT that
have been empowering numerous standard NLP tasks to approach human benchmarks. Through presenting our corpus
and benchmark, we attempt to seed initial discussions and endeavors in advancing semantic representations from modeling syntactic and semantic levels to coherence and discourse
levels1 .

1

Table 1: We illustrate lexical coherence instantiated by lexical contrast relation. We can see the word pair positive and
negative. The Pos means this pair establishes a contextual
lexical contrast while the Neg means not.

Therefore, extensive research is focused on coherence
modeling. However, efforts have focused on tasks like coreference resolution (Harabagiu and Maiorano 1999) and
entity-based solution (cf Section 2.1). By contrast, lexicalbased approaches are under-explored. According to (Halliday and Hasan 2014), lexical coherence is achieved by a pair
of words of certain relations like similar and contrast, being
interpreted in a certain context. For example, in Context 1,
a reader needs to understand the contrast between “positive”
and “negative” so as to interpret the contrasting manners of
taking exams – “relax and ace the exam” and “nervous and
sleepless”, i.e., discourse-level coherence.
Unfortunately, the few existing studies on lexical coherence mostly ignore context. They either directly use lexicons
to map the context (Somasundaran, Burstein, and Chodorow
2014) or use word embeddings to model coherence regardless of the context (Mesgar and Strube 2016), which could
lead to false positive cases. For example, although the word
pair “positive–negative” is recorded as a contrast word pair
by ConceptNet (Liu and Singh 2004), it only functions to
achieve lexical cohesion in context 1. In fact, in context 2,
the two words co-occur just by chance. The words “negative” and “positive” are not interpreted as contrast to understand the coherence of the sentence. Specifically, the “positive” review for the paper is due to an important discovery in
the paper, it does not matter whether the result is positive or
negative. Hence “negative” is not co-interpreted with “positive” to contribute to the text cohesion of the two sentences
in this example.

Introduction

Coherence is what distinguishes well-written text from disorganized text and well-planned dialogue from random sentences and utterances (Halliday and Hasan 2014). It is a fundamental phenomenon in natural languages as long as the
texts are consisting of multiple sentences and hence being
imperative to downstream tasks such as text quality assessment (Li and Hovy 2014), discourse structure understanding (Somasundaran, Burstein, and Chodorow 2014) and dialogue systems (Lin, Wang, and Lee 1999).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Corpus and codes are available at: https://cont2lex.github.io/

13208

