The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Complexity and Algorithms for Exploiting Quantal Opponents
in Large Two-Player Games
David Milec1 , Jakub Černý2 , Viliam Lisý1 , Bo An2
1

AI Center, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
milecdav@fel.cvut.cz, cerny@disroot.org, viliam.lisy@fel.cvut.cz, boan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

2008). QR is also the hearth of the algorithms successfully deployed in the real world (Yang, Ordonez, and Tambe
2012; Fang et al. 2017). It suggests that players respond
stochastically, picking better actions with higher probability. Therefore, we investigate how to scalably compute a
good strategy against a quantal response opponent in
two-player normal-form and extensive-form games.
If both players choose their actions based on the QR
model, their behavior is described by quantal response equilibrium (QRE). Finding QRE is a computationally tractable
problem (McKelvey and Palfrey 1995; Turocy 2005), which
can be also solved using the CFR framework (Farina, Kroer,
and Sandholm 2019). However, when creating AI agents
competing with humans, we want to assume that one of the
players is perfectly rational, and only the opponent’s rationality is bounded. A tempting approach may be using the
algorithms for computing QRE and increasing one player’s
rationality or using generic algorithms for exploiting opponents (Davis, Burch, and Bowling 2014) even though the QR
model does not satisfy their assumptions, as in (Basak et al.
2018). However, this approach generally leads to a solution
concept we call Quantal Nash Equilibrium (QNE), which we
show is very inefficient in exploiting QR opponents and may
even perform worse than an arbitrary Nash equilibrium.
Since the very nature of the quantal response model assumes that the sub-rational agent responds to a strategy
played by its opponent, a more natural setting for studying the optimal strategies against QR opponents are Stackelberg games, in which one player commits to a strategy that
is then learned and responded to by the opponent. Optimal
commitments against quantal response opponents - Quantal
Stackelberg Equilibrium (QSE) - have been studied in security games (Yang, Ordonez, and Tambe 2012), and the results were recently extended to normal-form games (Černý
et al. 2020b). Even in these one-shot games, polynomial algorithms are available only for their very limited subclasses.
In extensive-form games, we show that computing the QSE
is NP-hard, even in zero-sum games. Therefore, it is very unlikely that the CFR framework could be adapted to closely
approximate these strategies. Since we aim for high scalability, we focus on empirical evaluation of several heuristics,
including using QNE as an approximation of QSE. We identify a method that is not only more exploitative than QNE,
but also more robust when the opponent is rational.

Solution concepts of traditional game theory assume entirely
rational players; therefore, their ability to exploit subrational
opponents is limited. One type of subrationality that describes
human behavior well is the quantal response. While there
exist algorithms for computing solutions against quantal opponents, they either do not scale or may provide strategies
that are even worse than the entirely-rational Nash strategies. This paper aims to analyze and propose scalable algorithms for computing effective and robust strategies against a
quantal opponent in normal-form and extensive-form games.
Our contributions are: (1) we define two different solution
concepts related to exploiting quantal opponents and analyze
their properties; (2) we prove that computing these solutions
is computationally hard; (3) therefore, we evaluate several
heuristic approximations based on scalable counterfactual regret minimization (CFR); and (4) we identify a CFR variant
that exploits the bounded opponents better than the previously
used variants while being less exploitable by the worst-case
perfectly-rational opponent.

Introduction
Extensive-form games are a powerful model able to describe
recreational games, such as poker, as well as real-world situations from physical or network security. Recent advances in
solving these games, and particularly the Counterfactual Regret Minimization (CFR) framework (Zinkevich et al. 2008),
allowed creating superhuman agents even in huge games,
such as no-limit Texas hold’em with approximately 10160
different decision points (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and
Sandholm 2018). The algorithms generally approximate a
Nash equilibrium, which assumes that all players are perfectly rational, and is known to be inefficient in exploiting
weaker opponents. An algorithm that would be able to take
an opponent’s imperfection into account is expected to win
by a much larger margin (Johanson and Bowling 2009; Bard
et al. 2013).
The most common model of bounded rationality in humans is the quantal response (QR) model (McKelvey and
Palfrey 1995, 1998). Multiple experiments identified it as
a good predictor of human behavior in games (Yang, Ordonez, and Tambe 2012; Haile, Hortaçsu, and Kosenok
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5575

