The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Mitigating Political Bias in Language Models Through Reinforced Calibration
Ruibo Liu,1 Chenyan Jia, 2 Jason Wei, 3 Guangxuan Xu, 1 Lili Wang, 1 Soroush Vosoughi 1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Dartmouth College
Moody College of Communication, University of Texas at Austin
3
ProtagoLabs
ruibo.liu.gr@dartmouth.edu, soroush.vosoughi@dartmouth.edu

Abstract

with particular keywords of the aforementioned attributes,
and 2) Direct Bias, which measures bias in texts generated
using prompts that have directly ideological triggers (e.g.,
democrat, republican) in addition to keywords of aforementioned attributes. Table 1 shows four samples of text generated by off-the-shelf GPT-2 with different attribute keywords in the prompts—all samples exhibit political bias.
For example, when triggered with a prompt including marijuana, the generated text tends to present a favorable attitude (e.g., “I believe it should be legal and not regulated.”),
which is mostly a liberal stance. More interestingly, even
a prompt including a conservative trigger (republican) results in generation which leans to the liberal side (“vote for
Hillary...”).
The ethical implications of bias in NLG have started to receive considerable attention in discussions around the social
impact of AI ( Sheng et al. 2020, 2019; Wallace et al. 2019;
Bordia and Bowman 2019). Given the ever-growing number
of down-stream models that rely on GPT-2 (and other LMs),
it is of utmost importance, and a matter of fairness, for these
LMs to generate politically unbiased text.
In this paper, we define what political bias is in generative
LMs and present how to mitigate such bias during generation. Specifically, our contributions are three-fold:

Current large-scale language models can be politically biased as a result of the data they are trained on, potentially
causing serious problems when they are deployed in realworld settings. In this paper, we describe metrics for measuring political bias in GPT-2 generation and propose a reinforcement learning (RL) framework for mitigating political
biases in generated text. By using rewards from word embeddings or a classifier, our RL framework guides debiased
generation without having access to the training data or requiring the model to be retrained. In empirical experiments
on three attributes sensitive to political bias (gender, location, and topic), our methods reduced bias according to both
our metrics and human evaluation, while maintaining readability and semantic coherence.

1

Introduction

Large-scale language models (LMs) can generate humanlike text and have shown promise in many Natural Language Generation (NLG) applications such as dialogue generation (Zhang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020) and machine
translation (Yang et al. 2020; Zhu et al. 2020). These models
are often trained on large quantities of unsupervised data—
for example, GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019) is trained on a
dataset of 8 million unlabeled web pages. Although training
data is typically collected with content diversity in consideration, other factors, such as ideological balance, are often
ignored. This raises a couple of important questions:

• We propose two bias metrics (Indirect Bias and Direct
Bias) to quantify the political bias in language model generation (§3). Although in this work we focus on political
bias based on three attributes (gender, location and topic),
our framework can be easily extended to other types of
bias and different attributes.

Do current large-scale generative language models,
such as GPT-2, perpetuate political biases towards a
certain ideological extreme? And if so, can they be
guided towards politically unbiased generation?

• We present a reinforcement learning based framework for
mitigating political bias in two modes: word-embedding
guided debias and classifier-guided debias (§4). Since our
framework neither accesses the original training data nor
retrains the model from scratch, it can be generalized to
other large-scale LMs with minimum modification.

LM generation typically relies on a given text prompt,
e.g., “I’m from Massachusetts. I will vote...”, and we notice
that the demographic (i.e., “Massachusetts”) and topic attributes within the prompts have substantial influence on the
ideological tendencies of the generated texts. In this work,
we study the ideological biases of texts generated by GPT-2
with respect to three attributes: gender, location and topic.
We propose and investigate two bias types: 1) Indirect
Bias, which measures bias of texts generated using prompts

• We systematically evaluate our methods with the proposed metrics, finding that it successfully reduces political bias while maintaining reasonable fluency (§6.1-§6.3).
Furthermore, human evaluation confirms that our methods successfully mitigate the political bias without sacrificing readability and semantic coherence (§6.4).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14857

