The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SPIN: Structure-Preserving Inner Offset Network for Scene Text Recognition
Chengwei Zhang1∗ , Yunlu Xu2∗ , Zhanzhan Cheng3,2† ,
Shiliang Pu2‡ , Yi Niu2 , Fei Wu3 and Futai Zou1‡
1
Shanghai Jiaotong University, China; 2 Hikvision Research Institute, China; 3 Zhejiang University, China
{cwzhang, zoufutai}@sjtu.edu.cn; {xuyunlu, chengzhanzhan, pushiliang, niuyi}@hikvision.com; wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Arbitrary text appearance poses a great challenge in scene
text recognition tasks. Existing works mostly handle with the
problem in consideration of the shape distortion, including
perspective distortions, line curvature or other style variations. Rectification (i.e., spatial transformers) as the preprocessing stage is one popular approach and extensively studied. However, chromatic difficulties in complex scenes have
not been paid much attention on. In this work, we introduce
a new learnable geometric-unrelated rectification, StructurePreserving Inner Offset Network (SPIN), which allows the
color manipulation of source data within the network. This
differentiable module can be inserted before any recognition architecture to ease the downstream tasks, giving neural networks the ability to actively transform input intensity
rather than only the spatial rectification. It can also serve as
a complementary module to known spatial transformations
and work in both independent and collaborative ways with
them. Extensive experiments show the proposed transformation outperforms existing rectification networks and has comparable performance among the state-of-the-arts.

Figure 1: Examples of regular and irregular scene text,
where the problems of irregular case can be categorized into
geometric distortion and chromatic distortion.

2015) was proposed, RARE (Shi et al. 2016) integrated it as
a mainstreaming preprocessing procedure in the STR framework. Notice that the rectification module does not require
any extra annotations yet is effective in an end-to-end network. Therefore, it was soon popularly utilized and further
explored in later works (Bhunia et al. 2019; Baek et al. 2019;
Shi et al. 2019; Zhan and Lu 2019; Luo, Jin, and Sun 2019;
Yang et al. 2019). Although almost all the existing transformations are limited to geometric rectification, shape distortions do not account for all difficult cases in STR. Severe
conditions resulting from intensity variations, poor brightness, shadow, background and imaging noise, even some insensible to human beings also contribute to hard samples
for deep networks. In particular, corresponding to geometric
distortion, we term these irregularities as chromatic distortions, which are very common and intractable but attracted
rare attention in STR. Early work (Landau, Smith, and Jones
1988) stated that humans prefer to categorize objects based
on their shapes, even the geometric distorted texts in Fig.
1(b) can be easily recognized on condition that the shapes
of objects are well preserved. However, chromatic distortion
leads to unclear shapes like in Fig.1(c) and (d), thus, recognition becomes much harder. To reduce the burden of STR,
we are inspired to rectify the chromatic distortion to restore
shapes of texts. That is, to design intensity manipulations
towards variable distorted conditions.
Usually, chromatic distortions can be grouped into two
cases (in Fig. 2) named inter-pattern and intra-pattern problems (explained later). Here we denote all the pixels with the
same intensity as a structure-pattern (short in pattern). Assuming an ideal condition that the images to be identified are

Introduction
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) has long been an important task in many practical applications. Recently, recognizing text in natural scene images, referred to as Scene Text
Recognition (STR), has attracted great research interests due
to the diverse text appearances and even the extreme conditions. Modern techniques in deep neural networks have been
widely introduced (Shi, Bai, and Yao 2016; Shi et al. 2016;
Lee and Osindero 2016; Shi et al. 2019; Wang and Hu 2017;
Cheng et al. 2017, 2018; Liu et al. 2018a; Zhang et al. 2019;
Yu et al. 2020).
Since existing methods are quite powerful for regular text
recognition, reading irregular shaped text has become a challenging yet hot research topic for computer vision community. As spatial transformer network (STN) (Jaderberg et al.
∗
Authors contribute equally. Zhang did this work when he was
an intern in Hikvision Research Institute.
†
This work is completed under the supervision of Zhanzhan
Cheng (contact email: chengzhanzhan@hikvision.com).
‡
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3305

