The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relational Classification of Biological Cells in Microscopy Images
Ping Liu and Mustafa Bilgic
Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL
pliu19@hawk.iit.edu, mbilgic@iit.edu

Abstract
We investigate the relational classification of biological cells
in 2D microscopy images. Rather than treating each cell image independently, we investigate whether and how the neighborhood information of a cell can be informative for its prediction. We propose a Relational Long Short-Term Memory
(R-LSTM) algorithm, coupled with auto-encoders and convolutional neural networks, that can learn from both annotated
and unlabeled microscopy images and that can utilize both the
local and neighborhood information to perform an improved
classification of biological cells. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real datasets show that R-LSTM performs comparable to or better than six baselines.

Figure 1: Examples microscopy images of cells. This figure
is a cancer histology image from (Sirinukunwattana et al.
2016), where each cell is classified into four categories: epithelial, inflammatory, fibroblast, and miscellaneous.

Introduction
Signaling variability of individual cells results in different
responses when they are exposed to external stimuli such
as proteins, drugs, and viruses. Single-cell analyses are carried out to understand cell heterogeneity (Shipp et al. 2002).
Studying the cellular heterogeneity can help with understanding drug response (Sheng, Li, and Wong 2015), drug
tolerance (Lee et al. 2014), tumor necrosis (Obraztsov et al.
2019), viral infection (Drayman et al. 2017), and more.
One approach to single-cell analysis is to use imaging. For
example, cancer tissues can be stained, histology images can
be generated, cell nuclei can be detected, and cell types can
be manually annotated, as can be seen in Figure 1. Another
example is studying viral infections where viruses are introduced to a sample and protein dynamics are monitored under
a microscope, taking thousands of images during the process
(Drayman et al. 2017).
Through high-content screening (Usaj et al. 2016), it is
possible to generate thousands of images per day for studying cell biology. While it is possible to detect cell nuclei
(Shifat-E-Rabbi et al. 2020), labeling the cells is a costly
process, where experiments need to be carried out and the
cells need to be labeled manually. Therefore, even though
unlabeled data is abundant, labeled data is often scarce.
Machine learning models have been employed for analyses of these biological images. One simple modeling approach is to treat each cell independently. In this case, the

cell nuclei are detected and a rectangular area around the
nucleus can be cropped to represent the cells. One approach
to cell label prediction is to extract features, such as SIFT,
from the cell images and use vector-based machine learning models such as logistic regression and support vector
machines (Loo, Wu, and Altschuler 2007). Recently, deep
learning models have also been employed for cell classification (Kraus, Ba, and Frey 2016; Sirinukunwattana et al.
2016).
An alternative approach is to study and model the cells
and their neighborhood(Sirinukunwattana et al. 2016). This
approach can be informative due to several reasons including i) cells often communicate with their neighborhood, ii)
some stimuli diffuse locally in a neighborhood, iii) viral and
bacterial infections can affect a local neighborhood, and iv)
the labels of the cells within a local neighborhood might be
correlated (e.g., tumor cells tend to be neighbors with other
tumor cells.).
In this paper, we study relational classification of biological cells in 2D microscopy images. Rather than treating the
classification of each cell as independent of its neighborhood, we develop a relational deep learning model that is
able to utilize both the cell’s own image as well as its neighborhood to improve the classification performance. Our contributions in this paper include:

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• A relational Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model
344

