The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fairness in Forecasting and Learning Linear Dynamical Systems
Quan Zhou,1 Jakub Marecek,2 Robert Shorten 1,3
1

University College Dublin, Ireland
Czech Technical University in Prague, the Czech Republic
3
Imperial College London, UK
quan.zhou@ucdconnect.ie, jakub.marecek@fel.cvut.cz, r.shorten@imperial.ac.uk
2

where φt ∈ Rn is the hidden component (state) and
G ∈ Rn×n and F ∈ Rn×m are compatible system matrices. Random variables wt , vt capture normally-distributed
process noise and observation noise, with zero means and
covariance matrices W ∈ Rn×n and V ∈ Rm×m , respectively. In this setting, proper learning refers to identifying
the quadruple (G, F, V, W ) given the observations {Yt }t∈N
of L. This also allows for the estimation of subsequent observations, in the so-called “prediction-error” approach to
improper learning (Ljung 1998).
We consider a generalisation of the proper learning of LDS,
where:

Abstract
In machine learning, training data often capture the behaviour
of multiple subgroups of some underlying human population.
When the amounts of training data for the subgroups are not
controlled carefully, under-representation bias arises. We introduce two natural notions of subgroup fairness and instantaneous fairness to address such under-representation bias in
time-series forecasting problems. In particular, we consider the
subgroup-fair and instant-fair learning of a linear dynamical
system (LDS) from multiple trajectories of varying lengths and
the associated forecasting problems. We provide globally convergent methods for the learning problems using hierarchies of
convexifications of non-commutative polynomial optimisation
problems. Our empirical results on a biased data set motivated
by insurance applications and the well-known COMPAS data
set demonstrate both the beneficial impact of fairness considerations on statistical performance and the encouraging effects
of exploiting sparsity on run time.

• There are a number of individuals p ∈ P within a population. The population P is partitioned into subgroups
indexed by S.
• For each subgroup s ∈ S, there is a set I (s) of trajectories
of observations available and each trajectory i ∈ I (s)
has observations for periods T (i,s) , possibly of varying
cardinality |T (i,s) |.

Introduction
The identification of vector autoregressive processes with hidden components from time series of observations is a central
problem across Machine Learning, Statistics, and Forecasting
(West and Harrison 1997). This problem is also known as
proper learning of linear dynamical systems (LDS) in System
Identification (Ljung 1998). As a rather general approach to
time-series analysis, it has applications ranging from learning
population-growth models in actuarial science and mathematical biology to functional analysis in neuroscience. Indeed,
one encounters either partially observable processes (Åström
1965) or questions of causality (Pearl 2009) that can be tied
to proper learning of LDS (Geiger et al. 2015) in almost any
application domain.
A discrete-time model of a linear dynamical system L =
(G, F, V, W ) (West and Harrison 1997) suggests that the
random variable Yt ∈ Rm capturing the observed component
(output, observations, measurements) evolves over time t ≥ 1
according to:
φt = Gφt−1 + wt ,

(1)

Yt = F 0 φ t + vt ,

(2)

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11134

• Each subgroup s ∈ S is associated with a LDS, L(s) . For
all i ∈ I (s) , s ∈ S, the trajectory {Yt }(i,s) , for t ∈ T (i,s) ,
is hence generated by precisely one LDS L(s) .
Note that in our notation, the superscripts distinguish the
trajectories and subgroups, while subscripts indicate the periods. In this setting, under-representation bias (Blum and
Stangl 2019, cf. Section 2.2), where the trajectories of observations from one (“disadvantaged”) subgroup are underrepresented in the training data, harms both accuracy of the
classifier overall and fairness in the sense of varying accuracy
across the subgroups. This is particularly important if the
problem is constrained to be subgroup-blind, i.e., constrained
to consider only a single LDS as a model. This is the case
when the use of attributes distinguishing each subgroup can
be regarded as discriminatory (e.g., gender, race, cf. (Gajane
and Pechenizkiy 2018)). Notice that such anti-discrimination
measures are increasingly stipulated by legal systems, e.g.,
within product or insurance pricing, where the sex of the
applicant cannot be used, despite being known.
A natural notion of fairness in subgroup-blind learning of
LDS involves estimating the system matrices or forecasting
the next output of a single LDS that captures the overall
behaviour across all subgroups, while taking into account the

