The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weakly-Supervised Hierarchical Models for Predicting Persuasion Strategies in
Good-faith Textual Requests
Jiaao Chen, Diyi Yang
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
{jchen896,dyang888}@gatech.edu

Abstract

machine learning models (Yang et al. 2019) or (2) not representative for understanding persuasive strategies by only
looking at one specific domain (Wang et al. 2019). To make
persuasion research and technology maximally useful, both
for practical use and scientific study, a generic and representative corpus is a must, which can represent persuasive
language in a way that is not exclusively tailored to any
one specific dataset or platform. To fill these gaps, building
on theoretical work on persuasion and these prior empirical studies, we first introduce a set of generic persuasive
strategies and a multi-domain corpus to understand different persuasion strategies that people use in their requests
for different types of persuasion goals in various domains.

Modeling persuasive language has the potential to better facilitate our decision-making processes. Despite its importance, computational modeling of persuasion is still in its infancy, largely due to the lack of benchmark datasets that can
provide quantitative labels of persuasive strategies to expedite
this line of research. To this end, we introduce a large-scale
multi-domain text corpus for modeling persuasive strategies
in good-faith text requests. Moreover, we design a hierarchical weakly-supervised latent variable model that can leverage partially labeled data to predict such associated persuasive strategies for each sentence, where the supervision comes
from both the overall document-level labels and very limited sentence-level labels. Experimental results showed that
our proposed method outperformed existing semi-supervised
baselines significantly. We have publicly released our code at
https://github.com/GT-SALT/Persuasion Strategy WVAE.

However, constructing a large-scale dataset that contains
persuasive strategies labels is often time-consuming and expensive. To mitigate the cost of labeling fine-grained sentence persuasive strategy, we then introduce a simple but
effective weakly-supervised hierarchical latent variable
model that leverages mainly global or document-level labels
(e.g., overall persuasiveness of the textual requests) alongside with limited sentence annotations to predict sentencelevel persuasion strategies. Our work is inspired by prior
work (Oquab et al. 2015) in computer vision that used
the global image-level labels to classify local objects. Intuitively, our model is hierarchically semi-supervised, with
sentence-level latent variables to reconstruct the input sentence and all latent variables of sentences are aggregated
to predict document-level persuasiveness. Specifically, at
the sentence-level, we utilize two latent variables representing persuasion strategies and context separately, in order
to disentangle information pertaining to label-oriented and
content-specific properties to do reconstructions; at the document level, we encode those two latent variables together to
predict the overall document labels in the hope that it could
supervise the learning of sentence-level persuasive strategies. To sum up, our contributions include: (1) A set of
generic persuasive strategies based on theoretical and empirical studies and introducing a relatively large-scale dataset
that includes annotations of persuasive strategies for three
domains. (2) A hierarchical weakly-supervised latent variable model to predict persuasive strategies with partially labeled data. (3) Extensive experimental results that test the
effectiveness of our models and visualize the importance of
our proposed persuasion strategies.

Introduction
Persuasive communication has the potential to bring significant positive and pro-social factors to our society (Hovland, Janis, and Kelly 1971). For instance, persuasion could
largely help fundraising for charities and philanthropic organizations or convincing substance-abusing family members
to seek professional help. Given the nature of persuasion,
it is of great importance to study how and why persuasion
works in language. Modeling persuasive language is challenging in the field of natural language understanding since
it is difficult to quantify the persuasiveness of requests and
even harder to generalize persuasive strategies learned from
one domain to another. Although researchers from social
psychology have offered useful advice on how to understand
persuasion, most of them have been conducted from a qualitative perspective (Bartels 2006; Popkin and Popkin 1994).
Computational modeling of persuasion is still in its infancy,
largely due to the lack of benchmarks that can provide unified, representative corpus to facilitate this line of research,
with a few exceptions like (Luu, Tan, and Smith 2019b;
Atkinson, Srinivasan, and Tan 2019; Wang et al. 2019).
Most existing datasets concerning persuasive text are either (1) too small (e.g., in the order of hundreds) for current
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12648

