The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sketch Generation with Drawing Process Guided by Vector Flow and Grayscale
Zhengyan Tong,1 Xuanhong Chen,1,2 Bingbing Ni,1,2 * Xiaohang Wang 1
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Hisilicon
{418004, chen19910528, nibingbing, xygz2014010003}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

for image-based sketch rendering algorithms. For 2D natural images, the geometric information is often incomplete,
and the light components are usually complicated and noisy,
making it hard to do sketch rendering. Generally, mathematical rendering algorithms can maintain the structures well,
control the rendering effect in a fine-grained manner, and
are often interpretable. In recent years, many deep learning
methods for image style transfer tasks have been developed.
Results of these methods usually have a stronger style than
those of procedural rendering algorithms. However, due to
the complexity of pencil drawing, neural methods do not
perform well at capturing pencil sketch texture (Li et al.
2019). Deep learning style translation usually suffers structure distortion and artifacts, which is a serious defect for the
pencil drawing task that requires reserving structures and
producing high-quality textures. Besides, neural networks’
parameter control mechanisms are usually high-level and are
difficult to explain.
Whether it is a procedural algorithm or a deep learning
neural style transferer, existing algorithms can only get the
final result without offering the drawing process. Actually,
there exists very limited research on auto-drawing with the
drawing process. Our algorithm implements image-to-pencil
with a drawing process for the first time, which significantly
enhances our algorithm’s novelty. As shown in Figure 1,
given an image (in the rightmost column), our algorithm can
produce a pencil sketch by drawing one stroke at a time (Figure 1 only shows the drawing process in stages, the whole
process can be found in the supplementary material). Our algorithm could generate high-quality details, and the final result has a strong style. Besides, we can produce pencil drawings with obviously different visual effects by adjusting the
strokes’ properties. Comparison with existing pencil drawing algorithms shows that our method performs favorably in
terms of texture quality, style, and user evaluation.
Our work is inspired by the observation of real pencil
drawings, and our algorithm models the real artists’ drawing techniques. Thus the interpretability of our method is
stronger than others. Since pencil drawing has many different drawing styles and artists use various drawing tools
(Dodson 1990), we only simulate the most popular sketching method. That is, drawing strokes with diverse directions, shades, lengths, and widths on a canvas to gradually form a picture. For the strokes’ direction, artists usu-

We propose a novel image-to-pencil translation method
that could not only generate high-quality pencil sketches
but also offer the drawing process. Existing pencil sketch
algorithms are based on texture rendering rather than the
direct imitation of strokes, making them unable to show
the drawing process but only a final result. To address
this challenge, we first establish a pencil stroke imitation
mechanism. Next, we develop a framework with three
branches to guide stroke drawing: the first branch guides the
direction of the strokes, the second branch determines the
shade of the strokes, and the third branch enhances the details
further. Under this framework’s guidance, we can produce a
pencil sketch by drawing one stroke every time. Our method
is fully interpretable. Comparison with existing pencil
drawing algorithms shows that our method is superior to
others in terms of texture quality, style, and user evaluation.
Our code and supplementary material are now available
at: https://github.com/TZYSJTU/Sketch-Generation-withDrawing-Process-Guided-by-Vector-Flow-and-Grayscale

1

Introduction

The pencil sketch is one kind of drawing with a highly realistic style. It is not only a popular form of art creation but also
the essential basic of other art forms such as oil painting. To
draw a pencil sketch, artists should have accurate contour
configuration ability and superb shading drawing skills, requiring long-term professional training. Therefore, there has
always been a strong demand for the pencil sketch rendering
algorithm.
The existing pencil drawing algorithms are mainly implemented by Non-Photorealistic Rendering (NPR) (Rosin and
Collomosse 2012) and can be further divided into 3D modelbased sketching and 2D image-based sketching (Lu, Xu, and
Jia 2012). 3D models can provide the complete geometric
information of the objects, and the lighting condition in the
3D scene is fully controllable. Thus 3D model-based sketching can accurately grasp the spatial structure and render the
shading texture according to the light condition. However,
in most application scenarios, we can not get 3D models
but only 2D natural images, so there is a greater demand
* Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

609

