The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PREMERE: Meta-Reweighting via Self-Ensembling for Point-of-Interest
Recommendation
Minseok Kim, Hwanjun Song, Doyoung Kim, Kijung Shin, Jae-Gil Lee∗
KAIST, Korea
{minseokkim, songhwanjun, doyo09, kijungs, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

does not necessarily indicate being uninteresting, because
users may omit or forget to share their visits to POIs which
they are interested in. Therefore, the class imbalance and
noisy values of the user-POI check-in matrix may lead to
poor performance of POI recommendation (Lian et al. 2014;
Yu, Bilenko, and Lin 2017).
Sample reweighting (Ma et al. 2018; Hu, Koren, and
Volinsky 2008; Yu, Bilenko, and Lin 2017; Song et al.
2020b) is one common strategy for addressing the challenge. Specifically, it increases the learning weight of positive (non-zero) samples which are very valuable owing to
their scarcity (Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008), and/or decreases the weight of negative (zero) samples during model
training (Yu, Bilenko, and Lin 2017). The solutions employed in the prior studies are to design a weighting function
that maps the value or loss of a sample to its learning weight,
to induce a recommender learn more or less of the sample
when updating the model. For example, it is reasonable to
increase the impact of positive samples more for conservative users than for exploratory users. However, because the
fixed weighting function is used throughout the entire optimization process, the weighting scheme cannot address the
different characteristics of users or POIs (Zhang et al. 2018).
To overcome the limitation of the fixed weighting function, we propose an adaptive weighting scheme, called
PREMERE (POI REcommendation with MEta-learning
based REweighting). In short, PREMERE learns to
reweight samples from data; for each sample, it produces
the weight most suitable at the current stage of an optimization process. Meta-learning has been recently adopted to
reweight samples for training image classifiers (Ren et al.
2018; Shu et al. 2019), and the weighting function exploits meta-data (i.e., an unbiased validation set) to inspect
whether the reweighting is properly guiding the training process. However, applying meta-learning to sample reweighting for POI recommendation is very challenging because
meta-data, which corresponds to precise user preferences or
user trajectories, is practically very hard to obtain.1
Thus, the primary goal of this paper is to alleviate the lack
of meta-data in POI recommendation for sample reweight-

Point-of-interest (POI) recommendation has become an important research topic in these days. The user check-in history used as the input to POI recommendation is very imbalanced and noisy because of sparse and missing check-ins.
Although sample reweighting is commonly adopted for addressing this challenge with the input data, its fixed weighting scheme is often inappropriate to deal with different characteristics of users or POIs. Thus, in this paper, we propose
PREMERE, an adaptive weighting scheme based on metalearning. Because meta-data is typically required by metalearning but is inherently hard to obtain in POI recommendation, we self-generate the meta-data via self-ensembling.
Furthermore, the meta-model architecture is extended to deal
with the scarcity of check-ins. Thorough experiments show
that replacing a weighting scheme with PREMERE boosts
the performance of the state-of-the-art recommender algorithms by 2.36–26.9% on three benchmark datasets.

Introduction
With the prevalence of mobile devices and the emergence
of location-based social networks (LBSNs), it has become
feasible for people to share location-related contents. People visit point-of-interests (POIs) and share their check-in
records to LBSN services, and discover potentially interesting POIs from the services. The check-in records, which indicate the preference of users, are harnessed to improve the
quality of POI recommendation. Successful POI recommendation saves the users’ time and effort in finding interesting
POIs and helps business owners increase their profits by attracting potential customers to their venue. Thus, numerous
POI recommender systems have been actively developed (Ye
et al. 2011; Zhang and Chow 2013; Li et al. 2015).
The POI check-in history of users is represented by a
user-POI check-in matrix, where rows correspond to users
and columns correspond to POIs. Each (i, j)-th element indicates the number of check-ins at the j-th POI by the i-th
user. While almost all prior studies have mainly relied on the
user-POI check-in matrix, it is biased in two aspects. First, it
is very sparse, where only a small fraction (around 0.1%) of
entries are non-zero (Liu et al. 2017). Second, a zero entry

1

∗

Jae-Gil Lee is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4164

A clean validation set could be obtained by extensive user surveys
or GPS data with high sampling rate, but either of them is not
available in a large scale owing to cost and privacy issues.

