The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Reasoning and Learning for Automated Payroll Management
Sebastijan Dumančić, 1 Wannes Meert, 1 Stijn Goethals, 2 Tim Stuyckens, 2 Jelle Huygen, 2 Koen
Denies 2
1

KU Leuven, Belgium
Teal Partners, Belgium
{sebsatijan.dumancic,wannes.meert}@kuleuven.be, {stijn,tim,jelle,koen}@tealpartners.com
2

Abstract

be generated and customised on demand. The benefit of the
single knowledge base supporting all tasks is that there is
no additional maintenance cost and lower risk that errors are
introduced.
The second challenge is to systematically explore various
policies. Simple intuition is often misleading – increasing
the gross wage by a small amount could change the taxation grade of an employee and result in a smaller net wage
– and all possible scenarios should be tried and checked.
This requires an intractable amount of time if many choices
are available and is thus not a valid approach. As a consequence, exploring various policies is often a manual adhoc exercise based on limited intuitions. For a certain set of
tasks, automated approaches are available but they are limited to tasks that can be expressed as linear programs (LP) or
mixed-integer programs (MIP). But many payroll tasks are
non-linear and current software packages for payroll management, to the best of our knowledge, have limited support
for finding optimal values in this setting (e.g., TurboTax).
In this work we focus on any financial decision that can
be expressed as an optimisation tasks of the following form:
Optimise an output quantity given a number of open input
variables, while respecting the financial computation rules.
For instance, a self-employed person might be interested
in the minimally required number of working days and the
desired rate to achieve an income above a certain amount.
Important to note is that the exact optimisation task is not
known upfront and depends on the question that a customer
asks. Therefore, the task cannot be coded upfront and we
need to support all tasks with various input-output relations.
In this work, we describe a general methodology for solving the described optimisation tasks based on the state-ofthe-art constraint solving technology, a field of artificial intelligence (De Moura and Bjørner 2008). The methodology
is integrated into V IREN1 , a platform which helps companies
to manage the complexity related to payroll regulation and
enables users to generate, simulate and compare different
earning scenarios in real-time. The results of this work have
been deployed successfully for almost one year by Xerius, a
social insurance fund, and Teal Partners. The knowledge for
this particular use case has been supplied by SD Worx, one
of the main payroll service providers in Belgium, and the

While payroll management is a crucial aspect of any business
venture, anticipating the future financial impact of changes to
the payroll policy is a challenging task due to the complexity
of tax legislation. The goal of this work is to automatically
explore potential payroll policies and find the optimal set of
policies that satisfies the user’s needs. To achieve this goal,
we overcome two major challenges. First, we translate the
tax legislative knowledge into a formal representation flexible enough to support a variety of scenarios in payroll calculations. Second, the legal knowledge is further compiled
into a set of constraints from which a constraint solver can
find the optimal policy. Furthermore, payroll computation is
performed on an individual basis which might be expensive
for companies with a large number of employees. To make
the optimisation more efficient, we integrate it with a machine learning model that learns from the previous optimisation runs and speeds up the optimisation engine. The results
of this work have been deployed by a social insurance fund.

Introduction
Payroll management is a crucial aspect of any business venture. While performing the tax calculation given all necessary inputs is straightforward, anticipating the impact of
changes in the inputs is a challenging task due to the complexity of the legislation. Evaluating changes, however, is
necessary to find an optimal payroll policy (e.g., allowing a
car or paying part of a salary in the shares of the company).
The goal of this work is to automatically explore potential
policies and find a set of optimal policies.
To achieve this goal, two challenges need to be solved.
The first challenge is to translate legal knowledge into a
formal representation flexible enough to support and simulate a variety of scenarios that can occur in payroll calculations. The advantage of working with tax legislation is that
it is precisely defined and deterministic whereas many other
areas of legislation are vague and open-textured (Prakken
2017). The major challenge in this regard is that the exact
calculation is not known upfront and thus a single algorithm
or a computation graph cannot be used. An alternative, and
more general, approach is to encode the knowledge in a formal declarative language from which computation graph can
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15107

https://www.viren.be/

