The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stratified Negation in Datalog with Metric Temporal Operators
David J. Tena Cucala,1 Przemysław A. Wał˛ega,1 Bernardo Cuenca Grau,1 Egor V. Kostylev2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
2
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo
{david.tena.cucala, przemyslaw.walega, bernardo.cuenca.grau}@cs.ox.ac.uk, egork@ifi.uio.no

Abstract

The first rule defines the continuous cough symptom as a
cough that has occurred at least once every 10 seconds (expressed using the operator x(0,10s] ) within the previous 5
minutes (expressed using [0,5m] ); the remaining rules establish that anyone with a continuous cough or a fever in the
last 24 hours is displaying COVID-19 symptoms.
An important limitation of DatalogMTL as defined in
prior work is that it does not allow negation in rules.
Non-monotonic negation applied to temporal information is,
however, a very useful feature that has been recently considered in the contexts of temporal answer set programming
over the integer timeline (Cabalar et al. 2019, 2020) and
stream reasoning (Beck, Dao-Tran, and Eiter 2018; Zaniolo
2012; Das, Gandhi, and Zaniolo 2018).
In this paper, we propose and study the language of
DatalogMTL with stratified negation as failure. Our language extends positive (i.e., negation-free) DatalogMTL
(over the rational timeline and under continuous semantics)
as well as plain Datalog with stratified negation. It provides
useful additional expressivity for a wide range of application
scenarios. For instance, consider the guidance that people
with COVID-19 symptoms must remain in home isolation
for 10 days after the onset of their symptoms. We can attempt to represent this policy using the following rule:

We extend DatalogMTL—Datalog with operators from metric temporal logic—by adding stratified negation as failure.
The new language provides additional expressive power for
representing and reasoning about temporal data and knowledge in a wide range of applications. We consider models
over the rational timeline, study their properties, and establish
the computational complexity of reasoning. We show that,
as in negation-free DatalogMTL, fact entailment in our language is PS PACE-complete in data and E XP S PACE-complete
in combined complexity. Thus, the extension with stratified
negation does not lead to higher complexity.

Introduction
We consider DatalogMTL (Brandt et al. 2017, 2018; Wał˛ega
et al. 2019)—a temporal extension of Datalog, where atoms
in rules can mention operators from metric temporal logic
MTL (Koymans 1990) interpreted over the rational timeline.
For example, the metric expression x(0,10s] Sym(x, cough)
states that x coughed at least once in the last 10 seconds,
whereas (0,10s] Sym(x, cough) states that x coughed continuously in the described period. By allowing such expressions in rules, DatalogMTL provides a powerful language for representing and reasoning about information involving temporal intervals, which is expressive enough to
capture other well-known temporal rule languages such as
Datalog1S (Chomicki and Imieliński 1988, 1989) and Templog (Abadi and Manna 1989). As a result, DatalogMTL
has been suggested as a suitable formalism for applications
such as temporal ontology-based data access (Brandt et al.
2018), stream reasoning (Wał˛ega, Cuenca Grau, and Kaminski 2019), and temporal logic programming (Brzoska 1998).
As a running example, let us consider the formalisation of
some of the COVID-19 self-isolation rules for households in
the United Kingdom1 using DatalogMTL:
Sym(x, cont_cough) ← [0,5m] x(0,10s] Sym(x, cough),

[0,10d] Isol (x) ← COVIDSym(x).
Here, the future operator [0,10d] states that isolation should
continue uninterrupted for 10 days after symptoms are detected. This rule, however, does not faithfully represent the
aforementioned policy; in particular, it implies that a patient
must isolate for 10 days in future for as long as they display
symptoms, where the UK’s guidance dictates that the 10 day
self-isolation is effective from the onset of symptoms; indeed,
a patient can stop isolating after that period since symptoms
like a continuous cough can linger for several weeks after the
infection has gone. Negation as failure, which is denoted by
not, can be used to faithfully capture the requirement that
symptoms must be new for an isolation period to start; in
particular, the following rule states that an isolation period
is triggered whenever a patient first displays symptoms after
a period of 10 days without showing signs of the disease:

COVIDSym(x) ← x[0,24h] Sym(x, cont_cough),
COVIDSym(x) ← x[0,24h] Sym(x, fever).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-stayat-home-guidance/stay-at-home-guidance-for-households-withpossible-coronavirus-covid-19-infection

[0,10d] Isol (x) ← COVIDSym(x) ∧
not x(0,10d] COVIDSym(x).
6488

