The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sample-Efficient L0-L2 Constrained Structure Learning of Sparse Ising Models
Antoine Dedieu, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Dileep George
Vicarious AI
{antoine, miguel, dileep}@vicarious.com

In this paper1 , we consider the problem of learning the
Ising model in Equation (1) from n samples independently
drawn from the model. In particular, we are interested in
analyzing the number of samples required for theoretical
and empirical recovery of the connectivity graph. Maximum
likelihood estimators are intractable for this task (Bishop
2006; Welling and Sutton 2005) as the computational cost
of estimating the partition function is exponential with the
number of nodes in the graph. While early attempts to
learn Ising models were based on mean-field approximation
(Tanaka 1998), recent work has shown that the connectivity
graph can be efficiently recovered by solving a convex problem for each node, without estimating the partition function.
We review the two most recent and influential methods.

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the underlying graph
of a sparse Ising model with p nodes from n i.i.d. samples.
The most recent and best performing approaches combine an
empirical loss (the logistic regression loss or the interaction
screening loss) with a regularizer (an L1 penalty or an L1 constraint). This results in a convex problem that can be solved
separately for each node of the graph. In this work, we leverage the cardinality constraint L0 norm, which is known to
properly induce sparsity, and further combine it with an L2
norm to better model the non-zero coefficients. We show that
our proposed estimators achieve an improved sample complexity, both (a) theoretically, by reaching new state-of-the-art
upper bounds for recovery guarantees, and (b) empirically, by
showing sharper phase transitions between poor and full recovery for graph topologies studied in the literature, when
compared to their L1-based state-of-the-art methods.

1

Notation: For a vector u ∈ Rp and an index j ∈ {1, . . . , p},
we denote u−j = (u1 , . . . , uj−1 , uj+1 , up ) ∈ Rp−1 the
vector with all entries except the jth one.

Introduction

Method 1: Logistic regression estimators For a sample z
following Equation (1) and a node j ∈ {1, . . . , p} of the
Ising graph, the conditional probability of the jth observation zj given all the other observations z−j can be expressed

Ising models are extremely popular and useful tools (Onsager 1944; McCoy and Maillard 2012) with origins dating
back to the 1920s (Ising 1925) which have been widely studied in the fields of statistical physics (Thompson 2015) and
Bayesian modeling (Bishop 2006). Given an integer p and a
symmetric matrix W ∗ ∈ Rp×p with zero diagonal, a binary
Ising graph (also known as fully visible Boltzman machine)
with p nodes and without external fields specifies the probability of a binary vector z ∈ {−1, 1}p as


1
1 T ∗
p(z|W ∗ ) =
exp
z
W
z
,
(1)
Z(W ∗ )
2

p(zj |z−j , W ∗ ) =

1
∗ )T z ) ,
1 + exp(−2zj (w−j
−j

(3)

∗
where we have noted w−j
= (eTj W ∗ )−j ∈ Rp−1 the jth
row of the connectivity matrix, without the (null) diagonal term. Consequently, given n independent observations
z (1) , . . . , z (n) , the (normalized) pseudo-likelihood (PL) estimator (Besag 1975) of W ∗ is computed by solving the
convex logistic regression (LR) problem for each node:

where Z(W ∗ ) is a normalization term called the partition
function, which is defined as

P
Z(W ∗ ) = z∈{−1,1}p exp 12 z T W ∗ z .
(2)

n

1X
log(1 + exp(−2yi xTi w)),
w∈Rp−1 n i=1

w̃−j ∈ argmin

(4)

We define the connectivity graph associated with W ∗ as the
graph G = (V, E) with vertices V = {1, . . . , p} and edges
E = {(i, j) : Wij∗ 6= 0}. We additionally assume that each
vertex of G has a degree at most k ∗ — which is equivalent from saying that each row of W ∗ has at most k ∗ nonzero entries — as it is traditionally the case in the literature
(Bresler 2015; Vuffray et al. 2016; Lokhov et al. 2018).

xi = z−j for the sake of simplicity. We can then derive an
estimator W̃ of W ∗ by solving Problem (4) for each node
of the graph. The symmetrized estimator Ŵ is then derived
by sharing the parameters for both halves (Ravikumar et al.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our code is available at https://github.com/antoine-dedieu/
structure learning sparse ising models

(i)

where, for the jth node, we have we denoted yi = zj and
(i)

7193

