The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncertainty Quantification in CNN Through the Bootstrap of Convex Neural
Networks
Hongfei Du 1 , Emre Barut 2 , Fang Jin 1
1

The George Washington University
2
Amazon.com, Inc.
hongfei@gwu.edu, ebarut@amazon.com, fangjin@gwu.edu
Abstract

Artificial neural networks have been a huge success in
many areas and its uncertainty quantification (UQ) is also
an important task for many machine learning practitioner
(Ghahramani 2015; Krzywinski and Altman 2013). Lack of
uncertainty quantification can severely limit -if not completely hinder- the deep learning applications in numerous
fields. Straightforward examples such as medicinal applications where confidence intervals are commonly used to evaluate the usefulness of a treatment option while weighing its
possible side effects; and in deep reinforcement learning,
an upper bound on the reward of action has to be quantified to perform proper exploration. Furthermore, as the importance of bias and fairness in machine learning becomes
mainstream, practitioners need to test hypotheses that use
model outputs, e.g., “is gender a determining factor for the
predictions?”. All these kind of application scenarios cannot
be accomplished without a UQ framework to provide theoretical inference.

(Paass and Gerhard 1993) is the first work that suggests
the use of bootstrap in neural networks. (Robert 1996) compares bootstrap with other UQ methods for neural networks,
and finds bootstrap to be more ideal than other approaches.
More recently, (Khosravi et al. 2015) uses bootstrap for UQ
in neural networks and proposes a prediction interval optimized cost function to train the neural networks. However,
all these approaches are limited due to non-convexity, that
means it is not clear if the optimal solution can be obtained
at every bootstrap sample, which can result in a wide confidence intervals.
To summarize, the challenge of uncertainty quantification
has the following aspects. Firstly, to make the theoretical inference, it is challenging to build a UQ framework with a
proper probabilistic framework that explains the variations
in the fitted models. Specifically, one needs to be able to formulate the distribution of the data generating process and
the sampling distribution, which can be used to quantify the
uncertainties in the fitted parameters. Secondly, procedures
involved in training a neural network, i.e. stochastic gradient descent and its variations, are often intractable. Due to
issues such as non-convexity, it is very difficult to obtain
theoretical bounds on the consistency of the predictions, or
the quality of the final fitted model. Additionally, neural networks often contain millions of parameters and are trained
on datasets with sample sizes that are on the same order.
This process limits the application of statistical inference
which deals with a limited number of variables and often
asymptotically infinite samples. Finally, as shown in (Zhang
et al. 2017), the best performing neural networks training
on CIFAR10 datasets (Krizhevsky 2009) tend to over-fitting
very easily. An overfitted neural network is bound to underestimate its uncertainty on hold-out samples, and thus any
approach that solely relies on neural networks for UQ will
result in over-confident estimates for uncertainty.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose a novel
framework to obtain prediction intervals by bootstrapping
the predictions of convexified convolutional neural networks
(CCNN) (Zhang, Liang, and Wainwright 2017) with the assistance of transfer learning method, which could further improve the framework’s performance and compatibility. The
contribution of this paper is threefold:

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Firstly, we construct a novel framework for uncertainty
quantification (UQ) through Bootstrap of Convex Neural

Despite the popularity of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN), the problem of uncertainty quantification (UQ) of
CNN has been largely overlooked. Lack of efficient UQ tools
severely limits the application of CNN in certain areas, such
as medicine, where prediction uncertainty is critically important. Among the few existing UQ approaches that have been
proposed for deep learning, none of them has theoretical consistency that can guarantee the uncertainty quality. To address
this issue, we propose a novel bootstrap based framework for
the estimation of prediction uncertainty. The inference procedure we use relies on convexified neural networks to establish the theoretical consistency of bootstrap. Our approach
has a significantly less computational load than its competitors, as it relies on warm-starts at each bootstrap that avoids
refitting the model from scratch. We further explore a novel
transfer learning method so our framework can work on arbitrary neural networks. We experimentally demonstrate our
approach has a much better performance compared to other
baseline CNNs and state-of-the-art methods on various image datasets.

Introduction

12078

