The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

UAG: Uncertainty-aware Attention Graph Neural Network
for Defending Adversarial Attacks
Boyuan Feng, Yuke Wang, Yufei Ding
University of California, Santa Barbara
{boyuan, yuke_wang, yufeiding}@ucsb.edu

Abstract

2018) has shown that GNNs are sensitive to small perturbations on the topology and the node features, which motivates
our work for defending adversarial attacks.
The most recent work, RGCN (Zhu et al. 2019), improves
GNN robustness with a simple strategy that replaces deterministic GNN features with a Gaussian distribution and measures the variance in the intermediate feature vectors. However, it assumes fixed GNN weights without quantifying the
uncertainty from GNN models and does not consider the uncertainty from the graph topology, leading to unsatisfactory
accuracy under severe attacks. We believe the key to improve
the GNN robustness is to develop a powerful technique to
quantify and exploit uncertainties from various sources to
absorb the effect of adversarial attacks.
In this paper, we focus on exploring the benefits of explicitly quantifying GNN uncertainty to defend GNNs against
adversarial attacks. In particular, there are two major types of
uncertainties in GNNs – the model uncertainty and the data
uncertainty. The former refers to the uncertainty in model parameters to tell whether the selected parameters can best suit
the distribution of the collected data. The latter refers to the
uncertainty in the noisy data collection, coming from either
the noises in the data collection process or the adversarial
attacks. However, exploring these uncertainties is non-trivial
since there are several challenges to overcome:

With the increasing popularity of graph-based learning, graph
neural networks (GNNs) emerge as the essential tool for gaining insights from graphs. However, unlike the conventional
CNNs that have been extensively explored and exhaustively
tested, people are still worrying about the GNNs’ robustness
under the critical settings, such as financial services. The main
reason is that existing GNNs usually serve as a black-box in
predicting and do not provide the uncertainty on the predictions. On the other side, the recent advancement of Bayesian
deep learning on CNNs has demonstrated its success of quantifying and explaining such uncertainties to fortify CNN models.
Motivated by these observations, we propose UAG, the first
systematic solution to defend adversarial attacks on GNNs
through identifying and exploiting hierarchical uncertainties
in GNNs. UAG develops a Bayesian uncertainty technique to
explicitly capture uncertainties in GNNs and further employs
an uncertainty-aware attention technique to defend adversarial attacks on GNNs. Intensive experiments show that our
proposed defense approach outperforms the state-of-the-art
solutions by a significant margin.

Introduction
As the emerging trend of extending deep learning from
Euclidean data (e.g., images) to non-Euclidean data (e.g.,
graphs), graph neural network (GNN) (Xu et al. 2019b; Kipf
and Welling 2017; Veličković et al. 2018) wins lots of attentions from both research and industrial domains. Compared
with the conventional graph-learning approaches (e.g., random walk (Grover and Leskovec 2016; Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and
Skiena 2014), and graph Laplacians (Luo et al. 2011, 2009;
Cheng et al. 2018)), GNNs excel at both computation efficiency and runtime performance for various tasks, such as the
node classification (Kaspar and Horst 2010; Gibert, Valveny,
and Bunke 2012; Duran and Niepert 2017) and link prediction (Chen, Li, and Huang 2005; Kunegis and Lommatzsch
2009; Tylenda, Angelova, and Bedathur 2009). Despite the
stunning success, people still concern about the robustness
of GNNs, especially in some safety-critical domains (e.g.,
financial services and medicinal chemistry). Existing work
(Zügner and Günnemann 2019; Xu et al. 2019a; Waniek et al.

1. Uncertainty Measurement: How to explicitly measure
the uncertainty of GNNs?
2. Robustness: How to effectively incorporate the measured
uncertainty into existing GNNs for defending adversarial
attacks?
To tackle these challenges, we propose the first Bayesianbased uncertainty guided approach to defend the GNN effectively. First, we develop a Bayesian uncertainty technique
based on the powerful Bayesian framework to capture these
uncertainties from different sources. Intuitively, we measure
the uncertainty value for individual nodes where a higher
uncertainty usually indicates a lower prediction accuracy.
Then, we design an uncertainty-aware attention technique
to dynamically adjust the impact of one node towards its
neighboring nodes according to its uncertainty. In particular,
for nodes with high uncertainty that may have been attacked,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7404

