The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

REFINE: Prediction Fusion Network for Panoptic Segmentation
Jiawei Ren* ,1 Cunjun Yu* † ,1 Zhongang Cai* ,1 Mingyuan Zhang,1 Chongsong Chen† ,1,2
Haiyu Zhao‡ ,1 Shuai Yi,1 Hongsheng Li 3
1
SenseTime Research
Nanyang Technological University
3
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{renjiawei, caizhongang, zhangmingyuan, zhaohaiyu, yishuai}@sensetime.com,
cunjun.yu@comp.nus.edu.sg, chen1129@e.ntu.edu.sg, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Abstract

Instance Segmentation Branch

Panoptic segmentation aims at generating pixel-wise class
and instance predictions for each pixel in the input image,
which is a challenging task and far more complicated than
naively fusing the semantic and instance segmentation results. Prediction fusion is therefore important to achieve accurate panoptic segmentation. In this paper, we present REFINE, pREdiction FusIon NEtwork for panoptic segmentation, to achieve high-quality panoptic segmentation by improving cross-task prediction fusion, and within-task prediction fusion. Our single-model ResNeXt-101 with DCN
achieves PQ=51.5 on the COCO dataset, surpassing stateof-the-art performance by a convincing margin and is comparable with ensembled models. Our smaller model with a
ResNet-50 backbone achieves PQ=44.9, which is comparable with state-of-the-art methods with larger backbones.

Backbone

Bounding Box Branch

Soft
Occlusion
Estimation

Iterative Bi-directional
Prediction Projection

Semantic Segmentation Branch

Figure 1: The proposed Prediction Fusion Network for
Panoptic Segmentation

both tasks, which show significant improvement over separately trained models (Li et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2019;
Yang et al. 2019) on either task. Moreover, to fully utilize
the advantages of joint training, some works proposed to
fuse instance information and semantic information by introducing designated fusion modules (Li et al. 2019, 2018).
In light of this strategy, notable progress has been made in
addition to the unified networks, where only the backbone is
shared by both segmentation branches.
However, there is an inherent challenge for obtaining the
final panoptic segmentation map: the fusion of predictions
by semantic and instance segmentation. The challenge is
of two-fold: 1) Cross-task synergy. Intrinsically, instance
segmentation prediction head focuses on fine-grained instance details, while semantic segmentation prediction head
is more attentive to holistic context. The fusion of the diverse
predictions remains challenging in existing panoptic segmentation pipelines. Instance prediction and semantic prediction generally fail to reach a consensus. Existing works
(Fu, Berg, and Berg 2019; Chen et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2018)
only perform one-off uni-directional enhancement that uses
one task branch to improve another, not fully exploiting the
mutual benefits. 2) Inter-instance prediction fusion. To convert multiple instance segmentation masks to a single canvas in the end to generate the final segmentation map, it is
necessary to have an accurate estimation of the spatial relation between pairs of instances. The fusion is especially
crucial since an incorrect occlusion estimation would lead
to missing objects or incomplete masks in the final segmentation map. The complex occlusion scenarios further exacerbate this issue. Existing works (Lazarow, Lee, and Tu 2020;
Yang et al. 2020) leverage appearance and shape priors of
predicted instance mask but neglect the mask quality associ-

Introduction
As a step towards human-level visual scene understanding,
the newly proposed task, panoptic segmentation (Kirillov
et al. 2019b) has been drawing increasing attention in recent
years. Different from instance segmentation, which focuses
only on countable foreground instances, and semantic segmentation, which focuses on regions without differentiating
instances, panoptic segmentation aims to provide a complete
scene segmentation map that has both instance-wise labels
for foreground objects and pixel-wise labels for background
regions.
Under this holistic scene parsing setup, a de-facto multitask strategy is generally adopted by state-of-the-art methods, in which both semantic segmentation and instance segmentation are conducted with two interacting networks. The
semantic and instance segmentation results from both networks would be merged in the end to yield the desired
panoptic segmentation.
Recently, many research works have exploited the benefits of the unified networks, with shared weights trained on
* Equal contribution
†

Work done at SenseTime Research
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

2477

