The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Future-Guided Incremental Transformer for Simultaneous Translation
Shaolei Zhang 1,2 , Yang Feng 1,2 * , Liangyou Li3
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhangshaolei20z, fengyang}@ ict.ac.cn
liliangyou@huawei.com

Abstract

wait-k needs to re-calculate the hidden states of all previous
source tokens at each decoding step, making the computational cost increase quadratically (Dalvi et al. 2018; Chen
et al. 2020). The growth factor of the computational cost
in training is proportional to the length of the target sentence. Second, for the future source, since wait-k policy is
trained with “prefix-to-prefix” architecture, some source tokens will lag behind due to the different word order, which
is not considered in training. Although “prefix-to-prefix” architecture makes wait-k policy have some implicit anticipation, Ma et al. (2019) pointed that the acquisition of implicit
anticipation is data-driven, since the training data contains
many prefix-pairs in the similar form. We consider that the
data-driven approach is inefficient and uncontrollable. During training, wait-k policy lacks the guidance from future
source information, to gain a stronger predictive ability.
To address the above two problems, we propose a
Future-Guided Incremental Transformer with average
embedding layer (AEL) and knowledge distillation (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015). The proposed method greatly accelerate the training speed, meanwhile plenty exploit the future information to guide training and enable the model to
obtain a stronger predictive ability.
To avoid the high complexity caused by recalculation
of the consumed source hidden states, inspired by Zhang,
Xiong, and Su (2018), we propose the incremental Transformer, including a unidirectional encoder and a decoder
with an average embedding layer. The average embedding
layer is added into decoder to summarize the consumed
source information, by calculating the average embedding
of all consumed source tokens. Therefore, each token can
attend to all consumed tokens through the unidirectional encoder and AEL, avoiding the recalculation at the same time.
To utilize future source information to enhance the predictive ability, we encourage the model to embed some
future information through knowledge distillation (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Ravanelli, Serdyuk, and Bengio
2018; Novitasari et al. 2019). Unlike some previous methods of adding ‘predict operation’ to ST, out method do not
explicitly predict the next word or verb, but implicitly embed the future information in the model. While training incremental Transformer (student), we simultaneously trained
a conventional Transformer for full-sentence NMT as the
teacher of incremental Transformer. Thus, the incremental

Simultaneous translation (ST) starts translations synchronously while reading source sentences, and is used in
many online scenarios. The previous wait-k policy is concise and achieved good results in ST. However, wait-k policy faces two weaknesses: low training speed caused by the
recalculation of hidden states and lack of future source information to guide training. For the low training speed, we
propose an incremental Transformer with an average embedding layer (AEL) to accelerate the speed of calculation of the
hidden states during training. For future-guided training, we
propose a conventional Transformer as the teacher of the incremental Transformer, and try to invisibly embed some future information in the model through knowledge distillation.
We conducted experiments on Chinese-English and GermanEnglish simultaneous translation tasks and compared with the
wait-k policy to evaluate the proposed method. Our method
can effectively increase the training speed by about 28 times
on average at different k and implicitly embed some predictive abilities in the model, achieving better translation quality
than wait-k baseline.

Introduction
Simultaneous translation(ST) (Cho and Esipova 2016; Gu
et al. 2017; Ma et al. 2019; Arivazhagan et al. 2019), a variant of machine translation, aims to output the translations
while reading source sentences, which is more suitable for
input-output synchronization tasks (such as online translation, live subtitle and simultaneous interpretation).
Recently, wait-k policy (Ma et al. 2019) is a widely used
read / write policy, which first waits for k source tokens, and
then translates concurrently with the rest of source sentence.
Wait-k policy was trained by a “prefix-to-prefix” architecture, and need to recalculate the hidden states of all previous source tokens when a new source token is received. The
wait-k policy achieved excellent results in ST and successfully integrated some implicit anticipation through “prefixto-prefix” training.
However, there are still two shortcomings in the adoption of source information. According to whether the token is read, all source tokens can be divided into two categories: consumed and future. First, for the consumed source,
* Corresponding author: Yang Feng.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14428

