The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Progressive Multitask Learning with Controlled Information Flow
for Joint Entity and Relation Extraction
Kai Sun,1,2 Richong Zhang,1,2∗ Samuel Mensah,1,2 Yongyi Mao,3 Xudong Liu1,2
1

Beijing Advanced Institution for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
sunkai@buaa.edu.cn, zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn, samensah@buaa.edu.cn, ymao@uottawa.ca, liuxd@act.buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

model (e.g. multilayer perceptron) on both the early predictions and shared representations to output the task-specific
representations. Obviously, deterministic models do not take
into account the randomness of the early predictions, as the
quality of these predictions is heavily dependent on the quality of early classifiers. A more natural approach is to consider a stochastic model that possesses some inherent randomness. Besides, it is important to additionally control the
flow of information from the early predictions since they
are just an approximation to the ground truth, and not the
ground truth itself. That way we are sure to reduce the noise
that comes with early predictions to extract more expressive
task-specific representations.
Moreover, the previous MTL models (Liu et al. 2019b;
Hu et al. 2019) only exploit the implicit interaction that is
captured by the shared representation. Our understanding of
task relatedness informs us that correlations actually exist
between the outputs of some related tasks, e.g. the entity
recognition and relation classification tasks. Since we can
obtain access to early predictions, we can model such correlations explicitly to improve task-specific representations.
Motivated by these findings, the goal of this paper is
to develop a multi-task learning architecture that incorporates early predictions of task-specific structures to improve
the learning of task-specific representations. Specifically,
we follow an approach used to extract the minimal sufficient statistics of an input about an output using neural networks (Alemi et al. 2017), and develop stochastic maps that
consider the shared representations and the interaction of
early predictions of task-specific networks to extract good
task-specific representations for supervision.
To verify our proposed multitask learning approach, we
choose the joint entity and relation extraction as our target
task due to its popularity in NLP. So far, many works (Miwa
and Sasaki 2014; Gupta, Schütze, and Andrassy 2016; Fu,
Li, and Ma 2019) have focused on leveraging multitask
learning to solve this joint task by taking entity recognition
(ER) as one task, and relation classification (RC) as another
task. The ER aims to extract all entities in the sentence, and
the RC aims to classify the relations between all word pairs
in the sentence. However, most of the previous works do not
consider leveraging the early prediction to improve the taskspecific representation nor do they explicitly model the interactions between the two tasks. We show that our proposed

Multitask learning has shown promising performance in
learning multiple related tasks simultaneously, and variants of
model architectures have been proposed, especially for supervised classification problems. One goal of multitask learning
is to extract a good representation that sufficiently captures
the relevant part of the input about the output for each learning task. To achieve this objective, in this paper we design a
multitask learning architecture based on the observation that
correlations exist between outputs of some related tasks (e.g.
entity recognition and relation extraction tasks), and they reflect the relevant features that need to be extracted from the
input. As outputs are unobserved, our proposed model exploits task predictions in lower layers of the neural model,
also referred to as early predictions in this work. But we control the injection of early predictions to ensure that we extract
good task-specific representations for classification. We refer
to this model as a Progressive Multitask learning model with
Explicit Interactions (PMEI). Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets produce state-of-the-art results on
the joint entity and relation extraction task.

Introduction
Multitask learning (MTL) is an important methodology that
simultaneously co-models multiple related tasks in a single model. One of the earliest proposed MTL architectures
learns a shared representation for multiple tasks, where this
shared representation is utilized by task-specific structures
independently to learn task-specific representations for supervision (Collobert and Weston 2008). Thus, it induces an
inductive bias that enhances the model’s ability to generalize
well on new inputs. This is a basic MTL structure which has
been used successfully in several natural language processing (NLP) tasks (Liu et al. 2019b; Hu et al. 2019).
Although impressive performance has been achieved by
considering the basic MTL architecture, some models have
considered incorporating early predictions (predictions of
the input in lower layers of the neural network) of the
task-specific structures to improve the task-specific representations (He, Lee, and and‘ Daniel Dahlmeier 2019; Zhao
et al. 2019). However, their approach applies a deterministic
∗

Corresponding author: zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13851

