The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proactive Privacy-preserving Learning for Retrieval
Peng-Fei Zhang,1 Zi Huang, 1 Xin-Shun Xu 2
1

School of Information Technology & Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia
2
School of Software, Shandong University, Jinan, China
mima.zpf@gmail.com, huang@itee.uq.edu.au, xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract

contain sensitive information, such as faces, child pictures,
ID photos, etc. A malicious search engine could use a snapshot of someone as a query example to search against the
entire Internet. Based on the returned search results (i.e.,
relevant or similar images), implicit connections between
queries and results could be exposed and revealed, causing
privacy leakage. For instance, a profile photo could be the
hint to find out his/her family photos. A malicious party can
also crawl and scrape images online and accordingly build
high-performance retrieval models used for profit or a nefarious purpose. These worrying issues highlight the necessity
of protecting data privacy.
Recently, a wide range of studies have revealed the fragile nature of deep models to the existence of adversarial examples (Biggio et al. 2013; Mopuri, Garg, and Babu 2017;
Gu, Dolan-Gavitt, and Garg 2017; Shafahi et al. 2018). By slightly modifying clean data, one can craft visually plausible
adversarial data but mislead target models towards wrong
predictive results with high probability. Such an intriguing
property provides inspiration for privacy protection against
malevolent ends, i.e., using adversarial data. In real world
situations, it is very common that data owners are usually
unaware of when and how an invasion takes place. Based on
this observation, it is natural to proactively take action on the
raw data before releasing them for a precaution, reducing the
chance of being invaded.
Motivated by this, we propose PPL, a data-centric
Proactive Privacy-preserving Learning algorithm against potential menacing models. We discuss our work in the context
of hashing based searching scenarios (Shen et al. 2009; Zhu
et al. 2013; Li, Wang, and Kang 2016; Yang et al. 2016; Liu
et al. 2019), where high dimensional data would be represented as compact binary codes via hash techniques to satisfy the requirements of both query speed and accuracy. The
proposed PPL achieves the privacy protection by transferring data from the original domain into the adversarial domain via an adversarial generator without significantly sacrificing the visual quality. As illustrated in Figure 1, before the
data release, the adversarial processing is performed, where
the raw data is imperceptibly modified. The perturbed data, i.e., adversarial data, will manipulate the predictive behaviours of malicious retrieval models in various scenarios.
More specifically, in Figure 1 (a), when someone leverages
well-established models to retrieve the released adversarial

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have recently achieved remarkable performance in image retrieval, yet posing great
threats to data privacy. On the one hand, one may misuse a deployed DNNs based system to look up data without consent.
On the other hand, organizations or individuals would legally or illegally collect data to train high-performance models
outside the scope of legitimate purposes. Unfortunately, less
effort has been made to safeguard data privacy against malicious uses of DNNs. In this paper, we propose a data-centric
Proactive Privacy-preserving Learning (PPL) algorithm for
hashing based retrieval, which achieves the protection purpose by employing a generator to transfer the original data
into the adversarial data with quasi-imperceptible perturbations before releasing them. When the data source is infiltrated, the adversarial data can confuse menacing retrieval
models to make erroneous predictions. Given that the prior knowledge of malicious models is not available, a surrogate retrieval model is instead introduced acting as a fooling
target. The framework is trained by a two-player game conducted between the generator and the surrogate model. More
specifically, the generator is updated to enlarge the gap between the adversarial data and the original data, aiming to
lower the search accuracy of the surrogate model. On the contrary, the surrogate model is trained with the opposing objective that is to maintain the search performance. As a result,
an effective and robust adversarial generator is encouraged.
Furthermore, to facilitate an effective optimization, a Gradient Reversal Layer (GRL) module is inserted to connect two
models, enabling the two-player game in a one-step learning.
Extensive experiments on three widely-used realistic datasets
prove the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Introduction
In recent decades, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
made a giant leap forward and been widely adopted in image retrieval (Babenko et al. 2014; Li et al. 2017; Shen et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2020). With sufficient training data, one
may build deep models with promising performance on target searching tasks. On the flip side, once misused, this advanced technology could raise significant data privacy issues. Nowadays, unprecedented amounts of user-generated
images are shared or published on the Internet, which may
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3369

