The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Anytime Inference with Distilled Hierarchical Neural Ensembles
Adria Ruiz1 , Jakob Verbeek2
1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, aruiz@iri.upc.edu
2
Facebook AI Research, jjverbeek@fb.com

Hierarchical Neural Ensemble

Abstract
Inference in deep neural networks can be computationally expensive, and networks capable of anytime inference are important in scenarios where the amount of compute or input
data varies over time. In such networks the inference process
can interrupted to provide a result faster, or continued to obtain a more accurate result. We propose Hierarchical Neural Ensembles (HNE), a novel framework to embed an ensemble of multiple networks in a hierarchical tree structure,
sharing intermediate layers. In HNE we control the complexity of inference on-the-fly by evaluating more or less models
in the ensemble. Our second contribution is a novel hierarchical distillation method to boost the predictions of small
ensembles. This approach leverages the nested structure of
our ensembles, to optimally allocate accuracy and diversity
across the individual models. Our experiments show that,
compared to previous anytime inference models, HNE provides state-of-the-art accuracy-computation trade-offs on the
CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet datasets.

N=1

N=2

+

+

N=4
+

Hierarchical Distillation

+

Input

Network Blocks

Individual Outputs

Introduction

+

Classiﬁer

Ensemble Output

+

Distillation Loss
+ Averaging

Figure 1: (Top) HNE shares parameters and computation in
a hierarchical manner. Tree leafs represent separate models
in the ensemble. Anytime inference is obtained via depthfirst traversal of the tree, and using at any given time the
ensemble prediction of the N models evaluated so far. (Bottom) Hierarchical distillation leverages the full ensemble to
supervise parts of the tree that are used in small ensembles.

Deep learning models typically require a large amount of
computation during inference, limiting their deployment in
edge devices such as mobile phones or autonomous vehicles.
For this reason, methods based on network pruning (Huang
et al. 2018b), architecture search (Tan et al. 2019), as well as
manual network design (Sandler et al. 2018), have all been
used to find more efficient model architectures. Despite the
promising results achieved by these approaches, there exist
several applications where, instead of deploying a single efficient network, we are interested in dynamically adapting
the inference latency depending on external constraints. Examples include scanning of incoming data streams on online
platforms or autonomous driving, where either the amount
of data to be processed or the number of concurrent processes is non-constant. In these situations, models must be
able to scale the number of the operations on-the-fly depending on the amount of available compute at any point
in time. In particular, we focus on methods capable of anytime inference, i.e. methods where the inference process can
be interrupted for early results, or continued for more accurate results (Huang et al. 2018a). This contrasts with other

methods, where the accuracy-speed trade-off has be decided
before the computation for inference starts.
We address this problem by introducing Hierarchical
Neural Ensembles (HNE). Inspired by ensemble learning
(Breiman 1996), HNE embeds a large number of networks
whose combined outputs provide a more accurate prediction than any individual model. To reduce the computational
cost of evaluating the networks, HNE employs a binary-tree
structure to share a subset of intermediate layers between the
different models. This scheme allows to control the inference complexity by deciding how many networks to use, i.e.
how many branches of the tree to evaluate. To train HNE, we
propose a novel distillation method adapted to its hierarchical structure. See Figure 1 for an overview of our approach.
Our contributions are summarised as follows: (i) To the

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9463

