The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Portfolio Optimization via Distributional Prediction of Residual Factors
Kentaro Imajo, 1 Kentaro Minami, 1 Katsuya Ito, 1 Kei Nakagawa, 2
1

Preferred Networks, Inc.
Nomura Asset Management Co., Ltd.
{imos, minami, katsuya1ito}@preferred.jp, k-nakagawa@nomura-am.co.jp
2

Abstract

Generally speaking, a good way for deep learning methods to adapt quickly to the given environment is to introduce
a network architecture that reflects a good inductive bias for
the environment. The most prominent examples for such architectures include convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) for image data
and long short-term memories (LSTMs) (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) for general time series data. Therefore,
a natural question to ask is what architecture is effective for
processing financial time series.
In finance, researchers have proposed various trading
strategies and empirically studied their effectiveness. Hence,
it is reasonable to seek architectures inspired by empirical
findings in financial studies. In particular, we consider the
following three features in the stock market.

Recent developments in deep learning techniques have motivated intensive research in machine learning-aided stock
trading strategies. However, since the financial market has
a highly non-stationary nature hindering the application of
typical data-hungry machine learning methods, leveraging financial inductive biases is important to ensure better sample efficiency and robustness. In this study, we propose a
novel method of constructing a portfolio based on predicting
the distribution of a financial quantity called residual factors,
which is known to be generally useful for hedging the risk
exposure to common market factors. The key technical ingredients are twofold. First, we introduce a computationally efficient extraction method for the residual information, which
can be easily combined with various prediction algorithms.
Second, we propose a novel neural network architecture that
allows us to incorporate widely acknowledged financial inductive biases such as amplitude invariance and time-scale
invariance. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method on
U.S. and Japanese stock market data. Through ablation experiments, we also verify that each individual technique contributes to improving the performance of trading strategies.
We anticipate our techniques may have wide applications in
various financial problems.

1

1.1

Hedging Exposures to Common Market
Factors

Many empirical studies on stock returns are described in
terms of factor models (e.g., (Fama and French 1992,
2015)). These factor models express the return of a certain
stock i at time t as a linear combination of K factors plus a
residual term:

Introduction

ri,t =

Developing a profitable trading strategy is a central problem in the financial industry. Over the past decade, machine learning and deep learning techniques have driven
significant advances across many application areas (Devlin
et al. 2019; Graves, Mohamed, and Hinton 2013), which
inspired investors and financial institutions to develop machine learning-aided trading strategies (Wang et al. 2019;
Choudhry and Garg 2008; Shah 2007). However, it is believed that forecasting the nature of financial time series is
essentially a difficult task (Krauss, Do, and Huck 2017).
In particular, the well-known efficient market hypothesis
(Malkiel and Fama 1970) claims that no single trading strategy could be permanently profitable because the dynamics of the market changes quickly. At this point, the financial market is significantly different from stationary environments typically assumed by most machine learning/deep
learning methods.

K
X

(k) (k)

βi ft

+ i,t .

(1)

k=1
(1)

(K)

Here, ft , . . . , ft are the common factors shared by multiple stocks i ∈ {1, . . . , S}, and the residual factor i,t is
specific to each individual stock i. Therefore, the common
factors correspond to the dynamics of the entire stock market or industries, whereas the residual factors convey some
firm-specific information.
In general, if the return of an asset has a strong correlation to the market factors, the asset exhibits a large exposure to the risk of the market. For example, it is known that
a classical strategy based on the momentum phenomenon
(Jegadeesh and Titman 1993) is correlated to the Fama–
French factors (Fama and French 1992, 2015), which exhibited negative returns around the credit crisis of 2008
(Calomiris, Love, and Peria 2010; Szado 2009). On the other
hand, researchers found that trading strategies based only on
the residual factors can be robustly profitable because such
strategies can hedge out the time-varying risk exposure to

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

213

