The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SCAN: A Spatial Context Attentive Network for Joint Multi-Agent Intent
Prediction
Jasmine Sekhon1 , Cody Fleming1, 2
1

University of Virginia,
Iowa State University
js3cn@virginia.edu, flemingc@iastate.edu
2

Abstract

experienced by a pedestrian at a point of time into a spatial context vector.
• We propose SCAN, a Spatial Context Attentive Network,
that jointly predicts trajectories for all pedestrians in the
scene for a future time window by attending to spatial
contexts experienced by them individually over an observed time window.
• Since human motion is multimodal, we extend our proposed framework to predicting multiple socially feasible
paths for all pedestrians in the scene.

Safe navigation of autonomous agents in human centric environments requires the ability to understand and predict motion of neighboring pedestrians. However, predicting pedestrian intent is a complex problem. Pedestrian motion is governed by complex social navigation norms, is dependent
on neighbors’ trajectories, and is multimodal in nature. In
this work, we propose SCAN, a Spatial Context Attentive
Network that can jointly predict socially-acceptable multiple future trajectories for all pedestrians in a scene. SCAN
encodes the influence of spatially close neighbors using a
novel spatial attention mechanism in a manner that relies
on fewer assumptions, is parameter efficient, and is more
interpretable compared to state-of-the-art spatial attention
approaches. Through experiments on several datasets we
demonstrate that our approach can also quantitatively outperform state of the art trajectory prediction methods in terms of
accuracy of predicted intent.

Related Work
Since a key contribution of our work is the ability of our
proposed framework to model spatial interactions between
neighboring pedestrians in a novel manner, we briefly discuss how existing trajectory forecasting methods encode
spatial influences while predicting pedestrian intent.
Traditional methods have relied on hand-crafted functions and features to model spatial interactions. For instance,
the Social Forces model (Helbing and Molnár 1995) models pedestrian behavior with attractive forces encouraging
moving towards their goal and repulsive forces discouraging collision with other pedestrians. Similarly, (Alahi, Ramanathan, and Fei-Fei 2014) and (Yi, Li, and Wang 2015)
proposed trajectory forecasting approaches that rely on features extracted from human trajectories or human attributes.
Such methods are limited by the need to hand craft features
and attributes and their simplistic models and lack generalizability to complex crowded settings. Further, they only
model immediate collision-avoidance behavior and do not
consider interactions that may occur in the more distant future.
More recently, deep learning based frameworks are being used to model spatial interactions between pedestrians. LSTM-based (Long short-term memory) approaches
are well-suited to predict pedestrian trajectories owing to the
sequential nature of the data. Consequently, several LSTMbased approaches have been proposed and successfully applied to predict pedestrian intent in the past. Alahi et. al.
proposed Social LSTM (Alahi et al. 2016) that uses a social pooling layer to encode spatial influences from neighboring pedestrians within an assumed spatial grid. More
recently, Gupta et. al. proposed Social GAN (Gupta et al.
2018), which goes beyond modeling only local interactions

Introduction
Modes of autonomous navigation are increasingly being
adopted in land, marine and airborne vehicles. In all these
domains, these autonomous vehicles are often expected to
operate in human-centric environments (e.g. social robots,
self-driving cars, etc.). When humans are navigating in
crowded environments, they follow certain implicit rules
of social interaction. As an example, when navigating in
crowded spaces like sidewalks, airports, train stations, and
others, pedestrians attempt to navigate safely while avoiding
collision with other pedestrians, respecting others’ personal
space, yielding right-of-way, etc. Any autonomous agent attempting to navigate safely in such shared environments
must be able to model these social navigation norms and
understand neighbors’ motion as a function of such complex spatial interactions. In this work, we aim to understand
pedestrian interactions and model these towards jointly predicting future trajectories for multiple pedestrians navigating in a scene. The contributions of our work are three-fold:
• We introduce a novel spatial attention mechanism to
model spatial influence of neighboring pedestrians in a
manner that relies on fewer assumptions, is parameter efficient, and interpretable. We encode the spatial influences
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6119

