The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling the Compatibility of Stem Tracks to Generate Music Mashups
Jiawen Huang*,2 , Ju-Chiang Wang1 , Jordan B. L. Smith1 , Xuchen Song1 , and Yuxuan Wang1
1

ByteDance
Queen Mary University of London
jiawen.huang@qmul.ac.uk, {ju-chiang.wang, jordan.smith, xuchen.song, wangyuxuan.11}@bytedance.com
2

Abstract

of other songs. Typically, the vocal part from one song is
juxtaposed with the instrumental part of another, although
it is also common for basic mashups to include samples
of 3 songs (Boone 2013). However, creating mashups is
challenging: it requires an expert’s ear to decide whether
two samples would make a good mashup, and it is timeconsuming to search for pairs of songs that would work well
together. Both issues are exacerbated when aiming to combine elements of three or more songs.
Accordingly, efforts to assist users in creating mashups or
to automate the process have continued for over a decade.
At minimum, two samples being combined should have
the same tempo and time signature, and they should not
clash harmonically; these criteria informed early systems for
assisting mashup creation (Tokui 2008; Griffin, Kim, and
Turnbull 2010), but they are also easy to meet using beattracking, key estimation, and audio-stretching algorithms.
To predict the mashability (i.e., the compatibility) of a candidate group of samples is more challenging, but allows one
to automate the creation of mashups.
Previous methods for estimating compatibility have relied
on rule-based systems with hand-crafted features (Davies
et al. 2014; Lee et al. 2015), even though the criteria used
by listeners to judge mashup quality are unknown and undoubtedly complex. We thus propose to use a neural network
to learn the criteria. The central challenge in training such a
model is that there is no training data: i.e., no datasets of audio samples with annotations defining which combinations
of samples are better than others. To address this, we propose to use self-supervised learning (by leveraging existing
music as training data) and a semi-supervised approach that
maximizes the utility of the other data we create.
We create training data by applying a supervised music
source separation (MSS) algorithm (e.g., Jansson et al. 2017;
Stöter, Liutkus, and Ito 2018) to extract independent stem
tracks from existing music (i.e., separated vocal, bass, drum
and other parts). We can then recombine the stems to generate many new mashups, with the original combinations
serving as ground truth examples of ‘good’ mashups; in this
way our model is self-supervised.1 It is straightforward to

A music mashup combines audio elements from two or more
songs to create a new work. To reduce the time and effort required to make them, researchers have developed algorithms
that predict the compatibility of audio elements. Prior work
has focused on mixing unaltered excerpts, but advances in
source separation enable the creation of mashups from isolated stems (e.g., vocals, drums, bass, etc.). In this work,
we take advantage of separated stems not just for creating
mashups, but for training a model that predicts the mutual
compatibility of groups of excerpts, using self-supervised and
semi-supervised methods. Specifically, we first produce a random mashup creation pipeline that combines stem tracks obtained via source separation, with key and tempo automatically adjusted to match, since these are prerequisites for highquality mashups. To train a model to predict compatibility,
we use stem tracks obtained from the same song as positive examples, and random combinations of stems with key
and/or tempo unadjusted as negative examples. To improve
the model and use more data, we also train on “average” examples: random combinations with matching key and tempo,
where we treat them as unlabeled data as their true compatibility is unknown. To determine whether the combined signal
or the set of stem signals is more indicative of the quality
of the result, we experiment on two model architectures and
train them using semi-supervised learning technique. Finally,
we conduct objective and subjective evaluations of the system, comparing them to a standard rule-based system.

Introduction
In Margaret Boden’s account of how creativity works,
“combinational” creativity—the juxtaposition of unrelated
ideas—and “exploratory” creativity—the searching within
the rules of a style for exciting possibilities—are two essential modes of creative thinking (Boden 2007). Modeling
these processes computationally is an important step for developing artificial creativity in the field of AI (Jordanous
2014). The combinatory possibilities and joy of exploration
are perhaps two causes for the continued popularity of creating music mashups.
Mashups are a popular genre of music where new songs
are created by combining audio excerpts (called samples)
*

1

The author performed this work as an intern at ByteDance.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

This may be different from conventional settings such as learning a representation of signals or their temporal coherence (Misra,
Zitnick, and Hebert 2016; Huang, Chou, and Yang 2018).

187

