The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Programmatic Strategies for Real-Time Strategy Games
Julian R. H. Mariño,1 Rubens O. Moraes,2 Tassiana C. Oliveira,2 Claudio Toledo,1 Levi H. S. Lelis3
1

Departamento de Sistemas de Computação, ICMC, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
2
Departamento de Informática, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Brazil
3
Department of Computing Science, Alberta Machine Intelligence Institute (Amii), University of Alberta, Canada
julianmarino@usp.br, rubens.moraes@ufv.br, tassiana.rios@ufv.br, claudio@icmc.usp.br, levi.lelis@ualberta.ca

Abstract

strategy that is encoded in a script. The process of manually
writing scripts can be time consuming. Moreover, strategies
written by programmers are fixed and, if a player creates new
content for a game (e.g., a new map for playing a real-time
strategy game), then the artificial agents might have to play
a strategy encoded in a script developed for a different map.
In this paper we introduce Local Search and Language
Simplifier (LS2), a system for synthesizing scripts for realtime strategy (RTS) games. The inputs of LS2 are an RTS
map for which a strategy is to be synthesized and a domainspecific language (DSL). LS2 returns a script encoding a
strategy that is specialized for the map provided as input.
The DSL is designed to be expressive enough to allow for
the synthesis of scripts encoding effective strategies, but also
restrictive enough to prune from the synthesis space programs encoding weak strategies. Since strategies can change
depending on the game map, features that make a DSL effective for a given map might not be necessary for another map.
LS2 uses an algorithm we call Domain-Specific Language
Simplifier (Lasi) to simplify the DSL according to the map
provided as input. Lasi receives as input a trace of the game,
i.e., a sequence of state-action pairs starting at the game’s
start state and finishing at a terminal state. This trace can be
generated, for example, by an algorithm playing the game
against itself or by a human demonstrator. Then, Lasi greedily chooses the features from the input DSL that allows one
to synthesize a program that reproduces the trace provided as
input. The features selected by this greedy approach define
the simplified DSL. The intuition behind Lasi’s procedure
is that the DSL should contain only the features deemed as
important by the agent who generated the game trace, thus
allowing the synthesis to search on a more promising program space. Once the DSL is simplified LS2 uses a local
search algorithm with self play to search over the simplified
program space.
We evaluate LS2 on four maps of µRTS, a real-time strategy (RTS) game designed for research purposes. We enlisted
four professional programmers to write scripts for all four
maps used in our experiment. In addition to the scripts written by programmers, we also compare the LS2’s scripts with
search algorithms and other scripts from the µRTS codebase
in a tournament-style experiment. A script LS2 synthesized
obtained the highest winning rate in two of the maps tested
and a script written by one of the programmers obtained the

Search-based systems have shown to be effective for planning in zero-sum games. However, search-based approaches
have important disadvantages. First, the decisions of search
algorithms are mostly non-interpretable, which is problematic in domains where predictability and trust are desired such
as commercial games. Second, the computational complexity of search-based algorithms might limit their applicability, especially in contexts where resources are shared among
other tasks such as graphic rendering. In this work we introduce a system for synthesizing programmatic strategies for
a real-time strategy (RTS) game. In contrast with search algorithms, programmatic strategies are more amenable to explanations and tend to be efficient, once the program is synthesized. Our system uses a novel algorithm for simplifying
domain-specific languages (DSLs) and a local search algorithm that synthesizes programs with self play. We performed
a user study where we enlisted four professional programmers to develop programmatic strategies for µRTS, a minimalist RTS game. Our results show that the programs synthesized by our approach can outperform search algorithms and
be competitive with programs written by the programmers.

Introduction
Search and learning-based algorithms represent the current state-of-the-art approaches for playing zero-sum games,
e.g., AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2018) and AlphaStar (Vinyals
et al. 2019). One disadvantage of such approaches is that
their decisions are often non-interpretable, which can be an
issue if the artificial agent is deployed in scenarios where
predictability, explainability, and trust are important, such
as commercial games. Programmatic strategies, which we
refer to as scripts, might not be as strong as strategies derived by search or reinforcement learning algorithms. However, scripts can more easily be interpreted and modified by
a domain expert. The computer games industry heavily relies on scripts for controlling artificial agents because game
designers and programmers are able to understand, predict,
and thus trust the agent behavior in production. In the industry, scripted strategies are written by professional programmers in a trial-and-error process as they try to understand
how other agents (including the player) could react to the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

381

