The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Graph Neural Networks with Heterophily
Jiong Zhu,1 Ryan A. Rossi,2 Anup Rao,2 Tung Mai,2
Nedim Lipka,2 Nesreen K. Ahmed,3 Danai Koutra1
1

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA
3
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, USA
jiongzhu@umich.edu, {ryrossi, anuprao, tumai, lipka}@adobe.com, nesreen.k.ahmed@intel.com, dkoutra@umich.edu
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have proven to be useful for
many different practical applications. However, many existing GNN models have implicitly assumed homophily among
the nodes connected in the graph, and therefore have largely
overlooked the important setting of heterophily, where most
connected nodes are from different classes. In this work, we
propose a novel framework called CPGNN that generalizes
GNNs for graphs with either homophily or heterophily. The
proposed framework incorporates an interpretable compatibility matrix for modeling the heterophily or homophily level
in the graph, which can be learned in an end-to-end fashion,
enabling it to go beyond the assumption of strong homophily.
Theoretically, we show that replacing the compatibility matrix in our framework with the identity (which represents
pure homophily) reduces to GCN. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in more realistic
and challenging experimental settings with significantly less
training data compared to previous works: CPGNN variants
achieve state-of-the-art results in heterophily settings with or
without contextual node features, while maintaining comparable performance in homophily settings.

1

Introduction

As a powerful approach for learning and extracting information from relational data, Graph Neural Network (GNN)
models have gained wide research interest (Scarselli et al.
2008) and been adapted in applications including recommendation systems (Ying et al. 2018), bioinformatics (Zitnik,
Agrawal, and Leskovec 2018; Yan et al. 2019), fraud detection (Dou et al. 2020), and more. While many different
GNN models have been proposed, existing methods have
largely overlooked several limitations in their formulations:
(1) implicit homophily assumptions; (2) heavy reliance on
contextual node features. First, many GNN models, including
the most popular GNN variant proposed by Kipf and Welling
(2017), implicitly assume homophily in the graph, where most
connections happen among nodes in the same class or with
alike features (McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook 2001).
This assumption has affected the design of many GNN models, which tend to generate similar representations for nodes
within close proximity, as studied in previous works (Ahmed
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11168

et al. 2018; Rossi et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2019). However, there
are also many instances in the real world where nodes of different classes are more likely to connect with one another —
in idiom, this phenomenon can be described as “opposites attract”. As we observe empirically, many GNN models which
are designed under implicit homophily assumptions suffer
from poor performance in heterophily settings, which can be
problematic for applications like fraudster detection (Pandit
et al. 2007; Dou et al. 2020) or analysis of protein structures (Fout et al. 2017), where heterophilous connections
are common. Second, many existing models rely heavily on
contextual node features to derive intermediate representations of each node, which is then propagated within the graph.
While in a few networks like citation networks, node features
are able to provide powerful node-level contextual information for downstream applications, in more common cases
the contextual information are largely missing, insufficient
or incomplete, which can significantly degrade the performance for some models. Moreover, complex transformation
of input features usually requires the model to adopt a large
number of learnable parameters, which need more data and
computational resources to train and are hard to interpret.
In this work, we propose CPGNN, a novel approach that
incorporates into GNNs a compatibility matrix that captures
both heterophily and homophily by modeling the likelihood
of connections between nodes in different classes. This novel
design overcomes the drawbacks of existing GNNs mentioned above: it enables GNNs to appropriately learn from
graphs with either homophily or heterophily, and is able to
achieve satisfactory performance even in the cases of missing and incomplete node features. Moreover, the end-to-end
learning of the class compatibility matrix effectively recovers the ground-truth underlying compatibility information,
which is hard to infer from limited training data, and provides
insights for understanding the connectivity patterns within
the graph. Finally, the key idea proposed in this work can naturally be used to generalize many other GNN-based methods
by incorporating and learning the heterophily compatibility
matrix H in a similar fashion.
We summarize the main contributions as follows:
• Heterophily Generalization of GNNs. We describe a
generalization of GNNs to heterophily settings by incorporating a compatibility matrix H into GNN-based methods,

