The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

VisualMRC: Machine Reading Comprehension on Document Images
Ryota Tanaka∗ , Kyosuke Nishida∗ , Sen Yoshida
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories, NTT Corporation
{ryouta.tanaka.rg, kyosuke.nishida.rx, sen.yoshida.tu}@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Recent studies on machine reading comprehension have focused on text-level understanding but have not yet reached
the level of human understanding of the visual layout and
content of real-world documents. In this study, we introduce
a new visual machine reading comprehension dataset, named
VisualMRC, wherein given a question and a document image, a machine reads and comprehends texts in the image to
answer the question in natural language. Compared with existing visual question answering (VQA) datasets that contain
texts in images, VisualMRC focuses more on developing natural language understanding and generation abilities. It contains 30,000+ pairs of a question and an abstractive answer
for 10,000+ document images sourced from multiple domains
of webpages. We also introduce a new model that extends existing sequence-to-sequence models, pre-trained with largescale text corpora, to take into account the visual layout and
content of documents. Experiments with VisualMRC show
that this model outperformed the base sequence-to-sequence
models and a state-of-the-art VQA model. However, its performance is still below that of humans on most automatic
evaluation metrics. The dataset will facilitate research aimed
at connecting vision and language understanding.

Q: Who were the winners of the Ig Nobel prize for Biology and Chemistry?
A: The winner of the Ig Nobel prize for biology was Dr
Johanna van Bronswijk, and the winner for Chemistry was
Mayu Yamamoto.

Figure 1: Example from our VisualMRC dataset. The dataset
provides regions-of-interest (ROIs) with semantic classes in
addition to QA pairs and document images. E.g., a bounding box colored in brown indicates a list. The image was
sourced from https://en.wikinews.org/wiki/2007 Ig Nobel
Prize winners announced.

Introduction
Creating intelligent agents that can answer questions as well
as people can is a long-cherished goal of artificial intelligence. To achieve this goal, machine reading comprehension
(MRC), a challenge to enable a machine to read and comprehend natural language texts so that it can answer questions, has received much attention (Rajpurkar et al. 2016;
Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang 2018). The MRC capability can
be of value to users if it can be employed by automated assistants such as customer-service chatbots on e-commerce
websites (Cui et al. 2017) or assistant systems for reading professional literature (Hong et al. 2019). Here, most
real-world documents are provided in non-plain text formats
(e.g., HTML and PDF). However, current studies in MRC
almost exclusively focus on text-level understanding, while
neglecting the visual layout and content (text appearance,
tables, charts, etc.) of the documents. Visual question answering (VQA) on images containing a few words (Singh

et al. 2019; Biten et al. 2019) has recently been studied as
a challenging task that lies at the intersection of vision and
language understanding. However, these learning tasks do
not focus on document understanding. They cannot be used
to develop the ability to make a machine visually read and
comprehend real-world documents.
To move towards more advanced vision and language understanding, we have created a new dataset1 , called Visual
Machine Reading Comprehension (VisualMRC), wherein
given a question and a document image, a machine reads
and comprehends texts in an image to answer the question in
natural language. As shown in Figure 1, the task demands a
rich set of abilities as varied as understanding the document
layout and visual representations of the text and non-text ob-

∗

The first two authors have equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We will release further information about this dataset at https:
//github.com/nttmdlab-nlp/VisualMRC.

13878

