The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Intact Features by Erasing-Inpainting for Few-shot Classification
Junjie Li, Zilei Wang* , Xiaoming Hu
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
hnljj@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn, cjdc@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

query samples (i.e., query set) from the novel set into the
unseen classes having few labeled samples (i.e., support set).
Currently, the metric-based methods can achieve promising performance for few-shot learning (Ye et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2019a; Vinyals et al. 2016; Sung et al. 2018). These
methods first adopt a feature extractor (embedding function)
to translate samples into the feature embedding, and then
employ a metric function to calculate the similarity between
a test sample in the query set and each class represented by
few samples in the support set. Finally, the test sample is
classified according to the nearest-neighbor rule. Evidently,
how to design the feature extractor and metric function are
the two key problem of these methods, which critically determine the classification performance.
On the other hand, the episode training method (Vinyals
et al. 2016) is proposed to train the models. It samples the
tasks from the base set by imitating the settings in test stage,
which are called episodes, and then trains the model using
the sampled tasks. Through maintaining the consistency of
the sampling task over the seen and unseen classes, it is expected the model trained on the base set can well transfer to
the novel set. With the help of episode training, many methods dedicate to building good metric functions, and a simple
CNN (e.g., ResNet-12) is usually trained for feature extraction. For examples, DSN (Simon et al. 2020) proposes to
exploit the subspace distance to define a classifier which is
robust against perturbations. EMD (Zhang et al. 2020b) employs Earth Mover’s Distance to calculate the similarity of
local features between the query sample and support sample.

Few-shot classification aims to categorize the samples from
unseen classes with only few labeled samples. To address
such a challenge, many methods exploit a base set consisting of massive labeled samples to learn an instance embedding function, i.e., image feature extractor, and it is expected
to possess good transferability among different tasks. Such
characteristics of few-shot learning are essentially different
from that of traditional image classification only pursuing to
get discriminative image representations. In this paper, we
propose to learn intact features by erasing-inpainting for fewshot classification. Specifically, we argue that extracting intact features of target objects is more transferable, and then
propose a novel cross-set erasing-inpainting (CSEI) method.
CSEI processes the images in the support set using erasing
and inpainting, and then uses them to augment the query set
of the same task. Consequently, the feature embedding produced by our proposed method can contain more complete
information of target objects. In addition, we propose taskspecific feature modulation to make the features adaptive to
the current task. The extensive experiments on two widely
used benchmarks well demonstrates the effectiveness of our
proposed method, which can consistently get considerable
performance gains for different baseline methods.

Introduction
Image classification with massive labeled data has achieved
great success benefiting from the power of deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) (He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Szegedy et al. 2015, 2016; Hu,
Shen, and Sun 2018). But it is still very challenging for
DCNN to quickly learn a new concept from few samples.
Few-shot classification exactly aims to categorize the samples from the classes with only few labeled samples. Conventionally, there are two fundamental concepts in few-shot
classification: base set (seen class) and novel set (unseen
class). Particularly, each class in the base set has a lot of labeled samples, while the class in the novel set only contains
few samples. Note that there is no class overlap between the
base and novel sets. For few-shot learning, we need train
a classifier on the base set, and then use it to category the

Figure 1: Activation maps for different training methods: (a)
input, (b) traditional classification model, (c) CAN (baseline), and (d) CSEI (ours). Here warmer color indicates
higher values. Best viewed in color.
Actually, the requirement of few-shot classification to feature extractor is different from the traditional image classification. In the traditional image classification, there are lots
of labeled samples for training and thus the learned model

* Corresponding Author

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8401

