The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FedRec++: Lossless Federated Recommendation with Explicit Feedback
Feng Liang, Weike Pan*, Zhong Ming*
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
liangfeng2018@email.szu.edu.cn, panweike@szu.edu.cn, mingz@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

gorithms and systems (including recommender systems).
Some recent works (Ammad-ud-din et al. 2019; Chai et al.
2020) revisit some recommendation algorithms in the new
federated learning paradigm. Specifically, the original rating data are always kept locally in each client (i.e., user) in
the whole process of model training, and each client only
uploads the corresponding model parameters to the server
in order to update the model jointly. For example, federated
collaborative filtering (FCF) (Ammad-ud-din et al. 2019) focuses on item ranking with implicit feedback, and treats all
the unrated items as negative ones, which may cause bias
in model training and also high communication cost during the server-client interactions. FedMF (Chai et al. 2020)
uses the homomorphic encryption technology to encrypt the
items’ gradients before uploading them to the server in order to protect the users’ privacy. A federated meta learning work (Jalalirad et al. 2019) combines a meta learning
method called REPTILE (Nichol, Achiam, and Schulman
2018) with federated learning for rating prediction with explicit feedback, which is able to fine tune the model parameters for each user. Federated multi-view matrix factorization (FED-MVMF) (Flanagan et al. 2020) combines multiview matrix factorization with federated learning in order to
protect the users’ original rating data when modeling multiparty data. However, it will leak the users’ rating behaviors
(i.e., the set of items rated by a user) similar to the aforementioned methods.
We can see that most existing federated recommendation
methods will either bias the model training or do not protect
the users’ rating behaviors well. Recently, SDCF (Jiang, Li,
and Lin 2019) proposes a two-stage randomized response algorithm to perturb the rated and unrated items of each user,
and then calculates and uploads their gradients to the server.
In this way, the server can not identify the set of items rated
by the users easily, which thus protects the users’ rating behaviors. FedRec (Lin et al. 2020) also uploads the gradients
of the rated items and the randomly sampled unrated items
of the users. Notice that it uses a hybrid filling strategy to assign some virtual ratings to the unrated items. However, both
of them will introduce some noise to the gradients, which
will cause loss in the recommendation performance.
In order to eliminate the gradient noise, we propose to allocate some denoising users (i.e., clients) to eliminate the
noise caused by the randomly sampled items and their as-

With the marriage of federated machine learning and recommender systems for privacy-aware preference modeling and
personalization, there comes a new research branch called
federated recommender systems aiming to build a recommendation model in a distributed way, i.e., each user is represented as a distributed client where his/her original rating
data are not shared with the server or the other clients. Notice that, besides the sensitive information of a specific rating
score assigned to a certain item by a user, the information
of a user’s rated set of items shall also be well protected.
Some very recent works propose to randomly sample some
unrated items for each user and then assign some virtual ratings, so that the server can not identify the scores and the
set of rated items easily during the server-client interactions.
However, the virtual ratings assigned to the randomly sampled items will inevitably introduce some noise to the model
training process, which will then cause loss in recommendation performance. In this paper, we propose a novel lossless
federated recommendation method (FedRec++) by allocating
some denoising clients (i.e., users) to eliminate the noise in a
privacy-aware manner. We further analyse our FedRec++ in
terms of security and losslessness, and discuss its generality
in the context of existing works. Extensive empirical studies
clearly show the effectiveness of our FedRec++ in providing
accurate and privacy-aware recommendation without much
additional communication cost.

Introduction
In the era of information overload, it is often difficult for
people to find what they like among a huge number of
items. Recommender systems solve the problem by exploiting users’ historical data to recommend some items that the
users may like. Traditional collaborative filtering (CF) algorithms (Mnih and Salakhutdinov 2007; Koren 2008; Rendle
2012) need to collect all the users’ rating data in one central
place, e.g., the server, for model training. With the increasing awareness of privacy and the publishing of some related
privacy protection laws such as GDPR (EU 2016), collecting
users’ data may not be feasible in many cases.
Recently, federated machine learning (McMahan et al.
2017; Yang et al. 2019; Kairouz et al. 2019) has been proposed for protecting users’ privacy in machine learning alCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4224

