The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Recognizing and Verifying Mathematical Equations using Multiplicative
Differential Neural Units
Ankur Mali1 , Alexander G. Ororbia2 , Dan Kifer 1 and C. Lee Giles1
1

The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 16802, USA
2
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY, 14623, USA
{aam35, duk17, clg20}@psu.edu
{ago}@cs.rit.edu

Abstract

to this kind of reasoning, artificial neural networks (ANNs)
have been shown to experience great difficulty achieving the
robustness, adaptability, and flexibility exhibited by human
agents (Fodor, Pylyshyn et al. 1988). Specifically, for tasks
requiring the ability to compose knowledge, where complex
expressions or structures are created by learning and manipulating rules that permit combination and usage of atomic
elements of knowledge (such as the operations of addition
or multiplication), ANNs struggle to work correctly and reliably. Indeed, it is often argued that ANNs are incapable
of learning to perform the compositional actions needed to
mathematically reason (Fodor, Pylyshyn et al. 1988).
Nonetheless, in this paper, we argue that the limitations
in an ANN’s ability to learn compositionality is due (at least
in part) to several limitations in their current structural design. First, ANNs do not possess the right inductive bias (or
prior, in the form of structural constraints) that would allow
them to more readily and naturally extract the compostionality in various symbolic languages. Second, standard ANNs,
even those that are stateful, e.g., recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), lack a proper (interpretable) memory structure that
would be allow them to properly handle the arrangements
of symbols that compose mathematical expressions of increasing depth (complexity) and length. Since mathematical
equations are derived from context-free languages related
to mathematical identities (Arabshahi, Singh, and Anandkumar 2018), it would make sense to manipulate an external
memory when
√ processing equations. For example, a model
trained on ( 1×1×y)+x = (1×y)+x should be capable of
generally understanding structure that includes equality and
inequality. Furthermore, a memory structure would allow a
network to better generalize to unseen equations of different
depths, since memory can offload some of the memorization
that a network typically does using its short-term synapses
for (Arabshahi et al. 2019). For instance, a model augmented
with external memory should be capable of understanding
the following
 equation (without any need
 to train it directly
1
0×1
1
on it): y × 1 ×(3+(−1×4 ))+x = y ×20 ×(2+x).

Automated mathematical reasoning is a challenging problem
that requires an agent to learn algebraic patterns that contain
long-range dependencies. Two particular tasks that test this
type of reasoning are (1) mathematical equation verification,
which requires determining whether trigonometric and linear
algebraic statements are valid identities or not, and (2) equation completion, which entails filling in a blank within an expression to make it true. Solving these tasks with deep learning requires that the neural model learn how to manipulate
and compose various algebraic symbols, carrying this ability
over to previously unseen expressions. Artificial neural networks, including recurrent networks and transformers, struggle to generalize on these kinds of difficult compositional
problems, often exhibiting poor extrapolation performance.
In contrast, recursive neural networks (recursive-NNs) are,
theoretically, capable of achieving better extrapolation due to
their tree-like design but are difficult to optimize as the depth
of their underlying tree structure increases. To overcome
this issue, we extend recursive-NNs to utilize multiplicative,
higher-order synaptic connections and, furthermore, to learn
to dynamically control and manipulate an external memory.
We argue that this key modification gives the neural system
the ability to capture powerful transition functions for each
possible input. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed higher-order, memory-augmented recursive-NN models on two challenging mathematical equation tasks, showing
improved extrapolation, stable performance, and faster convergence. Our models achieve a 1.53% average improvement
over current state-of-the-art methods in equation verification
and achieve a 2.22% Top-1 average accuracy and 2.96% Top5 average accuracy for equation completion.

Introduction
Mathematical reasoning is one problem domain that crucially requires understanding the composition between symbols and arithmetic operators. In demonstrating that it has
an “understanding” of basic mathematical and logical concepts, an agent must solve new equations or resolve expressions that might become increasingly more complex with
time. This entails understanding the structure of equations,
as well as their underlying grammar, in order to properly
and effectively extrapolate to unseen examples. With respect

Ultimately, we aim to better understand the components
required to enhance an ANN’s ability to mathematically
reason and, therefore, we explore two important reasoning
tasks: mathematical equation verification (is a stated identity true?) and mathematical equation completion (fill in the

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5006

