The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Multi-Context Attention Networks for Citation Forecasting of Scientific
Publications
Taoran Ji,1 Nathan Self, 1 Kaiqun Fu, 1 Zhiqian Chen, 2 Naren Ramakrishnan, 1
and Chang-Tien Lu 1
1

2

Discovery Analytics Center, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA 22203, USA
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Mississippi State University, MS 39762, USA
jtr@vt.edu
Abstract

Many previous works (Yan et al. 2011; Acuna, Allesina,
and Kording 2012; Yan et al. 2012) regard citation prediction
problems as feature-driven regression tasks. Often, domainspecific, handcrafted features (e.g., domain keywords, topics, quality indicators, author information) are collected to
formulate a deterministic model to predict the future citation
count. However, these models cannot predict the technological categories of citing documents and thus are incapable
of technological diversity assessment. Also, these models
require prior domain knowledge and are hard to extend to
different research areas. The performance of such models
depends heavily on the quality of collected features. But,
in real-world datasets, features like author lists and institution information (Kim et al. 2014) are often noisy, especially
when considering papers from multiple disciplines. Furthermore, this category of models treats features as an accumulated view over a historical window, and thus ignores crucial
patterns that evolve over time.

Forecasting citations of scientific patents and publications is a
crucial task for understanding the evolution and development
of technological domains and for foresight into emerging
technologies. By construing citations as a time series, the task
can be cast into the domain of temporal point processes. Most
existing work on forecasting with temporal point processes,
both conventional and neural network-based, only performs
single-step forecasting. In citation forecasting, however, the
more salient goal is n-step forecasting: predicting the arrival time and the technology class of the next n citations.
In this paper, we propose Dynamic Multi-Context Attention
Networks (DMA-Nets), a novel deep learning sequence-tosequence (Seq2Seq) model with a novel hierarchical dynamic
attention mechanism for long-term citation forecasting. Extensive experiments on two real-world datasets demonstrate
that the proposed model learns better representations of conditional dependencies over historical sequences compared to
state-of-the-art counterparts and thus achieves significant performance for citation predictions.

PID
125559693

Introduction
The evolution of technology is a coupling of prior work with
new innovations in incremental or disruptive fashions. As
such, as a paper or patent receives citations, their frequency
and provenance can serve as a reflection of that evolutionary character. Citation-based bibliometrics analysis, such as
g-index (Egghe 2006) and H-index (Hirsch 2005), have become well-accepted standard measures applied to individuals, high-tech companies, and institutions alike. The technological diversity of scientific documents, such as generality and originality, critical factors for decision-makers, can
be measured via the technology class of the citing documents (Bessen 2008). Furthermore, patent citation statistics have been widely used for the tasks of technology impact analysis (Jang, Woo, and Lee 2017), patent quality assessment (Bessen 2008) (Lee et al. 2018), and identifying
emerging technologies at an early stage. Citation forecasting
is a field of growing importance due to the accelerating pace
of technological change in increasingly competitive industrial and academic environments.

Jan
2016

Apr
2016

PID
351174443

PID
257839285

Jul
2016

Jan
2017

Oct
2016

PID
260456761

Apr
2017

Jul
2017

PID
280274140

Oct
2017

Jan
2018

Figure 1: The citation chain for “The Essence of Wildlife
Management” from the MAG dataset. The first 4 citations
are shown along the timeline with their MAG ID attached
by vertical line.
To address the above issues, point process based citation prediction models (Lee et al. 2012; Jang, Woo, and
Lee 2017; Liu et al. 2017) have drawn growing attention
in recent years. As shown in Figure 1, the sequence of citations that reference a given paper is naturally a time series. Consequently, it can be modeled as a temporal point
process that modulates the temporal pattern in a series of
points. In theory, the temporal point process is characterized
by a conditional intensity function learned from observing
points along the timeline. Conventional methods concentrate on designing a specific parametric form of the intensity
function using heuristic assumptions specific to their appli-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7953

