The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Pivoting for (Unsupervised) Entity Alignment
Fangyu Liu1 , Muhao Chen2,3 , Dan Roth2 , Nigel Collier1
1

2

Language Technology Lab, TAL, University of Cambridge, UK
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania, USA
3
Viterbi School of Engineering, University of Southern California, USA
{fl399, nhc30}@cam.ac.uk, muhaoche@usc.edu, danroth@seas.upenn.edu

REGULAR KG (ENGLISH)

Abstract

FAST AND
FURIOUS

This work studies the use of visual semantic representations
to align entities in heterogeneous knowledge graphs (KGs).
Images are natural components of many existing KGs. By
combining visual knowledge with other auxiliary information, we show that the proposed new approach, EVA
,
creates a holistic entity representation that provides strong
signals for cross-graph entity alignment. Besides, previous
entity alignment methods require human labelled seed alignment, restricting availability. EVA provides a completely unsupervised solution by leveraging the visual similarity of entities to create an initial seed dictionary (visual pivots). Experiments on benchmark data sets DBP15k and DWY15k
show that EVA offers state-of-the-art performance on both
monolingual and cross-lingual entity alignment tasks. Furthermore, we discover that images are particularly useful to
align long-tail KG entities, which inherently lack the structural contexts that are necessary for capturing the correspondences. Code release: https://github.com/cambridgeltl/eva;
project page: http://cogcomp.org/page/publication view/927.

1

starring

ENGLISH

ALEC
BALDWIN

DWAYNE
JOHNSON

(MULTI-MODAL)
EMBEDDING SPACE

REGULAR KG (CHINESE)
英語

玩命關頭

after
language

演員
語⾔

before
CHRIS
HEMSWORTH

巨⽯強森

almaMater

UNIVERSITY OF MIAMI

MULTI-MODAL KG (ENGLISH)
FAST AND
FURIOUS DWAYNE

JOHNSON

starring

英語

玩命關頭

after

演員

language

ENGLISH

before

CHRIS
HEMSWORTH

MULTI-MODAL KG (CHINESE)

ALEC
BALDWIN

almaMater

語⾔

巨⽯強森

UNIVERSITY
OF MIAMI

Figure 1: A challenging example which heavily benefits
from using vision to align entities between cross-lingual
KGs in DBP15k. We display the neighbourhoods of entity
DWAYNE J OHNSON in English and Chinese KGs. Without
the visual component, the two embedded vectors are far apart
(top) while similar images can pull them together (bottom).

Introduction

A major bottleneck for training EA models is the scarce
cross-graph pivots2 available as alignment signals (Chen et al.
2017; Sun et al. 2018). Besides, the sparsity of KGs is usually
accompanied with weak structural correspondence, posing
an even greater challenge to EA. To mitigate this problem,
recent works have attempted to retrieve auxiliary supervision
signals from the supplementary information of entities, such
as attributes (Sun, Hu, and Li 2017; Trisedya, Qi, and Zhang
2019; Yang et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020c) and descriptions
(Chen et al. 2018). However, existing EA approaches are still
limited in their capabilities. Our study proposes to leverage
images, a natural component of entity profiles in many KGs
(Lehmann et al. 2015; Vrandečić and Krötzsch 2014; Liu et al.
2019), for better EA. Images have been used to enrich entity
representations for KG completion in a single-graph scenario
(Xie et al. 2017; Mousselly-Sergieh et al. 2018; Pezeshkpour,
Chen, and Singh 2018). However, the visual modality is yet
to be explored for cross-graph tasks such as EA.
Our study stands upon several advantages that the visual

Knowledge graphs (KGs) such as DBpedia (Lehmann et al.
2015), YAGO (Rebele et al. 2016) and Freebase (Bollacker
et al. 2008) store structured knowledge that is crucial to
numerous knowledge-driven applications including question answering (Cui et al. 2017), entity linking (Radhakrishnan, Talukdar, and Varma 2018), text generation (KoncelKedziorski et al. 2019) and information extraction (Hoffmann
et al. 2011). However, most KGs are independently extracted
from separate sources, or contributed by speakers of one
language, therefore limiting the coverage of knowledge. It
is important to match and synchronise the independently
built KGs and seek to provide NLP systems the benefit of
complementary information contained in different KGs (Bleiholder and Naumann 2009; Bryl and Bizer 2014). To remedy
this problem, the Entity Alignment (EA)1 task aims at building cross-graph mappings to match entities having the same
real-world identities, therefore integrating knowledge from
different sources into a common space.

2

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The entity in EA refers to real-world objects and concepts.

In this paper, pivot is used interchangeably with seed alignment
between cross-graph entities; visual pivoting means to use the visual
space as intermediate to find seed alignment.

4257

