The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Web-based Platform for K-12 AI Education in China
Chao Wu, Yan Li, Junxiang Li, Qiongdan Zhang, Fei Wu
Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, China
chao.wu@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

like deeplearning.ai), some trials have been made for K-12
(e.g. aiK-12 by MIT 1) and (Touretzky 2019). Although there
are no specific statistical data about how many AI courses
are available in K-12 schools, we believe that it's getting priority in schools. For example, schools in the Pennsylvania
Montour School District 2 have mandated AI contents in the
grades 5-8 curriculum, and they have embedded AI in
STEM courses and other subjects like Music, Computer Science, and Media Arts. Additionally, the district requires the
students to take a stand-alone AI Ethics course. With these
kinds of efforts, AI will become new literacy in the future.
China is among the leading countries of AI research and
engineering, and the development of AI is strongly supported as the national strategy. AI education is also emphasized in China (Hao 2019), as a chance to promote the intellect and competence of its large population. The Chinese
government published a guideline for AI education in 2017 3.
Following this guideline, over 180 Chinese universities have
established AI majors for both undergraduates and graduates. Many efforts have also been made in K-12 education.
More than ten types of AI textbooks have been published for
middle and primary schools. Trial courses have been tested
in provinces/cities like Zhejiang, Hubei, and Shanghai.
More provinces are on the way. We argue that successful AI
education in China also benefits the world, not only because
China has exported numerous technical talents to the world
in past decades and will continue to do so, but also because
the widely adopted and affordable products and accumulated experience of AI education can be deployed to other
countries, especially those developing countries.
To understand the current situation of K-12 AI education
in China. We conducted an online survey from July to August 2020. In this survey, we collected 218 valid responses
(24 teachers, 72 parents, and 122 students) from K-12
schools. About 17.89% of subjects were from first-tier cities
(like Shanghai and Beijing) and provincial capitals which
are relatively developed cities in China, 27.52% were from

As human beings are entering the era in which AI becomes
the new engine to drive social, economic, and scientific advancement, education is intensively being required to adapt
to this trend, to equip current and next-generation with the
necessary knowledge, skills, and thinking. Although AI education has achieved relative success in universities and cultivated a large number of talents and companies in the past decade, it hasn't made significant progress in K-12 education.
We identify the key challenges as two gaps, one is about
transferring practice from university education to K-12 education, and the other is about the inequal distribution of AI
educational resources. To fill these gaps and to efficiently facilitate K-12 AI education, especially in countries like China,
we designed and implemented a web-based platform, which
as a focal and sharing point of K-12 educational resources to
provide essential AI learning and exercising components to
both students and instructors. With this platform, we've successfully conducted a series of initial trials and gained positive feedbacks. We believe a wider-range of applications of
the platform will achieve promising results for K-12 AI education.

Introduction
Recent advancements in AI, especially in machine learning,
have achieved phenomenal success (LeCun 2015; Jordan
and Mitchell 2015; Lakemeyer and Nebel 2003). The impact
of AI is now beyond the research and industrial scopes and
it’s attracting intensive attention from the whole society. It
has become a common belief that AI will be an indispensable infrastructure of the future society and the new engine of
the growing AI-economy (Bolton et al. 2018; D'souza and
Williams 2017). Therefore, a consensus is forming about AI
education that it’s necessary for the current and next generation and should be integrated into our whole educational
framework.
There have been a lot of practices in this direction (Dodds
et al. 2006; Conati et al. 2018; Jungah 2019). While most of
the efforts were from universities (Dodds et al. 2006) and
professional level (Fiebrink 2019) (such as online courses
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

aiK-12 by MIT: https://aieducation.mit.edu/
https://www.robotlab.com/blog/ai-curricula-for-k-12-classrooms
3
http://www.gov.cn/home/2017-07/20/content_5212053.htm.
1
2

15687

