The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Show, Attend and Distill:
Knowledge Distillation via Attention-based Feature Matching
Mingi Ji 1∗ , Byeongho Heo 2 , Sungrae Park 3
1

Korea Advenced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
NAVER AI LAB
3
CLOVA AI Research, NAVER Corp.
qwertgfdcvb@kaist.ac.kr, bh.heo@navercorp.com, sungrae.park@navercorp.com
Abstract

For the success of knowledge distillation, various distillation methods were introduced. Starting from transferring output probability distributions of the teacher (Hinton,
Vinyals, and Dean 2015), intermediate features representations (Romero et al. 2014) and their variants (Zagoruyko
and Komodakis 2016a; Park et al. 2019; Tian, Krishnan, and
Isola 2019) are investigated to identify what knowledge of
the teacher helps to build a better student. However, most
studies manually links the teacher and student features and
perform distillation through the links individually. This manual link selection does not consider the similarity between
the teacher and student features, so there is a risk of forcing
an incorrect intermediate process to the student. Furthermore,
the link selection has a limitation on fully utilizing the whole
knowledge of the teacher by choosing a few of all possible
links.
To compensate for the limitation, Jang et al. (Jang et al.
2019) apply a meta-networks, “learning to transfer (L2T)”,
automatically determining the links. In more details, the metanetwork consists of individual gates for all possible links, and
each gate determines whether distillation through the link
contributes to decreasing the classification loss of the student. Their results prove that knowledge distillation with the
identified links provides better performance than those with
manually selected links. However, the individual gates are
not aware of each other although the distillation through the
gates simultaneously affect the student. Moreover, their metalearning scheme requires expensive inner-loop procedures to
learn their meta-networks, thus its application can be limited
under practical scenarios.
In this paper, we introduce a new feature linking method
based on an attention mechanism (Xu et al. 2015; Vaswani
et al. 2017), which is called attention-based feature distillation (AFD). Specifically, AFD utilizes an attention-based
meta-network that identifies similar features between the
teacher and student. The identified similarities are applied
to control the distillation intensities for all possible feature
pairs. Figure 1 shows an overview of our proposed distillation
method to provide graphical descriptions.
When comparing from L2T, our proposed method considers the granularity of the teacher and student features to
identify the importance of their links while L2T only uses
information for a single pair in a narrow perspective. In addition, AFD learns from feature similarities without any inner-

Knowledge distillation extracts general knowledge from a pretrained teacher network and provides guidance to a target student network. Most studies manually tie intermediate features
of the teacher and student, and transfer knowledge through
pre-defined links. However, manual selection often constructs
ineffective links that limit the improvement from the distillation. There has been an attempt to address the problem, but it
is still challenging to identify effective links under practical
scenarios. In this paper, we introduce an effective and efficient feature distillation method utilizing all the feature levels
of the teacher without manually selecting the links. Specifically, our method utilizes an attention-based meta-network
that learns relative similarities between features, and applies
identified similarities to control distillation intensities of all
possible pairs. As a result, our method determines competent
links more efficiently than the previous approach and provides
better performance on model compression and transfer learning tasks. Further qualitative analyses and ablative studies
describe how our method contributes to better distillation. The
implementation code is available at open sourced1 .

Introduction
Knowledge distillation is the technique for transferring
knowledge from a source neural network to a target neural network (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). The source
network, referred to as a teacher, indicates a large network
that is highly regularized via pre-training, and the target network, referred to as a student, is a smaller network for a
specific task. The pre-trained teacher directly informs the
student of the solution and intermediate process of a problem,
and this informative supervision enables fast and effective
learning of the student. Based on knowledge distillation, recent studies have shown significant improvements in model
compression (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015; Romero et al.
2014; Yim et al. 2017; Tian, Krishnan, and Isola 2019), crossdomain transfer learning (Orbes-Arteainst et al. 2019; Li
et al. 2017; Asami et al. 2017), and continual learning (Li
and Hoiem 2017; Hou et al. 2018).
∗

This work was done at internship in CLOVA AI Research,
NAVER Corp.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
github.com/clovaai/attention-feature-distillation.

7945

