The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentiable Fluids with Solid Coupling for Learning and Control
Tetsuya Takahashi1, 2 , Junbang Liang2 , Yi-Ling Qiao2 and Ming C. Lin2
1

2

Adobe,
University of Maryland at College Park

Abstract

posed, approaches to achieving differentiable physics differ
from each other, typically due to differences in the underlying fluid simulation methodologies. In the literature, there
are two types of commonly used fluid simulation methods
characterized by distinct spatial discretization techniques:
Eulerian grid-based approach and Lagrangian particle-based
approach. While the Lagrangian particle-based approach has
become popular due to its flexibility, it is known to be challenging to enforce the fluid incompressibility, which plays
an important role for realistic fluid behaviors. By contrast,
Eulerian grid-based approach has been proven to be efficient
and effective in simulating incompressible fluids.
The differentiable approach for Eulerian fluid simulation
has been proposed, e.g., with deep neural networks to predict
fluid behaviors (Wiewel, Becher, and Thuerey 2019; Wiewel
et al. 2020; Holl, Thuerey, and Koltun 2020; Wiewel et al.
2020). However, it is reported that predicting the complex
fluid behaviors for a long term can be difficult (Wiewel,
Becher, and Thuerey 2019; Wiewel et al. 2020). In addition,
fluids involving solid objects can pose additional challenges
because of the increased possible fluid and solid configurations, which further make it difficult to learn and predict
the fluid dynamics. As such, for reliable predictions of fluid
behaviors involving solid interactions, it is typically necessary to compute the fluid and solid dynamics using numerical simulation based on their governing equations.
In this paper, we propose a new differentiable fluid simulation method that can be integrated as a part of layers in
deep neural networks. The integrated differentiable simulator enables end-to-end learning of the neural networks with
back propagation of the gradient through both of the simulator and networks. The trained networks can generate control inputs for the simulator to handle fluid and solid control
problems. Our key contributions are summarized as follows.

We introduce an efficient differentiable fluid simulator that
can be integrated with deep neural networks as a part of layers for learning dynamics and solving control problems. It offers the capability to handle one-way coupling of fluids with
rigid objects using a variational principle that naturally enforces necessary boundary conditions at the fluid-solid interface with sub-grid details. This simulator utilizes the adjoint
method to efficiently compute the gradient for multiple time
steps of fluid simulation with user defined objective functions. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method for
solving inverse and control problems on fluids with one-way
coupled solids. Our method outperforms the previous gradient computations, state-of-the-art derivative-free optimization, and model-free reinforcement learning techniques by at
least one order of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Differentiable physics has been introduced recently as a
powerful and effective approach to solving control and inverse problems due to the differentiability that makes it possible to compute the gradient with user-defined objective
functions in a neural network. The computed gradient allows
us to use gradient-based optimizers, such as gradient descent
and quasi-Newton method, that are generally much more efficient than derivative-free optimization methods. Given the
larger number of degrees of freedoms (DOFs) for complex
dynamical systems (e.g., DOFs of fluids can be more than
10k) and their high computational cost for simulation over
many time steps, it is indispensable to take advantage of
the gradient information to efficiently minimize the objective functions.
Because of the effectiveness, many researchers investigated differentiable physics formulations and their applications, e.g., for rigid bodies (Belbute-Peres et al. 2018; Degrave et al. 2016), articulated rigid bodies (Geilinger et al.
2020; Sueda 2020), deformable solids (Hu et al. 2019; Weiss
et al. 2020), thin shells and cloths (Liang, Lin, and Koltun
2019), coupling of rigid bodies and cloths (Qiao et al. 2020),
smokes (Holl, Thuerey, and Koltun 2020; Um et al. 2020),
and liquids (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2020). While some differentiable formulations for fluid materials have been pro-

1. Our differentiable fluid simulator offers the capability of
handling one-way coupled solids due to a variational principle enforcing the fluid incompressibility for realistic
fluid behaviors, while appropriately applying the free-slip
boundary condition at the sub-grid, fluid-solid interface.
2. To achieve the differentiability, we apply the adjoint
method to the entire simulation steps of dynamical systems (unlike partial application of the adjoint method
within one time step, e.g., as in (Belbute-Peres et al. 2018;

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6138

