The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

KG-BART: Knowledge Graph-Augmented BART for Generative
Commonsense Reasoning
Ye Liu1 , Yao Wan2 , Lifang He3 , Hao Peng4 , Philip S. Yu1
1

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
3
Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA 4 Beihang University, Beijing, China
{yliu279, psyu}@uic.edu, wanyao@hust.edu.cn, lih319@lehigh.edu, penghao@act.buaa.edu.cn
2

Concept Set: {river, fish, net, catch}

Abstract

[Expected Output]: everyday scenarios covering all given concepts.
1. Fisherman uses a strong net to catch plentiful fishes in the river.
2. Men like to catch fishes in the wide river with a net in the afternoon.

Generative commonsense reasoning which aims to empower
machines to generate sentences with the capacity of reasoning over a set of concepts is a critical bottleneck for text
generation. Even the state-of-the-art pre-trained language generation models struggle at this task and often produce implausible and anomalous sentences. One reason is that they
rarely consider incorporating the knowledge graph which can
provide rich relational information among the commonsense
concepts. To promote the ability of commonsense reasoning
for text generation, we propose a novel knowledge graphaugmented pre-trained language generation model KG-BART,
which encompasses the complex relations of concepts through
the knowledge graph and produces more logical and natural
sentences as output. Moreover, KG-BART can leverage the
graph attention to aggregate the rich concept semantics that
enhances the model generalization on unseen concept sets.
Experiments on benchmark CommonGen dataset verify the
effectiveness of our proposed approach by comparing with
several strong pre-trained language generation models, particularly KG-BART outperforms BART by 5.80, 4.60, in terms
of BLEU-3, 4. Moreover, we also show that the generated
context by our model can work as background scenarios to
benefit downstream commonsense QA tasks.1

[GPT-2]: A fish is catching in a net
[UniLM]: A net catches fish in a river
[T5]: Fish are caught in a net in the river.
[BART]: A man catches a fish with a net in the river

properly

Related
To

lat
ed
To
Re

isi
te

Ha
sP
re
re
qu

quickly

net

neat

To
ed
lat

diverse

RelatedTo

Re

using net

catch

To
ed
lat

wide

HasSubevent

Re

Re

fish

ty
per
Pro
has

clean

RelatedTo
AtLocation

o
RelatedT

lat
ed
To

river

good

[KG-BART]: A fisherman catches fishes by using good net in the clean river.

Figure 1: An example of the generation outputs of our KGBART model (blue dotted box) and the existing models without knowledge graph augmentation (red dotted box).

GPTs (Radford et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020), UniLM (Dong
et al. 2019), T5 (Raffel et al. 2020) and BART (Lewis et al.
2020). Although they can capture rich language information
from text sentence corpus and generate accurate language
texts, almost all of them ignore knowledge information and
thereby fail to generate output towards capturing the human
commonsense. For example, as shown in Figure 1, given a
set of commonsense concepts {river, fish, net, catch}, the
task is to generate a coherent sentence describing a scenario
covering all given concepts, such as “Fisherman uses a strong
net to catch plentiful fishes in the river”. From our analysis,
we note that the state-of-the-art pre-trained models generate
implausible and anomalous sentences in this task (red dotted
box) - e.g., GPT-2 generated “A fish is catching in a net”,
UniLM generated “A net catches fish”, etc. Moreover, the
generated sentences by the pre-trained models are simple and
rigid, while the human sentence is more natural and rich, like
“plentiful fishes”, “wide river”, etc.
In this paper, we argue that only using pre-trained language models with textual concepts alone cannot provide
sufficient information for generative commonsense reasoning.
The commonsense knowledge graphs (KGs) (Speer, Chin,
and Havasi 2017) have been developed especially for knowledge representation in symbolic systems, and they provide
a lot of candidate commonsense facts mined from corpora,
which have been widely used in commonsense QA tasks (Lin

Introduction
Nowadays, numerous benchmarks for commonsense reasoning have been developed to make computers more competent and human-aware. In particular, various pre-trained approaches have achieved impressive performance on the discriminative commonsense tasks – i.e., AI systems are required to choose the correct option from a set of choices
based on a given context (Lin et al. 2020), such as CommonsenseQA (Talmor et al. 2019) and COSMOSQA (Huang et al.
2019). However, commonsense reasoning in text generation,
known as generative commonsense reasoning, still remains a
challenge to existing models, which requires machines to generate a sentence describing a day-to-day scene using concepts
from a given concept set.
In recent years, many pre-trained language generation models have been presented for text generation tasks, such as
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Our code is available at https://github.com/yeliu918/KG-BART

6418

