The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Theory of Independent Mechanisms for Extrapolation in Generative Models
Michel Besserve,1,2 Rémy Sun,1,3,† Dominik Janzing1,† and Bernhard Schölkopf1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany
3
ENS Rennes, France
{michel.besserve, bs}@tuebingen.mpg.de, janzind@amazon.de, remy.sun@ens-rennes.fr
2

Abstract

would thus endow it with a form of layer modularity, such
that intervening on intermediate layers causes changes in the
output distribution similar to what would happen in the real
world. We call such ability extrapolation, as it intuitively
involves generalizing beyond the support of the distribution
sampled during training, or its convex hull.
In this paper, we focus on the challenging case where no
additional variables, besides the samples from the data
to generate, are observed (in contrast with related work,
as explained below). In this unsupervised setting, generative
models are typically designed by applying successive transformations to latent variables, leading to a multi-layered architecture, where neither the latent inputs nor the hidden layers correspond to observed variables. We elaborate a general
framework to assess extrapolation capabilities when intervening on hidden layer parameters with transformations belonging to a given group G, leading to the notion of G-genericity
of the chosen parameters. We then show how learning based
on stochastic gradient descent can hinder G-genericity, suggesting additional control on the learning algorithm or the
architecture is needed to enforce extrapolation abilities. Although we see our contribution as chiefly conceptual and
theoretical, we use toy models and deep generative models
trained on real world data to illustrate our framework.

Generative models can be trained to emulate complex empirical data, but are they useful to make predictions in the context
of previously unobserved environments? An intuitive idea to
promote such extrapolation capabilities is to have the architecture of such model reflect a causal graph of the true data
generating process, such that one can intervene on each node
independently of the others. However, the nodes of this graph
are usually unobserved, leading to overparameterization and
lack of identifiability of the causal structure. We develop a
theoretical framework to address this challenging situation by
defining a weaker form of identifiability, based on the principle
of independence of mechanisms. We demonstrate on toy examples that classical stochastic gradient descent can hinder the
model’s extrapolation capabilities, suggesting independence
of mechanisms should be enforced explicitly during training.
Experiments on deep generative models trained on real world
data support these insights and illustrate how the extrapolation
capabilities of such models can be leveraged.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014), and Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2013; Rezende,
Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) are able to learn complex
structured data such as natural images. However, once such
a network has been trained on a particular dataset, can it be
leveraged to simulate meaningful changes in the data generating process? Capturing the causal structure of this process
allows the different mechanisms involved in generating the
data to be intervened on independently, based on the principle of Independence of Mechanisms (IM) (Janzing and
Schölkopf 2010; Lemeire and Janzing 2012; Peters, Janzing,
and Schölkopf 2017). IM reflects a foundational aspect of
causality, related to concepts in several fields, such as superexogeneity in economics (Engle, Hendry, and Richard 1983),
the general concept of invariance in philosophy (Woodward
2003) and modularity. In particular, having the internal computations performed by a multi-layer generative model reflect
the true causal structure of the data generating mechanism

Appendix. Readers can refer to the technical appendix in
the extended version of this paper4 for supplemental figures,
code resources, symbols and acronyms (Table 1), all proofs
(App. A) and method details (App. B).
Related Work. Deep neural network have been leveraged
in causal inference for learning causal graphs between observed variables (Lopez-Paz and Oquab 2016) and associated
causal effects (Louizos et al. 2017; Shalit, Johansson, and
Sontag 2017; Kocaoglu et al. 2017; Lachapelle et al. 2019;
Zhu, Ng, and Chen 2019). Our ultimate goal is more akin to
the use of a causal framework to enforce domain adaptation
(Zhang et al. 2013; Zhang, Gong, and Schölkopf 2015) and
domain shift robustness of leaning algorithms, which has
been done by exploiting additional information in the context of classification (Heinze-Deml and Meinshausen 2017).
Broadly construed, this also relates to zero-shot learning
(Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2009) and notions of

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†
DJ contributed before joining Amazon. RS contributed before
joining Thales and Sorbonne University.

4

6741

https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.00184

