The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

News Content Completion with Location-Aware Image Selection
Zhengkun Zhang1 , Jun Wang2 , Adam Jatowt3 , Zhe Sun4 * , Shao-Ping Lu1 , Zhenglu Yang1 *
1

TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University, China,
2
Ludong University, China,
3
Kyoto University, Japan,
4
Computational Engineering Applications Unit, RIKEN, Japan
{zhangzk2017, junwang}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, jatowt@gmail.com, zhe.sun.vk@riken.jp, {slu, yangzl}@nankai.edu.cn
National League side FC United of Manchester have
announced they will split with their first and only
manager Karl Marginson by mutual consent and with
immediate effect. Marginson, 46, joined the
Manchester club in 2005 just days after it was formed
by its supporters and with no managerial experience.
Since then, FC United have climbed four tiers of the
English football ladder, winning three league titles and
two league cups, as well as claiming the Manchester
Premier Cup last season. … As well as his numerous
successes at the helm of Broadhurst Park, Marginson
guided FC United to their first FA Cup first round
2010, before making history as his side defeated
professional opposition Rochdale 3-2 - only to be
beaten 4-0 by Brighton in a second-round replay.
Despite their years of success though, Marginson
leaves United in a desperate situation - second bottom
of the National League North and with just 11 points
from 14 games. … As well as leading the National
League North side to the second round of the FA Cup
in 2010. Marginson leaves FC United second bottom
in the National League North and with just three wins
and nine defeats to their name in 14 league games. …

Abstract
News, as one of the fundamental social media types, typically
contains both texts and images. Image selection, which involves choosing appropriate images according to some specified contexts, is crucial for formulating good news. However,
it presents two challenges: where to place images and which
images to use. The difficulties associated with this wherewhich problem lie in the fact that news typically contains
linguistically rich text that delivers complex information and
more than one image. In this paper, we propose a novel endto-end two-stage framework to address these issues comprehensively. In the first stage, we identify key information in
news by using location embeddings, which represent the local
contextual information of each candidate location for image
insertion. Then, in the second stage, we thoroughly examine
the candidate images and select the most context-related ones
to insert into each location identified in the first stage. We
also introduce three insertion strategies to formulate different
scenarios influencing the image selection procedure. Extensive experiments demonstrate the consistent superiority of the
proposed framework in image selection.

Figure 1: Illustration of multiple news image selection task.
Given a news article (left), our model extracts the key information (with lighter colors) and selects context-related images (indicated by the arrows).

Introduction
Given recent developments in social media, large amounts
of content are being on the Web every day. One of the key
procedures in content creation is the selection of appropriate images. Current image selection systems (Wang et al.
2019; Liu et al. 2020) usually deliver only one image for
each article, however, this practice does not match the requirements of many social media platforms, especially online news sites that often contain more than one image per
article. Moerover, the selected images must be closely related to the article they accompany but sufficiently differ
from each other according to the surrounding textual contexts that they are supposed to visually represent or enrich.
To the best of our knowledge, automatically selecting multiple images for a given input text has rarely been explored in
the literature. In this work, we focus on a novel news image
selection task, which assumes selecting a series of suitable
images to complete input news articles.
A sample article shown in Figure 1 depicts a news article taken from the DailyM ail website; this article is com-

posed of several distinct events that cannot be sufficiently
illustrated by a single image. In the present example, multiple images are required to complete the news content. This
task, however, faces two key challenges: where to place images and which images to show. The first challenge is to
identify the appropriate image insertion locations. In practice, when editors decide to insert an image into a certain
location within the text of a news article, the context of this
location tends to be salient with respect to the news content. The previous relevant works (Lin et al. 2014; Young
et al. 2014) employ the image description, which is usually
a single sentence containing limited information, for retrieving the corresponding image. Unlike these works, we face
the crucial problem in the first challenge of this task of how
to extract the important information from the linguistically
richer news content, which also tend to be of longer size. The
second challenge involves the selection of a series of images
corresponding to the news content. Since the images are to
be incorporated in the same article, their contents should be
consistent according to the theme of the article, but, at the

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14498

