The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DenserNet: Weakly Supervised Visual Localization
Using Multi-Scale Feature Aggregation
Dongfang Liu1 , Yiming Cui2 * , Liqi Yan3 , Christos Mousas1 , Baijian Yang1 , Yingjie Chen1
1

Purdue University
University of Florida
3
Fudan University
liu2538@purdue.edu, cuiyiming@ufl.edu, yanliqi@westlake.edu.cn,
cmousas@purdue.edu, byang@purdue.edu, victorchen@purdue.edu
2

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a Denser Feature Network
(DenserNet) for visual localization. Our work provides three
principal contributions. First, we develop a convolutional
neural network (CNN) architecture which aggregates feature
maps at different semantic levels for image representations.
Using denser feature maps, our method can produce more
keypoint features and increase image retrieval accuracy. Second, our model is trained end-to-end without pixel-level annotation other than positive and negative GPS-tagged image
pairs. We use a weakly supervised triplet ranking loss to
learn discriminative features and encourage keypoint feature
repeatability for image representation. Finally, our method
is computationally efficient as our architecture has shared
features and parameters during forwarding propagation. Our
method is flexible and can be crafted on a light-weighted
backbone architecture to achieve appealing efficiency with a
small penalty on accuracy. Extensive experiment results indicate that our method sets a new state-of-the-art on four
challenging large-scale localization benchmarks and three
image retrieval benchmarks with the same level of supervision. The code is available at https://github.com/goodproj13/
DenserNet.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. DenserNet can correctly perform visual localization under challenging conditions. Despite environmental
variations (such as pedestrian or vehicle occlusions, illumination changes, and seasonal changes), DenserNet can find
the location (a) from the database based on the query (b).

Introduction

would have similar representations in feature spaces while
images from different locations would have dissimilar representations. Typically, a large-scale database contains images of similar man-made structures or landmarks that may
cause severe ambiguities. Illumination variations or occlusions may also change object appearances which compromise the localization prediction (Tolias, Avrithis, and Jégou
2016). To address these problems, our method is designed to
be robust for a large-scale dataset with different challenging
conditions (Figure 1).
In the last decade, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have emerged as a powerful technique to explore image
representations including visual localization (Sandler et al.
2018; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014). CNN-based visual
localization networks have a similar architecture (Dusmanu
et al. 2019; Jin Kim, Dunn, and Frahm 2017). They generally have a convolutional backbone encoder to produce feature maps of the input image. Then, a detection-description
decoder organizes the obtained feature maps to depict the
image representation. The conventional approaches only use

The task of visual localization is to predict the geographic
location of a query image, based on its comparisons to GPStagged images from a database (Salarian et al. 2018). Visual
localization has drawn considerable attention recently due
to its potential value to wide-ranging applications such as
robot navigation or autonomous driving (Liu et al. 2020b,a).
Under the region where GPS signal is partially or completely
shadowed, visual localization is an effective addition to GPS
to support the operation of these mobile agents.
In our work, we cast the visual localization problem
as an image retrieval task (Arandjelovic et al. 2016). Image retrieval task relies on local features to search over a
GPS-tagged image database to estimate the current location. The primary challenge is how to produce discriminative
image representation so that images from nearby locations
* is the corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6101

