The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robustness to Spurious Correlations in Text Classification via Automatically
Generated Counterfactuals
Zhao Wang1 and Aron Culotta 2
1

Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL
2
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
zwang185@hawk.iit.edu, aculotta@tulane.edu

Abstract

system recognizes a sheep based on the grass in the background (Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou 2019). If these kinds of
spurious correlations are built into the model during training time, the model could fail when test data has a different
distribution or even on samples with minor changes, and the
predictions will be problematic and suffer from algorithm
fairness or trust issues.
One solution to achieve robustness is to learn causal associations between features and classes. E.g., in the sentence
“This was a free book that sounded boring to me”, the word
most responsible for the label being negative is “boring” instead of “free”. Identifying causal associations provides a
way to build more robust and generalizable models.
Recent works try to achieve robustness with the aid
of human-in-the-loop systems. Srivastava, Hashimoto, and
Liang (2020) present a framework to make models robust to
spurious correlations by leveraging human common sense of
causality. They augment training data with crowd-sourced
annotations about reasoning of possible shifts in unmeasured variables and finally conduct robust optimization to
control worst-case loss. Similarly, Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton (2020) ask humans to revise documents with minimal
edits to change the class label, then augment the original
training data with the counterfactual samples. Results show
that the robust classifier is less sensitive to spurious correlations. While these prior works show the potential of using
human annotations to improve model robustness, collecting
such annotations can be costly.
In this paper, we propose to train a robust classifier with
automatically generated counterfactual samples. Specifically, we first identify likely causal features using the closest opposite matching approach and then generate counterfactual training samples by substituting causal features with
their antonyms and assigning opposite labels to the newly
generated samples. Finally, we combine the original training
data with counterfactual data to train a more robust classifier.
We experiment with sentiment classification tasks on
two datasets (IMDB movie reviews and Amazon kindle reviews). For each dataset, we have the original training data
and testing data, and additional human-generated counterfactual testing data. We first train a traditional classifier using the original data, which performs poorly on the counterfactual testing data (i.e., 10%-37% drop in accuracy). Then,
we train a robust classifier with the combination of orig-

Spurious correlations threaten the validity of statistical classifiers. While model accuracy may appear high
when the test data is from the same distribution as the
training data, it can quickly degrade when the test distribution changes. For example, it has been shown that
classifiers perform poorly when humans make minor
modifications to change the label of an example. One
solution to increase model reliability and generalizability is to identify causal associations between features
and classes. In this paper, we propose to train a robust
text classifier by augmenting the training data with automatically generated counterfactual data. We first identify likely causal features using a statistical matching
approach. Next, we generate counterfactual samples for
the original training data by substituting causal features
with their antonyms and then assigning opposite labels
to the counterfactual samples. Finally, we combine the
original data and counterfactual data to train a robust
classifier. Experiments on two classification tasks show
that a traditional classifier trained on the original data
does very poorly on human-generated counterfactual
samples (e.g., 10%-37% drop in accuracy). However,
the classifier trained on the combined data is more robust and performs well on both the original test data and
the counterfactual test data (e.g., 12%-25% increase in
accuracy compared with the traditional classifier). Detailed analysis shows that the robust classifier makes
meaningful and trustworthy predictions by emphasizing
causal features and de-emphasizing non-causal features.

Introduction
Despite the remarkable performance machine learning models have achieved in various tasks, studies have shown that
statistical models typically learn correlational associations
between features and classes, and model validity and reliability are threatened by spurious correlations. Examples include: a sentiment classifier learns that “Spielberg” is correlated with positive movie reviews (Wang and Culotta 2020);
a toxicity classifier learns that “gay” is correlated with toxic
comments (Wulczyn, Thain, and Dixon 2017); a medical
system learns that the disease is associated with patient
ID (Kaufman, Rosset, and Perlich 2011); an object detection
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14024

