The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SSN3D: Self-Separated Network to Align Parts for 3D Convolution in Video
Person Re-Identification
Xiaoke Jiang1,2 , Yu Qiao 1,3 , Junjie Yan 2 , Qichen Li 4 , Wanrong Zheng 2 , Dapeng Chen 2
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SenseTime Group
3
Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
4
MIT
{jiangxiaoke, yanjunjie, zhengwanrong, chendapeng}@sensetime.com, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn, liqichen@mit.edu
Abstract

1x1x1
conv

Input
Video
Snippet

Temporal appearance misalignment is a crucial problem in
video person re-identification. The same part of person (e.g.
head or hand) appearing on different locations in video sequence weakens its discriminative ability, especially when we
apply standard temporal aggregation such as 3D convolution
or LSTM. To address this issue, we propose Self-Separated
network (SSN) to seek out the same parts in different images.
As the name implies, SSN, if trained in an unsupervised strategy, guarantees the selected parts distinct. With a few samples
of labeled parts to guide SSN training, this semi-supervised
trained SSN seeks out the parts that are human-understandable
within a frame and stable across a video snippet. Given the
distinct and stable person parts, rather than performing aggregation on features, we then apply 3D convolution across
different frames for person re-identification. This SSN + 3D
pipeline, dubbed SSN3D, is proved to be efficient through
extensive experiments on both synthetic and real data.

3x3x3
conv

1x1x1
conv

Average
Pooling

3D Convolutional Block
1st
module

SSN

SSN

SSN

SSN

2nd module
3D Aggregator

Spatial
Feature 1
e.g. head

3D
Convolutional
Block

Spatial
Temporal
Feature 1

Spatial
Feature
N-1
e.g. hand

3D
Convolutional
Block

Spatial
Temporal
Feature N-1

Spatial
Feature N
e.g. leg

3D
Convolutional
Block

Spatial
Temporal
Feature N

Fusion
Layer

Output

Video
Feature
Embed
dings

Figure 1: Overall Workflow of SSN3D. It takes a video snippet as input, and outputs a feature embedding vector

Introduction

In this paper, we address the appearance misalignment for
3D convolution. The whole network includes two modules as
shown in figure 1. One named self-separated network (SSN),
leveraging attention mechanism, seeks out distinct person
parts while preserving the original spatial information within
a single image. SSN is then applied to a video snippet, and
same parts appeared in multiple frames are aligned forming
4D-tensors. The other is a 3D convolution based aggregator.
It takes the 4D-tensors of each part as input, summarizes the
feature of distinct parts through the temporal dimension, and
transforms the resulted feature maps into a single feature vector. To indicate the combination of SSN and 3D convolution,
we name our method SSN3D.
SSN is different from conventional attention mechanism.
A sophisticated two-round classification is designed to take
advantage of the consistency between the pixel-wise feature
and the aggregated feature. The consistency provides signals for unsupervised training, and allows SSN to separate
those distinct parts of person with cross-entropy loss. That’s
why we call it self-separated network. However, unsupervised training, without human’s guidance, would find some
parts that are distinct, but cannot guarantee those parts to be
human-understandable or stable due to its blind searching.

Video person re-identification (ReID) (Wang et al. 2014;
Zheng et al. 2016; Hou et al. 2019) is of great interests as
it provides the temporal variant appearance of a person to
achieve more accurate ReID. In this task, a query video clip
is given to find the clips belonging to the same person from
a large video gallery. In order to aggregate useful information, LSTM (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997; Yue-Hei Ng
et al. 2015) and 3D convolutional networks (Tran et al. 2015;
Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Qiu, Yao, and Mei 2017) are
widely employed. And 3D convolution is believed to outperform LSTM on video person classification (Carreira and
Zisserman 2017). However, 3D convolution suffers from temporal misalignment issue. It processes the features at the same
spatial position in adjacent frames into one value, which expects the human pose and camera viewpoints to be aligned
before being fed into the network. When we observe many
video person ReID datasets, it is manifest that due to the
imperfect person detection algorithm, the locations where a
person appears in the bounding boxes are inconsistent, not to
mention the pose variation of person.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1691

