The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Denoising Distantly Supervised Named Entity Recognition via a Hypergeometric
Probabilistic Model
Wenkai Zhang1,3,* , Hongyu Lin1,* , Xianpei Han1,2,† , Le Sun1,2,† , Huidan Liu1 ,
Zhicheng Wei4 , Nicholas Jing Yuan4
Chinese Information Processing Laboratory 2 State Key Laboratory of Computer Science
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Huawei Cloud&AI
{wenkai2019,hongyu,xianpei,sunle,huidan}@iscas.ac.cn
{weizhicheng1,nicholas.yuan}@huawei.com
1.0

Abstract
Noise Rate

Denoising is the essential step for distant supervision based
named entity recognition. Previous denoising methods are
mostly based on instance-level confidence statistics, which
ignore the variety of the underlying noise distribution on different datasets and entity types. This makes them difficult to
be adapted to high noise rate settings. In this paper, we propose Hypergeometric Learning (HGL), a denoising algorithm
for distantly supervised NER that takes both noise distribution and instance-level confidence into consideration. Specifically, during neural network training, we naturally model the
noise samples in each batch following a hypergeometric distribution parameterized by the noise-rate. Then each instance
in the batch is regarded as either correct or noisy one according to its label confidence derived from previous training step,
as well as the noise distribution in this sampled batch. Experiments show that HGL can effectively denoise the weaklylabeled data retrieved from distant supervision, and therefore
results in significant improvements on the trained models.

0.8

Noise Rate

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

VEH WEA LOC FAC ORG GPE PER

ACE2005_ALL
ACE2005_NAM

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

ORG

GPE

PER

(a) Same setting, differnet types (b) Same type, different settings

Figure 1: Precision-Recall curves of different denoising algorithms on ACE2005 datasets. We can see that HGL significantly outperforms other baselines, especially on high noise
rate ACE ALL setting.
Lønning, and Øvrelid 2019) methods are introduced. Generally, DS-NER uses easily-available resources (commonly
dictionaries in NER) to automatically label plain texts to
produce large-scale data, which is generally referred as
weakly annotated data. And then the generated training data
will be used to learn neural network models. For example,
by matching person name “Washington” in dictionary with
text “Washington is the first U.S. president”, DS-NER will
produce a training instances with entity type PERSON. As
unlabeled plain texts and entity mention dictionaries are very
easy to obtain, distant supervision based methods can significantly reduce the annotation efforts and produce much
larger scale of annotation data for model learning.
Unfortunately, although DS-NER boosts the size of training data, it still faces critical high noise challenge. Due to
the ambiguity of natural language, distant supervision will
inevitably introduce remarkable noise into weakly labeled
data. For example, “Washington” can refer to either a person
name or a location name and DS will generate wrong PERSON instances such as “Washington, capital of the United
States”. As a result, denoising is critical to achieve promising DS-NER performance. Currently, most DS-NER denoising methods are based on instance-level confidence statistics, which predict whether one instance is noise according
to its feature similarity to the majority of other instances.
These instance-level denoising algorithms, unfortunately,

Introduction
Named Entity Recognition (NER), aiming to identify text
spans pertaining to specific semantic types such as person,
organization and location, is a foundational NLP task. In
recent years, supervised neural network-based approaches
(Lample et al. 2016; Chiu and Nichols 2016; Ma and Hovy
2016) , which can automatically extract underlying features
from annotated texts and conduct NER recognition, have
achieved promising results in almost all NER benchmarks.
Even with great success, supervised learning methods
heavily rely on fully-annotated training data. However, annotated training data is too expensive to obtain, which restricts the real-world application of current NER models in
various entity types. To tackle this problem, distant supervision based NER (DS-NER) (Ren et al. 2017; Yang et al.
2018; Shang et al. 2018; Peng et al. 2019; Nooralahzadeh,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†: Corresponding authors.
*: Equal Contribution. H. Lin designed the method and wrote the
paper. W. Zhang conducted the experiments and detailed analysis.

14481

