The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Optimal Selection for Composited Advertising Creatives
with Tree Structure
Jin Chen∗1 , Tiezheng Ge2 , Gangwei Jiang∗3 , Zhiqiang Zhang2 , Defu Lian†3 , Kai Zheng1
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group
3
University of Science and Technology of China
chenjin@std.uestc.edu.cn, tiezheng.gtz@alibaba-inc.com, gwjiang@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
zhang.zhiqiang@alibaba-inc.com, liandefu@ustc.edu.cn, zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn
Abstract

that multimedia features of ad creatives, such as color histogram, color harmony and texts, are significantly correlated
with the likelihood of user click. The increase of CTR may
lead to an increase of revenue for e-commerce companies
like Taobao and Amazon, so it is worth investigating how to
improve visual appearance of ad creatives.

Ad creatives are one of the prominent mediums for online
e-commerce advertisements. Ad creatives with enjoyable visual appearance may increase the click-through rate (CTR)
of products. Ad creatives are typically handcrafted by advertisers and then delivered to the advertising platforms for advertisement. In recent years, advertising platforms are capable of instantly compositing ad creatives with arbitrarily designated elements of each ingredient, so advertisers are only
required to provide basic materials. While facilitating the advertisers, a great number of potential ad creatives can be composited, making it difficult to accurately estimate CTR for
them given limited real-time feedback. To this end, we propose an Adaptive and Efficient ad creative Selection (AES)
framework based on a tree structure. The tree structure on
compositing ingredients enables dynamic programming for
efficient ad creative selection on the basis of CTR. Due to
limited feedback, the CTR estimator is usually of high variance. Exploration techniques based on Thompson sampling
are widely used for reducing variances of the CTR estimator, alleviating feedback sparsity. Based on the tree structure,
Thompson sampling is adapted with dynamic programming,
leading to efficient exploration for potential ad creatives with
the largest CTR. We finally evaluate the proposed algorithm
on the synthetic dataset and the real-world dataset. The results
show that our approach can outperform competing baselines
in terms of convergence rate and overall CTR.

Traditionally, ad creatives are handcrafted by advertisers
and then delivered to advertising platforms for advertisement. Due to the small number of ad creatives, their optimal selection can be easily achieved by multi-arm bandit
and variants in the advertising platform. However, advisers
have to employ professional designers to design appealing
ad creatives, incurring an additional economic cost. To help
advertisers reduce the extra cost, some companies like Alibaba and Google establish intelligent platforms (Hua 2018;
Kulkarni, Gavlovski, and Zhang 2018) for instantly compositing ad creatives with arbitrarily designated elements
of each ingredient. The compositing ingredients usually include templates, text color, text font and picture size. The
advertisers are only required to provide basic materials, such
as product pictures and copywritings.
However, the optimal selection for composited ad creatives is challenging. The reason lies in the following folds.
First, multiple ingredients are composited combinatorially,
leading to an exponential explosion in the number of ad creatives. For example, given 5 templates, 10 text fonts, 20 text
colors and 20 picture sizes, 20,000 candidate ad creatives
can be composited for a product. Moreover, the ingredients
may change over time, so that ad creative spaces of each
product are also varied. For example, the template often
changes with advertising spaces, seasons and festivals. Second, due to the limited advertising budget of advertisers, the
number of impressions for each product is usually small. According to our statistics in an advertisement platform of an
E-commerce company, the number of impressions for each
product within one day is less than 10 on average. When an
impression of each item apportioned to its ad creatives, each
ad creative is rarely impressed. Two questions are raised by
these two challenges. First, given a large number of potential
ad creatives, it is time-consuming to search the ad creative
with the largest CTR. The necessity of online serving motivates us to develop efficient solutions. Second, given extremely sparse feedback, the estimated CTR for each ad cre-

Introduction
With the rapid development of the Internet and mobile communication, the Internet has become the most important platform for advertisements, creating great commercial value for
many high-tech companies via intelligent advertisements.
Ad creatives, as shown in Fig.1, are one of the prominent
mediums for online e-commerce advertisements. Ad creatives with enjoyable visual appearance may lead to a higher
likelihood of click (Mo et al. 2015; Teo et al. 2016), and thus
increase the click-through rate (CTR) of products. Several
works (Azimi et al. 2012; Cheng et al. 2012) have shown
∗
This work was done when the authors Jin Chen and Gangwei
Jiang were at Alibaba Group for intern.
†
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3967

