The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Regional Attention with Architecture-Rebuilt 3D Network
for RGB-D Gesture Recognition
Benjia Zhou1 , Yunan Li 3,4 ,∗ Jun Wan 2,5†
1

2

Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau SAR, China
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian Univeristy, China
4
Xi’an Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Vision, China
5
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
19098536ii20001@student.must.edu.mo, yunanli@xidian.edu.cn, jun.wan@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

(HCI) (Wang et al. 2016b). The handcrafted features (Wan
et al. 2013; Wan, Guo, and Li 2015) are always used for gesture recognition in the early years. The powerful feature representation ability of deep learning also promotes the application of neural networks in the field of gesture recognition
(Li et al. 2016; Miao et al. 2017; Simonyan and Zisserman
2014; Narayana, Beveridge, and Draper 2018).
For most of the deep learning-based gesture recognition
methods, some popular networks like ResNet (He et al.
2016), SENet (Hu, Shen, and Sun 2018) and Inflated 3D
Network (I3D) (Carreira and Zisserman 2017) are usually
employed as the backbone for gesture recognition. Although
these networks have achieved great success in many tasks, it
still worth pointing that the same modules are shared from
shallow to deep layers in these networks. Even the modules
in networks like I3D that employ multi-branch structure to
improve the width and diversity are fixed and all the same
through the network. However, features in the early stage
and late stage are quite different. Features in the early stage
are low-level features, which show the visual texture in each
frame, whereas the high-level features in the late stage are
abstracted and more related to the class of gestures. Therefore, it is not suitable to use the same structure to learn different features, and then we need to make the network more
adaptive and automatically determine what the shape is for
different parts of it.
Meanwhile, one of the most significant challenge hindering the improvement of recognition accuracy is the influence of gesture-irrelevant factors, such as backgrounds, different clothes of performers, and so on. The various textures and appearances could mislead the network to learn
inconsequential or less important features. For dynamic gesture recognition from a video sequence, we believe it is vital to focus on gesture movements, such as hands, arms or
elbows of the performers. Many researchers notice that it
is critical to make the network focusing on the gesture regions both spatially and temporally. Modules such as hand
detector (Wang et al. 2016c; Liu et al. 2017), and additional modalities of data like optical flow (Li et al. 2017)
or saliency (Li et al. 2018) are widely used via combining
with the raw RGB (and depth) data to design different algorithms. However, most of them require extra offline oper-

Human gesture recognition has drawn much attention in the
area of computer vision. However, the performance of gesture
recognition is always influenced by some gesture-irrelevant
factors like the background and the clothes of performers.
Therefore, focusing on the regions of hand/arm is important to the gesture recognition. Meanwhile, a more adaptive architecture-searched network structure can also perform better than the block-fixed ones like ResNet since it
increases the diversity of features in different stages of the
network better. In this paper, we propose a regional attention with architecture-rebuilt 3D network (RAAR3DNet) for
gesture recognition. We replace the fixed Inception modules
with the automatically rebuilt structure through the network
via Neural Architecture Search (NAS), owing to the different shape and representation ability of features in the early,
middle, and late stage of the network. It enables the network to capture different levels of feature representations
at different layers more adaptively. Meanwhile, we also design a stackable regional attention module called DynamicStatic Attention (DSA), which derives a Gaussian guidance
heatmap and dynamic motion map to highlight the hand/arm
regions and the motion information in the spatial and temporal domains, respectively. Extensive experiments on two
recent large-scale RGB-D gesture datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method and show it outperforms
state-of-the-art methods. The codes of our method are available at: https://github.com/zhoubenjia/RAAR3DNet.

Introduction
Gesture is produced as part of deliberate action and signs,
involving the motion of the up body, especially the arms,
hands, and fingers. Video-based classification makes an essential component in gesture recognition. It has been applied to many human-centred tasks, such as apparent personality analysis (Li et al. 2020), sign language recognition
(Cui, Liu, and Zhang 2019) and human-computer interaction
∗

Benjia Zhou and Yunan Li contribute equally to this paper.
Corresponding author; This work was done by Benjia Zhou
who visited the lab of Center for Biometrics and Security Research,
NLPR, CASIA.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3563

