The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LCollision: Fast Generation of Collision-Free Human Poses
using Learned Non-Penetration Constraints
Qingyang Tan1 , Zherong Pan2 , Dinesh Manocha1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland at College Park
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
qytan@umd.edu, zherong@illinois.edu, dmanocha@umd.edu

Abstract

a dataset, represented as the latent space of a deep autoencoder. Such autoencoders can be trained for applications including interactive rigging, human pose recognition
from images and videos, and VR games. However, current
learning-based methods do not account for any physicsbased requirements such as (self-)collision-free constraint,
thereby resulting in penetrations or other artifacts (Tretschk
et al. 2020; Bouritsas et al. 2019; Ranjan et al. 2018;
Bagautdinov et al. 2018; Tan et al. 2018a). By comparison, non-learning-based methods for character rigging (Shi
et al. 2007) and physics-based simulation (Barbič and James
2010) can detect and explicitly handle the collisions using numerical methods. Our goal is to equip learned-based
methods with similar collision-handling capabilities.
Although 3D data representations explicitly allow the
modeling of collision-free constraints, satisfying these hard
constraints in an end-to-end learning system is an open problem. Prior works have tried one of three ways to incorporate
hard constraints in a learning system. First, classical secondorder methods (Boggs and Tolle 1995) for constrained optimization can enforce exact hard constraints on the parameters of the neural network. Second, variants of the stochastic
projected gradient descend (Márquez-Neila, Salzmann, and
Fua 2017; Kervadec et al. 2019) have been proposed to approximately satisfy the constraints on the neural network parameters. Finally, differentiable optimization layers (Pham,
De Magistris, and Tachibana 2018; Agrawal et al. 2019) can
modify the neural network output to satisfy such constraints.
However, these methods are either limited to convex constraints, impractical for large networks, or do not provide
sufficient accuracy in terms constraint satisfaction.
Main Results: We present LCollision, a new learning algorithm to generate human poses that satisfy collision-free
constraints. Our approach incorporates the non-penetration
constraints by solving a general constrained optimization
during the test time, where the feasible domain corresponding to these hard constraints is learned during the training
time. The novel components of our approach include:

We present LCollision, a learning-based method that synthesizes collision-free 3D human poses. At the crux of our approach is a novel deep architecture that simultaneously decodes new human poses from the latent space and predicts
colliding body parts. These two components of our architecture are used as the objective function and surrogate hard constraints in a constrained optimization for collision-free human
pose generation. A novel aspect of our approach is the use of
a bilevel autoencoder that decomposes whole-body collisions
into groups of collisions between localized body parts. By
solving the constrained optimizations, we show that a significant amount of collision artifacts can be resolved. Furthermore, in a large test set of 2.5 × 106 randomized poses from
SCAPE, our architecture achieves a collision-prediction accuracy of 94.1% with 80× speedup over exact collision detection algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, LCollision
is the first approach that accelerates collision detection and
resolves penetrations using a neural network.

1

Introduction

There has been considerable work on developing learning
algorithms for 3D objects represented as point clouds (Qi
et al. 2017), meshes (Hanocka et al. 2019), volumetric grids
(Wang, Liu, and Tong 2020), and physical objects (Li et al.
2019). Because these algorithms are used for different applications, a major challenge is accounting for user requirements and physics-based constraints. Considering these constraints can significantly improve the test-time robustness by
preserving some known criteria of “correct” predictions. For
example, we need to consider various forces and dynamics
constraints for differentiable simulation (Qiao et al. 2020)
and cloth embedding (Tan et al. 2020), and a reliable robot
motion planner should preserve a clearance distance from
obstacles (Pham, De Magistris, and Tachibana 2018).
In this paper, we tackle the problem of collision-free human pose generation. Recently, 3D mesh representations
have been used for learning-based human pose synthesis
(Tretschk et al. 2020; Bouritsas et al. 2019; Ranjan et al.
2018; Bagautdinov et al. 2018; Tan et al. 2018a). These
methods learn a manifold of plausible human poses from

• Constrained Optimization Using Neural Network
Function Approximation: Instead of using exact
collision-response, learning the feasible domain using
a neural network provides approximate sub-gradients
via back-propagation, which is much faster than exact
collision-checking algorithms.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3913

