The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dec-SGTS: Decentralized Sub-Goal Tree Search for Multi-Agent Coordination
Minglong Li,∗1 Zhongxuan Cai,∗1 Wenjing Yang,†1 Lixia Wu,2 Yinghui Xu,2 Ji Wang1
1

Institute for Quantum Information & State Key Laboratory of High Performance Computing, College of Computer,
National University of Defense Technology, China
2
Artificial Intelligence Department, Zhejiang Cainiao Supply Chain Management Co., Ltd., China
liminglong10@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

To deal with the cases of multi-agent teamwork, the decentralized planning is highly expected.
Under a decentralized framework, each agent should plan
cooperatively considering teammates for a global objective.
To solve coordination in that context, the agents should
know their teammates’ current behavior intentions (plannings/decisions). One feasible way is by prediction via teammates’ behavior models, e.g. behavior cloning (Czechowski
and Oliehoek 2020). However, it relies on tedious offline
learning using a lot of training examples. Moreover, once
the task changes, the prediction on previous learned models
may fail. Another promising way for agents to understand
teammates is by communication. It means agents communicate frankly to exchange information about what they intend
to do, i.e. intention sharing. Decentralized Monte Carlo Tree
Search (Dec-MCTS) is developed upon that methodology,
where intentions are modeled based on feasible primitive
action sequences with low-level granularity, i.e. step-by-step
actions (Best et al. 2019, 2018; Best, Huang, and Fitch 2018;
Sukkar et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019). However, the negotiating
inefficiency with heavy communication and less semantics
severely limit the performance of Dec-MCTS.
In general, human communication always uses protocols
which model the intentions with enriched semantics (aka.
ontology) when cooperating. This high-level intention abstraction can not only exchange possible future behavior intentions in a highly-compressed style, but also be extremely
helpful for local search and optimization. Therefore, in analogy with human coordination, it is valuable to design an abstract high-level communication protocol with enriched semantics for decentralized problem solving.
To model the intentions at proper abstraction, it needs
to satisfy two requirements: modularity and semantics. For
modularity, it means that the abstraction can model the intention of individual agents at a proper granularity. It is neither too fined such as primitive steps nor too coarse such as
final goal. It is preferred with modular composition in a hierarchical way. For semantics, it means that the abstraction
should model the feasible behaviors of individual agents and
can facilitate the multi-agent coordination. With the above
requirements, we model intentions on subgoals or subtasks
(Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999; Dietterich 2000). For instance, in Courier Dispatching Problem (CDP) simplified as
grid world (Fig. 1), a courier may view a gate, a bridge, a

Multi-agent coordination tends to benefit from efficient communication, where cooperation often happens based on exchanging information about what the agents intend to do, i.e.
intention sharing. It becomes a key problem to model the
intention by some proper abstraction. Currently, it is either
too coarse such as final goals or too fined as primitive steps,
which is inefficient due to the lack of modularity and semantics. In this paper, we design a novel multi-agent coordination
protocol based on subgoal intentions, defined as the probability distribution over feasible subgoal sequences. The subgoal
intentions encode macro-action behaviors with modularity so
as to facilitate joint decision making at higher abstraction.
Built over the proposed protocol, we present Dec-SGTS (Decentralized Sub-Goal Tree Search) to solve decentralized online multi-agent planning hierarchically and efficiently. Each
agent runs Dec-SGTS asynchronously by iteratively performing three phases including local sub-goal tree search, local
subgoal intention update and global subgoal intention sharing. We conduct the experiments on courier dispatching problem, and the results show that Dec-SGTS achieves much better reward while enjoying a significant reduction of planning
time and communication cost compared with Dec-MCTS
(Decentralized Monte Carlo Tree Search).

Introduction
The capability to coordinate multiple agents across a wide
variety of complex tasks is a critical concern in AI community. It becomes increasingly important to ensure that agents
are able to operate not just as individuals but as members
of a cohesive team (Smith et al. 2019). Most coordination
approaches are centralized. It means that they often follow
a principle: centralized offline planning or learning, decentralized online execution of planning result. They usually
perform better than the decentralized methods. However,
the performance of the centralized ones are strongly limited
by the scalability, robustness, fault tolerance etc. Moreover,
centralized methods stand in stark contrast with human collaboration: in most context we plan individually, and in parallel with other humans (Czechowski and Oliehoek 2020).
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

11282

