The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exact Reduction of Huge Action Spaces in General Reinforcement Learning
Sultan J. Majeed1 * , Marcus Hutter2
1,2

Research School of Computer Science, ANU, Canberra
2
Google DeepMind, London
www.sultan.pk, www.hutter1.net

ot+1 rt+1

Abstract
The reinforcement learning (RL) framework formalizes the
notion of learning with interactions. Many real-world problems have large state-spaces and/or action-spaces such as
in Go, StarCraft, protein folding, and robotics or are nonMarkovian, which cause significant challenges to RL algorithms. In this work we address the large action-space problem by sequentializing actions, which can reduce the actionspace size significantly, even down to two actions at the expense of an increased planning horizon. We provide explicit
and exact constructions and equivalence proofs for all quantities of interest for arbitrary history-based processes. In the
case of MDPs, this could help RL algorithms that bootstrap.
In this work we show how action-binarization in the nonMDP case can significantly improve Extreme State Aggregation (ESA) bounds. ESA allows casting any (non-MDP, nonergodic, history-based) RL problem into a fixed-sized nonMarkovian state-space with the help of a surrogate Markovian process. On the upside, ESA enjoys similar optimality
guarantees as Markovian models do. But a downside is that
the size of the aggregated state-space becomes exponential in
the size of the action-space. In this work, we patch this issue
by binarizing the action-space. We provide an upper bound
on the number of states of this binarized ESA that is logarithmic in the original action-space size, a double-exponential
improvement.

ot+1 rt+1

Agent
Environment (P )

History
Start
ht
Abstraction (φ)
φ(ht )
Policy (Π)
at
at

Figure 1: The agent-environment interaction.
sionality. The sizes of an appropriately defined set of states1
and action-space play an important role in the choice of algorithms, architectures and solution techniques used to solve
the task (Sutton and Barto 2018).
It is usually required that the set of states is relatively
small to make the problem of RL tractable (Lattimore and
Hutter 2014b). There are many ways to achieve such approximations/abstractions, e.g. state aggregation (Li, Walsh, and
Littman 2006; Abel, Hershkowitz, and Littman 2016; Hutter 2016), homomorphism (Majeed and Hutter 2019), linear function approximation (Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis 1996),
or neural networks (Mnih et al. 2015) just to name a few.
The usual assumption for such abstractions is that they try
to produce a Markovian representation of the environment,
which is known as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Hutter 2009). In an MDP the most recent (abstract) observation
is sufficient to predict any future event2 , but not all events
are equally valuable. Some events might not lead to a high
rewarding state and/or some distinctions are not really necessary to perform well (McCallum 1995). For example, the
agent might end up experiencing two completely different
streams of observations with the same reward structure. An
algorithm which tries to produce a Markovian representation

Introduction
The reinforcement learning (RL) setting can be described by
an agent-environment interaction (Sutton and Barto 2018).
The agent Π has an action-space A to choose its actions
from while the environment P reacts to the action by dispensing an observation and a reward from the sets O and
R ⊆ R, respectively, see Figure 1. For simplicity, we assume that these sets are finite and hence the rewards are
bounded. Even with these restrictions, the problem of RL
does not trivialize, i.e. the agent can not learn the optimal
behavior without further structure. Under a suitable definition of the “state” of environment, the resultant set of states
might be huge or even infinite (Powell 2011).
The problem of RL is plagued with the curse of dimen-

1
We prefer not to call the set of observations O the set of states.
This set becomes a set of states under strong assumptions, see Section “Extreme State Aggregation” for more details on this distinction.
2
An event is any set of action-observation-reward sequences.

* The contact author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8874

