The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Voxel R-CNN: Towards High Performance Voxel-based 3D Object Detection
Jiajun Deng1 , Shaoshuai Shi2 , Peiwei Li1 , Wengang Zhou1,3 , Yanyong Zhang4 , Houqiang Li1,3
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Science and Technology of China
{dengjj, lpw0622}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {ssshi}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk {zhwg, yanyongz, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

1

PointsPool

Point-wise
Scores & Features

Recent advances on 3D object detection heavily rely on how
the 3D data are represented, i.e., voxel-based or point-based
representation. Many existing high performance 3D detectors
are point-based because this structure can better retain precise
point positions. Nevertheless, point-level features lead to high
computation overheads due to unordered storage. In contrast,
the voxel-based structure is better suited for feature extraction but often yields lower accuracy because the input data
are divided into grids. In this paper, we take a slightly different viewpoint — we find that precise positioning of raw
points is not essential for high performance 3D object detection and that the coarse voxel granularity can also offer
sufficient detection accuracy. Bearing this view in mind, we
devise a simple but effective voxel-based framework, named
Voxel R-CNN. By taking full advantage of voxel features in
a two stage approach, our method achieves comparable detection accuracy with state-of-the-art point-based models, but
at a fraction of the computation cost. Voxel R-CNN consists
of a 3D backbone network, a 2D bird-eye-view (BEV) Region Proposal Network and a detect head. A voxel RoI pooling is devised to extract RoI features directly from voxel
features for further refinement. Extensive experiments are
conducted on the widely used KITTI Dataset and the more
recent Waymo Open Dataset. Our results show that compared to existing voxel-based methods, Voxel R-CNN delivers a higher detection accuracy while maintaining a realtime frame processing rate, i.e., at a speed of 25 FPS on
an NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU. The code is available at
https://github.com/djiajunustc/Voxel-R-CNN.

PointNet++
3D Region
Proposals

IOU
Branch

Box Prediction
Branch

Spherical Anchors

3D Detection Boxes

a: Sparse-to-Dense 3D Object Detector (STD)

Voxelization

3D BackBone

To BEV

2D Backbone

RoI-grid
Pooling

VSA

Keypoints
Sampling

RPN

Point-wise Feature Vector

3D Detection Boxes

b: Point-Voxel Feature Set Abstraction for 3D Object Detection (PV-RCNN)

To BEV

Voxelization

3D BackBone

2D Backbone
RPN
Voxel RoI Pooling

Detect
Head

3D Detection Boxes

c: Ours (Voxel R-CNN)

Figure 1: Comparison with state-of-the-art 3D object detection
methods in two stage paradigm. Instead of aggregating RoI features
from a set of point representations, our method directly extract RoI
features from 3D voxel feature volumes.

Existing 3D detection methods can be broadly grouped
into two categories, i.e., voxel-based and point-based. The
voxel-based methods (Zhou and Tuzel 2018; Yan, Mao, and
Li 2018; Lang et al. 2019) divide point clouds into regular
grids, which are more applicable for convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and more efficient for feature extraction
due to superior memory locality. Nevertheless, the downside
is that voxelization often causes loss of precise position information. Current state-of-the-art 3D detectors are mainly
point-based, which take raw point clouds as input, and abstract a set of point representations with iterative sampling
and grouping (Qi et al. 2017a,b). The advanced point-based
methods (Yang et al. 2019; Shi, Wang, and Li 2019; Yang
et al. 2020; Shi et al. 2020a) are top ranked on various benchmarks (Geiger, Lenz, and Urtasun 2012; Caesar et al. 2020;
Sun et al. 2020). This has thus led to the popular viewpoint

Introduction

3D object detection using point clouds has received substantial attention in autonomous vehicles, robotics and augmented/virtual reality. Although the recent development of
deep learning has led to the surge of object detection with
2D images (Ren et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2016; Redmon and
Farhadi 2017; Szegedy et al. 2017), it is still non-trivial to
apply these 2D methods to 3D point clouds, especially when
dealing with the sparsity and unstructured property of point
clouds. Besides, the applications usually demand high efficiency from detection systems, making it even harder to
design a 3D detector due to the much larger 3D space.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1201

