The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Precise Temporal Point Event Detection
with Misaligned Labels
Julien Schroeter, Kirill Sidorov, David Marshall
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK
{SchroeterJ1, SidorovK, MarshallAD}@cardiff.ac.uk

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of robustly learning precise temporal point event detection despite only having access to poorly aligned labels for training. While standard
(cross entropy-based) methods work well in noise-free setting, they often fail when labels are unreliable since they attempt to strictly fit the annotations. A common solution to this
drawback is to transform the point prediction problem into a
distribution prediction problem. However, we show that this
approach raises several issues that negatively affect the robust learning of temporal localization. Thus, in an attempt to
overcome these shortcomings, we introduce a simple and versatile training paradigm combining soft localization learning
with counting-based sparsity regularization. In fact, unlike its
counterparts, our approach allows to directly infer clear-cut
point predictions in an end-to-end fashion while relaxing the
reliance of the training on the exact position of labels. We
achieve state-of-the-art performance against standard benchmarks in a number of challenging experiments (e.g., detection of instantaneous events in videos and music transcription) by simply replacing the original loss function with our
novel alternative—without any additional fine-tuning.

1

Figure 1: Task illustration. Model training solely relies on
noisy labels that differ from the ground-truth, while the final
inference objective is the precise localization of events.

to poorly aligned (w.r.t. the underlying ground-truth) annotations for training (see Figure 1). This task is characterized
by the discrepancy between the noisiness of the training labels and the precision expected of the predictions during
inference. Indeed, while models are trained on inaccurate
data, they are evaluated on their ability to predict event occurrences as precisely as possible with respect to the actual
ground-truth. In such a setting, effective models have to infer
event locations more accurately than the labels they relied on
for training. This requirement is particularly challenging for
most classical approaches that are designed to learn localization by strictly mimicking the provided annotations. Indeed,
as the training labels themselves do not accurately reflect the
event location, focusing on replicating these unreliable patterns is incompatible with the overall objective of learning
the actual ground-truth. These challenges highlight the need
for more relaxed learning approaches that are less dependent
on the exact location of labels for training.

Introduction

The surge of deep neural networks (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015) has accentuated the ever-growing need for
large corpora of data. The main bottleneck for the efficient
creation of datasets remains the annotation process. Over the
years, while new labeling paradigms have emerged to alleviate this issue (e.g., crowdsourcing (Deng et al. 2009) or external information sources (Abu-El-Haija et al. 2016)), these
methods have also highlighted and emphasized the prevalence of label noise. Deep neural networks are unfortunately
not immune to such perturbations, as their intrinsic ability
to memorize and learn annotation errors (Zhang et al. 2017)
can be the cause of training robustness issues and poor generalization performance. In this context, the development of
models that are robust to label noise is essential.
This work tackles the problem of precise temporal localization of point events (i.e., determining when and which
instantaneous events occur) in sequential data (e.g. time series, video, or audio sequences) despite only having access

Contributions This work: a) proposes a novel modelagnostic loss function that relies on sequence smoothing and
sparsity regularization to achieve a robust and relaxed learning of temporal point detection with predictions that converge towards clear-cut point estimates b) presents a succinct
analysis of the properties of the loss and its classical counterparts and c) demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed
approach against standard benchmarks in various temporal
event detection experiments (videos, wearable sensors time
series, and audio).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9505

