The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Unified Multi-Scenario Attacking Network for Visual Object Tracking
Xuesong Chen1 , Canmiao Fu2 , Feng Zheng∗4 , Yong Zhao3 ,
Hongsheng Li1 , Ping Luo5 , Guo-Jun Qi6
4

1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 WeChat AI, Tencent 3 Peking University
Depatment of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
5
The University of Hong Kong 6 Laboratory for MAPLE, Futurewei Technologies
{cedarchen, fcm, yongzhao}@pku.edu.cn, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing methods of adversarial attacks successfully generate adversarial examples to confuse Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) of image classification and object detection, resulting
in wrong predictions. However, these methods are difficult
to attack models of video object tracking, because the tracking algorithms could handle sequential information across
video frames and the categories of targets tracked are normally unknown in advance. In this paper, we propose a Unified and Effective Network, named UEN, to attack visual object tracking models. There are several appealing characteristics of UEN: (1) UEN could produce various invisible adversarial perturbations according to different attack settings by
using only one simple end-to-end network with three ingenious loss function; (2) UEN could generate general visible
adversarial patch patterns to attack the advanced trackers in
the real-world; (3) Extensive experiments show that UEN is
able to attack many state-of-the-art trackers effectively (e.g.
SiamRPN-based networks and DiMP) on popular tracking
datasets including OTB100, UAV123, and GOT10K, making
online real-time attacks possible. The attack results outperform the introduced baseline in terms of attacking ability and
attacking efficiency.

x

Perturbation
or Patch

Encoder ResBlock Decoder

G(x) x⨀B + G(x)

Lna
Victim
Tracker

Lta
Lpatch

Figure 1: The framework of our UEN, which consists of a
generator G and a attacked victim model F . Three different
losses are developed for the multi-scenario attacks.
driving. However, compared with classification, detection,
one of the security-critical problems in computer vision—
Single Object Tracking (SOT), has attracted limited research
efforts for different attack scenarios. Therefore, we study the
efficient multi-scenario adversarial attack algorithm against
SOT in this paper.
Using typical attack methods (Jia et al. 2019; Szegedy
et al. 2013; Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé 2019) to generate adversarial perturbations against SOT is difficult and we
analyze and summarize several reasons for it. Firstly, SOT
algorithms could handle information across frames in realtime to locate the trajectory of the target in videos. Consequently, it is unreasonable to attack only one video frame to
fail the tracker, although it works for attacks of classification
or detection. Secondly, the requirements of attacks against
SOT are different from image classification and detection.
For example, targeted and non-targeted attack of classification tasks only need to make the network output a specific or arbitrary wrong category, while non-targeted attack
on tracking should make the output box of a tracker deviate
from the target area continuously. For the targeted attack,
the attacker should hijack the output frame of the network
to the specified distracter, which put demands on attacking
ability of the confidence score, position, and shape of candidate boxes. Thirdly, for the real-world attacks, trackers’ preprocessing of input images like downsampling, will cause
information loss and the change of camera angle may affect
the appearance of adversarial examples, which puts an obstacle to the robustness of the real-world adversarial attacks.
Recently, a few existing works relevant to SOT attacks,
such as PAT (Wiyatno and Xu 2019) and SPARK (Guo et al.
2020), are both optimization-based methods and therefore
have many limitations. By adapting existing attack methods
for classification attacking, they generate adversarial exam-

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has made important breakthroughs in many applications over the past decade. However, recent researches on adversarial attacks (Carlini and
Wagner 2017; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016) have revealed that
deep learning models, e.g., classification, detection, and semantic segmentation networks, are vulnerable to adversarial
perturbations, which are in the form of some slight disturbances on images causing models to output wrong results.
For example, (Szegedy et al. 2013) first shows that adversarial examples, generated by adding visually imperceptible perturbations to the original images, could make classification models predict a wrong label with high confidence.
Further, (Thys, Van Ranst, and Goedemé 2019) successfully
generates adversarial patches that can hide a person from a
person detector while (Jia et al. 2019) studies adversarial attacks against the visual perception pipeline in autonomous
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1097

