The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Power up! Robust Graph Convolutional Network via Graph Powering
Ming Jin* 2 , Heng Chang* † 1 , Wenwu Zhu 3 , Somayeh Sojoudi 1,4
1

Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley
jinming@vt.edu, changh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn, sojoudi@berkeley.edu
2

Abstract

the adjacency matrix, respectively). Because this operation
is computational intensive for large graphs and non-spatially
localized (Bruna et al. 2014), early attempts relied on a parameterization with smooth coefficients (Henaff, Bruna, and
LeCun 2015) or a truncated expansion in terms of of Chebyshev polynomials (Hammond, Vandergheynst, and Gribonval
2011). By further restricting the Chebyshev polynomial order by 2, the approach in (Kipf and Welling 2017) referred
henceforth as the vanilla GCN pushed the state-of-the-art
performance of semi-supervised learning. The network has
the following layer-wise update rule:


H (l+1) := ψ AH (l) W (l) ,
(2)

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are powerful tools
for graph-structured data. However, they have been recently
shown to be vulnerable to topological attacks. To enhance
adversarial robustness, we go beyond spectral graph theory to
robust graph theory. By challenging the classical graph Laplacian, we propose a new convolution operator that is provably
robust in the spectral domain and is incorporated in the GCN
architecture to improve expressivity and interpretability. By
extending the original graph to a sequence of graphs, we also
propose a robust training paradigm that encourages transferability across graphs that span a range of spatial and spectral
characteristics. The proposed approaches are demonstrated in
extensive experiments to simultaneously improve performance
in both benign and adversarial situations.

where H (l) is the l-th layer hidden state (with H (1) := X
as nodal features), W (l) is the l-th layer weight matrix, ψ is
the usual point-wise activation function, and A is the convolution operator chosen to be the degree weighted Laplacian
with some slight modifications (Kipf and Welling 2017). Subsequent GCN variants have different architectures, but they
all share the use of the Laplacian matrix as the convolution
operator (Zhou et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019).

Introduction
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are powerful extensions of convolutional neural networks (CNN) to graphstructured data. Recently, GCNs and variants have been applied to a wide range of domains, achieving state-of-the-art
performances in social networks (Kipf and Welling 2017),
traffic prediction (Rahimi, Cohn, and Baldwin 2018), recommendation systems (Ying et al. 2018), applied chemistry and
biology (Kearnes et al. 2016; Fout et al. 2017), and natural
language processing (Atwood and Towsley 2016; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Bastings et al. 2017; Marcheggiani
and Titov 2017), just to name a few (Zhou et al. 2018; Wu
et al. 2019).
GCNs belong to a family of spectral methods that deal
with spectral representations of graphs (Zhou et al. 2018; Wu
et al. 2019). A fundamental ingredient of GCNs is the graph
convolution operation defined by the graph Laplacian in the
Fourier domain:
gθ ? x := ĝθ (L)x,

Why Not Graph Laplacian?
Undoubtedly, the Laplacian operator (and its variants, e.g.,
normalized/powered Laplacian) plays a central role in spectral theory, and is a natural choice for a variety of spectral
algorithms such as principal component analysis, clustering
and linear embeddings (Chung and Graham 1997; Belkin and
Niyogi 2002). So what can be problematic?
From a spatial perspective, GCNs with d layers cannot
acquire nodal information beyond its d-distance neighbors;
hence, it severely limits its scope of data fusion. Recent works
(Lee et al. 2018; Abu-El-Haija et al. 2018, 2019; Wu et al.
2019) alleviated this issue by directly powering the graph
Laplacian.
From a spectral perspective, one could demand better spectral properties, given that GCN is fundamentally a particular
(yet effective) approximation of the spectral convolution (1).
A key desirable property for generic spectral methods is
known as “spectral separation,” namely the spectrum should
comprise a few dominant eigenvalues whose associated eigenvectors reveal the sought structure in the graph. A well-known
prototype is the Ramanujan property, for which the second

(1)

n

where x ∈ R is the graph signal on the set of vertices V
and ĝθ is a spectral function applied to the graph Laplacian
L := D − A (where D and A are the degree matrix and
* The two first authors made equal contributions.
†
This work was conducted during Heng Chang’s visit to Professor Somayeh Sojoudi’s group at UC Berkeley.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8004

