The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RTS3D: Real-time Stereo 3D Detection from 4D Feature-Consistency Embedding
Space for Autonomous Driving
∗

†

Peixuan Li1,2,3,5,6 , Shun Su1,2,3,4, , Huaici Zhao1,2,5,6,

1
Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016, China
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110169, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016,
China
5
Key Laboratory of Opto-Electronic Information Processing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Key Lab of Image Understanding and Computer Vision, Liaoning Province
lipeixuan@sia.cn, sushun@sia.cn, hczhao@sia.cn
2

(a) Others Supervision Label: 3D bounding box, depth map, instance mask

Abstract
Although the recent image-based 3D object detection methods using Pseudo-LiDAR representation have shown great
capabilities, a notable gap in efficiency and accuracy still
exist compared with LiDAR-based methods. Besides, overreliance on the stand-alone depth estimator, requiring a large
number of pixel-wise annotations in the training stage and
more computation in the inferencing stage, limits the scaling application in the real world. In this paper, we propose
an efficient and accurate 3D object detection method from
stereo images, named RTS3D. Different from the 3D occupancy space in the Pseudo-LiDAR similar methods, we design a novel 4D feature-consistent embedding (FCE) space
as the intermediate representation of the 3D scene without depth supervision. The FCE space encodes the object’s
structural and semantic information by exploring the multiscale feature consistency warped from stereo pair. Furthermore, a semantic-guided RBF (Radial Basis Function) and
a structure-aware attention module are devised to reduce the
influence of FCE space noise without instance mask supervision. Experiments on the KITTI benchmark show that RTS3D
is the first true real-time system (FPS>24) for stereo image
3D detection meanwhile achieves 10% improvement in average precision comparing with the previous state-of-the-art
method.

Depth Supervision

Instance Supervision

Depth Map

Instance Mask

Occupancy Space

Spatial
Transform
Depth Estimation Instance Segmentation
3D Detection
3D Box Supervision
(b) Ours Supervision Label: Only 3D bounding box

Back Projection

Feature-Consistency Space
Semantic-Guided RBF

Perspective Projection
Left image

Right image

3D Detection
Only 3D Box Supervision

Introduction

Figure 1: Comparisons between occupancy space and proposed FCE space: (a) execute a depth generator to encode
the structure of the object in a 3D occupancy space, and use
instance mask to reduce the influence of noise in non-target
areas. By contrast, our proposed RTS3D, as shown in (b), encode the structure of the object by estimate the consistency
between warped left and right images for each 3D locations,
and explicitly model the semantic cues for noise filtering,
yielding superior accuracy and efficiency without additional
label supervision.

3D object detection serves as an important role in many
applications, such as augmented reality, robotics, and autonomous driving. Although recently developed LiDARbased detection algorithms (Shi et al. 2020; He et al. 2020)
show some excellent performance, the high price, low service life, and discordant appearance of the LiDAR system
restrict its further development in practical applications. Alternatively, the solutions relying on cameras are very competitive for its low-cost, low-power consumption, and high
∗

Peixuan Li and Shun Su contributed equally to this work
Huaici Zhao is corresponding authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

flexibility in development. Therefore, it is grabbing much
more attention in computer communities recently (Chen
1930

