The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Infinite-Dimensional Fisher Markets: Equilibrium, Duality and Optimization
Yuan Gao, Christian Kroer
Columbia University, Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research
gao.yuan@columbia.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract

its simplicity, this model has several applications. Perhaps
the most well-known application is in the competitive equilibrium from equal incomes (CEEI), where m items must be
fairly divided among n agents. By giving each agent one unit
of faux currency, the allocation from the resulting ME can be
used as the fair division. This approach guarantees several
fairness desiderata. Linear Fisher markets also have applications in large-scale ad markets (Conitzer et al. 2018, 2019)
and fair recommender systems (Kroer et al. 2019; Kroer and
Peysakhovich 2019).
For finite-dimensional linear Fisher markets, the
Eisenberg-Gale convex program computes a market
equilibrium via its optimal solution and Lagrange multipliers (Eisenberg and Gale 1959; Eisenberg 1961; Jain and
Vazirani 2010; Nisan et al. 2007; Cole et al. 2017). However,
in settings like Internet ad markets and fair recommender
systems, the number of items is often huge (Kroer et al.
2019; Kroer and Peysakhovich 2019; Balseiro, Besbes, and
Weintraub 2015), if not infinite or even uncountable. For
example, each item can be characterized by a set of features,
where features come from a compact set in a Euclidean
space. This motivates our study on infinite-dimensional
Fisher markets and ME for a continuum of items.
A problem closely related to our infinite-dimensional
Fisher-market setting is the cake-cutting or fair division
problem. There, the goal is to efficiently partition a “cake” –
often modeled as a compact measurable space, or simply the
unit interval [0, 1] – among n agents so that certain fairness
and efficiency properties are satisfied (Weller 1985; Brams
and Taylor 1996; Cohler et al. 2011; Procaccia 2013; Cohler
et al. 2011; Brams et al. 2012; Chen et al. 2013; Aziz and
Ye 2014; Aziz and Mackenzie 2016; Legut 2017, 2020). See
(Procaccia 2016) for a survey for the various problem setups,
algorithms and complexity results. Weller (1985) shows the
existence of a fair allocation, that is, a measurable division
of a measurable space satisfying weak Pareto optimality and
envy freeness. As will be seen shortly, when all buyers have
the same budget, our definition of a pure ME, i.e., where
the allocation consist of indicator functions of a.e.-disjoint
measurable sets, is in fact equivalent to this notion of fair
division (Weller 1985). A subtly different notion is considered in (Cohler et al. 2011; Chen et al. 2013): there, Pareto
optimality is w.r.t. the envy-free divisions only. In addition,
we also give an explicit characterization of the unique equi-

This paper considers a linear Fisher market with n buyers
and a continuum of items. In order to compute market equilibria, we introduce (infinite-dimensional) convex programs
over Banach spaces, thereby generalizing the Eisenberg-Gale
convex program and its dual. Regarding the new convex programs, we establish existence of optimal solutions, KKT conditions, as well as strong duality. All these properties are established via non-standard arguments, which circumvent the
limitations of duality theory in optimization over infinitedimensional vector spaces. Furthermore, we show that there
exists a pure equilibrium allocation, i.e., a division of the
item space. Similar to the finite-dimensional case, a market
equilibrium under the infinite-dimensional Fisher market is
Pareto optimal, envy-free and proportional. We also show
how to obtain the (a.e. unique) equilibrium prices and a pure
equilibrium allocation from the (unique) equilibrium utility
prices. When the item space is the unit interval [0, 1] and
buyers have piecewise linear utilities, we show that approximate equilibrium prices can be computed in polynomial time.
This is achieved by solving a finite-dimensional convex program using the ellipsoid method. To this end, we give nontrivial and efficient subgradient and separation oracles. For
general buyer valuations, we propose computing market equilibrium using stochastic dual averaging, which finds approximate equilibrium prices with high probability.

Introduction
1

Market equilibrium (ME) is a classical concept from economics, where the goal is to find an allocation of a set of
items to a set of buyers, as well as corresponding prices,
such that the market clears. One of the simplest equilibrium
models is the (finite-dimensional) linear Fisher market. A
Fisher market consists of a set of n buyers and m divisible
items, where the utility for a buyer is linear in their allocation. Each buyer i has a budget Bi and valuation vij for
each item j. A ME consists of an allocation (of items to
buyers) and prices (of items) such that (i) each buyer receives a bundle of items that maximizes their utility subject to their budget constraints, and (ii) the market clears (all
items such that pj > 0 are exactly allocated). In spite of
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An extended version is available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03025.

5432

