The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Decentralized Multi-Agent Linear Bandits with Safety Constraints
Sanae Amani,1 Christos Thrampoulidis 2
1

2

University of California, Los Angeles
University of British Columbia, Vancouver
samani@ucla.edu, cthrampo@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract

Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis 2010). LBs have been successfully applied over the years in online advertising, recommendation
services, resource allocation, etc. (Lattimore and Szepesvári
2018). More recently, researchers have explored the potentials of such algorithms in more complex systems, such
as in robotics, wireless networks, the power grid, medical trials, e.g., (Li et al. 2013; Avner and Mannor 2019;
Berkenkamp, Krause, and Schoellig 2016; Sui et al. 2018).
A distinguishing feature of many of these –perhaps less
conventional– bandit applications, is their distributive nature. For example, in sensor/wireless networks (Avner and
Mannor 2019), a collaborative behavior is required for
decision-makers/agents to select better actions as individuals, but each of them is only able to share information
about the unknown environment with a subset of neighboring agents. While a distributed nature is inherent in certain systems, distributed solutions might also be preferred in
broader settings, as they can lead to speed-ups of the learning process. This calls for extensions of the traditional bandit setting to networked systems. At the same time, in many
of these applications the unknown system might be safetycritical, i.e., the algorithm’s chosen actions need to satisfy certain constraints that, importantly, are often unknown.
This leads to the challenge of balancing the goal of reward
maximization with the restriction of playing safe actions.
The past few years have seen a surge of research activity in
these two areas: (i) distributed (Wang et al. 2019; Martı́nezRubio, Kanade, and Rebeschini 2019; Szörényi et al. 2013;
Landgren, Srivastava, and Leonard 2016a); and (ii) safe bandits (Sui et al. 2015, 2018; Kazerouni et al. 2017; Amani,
Alizadeh, and Thrampoulidis 2019; Moradipari et al. 2019;
Khezeli and Bitar 2019; Pacchiano et al. 2020).
This paper contributes to the intersection of these two
emerging lines of work. Concretely, we consider the problem of decentralized multi-agent linear bandits for a general
(connected) network structure of N agents, who can only
communicate messages with their immediate neighbors. For
this, we propose and analyze the first fully-decentralized algorithm. We also present a communication-efficient version
and discuss key trade-offs between regret, communication
cost and graph structure. Finally, we present the first simultaneously distributed and safe bandit algorithm for a setting
with unknown linear constraints.

We study decentralized stochastic linear bandits, where a network of N agents acts cooperatively to efficiently solve a linear bandit-optimization problem over a d-dimensional space.
For this problem, we propose DLUCB: a fully decentralized
algorithm that minimizes the cumulative regret over the entire
network. At each round of the algorithm each agent chooses
its actions following an upper confidence bound (UCB) strategy and agents share information with their immediate neighbors through a carefully designed consensus procedure that
repeats over cycles. Our analysis adjusts the duration of
these communication cycles
√ ensuring near-optimal regret performance O(d log N T N T ) at a communication rate of
O(dN 2 ) per round. The structure of the network affects the
regret performance via a small additive term – coined the regret of delay – that depends on the spectral gap of the underlying graph. Notably, our results apply to arbitrary network topologies without a requirement for a dedicated agent
acting as a server. In consideration of situations with high
communication cost, we propose RC-DLUCB: a modification of DLUCB with rare communication among agents. The
new algorithm trades off regret performance for a significantly reduced total communication cost of O(d3 N 2.5 ) over
all T rounds. Finally, we show that our ideas extend naturally to the emerging, albeit more challenging, setting of safe
bandits. For the recently studied problem of linear bandits
with unknown linear safety constraints, we propose the first
safe decentralized algorithm. Our study contributes towards
applying bandit techniques in safety-critical distributed systems that repeatedly deal with unknown stochastic environments. We present numerical simulations for various network
topologies that corroborate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Linear stochastic bandits (LB) provide simple, yet commonly encountered, models for a variety of sequential
decision-making problems under uncertainty. Specifically,
LB generalizes the classical multi-armed bandit (MAB)
problem of K arms that each yields reward sampled independently from an underlying distribution with unknown parameters, to a setting where the expected reward of each
arm is a linear function that depends on the same unknown parameter vector (Dani, Hayes, and Kakade 2008;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6627

