The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Coherence Modeling for Document Quality Assessment
Dongliang Liao, Jin Xu* , Gongfu Li, Yiru Wang
Data Quality Team, WeCaht, Tencent Inc., China.
{brightliao, jinxxu, gongfuli,dorisyrwang}@tencent.com

Abstract

Chinese cuisine is an important part of Chinese A1
culture, which includes …
The history of Chinese cuisine has influenced
A2
many other cuisines in Asia, …

Text coherence plays a key role in document quality assessment. Most existing text coherence methods only focus on
the similarity of adjacent sentences. However, local coherence exists in sentences with broader contexts and diverse
rhetoric relations, rather than just adjacent sentence similarity. Besides, the high-level text coherence is also an important
aspect of document quality. To this end, we propose a hierarchical coherence model for document quality assessment. In
our model, we implement the local attention mechanism to
capture the location semantics, bilinear tensor layer to measure coherence and max-coherence pooling to acquire highlevel coherence. We evaluate the proposed method on two
realistic tasks: news quality judgement and automated essay
scoring. Experimental results demonstrate the validity and superiority of our work.

Chinese food staples and utensils can now be
found worldwide, …
Chinese dishes stress the three main points of
appearance, smell, and taste …

Burger Combo serves with chips and drink.

coherent
coherent

A4

incoherent

incoherent

Good news, McDonald‘s new burgers are 50% B1
off for 3 days.
Bacon Double Cheeseburger contains two 100%
B2
beef patties, …, all in a soft bun.

B3

coherent
coherent

Figure 1: An example of high-level coherence.
Firstly, there are various rhetorical relations between sentence and the broader context, rather than the similarity of
adjacent sentences. For example, in parallel structures, several consecutive sentences form a coherent and consistent
discourse unit, but are relative independent with each other.
An example of this circumstance is shown as follows:

Introduction
Document quality assessment is academically valuable and
industrially applicable in many tasks, such as online news
recommendation, automated essay scoring and readability
assessment (Chen et al. 2010; Li and Hovy 2014; Dasgupta
et al. 2018). Document quality is not only affected by the semantics, but also significantly affected by the text coherence
(Petersen et al. 2015). Coherent documents are readable and
attractive to readers, while documents with poor coherence
are boring to read and may lead to misunderstanding. Several approaches are designed for modeling coherence, such
as entity-based methods, lexical methods and neural coherence models. Entity-based methods connect by means of
entities in sentences (Li and Hovy 2014; Nguyen and Joty
2017). Lexical methods measure the coherence of adjacent
sentences based on word co-occurrence (Louis and Nenkova
2012; Chen et al. 2010). Neural coherence models learn vector representation of words and sentences, and capture local
coherence by measuring the similarity of words or sentences
vectors (Mesgar and Strube 2018; Moon et al. 2019).
However, most existing local coherence models only focus on the similarity of adjacent sentences, which is inadequate for modeling the full coherence of documents. Two
attributes of text coherence are ignored in existing methods.

A3

coherent

A: Let’s see the new features in IPhone 11.
B: It’s powered by the latest proprietary chip, the A13 Bionic processor.
C: New tri-lens camera array combines a 12-megapixel main lens,
an ultra-wide angle lens and a telephoto lens.
D: The iPhone 11 also features a new anodized aluminum finish,
which Apple says is more durable.

where sentences A,B,C and D form a coherent part about the
new features of IPhone 11, but each sentence describes an
independent feature. Therefore, the first challenge is how to
capture the various rhetorical relation between sentences
and broader contexts.
Secondly, the document quality is not only impacted by
sentence-level coherence, but also hierarchical coherence of
high-level discourse units. The high-level coherence reflects
the organizational structure and logicality. Figure 1 shows
an example of this circumstance, where the first four sentences are about Chinese cuisine, while the next three sentences form an advertisement. The inserted advertisements
hurt the reading experience and decrease document quality.
As for the sentence-level coherence, only A4 and B1 are incoherent, but the overall text is incoherent. Thus the second
challenge is how to model the hierarchical coherence of

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13353

