The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Finding Diverse Trees, Paths, and More
Tesshu Hanaka1 , Yasuaki Kobayashi2 , Kazuhiro Kurita3 , Yota Otachi4
1

Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
3
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
4
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan
hanaka.91t@g.chuo-u.ac.jp, kobayashi@iip.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp, kurita@nii.ac.jp, otachi@nagoya-u.jp
2

Abstract

in the set. This is a natural extension of usual optimization
problems, and many algorithms for finding k-best solutions
have been developed for classical combinatorial optimization problems (Murty 1968; Lawler 1972; Gabow 1977) and
other problems arise in several fields (Hara and Maehara
2017; Lindgren, Dimakis, and Klivans 2017).
However, solutions obtained by k-best enumeration algorithms might be similar to each other since those solutions
are essentially made by some local modifications. The basic strategy of k-best enumeration algorithms is that we first
find a single optimal solution S = {x1 , . . . , xt } and then,
for each 1 ≤ i ≤ t, compute an optimal solution that includes {x1 , . . . , xi−1 } but excludes xi . The entire algorithm
recursively computes k solutions in this way. Since the subsequent solution must contain {x1 , . . . xi−1 } and also tends
to contain {xi+1 , . . . , xt }, these solutions would be similar,
which would not fit for our original purpose.
To address this issue, diversity among solutions is an important factor, and a substantial effort is dedicated to finding
multiple solutions that optimize diversity measures in the literature (Hebrard et al. 2005; Danna and Woodruff 2009; Petit and Trapp 2015; Baste et al. 2019, 2020; Ingmar et al.
2020). Let U be a finite set and let S ⊆ 2U be the set of solutions in a combinatorial optimization problem. Several diversity measures have been proposed. Among others, many
existing studies focus on maximizing the pairwise Hamming
distances among solutions. In particular, the following two
diversity measures are widely used.
X
dsum (U1 , . . . , Ur ) =
(|Ui \ Uj | + |Uj \ Ui |),

Mathematical modeling is a standard approach to solve many
real-world problems and diversity of solutions is an important issue, emerging in applying solutions obtained from
mathematical models to real-world problems. Many studies have been devoted to finding diverse solutions. Baste
et al. (Algorithms 2019, IJCAI 2020) recently initiated the
study of computing diverse solutions of combinatorial problems from the perspective of fixed-parameter tractability.
They considered problems of finding r solutions that maximize some diversity measures (the minimum or sum of the
pairwise Hamming distances among them) and gave some
fixed-parameter tractable algorithms for the diverse version
of several well-known problems, such as V ERTEX C OVER,
F EEDBACK V ERTEX S ET, d-H ITTING S ET, and problems on
bounded-treewidth graphs. In this work, we further investigate the (fixed-parameter) tractability of problems of finding
diverse spanning trees, paths, and several subgraphs. In particular, we show that, given a graph G and an integer r, the
problem of computing r spanning trees of G maximizing the
sum of the pairwise Hamming distances among them can be
solved in polynomial time. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first polynomial-time solvable case for finding diverse solutions of unbounded size.

Introduction
To solve real-world problems, we often formulate problems
as mathematical models and then develop algorithms working on these mathematical models. In this context, algorithms are usually designed to find a single (near) optimal
solution by optimizing an objective function formulated in
a mathematical model. However, such a solution may be inadequate for original real-world problems since mathematical models “approximately” formulate them and some tacit
rules and ambiguous constraints inherent in real-world problems are usually ignored for taming mathematical models.
One possible (and straightforward) solution to this issue is
to find multiple solutions rather than a single solution. The
concept of k-best enumeration (Eppstein 2016) is a promising approach along this line. In this approach, given a parameter k, we compute a set of k distinct solutions, such
that every solution in the set is better than any solutions not

1≤i<j≤r

dmin (U1 , . . . , Ur )

=

min (|Ui \ Uj | + |Uj \ Ui |),

1≤i<j≤r

where U1 , . . . , Ur ∈ S are not necessarily distinct.
Baste et al. (Baste et al. 2019, 2020) initiated the study
of finding diverse solutions from the perspective of fixedparameter tractability. Fixed-parameter tractability is the
central notion in parameterized complexity theory, which
extends the notion of tractability (i.e., polynomial-time solvability) in classical complexity theory. In this context, we
consider problems that take an instance I and a parameter
k, and analyze the complexity of those problems in terms of
the input size |I| and parameter k. We say that a problem
is fixed-parameter tractable (FPT) parameterized by k if it

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3778

