The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Discriminative Region Suppression for
Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Beomyoung Kim, Sangeun Han, Junmo Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{qjadud1994, bichoomi, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Image

Abstract
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) using
image-level labels has recently attracted much attention for
reducing annotation costs. Existing WSSS methods utilize
localization maps from the classification network to generate pseudo segmentation labels. However, since localization
maps obtained from the classifier focus only on sparse discriminative object regions, it is difficult to generate highquality segmentation labels. To address this issue, we introduce discriminative region suppression (DRS) module that is
a simple yet effective method to expand object activation regions. DRS suppresses the attention on discriminative regions
and spreads it to adjacent non-discriminative regions, generating dense localization maps. DRS requires few or no additional parameters and can be plugged into any network. Furthermore, we introduce an additional learning strategy to give
a self-enhancement of localization maps, named localization map refinement learning. Benefiting from this refinement
learning, localization maps are refined and enhanced by recovering some missing parts or removing noise itself. Due to
its simplicity and effectiveness, our approach achieves mIoU
71.4% on the PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark
using only image-level labels. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

CAM

DRS

DRS†

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of localization maps produced
by original CAM, DRS, and DRS†. DRS† denotes that the
refinement learning is applied.

tion maps (CAMs) (Zhou et al. 2016). Specifically, the discriminative region for each target class provided by CAMs
is used as pixel-level supervision for segmentation network
training. However, this discriminative region is usually very
sparse and only covers a small part of the object, which is
not enough for semantic segmentation learning as shown
in the second column in Figure 1. Therefore, most studies
in the weakly-supervised semantic segmentation field focus
on expanding the object region to produce dense localization maps. One of the recent approaches is image-level and
feature-level erasure of discriminative parts (Wei et al. 2017;
Li et al. 2018; Hou et al. 2018). This approach strictly erases
discriminative parts, letting the network focus on other nondiscriminative parts. However, they not only tend to produce
undesired true negative regions when most of the discriminative parts are erased but also require a lot of additional
parameters for multiple classifiers or multiple branches.
In this paper, we propose discriminative region suppression (DRS) module, which is a simple and efficient yet effective and novel approach for generating dense localization
maps. The goal of DRS is to suppress discriminative regions,
not to erase them, so that attention spreads to adjacent nondiscriminative regions; this mild approach helps the classifier effectively expand discriminative object regions. DRS
module consists of three components as depicted in Figure

Introduction
Recent developments in deep learning have achieved great
success on semantic segmentation tasks with the help
of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and rich
pixel-level annotations. However, collecting a large-scale
pixel-level annotated dataset requires intensive human labor, which is both expensive and time-consuming. To end
this limitation, weakly-supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) using only image-level labels has recently attracted
much attention.
One problem with using image-level annotations is that
we have no information about the location of the target object; we only know whether the object is present in the image
or not. This makes semantic segmentation learning challenging. To learn pixel-level semantic knowledge from imagelevel labels, it is common practice to use localization maps
obtained from the classification network using class activaCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1754

