The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How does the Combined Risk Affect the Performance of Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation Approaches?
Li Zhong1,2, * , Zhen Fang2,∗ , Feng Liu2,∗ , Jie Lu2,† , Bo Yuan1 , Guangquan Zhang2
1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
zhongl18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, feng.liu@uts.edu.au, zhen.fang@student.uts.edu.au,
yuanb@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, {guangquan.zhang, jie.lu}@uts.edu.au
2

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to train a target
classifier with labeled samples from the source domain and
unlabeled samples from the target domain. Classical UDA
learning bounds show that target risk is upper bounded by
three terms: source risk, distribution discrepancy, and combined risk. Based on the assumption that the combined risk
is a small fixed value, methods based on this bound train a
target classifier by only minimizing estimators of the source
risk and the distribution discrepancy. However, the combined
risk may increase when minimizing both estimators, which
makes the target risk uncontrollable. Hence the target classifier cannot achieve ideal performance if we fail to control
the combined risk. To control the combined risk, the key
challenge takes root in the unavailability of the labeled samples in the target domain. To address this key challenge, we
propose a method named E-MixNet. E-MixNet employs enhanced mixup, a generic vicinal distribution, on the labeled
source samples and pseudo-labeled target samples to calculate a proxy of the combined risk. Experiments show that the
proxy can effectively curb the increase of the combined risk
when minimizing the source risk and distribution discrepancy. Furthermore, we show that if the proxy of the combined
risk is added into loss functions of four representative UDA
methods, their performance is also improved.

Figure 1: The values of combined risk and accuracy on the
task C → P on Image-CLEF. The left figure shows the value
of combined risk. The right figure shows the accuracy of the
task. Blue line: ignore the optimization of combined risk.
Green line: optimize the combined risk by source samples
and target samples with high confidence. Orange line: optimize combined risk by the proxy formulated by mixup. Purple line: optimize the proxy formulated by e-mixup.
upper bounded by three terms: source risk, marginal distribution discrepancy, and combined risk. This earliest learning bound has been extended from many perspectives, such
as considering more surrogate loss functions (Zhang et al.
2019a) or distributional discrepancies (Mohri and Medina
2012; Shen et al. 2018) (see (Redko et al. 2020) as a survey).
Recently, Zhang et al. (2019a) proposed a new distributional
discrepancy termed Margin Disparity Discrepancy and developed a tighter and more practical UDA learning bound.
The UDA learning bounds proposed by (Ben-David et al.
2007, 2010) and the recent UDA learning bounds proposed
by (Shen et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020a) consist of three terms: source risk, marginal distribution discrepancy, and combined risk. Minimizing the source risk aims to
obtain a source-domain classifier, and minimizing the distribution discrepancy aims to learn domain-invariant features
so that the source-domain classifier can perform well on the
target domain. The combined risk embodies the adaptability between the source and target domains (Ben-David et al.
2010). In particularly, when the hypothesis space is fixed,
the combined risk is a constant.
Based on the UDA learning bounds where the combined
risk is assumed to a small constant, many existing UDA
methods focus on learning domain-invariant features (Fang
et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2020c,a; Liu et al. 2019) by minimiz-

Introduction
Domain Adaptation (DA) aims to train a target-domain classifier with samples from source and target domains (Lu et al.
2015). When the labels of samples in the target domain
are unavailable, DA is known as unsupervised DA (UDA)
(Zhong et al. 2020; Fang et al. 2020), which has been applied to address diverse real-world problems, such as computer version (Zhang et al. 2020b; Dong et al. 2019, 2020b),
natural language processing (Lee and Jha 2019; Guo, Pasunuru, and Bansal 2020), and recommender system (Zhang
et al. 2017; Yu, Wang, and Yuan 2019; Lu et al. 2020)
Significant theoretical advances have been achieved in
UDA. Pioneering theoretical work was proposed by BenDavid et al. (2007). This work shows that the target risk is
* Equal Contribution. Work done at AAII, UTS.
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11079

