The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improved Knowledge Modeling and Its Use for Signaling
in Multi-Agent Planning with Partial Observability
Shashank Shekhar1 , Ronen I. Brafman1 and Guy Shani2
1

2

The Department of Computer Science, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Software and Information Systems Engineering, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel
{shekhar, brafman}@cs.bgu.ac.il; shanigu@bgu.ac.il

Abstract

clearly by the IMAP solver (Bazinin and Shani 2018), which
was later improved by the QDec-FP planner (Shekhar, Brafman, and Shani 2019).
QDec-FP solves an abstract and simplified centralized
problem which they call the team problem. It is the singleagent problem, where the single agent is the entire team.
This problem can be solved by a single-agent contingent
solver. However, its solution is not necessarily executable
by the agents. It may require that agent ϕj act differently
based on the value of some proposition p observed by agent
ϕi , even if ϕj cannot observe p. To fix this, a second set of
planning problems is solved, in which each agent attempts
to generate a plan that emulates its behavior in the solution
to the team problem (which may require it to perform additional sensing, for example). If this second stage of QDecFP is successful, we get a correct, executable solution. If it
is not, the planner attempts to generate a new team plan.
In this paper we describe a new algorithm, QDec-FPS,
which uses enhanced reasoning about the knowledge of individual agents in the team problem. Reasoning about individual agents’ knowledge during team plan execution has
two important advantages: First, it will lead to the generation of more informed team plans that are easier to extend
to true solutions, because the team planner adds an action
only if the agent that executes it knows that its preconditions
hold. Second, it allows us to model, within the team plan,
the process of explicit and implicit communication, which
we refer to here as signaling.
Signaling refers to cases where agent ϕi can sense p but
agent ϕj cannot. ϕi communicates this information to ϕj by
setting the value of some variable q that agent ϕj can sense,
to be correlated with the value of p. For example, ϕj cannot
sense whether a door is open, but it can sense whether the
light is on, while agent ϕi can sense both. If ϕi can also
turn the light on and off, it can signal the door state to ϕj by
turning on the light if and only if the door is open.
Technically, signaling consists of the following steps: (1)
Agent ϕi senses p. (2) Agent ϕi sets the value of q to the
value of p. (3) Agent ϕj senses q. To be sound, this behavior must be consistent between the two execution branches
that follow the sensing of p: if p is true, we must ensure q
is true. If p is false, we must ensure q is false. Note that, to
support signaling, the planner must model the knowledge of
each agent within the team plan. For otherwise, the planner

Collaborative Multi-Agent Planning (MAP) problems with
uncertainty and partial observability are often modeled as
Dec-POMDPs. Yet, in deterministic domains, Qualitative
Dec-POMDPs can scale up to much larger problem sizes. The
best current QDec solver (QDec-FP) reduces MAP problems
to multiple single-agent problems. In this paper we describe a
planner that uses richer information about agents’ knowledge
to improve upon QDec-FP. With this change, the planner not
only scales up to larger problems with more objects, but it
can also support signaling, where agents signal information
to each other by changing the state of the world.

Introduction
In many real-world problems, agents collaborate to achieve
joint goals. For example, disaster response teams typically
consist of agents that have multiple tasks to perform, some
of which require the cooperation of several agents. In such
domains, agents may have partial information, where they
can sense only their immediate surroundings. As agents are
often located in different positions and may possess different sensing abilities, their runtime information states differ.
While this can be overcome using communication, the communication infrastructure can be damaged, or communication may be costly and should be reasoned about explicitly.
In this setting, it is common to compute a policy for all
agents using a central engine. This policy is executed by
the agents in a decentralized manner, and agent communication is performed through explicit actions. Decentralized
POMDPs (Dec-POMDPs) offer a rich model for capturing
such multi-agent problems (Bernstein et al. 2002; Oliehoek
and Amato 2016), but Dec-POMDP solvers have difficulty
scaling up. Qualitative Dec-POMDPs (QDecs) were introduced as an alternative model, replacing the probability
distributions over possible states with qualitative sets of
states (Brafman, Shani, and Zilberstein 2013). QDecs can
also be viewed as the multi-agent extension of the well
known Contingent Planning model (Hoffmann and Brafman
2005). At least for deterministic problems, where partial observability plays the key role, QDec algorithms scale much
better than Dec-POMDP algorithms. This was demonstrated
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11954

