The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from eXtreme Bandit Feedback
Romain Lopez1 , Inderjit S. Dhillon2, 3 , Michael I. Jordan1, 2
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
2
Amazon.com
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin
{romain lopez, jordan}@cs.berkeley.edu
inderjit@cs.utexas.edu
Abstract

feedback is often viewed as the province of reinforcement
learning, but it is also possible to combine bandit feedback
with supervised learning by considering a batch setting in
which each data point is accompanied by an evaluation and
there is no temporal component. This is the Batch Learning
from Bandit Feedback (BLBF) problem (Swaminathan and
Joachims 2015a).
Of particular interest is the off-policy setting where the
training data is provided by a logging policy, which differs
from the learner’s policy and differs from the optimal policy. Such problems arise in many real-world problems, including supply chains, online markets, and recommendation
systems (Rahul, Dahiya, and Singh 2019), where abundant
data is available in a logged format but not in a classical supervised learning format.
Another difficulty with the classical notion of a “label” is
that real-world problems often involve huge action spaces.
This is the case, for example, in real-world recommendation systems where there may be billions of products and
hundreds of millions of consumers. Not only is the cardinality of the action space challenging both from a computational point of view and a statistical point of view, but even
the semantics of the labels can become obscure—it can be
difficult to place an item conceptually in one and only category. Such challenges have motivated the development of
eXtreme multi-label classification (XMC) and eXtreme Regression (XR) (Bhatia et al. 2016) methods, which focus on
computational scalability issues and target settings involving millions of labels. These methods have had real-world
applications in domains such as e-commerce (Agrawal et al.
2013) and dynamic search advertising (Prabhu et al. 2018,
2020).
We assert that the issues of bandit feedback and extremescale action spaces are related. Indeed, it is when action
spaces are large that it is particularly likely that feedback
will only be partial. Moreover, large action spaces tend to
support multiple tasks and grow in size and scope over time,
making it likely that available data will be in the form of a
logging policy and not a single target input-output mapping.
We also note that the standard methodology for accommodating the difference between the logging policy and an
optimal policy needs to be considered carefully in the setting of large action spaces. Indeed, the standard methodology is some form of importance sampling (Swaminathan

We study the problem of batch learning from bandit feedback in the setting of extremely large action spaces. Learning from extreme bandit feedback is ubiquitous in recommendation systems, in which billions of decisions are made
over sets consisting of millions of choices in a single day,
yielding massive observational data. In these large-scale realworld applications, supervised learning frameworks such as
eXtreme Multi-label Classification (XMC) are widely used
despite the fact that they incur significant biases due to the
mismatch between bandit feedback and supervised labels.
Such biases can be mitigated by importance sampling techniques, but these techniques suffer from impractical variance
when dealing with a large number of actions. In this paper,
we introduce a selective importance sampling estimator (sIS)
that operates in a significantly more favorable bias-variance
regime. The sIS estimator is obtained by performing importance sampling on the conditional expectation of the reward
with respect to a small subset of actions for each instance
(a form of Rao-Blackwellization). We employ this estimator
in a novel algorithmic procedure—named Policy Optimization for eXtreme Models (POXM)—for learning from bandit
feedback on XMC tasks. In POXM, the selected actions for
the sIS estimator are the top-p actions of the logging policy,
where p is adjusted from the data and is significantly smaller
than the size of the action space. We use a supervised-tobandit conversion on three XMC datasets to benchmark our
POXM method against three competing methods: BanditNet,
a previously applied partial matching pruning strategy, and a
supervised learning baseline. Whereas BanditNet sometimes
improves marginally over the logging policy, our experiments
show that POXM systematically and significantly improves
over all baselines.

Introduction
In the classical supervised learning paradigm, it is assumed
that every data point is accompanied by a label. Such labels
provide a very strong notion of feedback, where the learner
is able to assess not only the loss associated with the action that they have chosen but can also assess losses of actions that they did not choose. A useful weakening of this
paradigm involves considering so-called “bandit feedback,”
where the training data simply provides evaluations of selected actions without delineating the correct action. Bandit
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8732

