The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Enhanced Audio Tagging via Multi- to Single-Modal Teacher-Student
Mutual Learning
Yifang Yin,1 Harsh Shrivastava,1 Ying Zhang* ,1,4
Zhenguang Liu,2 Rajiv Ratn Shah,3 Roger Zimmermann1
1

National University of Singapore
Zhejiang Gongshang University
3
MIDAS Lab, IIIT-Delhi
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
{idsyin, dcsrz}@nus.edu.sg, {harsh.vardhan.shri, yingz118, liuzhenguang2008}@gmail.com, rajivratn@iiitd.ac.in
2

Abstract
Recognizing ongoing events based on acoustic clues has been
a critical yet challenging problem that has attracted significant research attention in recent years. Joint audio-visual
analysis can improve the event detection accuracy but may
not always be feasible as under many circumstances only audio recordings are available in real-world scenarios. To solve
the challenges, we present a novel visual-assisted teacherstudent mutual learning framework for robust sound event
detection from audio recordings. Our model adopts a multimodal teacher network based on both acoustic and visual
clues, and a single-modal student network based on acoustic
clues only. Conventional teacher-student learning performs
unsatisfactorily for knowledge transfer from a multi-modality
network to a single-modality network. We thus present a mutual learning framework by introducing a single-modal transfer loss and a cross-modal transfer loss to collaboratively
learn the audio-visual correlations between the two networks.
Our proposed solution takes the advantages of joint audiovisual analysis in training while maximizing the feasibility
of the model in use cases. Our extensive experiments on the
DCASE17 and the DCASE18 sound event detection datasets
show that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-theart audio tagging approaches.

Sound Event
Detector

Decision Making
Module

Figure 1: Illustration of an audio surveillance system in domestic environments.

Combining complementary information from multiple
modalities is intuitively appealing for improving the performance of machine learning based approaches (Liu et al.
2018; Yu et al. 2019; Gao et al. 2020). However, the multimodal features required by such models may not always
be available in real-world scenarios. For example, Figure 1
shows an audio surveillance system deployed in domestic
environments for anomaly detection such as home abuse.
Compared with video cameras, audio sensors (as microphones) have several appealing features including (1) microphones have a 360◦ coverage whereas standard cameras
are constrained by a limited field of view; and (2) Microphones can acquire audio events even when there are obstacles present along the path (Crocco et al. 2016). Thus,
it is crucial to develop an effective sound event detection
method based on audio recordings when the visual modality
is not available due to view obstruction or camera destruction made by people on purpose.
To embrace the advantage and reduce the limitation of
using signals from different modalities, we investigate using a multi-modal network to improve the performance of a
single-modal network where the latter has no dependence on
the auxiliary modalities during inference. To the best of our
knowledge, there are currently two popular transfer learning
techniques that are widely adopted in previous work in audio analysis: 1) teacher-student network based knowledge
transfer and 2) pre-trained model based knowledge transfer. Conventional teacher-student networks are designed for
knowledge transfer within a single modality from a large

Introduction
Audio tagging aims to automatically detect the presence of
multiple events in an audio recording, which is of great
significance in many applications including surveillance,
video indexing, context-aware services, etc. (Tian et al.
2018; Imoto et al. 2019; Shrivastava et al. 2020). A precisely recognized sound event can also be used as priors
to improve the performance of acoustic scene classification (Wu et al. 2019; Xuan et al. 2020). Existing work mostly
leveraged audios as the single modality input, while the attempt of transfer learning in this field is usually limited to
fine-tuning the pre-trained acoustic models on large-scale
YouTube videos (Hershey et al. 2017).
* The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10709

