The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Clustering Ensemble Meets Low-rank Tensor Approximation
Yuheng Jia1,2 , Hui Liu∗2 , Junhui Hou2 , Qingfu Zhang2
1
2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR
yhjia@seu.edu.cn, hliu99-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {jh.hou, qingfu.zhang}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

2007), matrix factorization (Jia et al. 2020a; Wu et al. 2018;
Jia et al. 2020c), hierarchical clustering (Johnson 1967),
Gaussian mixture models (Moore 1999), and so on. As
each method has its own advantages as well as drawbacks,
no method could always outperform others (Vega-Pons and
Ruiz-Shulcloper 2011). Additionally, a clustering method
usually contains a few hyper-parameters, on which its performance heavily depends (Jia, Hou, and Kwong 2020).
Moreover, the hyper-parameters are difficult to tune, and
some methods are quite sensitive to initialization, like Kmeans. Those dilemmas increase the difficulty in choosing an appropriate clustering method for a typical clustering task. To this end, clustering ensemble was introduced, i.e., given a set of base clusterings produced by different methods or the same method with different hyperparameters/initializations, it aims to generate a consensus
clustering with better clustering performance than the base
clusterings (Sagi and Rokach 2018; Boongoen and Iam-On
2018). Unlike supervised ensemble learning, clustering ensemble is more difficult (Tao et al. 2017, 2016), as the commonly used strategies in supervised ensemble learning, such
as voting, cannot be directly applied to clustering ensemble,
when labels of samples are unavailable.

This paper explores the problem of clustering ensemble,
which aims to combine multiple base clusterings to produce
better performance than that of the individual one. The existing clustering ensemble methods generally construct a coassociation matrix, which indicates the pairwise similarity
between samples, as the weighted linear combination of the
connective matrices from different base clusterings, and the
resulting co-association matrix is then adopted as the input
of an off-the-shelf clustering algorithm, e.g., spectral clustering. However, the co-association matrix may be dominated
by poor base clusterings, resulting in inferior performance. In
this paper, we propose a novel low-rank tensor approximation based method to solve the problem from a global perspective. Specifically, by inspecting whether two samples are
clustered to an identical cluster under different base clusterings, we derive a coherent-link matrix, which contains limited but highly reliable relationships between samples. We
then stack the coherent-link matrix and the co-association
matrix to form a three-dimensional tensor, the low-rankness
property of which is further explored to propagate the information of the coherent-link matrix to the co-association matrix, producing a refined co-association matrix. We formulate
the proposed method as a convex constrained optimization
problem and solve it efficiently. Experimental results over 7
benchmark data sets show that the proposed model achieves
a breakthrough in clustering performance, compared with 11
state-of-the-art methods. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work to explore the potential of low-rank tensor
on clustering ensemble, which is fundamentally different from
previous approaches. Last but not least, our method only
contains one parameter, which can be easily tuned.

To realize clustering ensemble, the existing methods generally first learn a pairwise relationship matrix from the base
clusterings, and then apply off-the-shelf clustering methods
like spectral clustering to the resulting matrix to produce the
final clustering result (Tao, Liu, and Fu 2017). Based on how
to generate the pairwise relationship matrix, we roughly divide the existing methods into two categories. (1) The first
kind of methods treat the base clusterings as new feature representations (as shown in Fig. 1-A), to learn a pairwise relationship matrix. For example, (Gao et al. 2016) formulated
clustering ensemble as a convex low-rank matrix representation problem. (Zhou, Zheng, and Pan 2019) used a Frobenius norm regularized self-representation model to seek a
dense affinity matrix for clustering ensemble. (2) The second kind of methods rely on the co-association matrix (as
shown in Fig. 1-C), which summarizes the co-occurrence of
samples in the same cluster of the base clusterings. The concept of co-association matrix was first proposed by (Fred and
Jain 2005), and since then it became popular as an important fundamental method in clustering ensemble. (Liu et al.
2017) theoretically bridged the co-association based method

Introduction
Clustering is an important but very challenging unsupervised task, the goal of which is to partition a set of samples into homogeneous groups (Jia et al. 2018). Numerous applications can be formulated as a clustering problem, such as recommender systems (Song, Tekin, and Van
Der Schaar 2014), community detection (Wu et al. 2018),
and image segmentation (Li et al. 2019). Over the past
decades, a large number of clustering techniques were proposed, e.g., K-means (Jain 2010), spectral clustering (Ulrike
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7970

