The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Augmented Methods for Matching:
Improving Invasive Species Management and Urban Mobility
Johan Bjorck 1 , Qinru Shi 1 , Carrie Brown-Lima 2
Jennifer Dean 3 , Angela Fuller 2 4 5 , Carla Gomes 1
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell 2 Department of Natural Resources and the Environment, Cornell
3
New York Natural Heritage Program, College of Environmental Science and Forestry, SUNY
4
U.S. Geological Survey, 5 New York Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit
{njb225, qs63, cjb37}@cornell.edu, jennifer.dean@dec.ny.gov, angela.fuller@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
With the success of machine learning, integrating learned
models into real-world systems has become a critical challenge. Naively applying predictions to combinatorial optimization problems can incur high costs, which has motivated
researchers to consider learning augmented algorithms that
can make use of faulty or incomplete predictions. Inspired
by two matching problems in computational sustainability
where data are abundant, we consider the learning augmented
min-cost matching problem where some nodes are revealed
online while others are known a priori, e.g., by being predicted by machine learning. We develop an algorithm that is
able to make use of this extra information and provably improves upon pessimistic online algorithms. We evaluate our
algorithm on two settings from computational sustainability
– the coordination of opportunistic citizen scientists for invasive species management and the matching between taxis and
riders under uncertain trip duration predictions. In both cases,
we perform extensive experiments on real-world datasets and
find that our method outperforms baselines, showing how
learning augmented algorithms can reliably improve solutions for problems in computational sustainability.

Figure 1: The economic damage of invasive species is estimated to be in the billions of dollars annually (Pimentel,
Zuniga, and Morrison 2005), and in invasive species management, one needs to match observers to spatial locations
in a landscape that might contain invasive species. Observers
might be both employees whose efforts can be planned as
well as opportunistic citizen scientists who’s engagement is
unknown at planning time. Orchestrating the efforts of these
agents provides an important challenge.
where data are abundant and one wants to provide guarantees that resources are spent efficiently (Dilkina and Gomes
2010; Bondi et al. 2018). Information might also only be
partly known for other reasons; e.g., land managers might
only know approximately what resources are available in the
future.
In this work, we consider two matching problems subject
to partial information: matching citizen scientists to observation locations for invasive species management and matching riders to taxis in urban mobility. In both settings, some
parts of the matching might be known a priori, e.g., we can
use predicted trip durations to guess what taxis are available,
whilst other parts might be unknown, e.g., some taxis might
arrive early due to favorable traffic conditions or model misspecification. We model these problems as a semi-online
matching problem, where we want to find the minimum cost
matching in an online fashion given partial predictions of the
graph, e.g., taxis become available one by one and must irrevocably be matched to customers as they become available.
A primary motivation for this project is coordinating the
efforts of citizen scientists for invasive species management
as part of an ongoing collaboration with the New York Nat-

Introduction
With the success of machine learning models for prediction, integrating such learned models into real-world systems has become a critical challenge. While the models are
typically evaluated with aggregate statistics, e.g., accuracy
on a test set, for many applications, such averages might
not necessarily imply efficiency. For example, in combinatorial optimization, predicting most of the choices correctly might nonetheless lead to poor solutions. An emerging
paradigm for integrating machine learning into optimization
algorithms, while giving theoretical guarantees, is to consider learning augmented algorithms (Lykouris and Vassilvitskii 2018). Here a machine learning model gives incomplete or partly incorrect predictions and given access to this
oracle, one constructs an algorithm that provably performs
well as long as the machine learning advice is sound but still
gives guarantees for inaccurate predictions. This approach is
applicable to many problems in computational sustainability
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14702

