The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization by Uncertainty Modeling
Pilhyeon Lee1 *

Jinglu Wang2

Yan Lu2

Hyeran Byun1,3†

1

2

Department of Computer Science, Yonsei University
Microsoft Research Asia 3 Graduate School of AI, Yonsei University
{lph1114, hrbyun}@yonsei.ac.kr {jinglwa, yanlu}@microsoft.com

time

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to learn
detecting temporal intervals of action classes with only videolevel labels. To this end, it is crucial to separate frames of action classes from the background frames (i.e., frames not belonging to any action classes). In this paper, we present a new
perspective on background frames where they are modeled
as out-of-distribution samples regarding their inconsistency.
Then, background frames can be detected by estimating the
probability of each frame being out-of-distribution, known
as uncertainty, but it is infeasible to directly learn uncertainty without frame-level labels. To realize the uncertainty
learning in the weakly-supervised setting, we leverage the
multiple instance learning formulation. Moreover, we further
introduce a background entropy loss to better discriminate
background frames by encouraging their in-distribution (action) probabilities to be uniformly distributed over all action
classes. Experimental results show that our uncertainty modeling is effective at alleviating the interference of background
frames and brings a large performance gain without bells and
whistles. We demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the benchmarks, THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet (1.2 & 1.3). Our code is available at
https://github.com/Pilhyeon/WTAL-Uncertainty-Modeling.

1

(a) dynamic background frames in a SoccerPenalty video

(b) inconsistent background frames in a GolfSwing video

Figure 1: Challenges in modeling background: dynamism
and inconsistency. (a) The background frames in red boxes
showing soccer players celebrating are very dynamic.
(b) The background frames are inconsistent. The frames in
green boxes show empty scenes with subtitles and the one
in a blue box shows a golfer preparing to shoot. These two
types do not have consistent appearances and semantics.

video is labeled as positive for action classes if it contains
corresponding action frames and as negative otherwise. Note
that a video may have multiple action classes as its label.
Existing approaches commonly cast WTAL as frame-wise
classification, and adopt attention mechanism (Nguyen et al.
2018) or multiple instance learning (Paul, Roy, and RoyChowdhury 2018) to learn from video-level labels. Nonetheless, they still show highly inferior performances when compared to fully-supervised counterparts. According to the literature (Xu et al. 2019), the performance degradation mainly
comes from the false alarms of background frames, since
video-level labels do not have any clue for background. To
bridge the gap, there appear several studies attempting explicit background modeling in the weakly-supervised manner. Liu et al. (Liu, Jiang, and Wang 2019) merges static
frames to synthesize pseudo background videos, but they
overlook dynamic background frames (Fig. 1a). Meanwhile,
some work (Nguyen, Ramanan, and Fowlkes 2019; Lee, Uh,
and Byun 2020) tries to classify background frames as a
separate class. However, it is undesirable to force all background frames to belong to one specific class, as they do not
share any common semantics (Fig. 1b).

Introduction

Temporal action localization (TAL) is a very challenging problem of finding and classifying action intervals in
untrimmed videos, which plays an important role in video
understanding and analysis. To tackle the problem, many
works have been done in the fully-supervised manner and
achieved impressive progress (Zeng et al. 2019; Lin et al.
2019, 2020; Xu et al. 2020). However, they suffer from the
extremely high cost of acquiring precise annotations, i.e., labeling the start and end timestamps of each action instance.
To relieve the high-cost issue and enlarge the scalability,
researchers direct their attention to the same task with weak
supervision, namely, weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WTAL). Among the various levels of weak supervision, thanks to the cheap cost, video-level action labels
are widely employed (Wang et al. 2017). In this setting, each
* Work done during his internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1854

