The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Context-aware Attentional Pooling (CAP) for Fine-grained Visual Classification
Ardhendu Behera, Zachary Wharton, Pradeep R P G Hewage and Asish Bera
Department of Computer Science, Edge Hill University
St Helen Road, Lancashire
United Kingdom, L39 4QP
beheraa@edgehill.ac.uk, zachary.wharton@go.edgehill.ac.uk, pradeep.hewage@edgehill.ac.uk, beraa@edgehill.ac.uk

Abstract

2011), pets (Parkhi et al. 2012) and man-made objects like
aircraft types (Maji et al. 2013), car models (Krause et al.
2013), etc. To address this, a global descriptor is essential
which ensembles features from multiple local parts and their
hierarchy so that the subtle changes can be discriminated
as a misalignment of local parts or pattern. The descriptor
should also be able to emphasize the importance of a part.
There have been some excellent works on fine-grained visual recognition (FGVC) using weakly-supervised complementary parts (Ge, Lin, and Yu 2019), part attention (Liu
et al. 2016), object-part attention (Peng, He, and Zhao 2018),
multi-agent cooperative learning (Yang et al. 2018), recurrent attention (Fu, Zheng, and Mei 2017), and destruction
and construction learning (Chen et al. 2019). All these approaches avoid part-level annotations and automatically discriminate local parts in an unsupervised/weakly-supervised
manner. Many of them use a pre-trained object/parts detector and lack rich representation of regions/parts to capture
the object-parts relationships better. To truly describe an image, we need to consider the image generation process from
pixels to object to the scene in a more fine-grained way, not
only to regulate the object/parts and their spatial arrangements but also defining their appearances using multiple partial descriptions as well as their importance in discriminating
subtle changes. These partial descriptions should be rich and
complementary to each other to provide a complete description of the object/image. In this work, we propose a simple
yet compelling approach that embraces the above properties
systematically to address the challenges associated with the
FGVC. Thus, it can benefit a wide variety of applications
such as image captioning (Herdade et al. 2019; Huang et al.
2019a; Li et al. 2019), expert-level image recognition (Valan
et al. 2019; Krause et al. 2016), and so on.
Our work: To describe objects in a conventional way as in
CNNs as well as maintaining their visual appearance, we
design a context-aware attentional pooling (CAP) to encode
spatial arrangements and visual appearance of the parts effectively. The module takes the input as a convolutional feature from a base CNN and then learns to emphasize the
latent representation of multiple integral regions (varying
coarseness) to describe hierarchies within objects and parts.
Each region has an anchor in the feature map, and thus many
regions have the same anchor due to the integral characteristics. These integral regions are then fed into a recurrent net-

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown a
strong ability in mining discriminative object pose and parts
information for image recognition. For fine-grained recognition, context-aware rich feature representation of object/scene
plays a key role since it exhibits a significant variance in the
same subcategory and subtle variance among different subcategories. Finding the subtle variance that fully characterizes
the object/scene is not straightforward. To address this, we
propose a novel context-aware attentional pooling (CAP) that
effectively captures subtle changes via sub-pixel gradients,
and learns to attend informative integral regions and their importance in discriminating different subcategories without requiring the bounding-box and/or distinguishable part annotations. We also introduce a novel feature encoding by considering the intrinsic consistency between the informativeness
of the integral regions and their spatial structures to capture
the semantic correlation among them. Our approach is simple
yet extremely effective and can be easily applied on top of
a standard classification backbone network. We evaluate our
approach using six state-of-the-art (SotA) backbone networks
and eight benchmark datasets. Our method significantly outperforms the SotA approaches on six datasets and is very
competitive with the remaining two.

Introduction
Over recent years, there has been significant progress in the
landscape of computer vision due to the adaptation and enhancement of a fast, scalable and end-to-end learning framework, the CNN (LeCun et al. 1998). This is not a recent invention, but we now see a profusion of CNN-based models
achieving SotA results in visual recognition (He et al. 2016;
Huang et al. 2017; Zoph et al. 2018; Sandler et al. 2018). The
performance gain primarily comes from the model’s ability
to reason about image content by disentangling discriminative object pose and part information from texture and shape.
Most discriminative features are often based on changes in
global shape and appearance. They are often ill-suited to distinguish subordinate categories, involving subtle visual differences within various natural objects such as bird species
(Wah et al. 2011; Van Horn et al. 2015), flower categories
(Nilsback and Zisserman 2008), dog breeds (Khosla et al.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

929

