The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Testing Independence Between Linear Combinations for Causal Discovery
Hao Zhang1 , Kun Zhang3 , Shuigeng Zhou2∗ , Jihong Guan4 , Ji Zhang5
1

2

School of Computer, Guangdong University of Petrochemical Technology, China
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
4
Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tongji University, China
5
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
{haoz15, sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; kunz1@cmu.edu; jhguan@tongji.edu.cn; ji.zhang@zhejianglab.com
Abstract

graph (DAG) (Pearl 2009). In the causal functional model (Velikova et al. 2014; Peters et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2016),
there is a solution to infer causal directions by testing the
independence between the set of independent variables x and
the corresponding residual R x→y (or the causal process of
P(y|x)).
Without given any assumption or precondition, CI testing
is generally more difficult than independence testing. Many
existing methods are based on explicit estimation of conditional densities or their variants, or first discretizing the
conditional set Z to a set of bins, and then transforming CI to
independence in each bin (Diakonikolas and Kane 2016; Su
and White 2008). For example, the method presented in (Su
and White 2008) uses a characterization of CI, P x|yZ =P x|Z ,
to check CI by measuring the weighted Hellinger distance
between estimates of conditional density. However, due to the
curse of dimensionality, inevitably the required sample size
increases dramatically when the conditional set becomes very
large, which makes accurate estimation of conditional density
or related quantity hard to be accomplished. Consider that the
controlling set Z takes a finite number of values {z1 , ..., zk },
then x y y|Z if and only if x y y|Z=zi for each value zi . Given
a sample of size n, even if the data are distributed evenly on
the values of Z, we must ensure that the independence within
each subset of the sample with the same Z value by using only
approximately n/k data points in each subset. When Z is realvalued and Pz is continuous, or Z contains several variables,
the observed values of Z are almost surely unique. To extend
the above procedure to the continuous cases, we must infer
conditional independence using nonidentical but neighboring
values of Z. Here, “neighboring” is quantified by some distance metric, but finding neighboring points becomes more
difficult as the dimensionality of Z grows.
As kernel methods are able to represent high order moments, kernel-based CI tests were developed to solve the
above problems. In practice, mapping variables into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs) allows us to infer
properties of distributions, such as independence and homogeneity (Gretton et al. 2006). In (Fukumizu et al. 2007), the
authors proposed to use the Hilbert-Schmidt norm of the
conditional cross-covariance operator, which is a measure
of conditional covariance of the images of x and y under
the corresponding functions from RKHSs. If the RKHSs are
characteristic kernels, the zero operator norm is equivalen-

Recently, regression based conditional independence (CI) tests
have been employed to solve the problem of causal discovery.
These methods provide an alternative way to test for CI by
transforming CI to independence between residuals. Generally, it is nontrivial to check for independence when these
residuals are linearly uncorrelated. With the ability to represent high-order moments, kernel-based methods are usually
used to achieve this goal, but at a cost of considerable time.
In this paper, we investigate the independence between two
linear combinations under linear non-Gaussian structural equation model (SEM). We show that generally the 1-st to 4-th
moments of the two linear combinations contain enough information to infer whether or not they are independent. The
proposed method provides a simpler but more effective way to
measure CIs, with only calculating the 1-st to 4-th moments
of the input variables. When applied to causal discovery, the
proposed method outperforms kernel-based methods in terms
of both speed and accuracy. which is validated by extensive
experiments.

Introduction
In the problem of causal discovery, statistical independence
and conditional independence (CI) tests are usually used for
checking CIs among variables. For example, in the implementation of the PC algorithm (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines
2000), we use independence and CI tests to remove the edges
that violate the joint distribution of given data. If two variables x and y that are conditional independent given a set
of variables Z (x, y < Z), denoted by x y y|Z, then given
Z, further knowing x (or y) does not provide any additional
information about y (or x). Therefore, we can deduce that
there is no direct causal relationship between x and y if the
faithfulness assumption holds (Pearl 2009).
In practice, independence and CI tests play a central role
in causal discovery. In constraint-based methods (Pearl and
Mackenzie 2018), the CI relationship x y y|Z allows us to
separate x−y when constructing a probabilistic model based
on the joint distribution, which results in a parsimonious representation (Zhang et al. 2011). By using CI tests, constraintbased methods can generally return a partial directed acyclic
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6538

