The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Backdoor Decomposable Monotone Circuits and Propagation Complete Encodings
Petr Kučera,1 Petr Savický2
1

Department of Theoretical Computer Science and Mathematical Logic, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles
University, Czech Republic
2
Institute of Computer Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Czech Republic
kucerap@ktiml.mff.cuni.cz, savicky@cs.cas.cz

Abstract

is consistent with a partial assignment, unit propagation derives all implied literals. When encoding a constraint into a
CNF we usually distinguish two kinds of variables, the main
variables which directly correspond to the variables of a constraint, and auxiliary variables. A well known example is encoding of a circuit into a CNF formula using Tseitin’s encoding (Tseitin 1983) where the main variables correspond to
the inputs of the circuit and auxiliary variables correspond to
the gates. Let us note that PC encodings treat all variables in
the same way: the propagation properties of a PC encoding
with respect to the auxiliary variables is the same as with respect to the main variables. By way of contrast, if the encoding only maintains GAC (see e.g. Bacchus 2007) or, equivalently, domain consistency, the propagation properties are
required only for the main variables (GAC encoding in this
paper). A systematic study of encodings of multi-valued decision diagrams (MDDs) with different propagation strength
is presented by (Abı́o et al. 2016) including a construction
of a polynomial size PC encoding for an arbitrary MDD.
Let us include a few remarks concerning a weaker notion
of consistency checker (CC encoding in this paper) considered, for example, by (Bessiere et al. 2009; Abı́o et al. 2016).
In the case of a CC encoding, unit propagation detects inconsistency with a partial assignment of the main variables.
Following the framework of closures initiated by Fargier and
Marquis (2008), Bordeaux et al. (2012) studied disjunctive
closures of different types of CNF encodings and their placement into knowledge compilation map. In particular, they
consider CC encodings denoted as ∃ URC-C and one of their
results is that the language of disjunctions of CC encodings is polynomially equivalent to the language of CC encodings. We generalize this by proving that the language of
disjunctions of PC encodings is polynomially equivalent to
the language of PC encodings. Using a slightly simpler construction, we also prove that the language of disjunctions of
URC encodings is polynomially equivalent to the language
of URC encodings.
The above results are a consequence of a more general
construction. We introduce a new target compilation language parameterized with a class C of encodings. For the
special case when C is the class of PC encodings, we demonstrate a transformation of a sentence in this language into a
single PC encoding.
A sentence in the proposed language is a monotone cir-

We describe a compilation language of backdoor decomposable monotone circuits (BDMCs) which generalizes several concepts appearing in the literature, e.g. DNNFs and
backdoor trees. A C-BDMC sentence is a monotone circuit
which satisfies decomposability property (such as in DNNF)
in which the inputs (or leaves) are associated with CNF encodings from a given base class C. We consider the class of
propagation complete (PC) encodings as a base class and we
show that PC-BDMCs are polynomially equivalent to PC encodings. Additionally, we use this to determine the properties
of PC-BDMCs and PC encodings with respect to the knowledge compilation map including the list of efficient operations on the languages.

Introduction
In knowledge compilation (Darwiche and Marquis 2002;
Marquis 2015), we are concerned with transforming a given
propositional theory into a form which allows efficient query
answering and manipulation. The form of the output representation is specified by a target compilation language. Lots
of target languages were described in knowledge compilation map (Darwiche and Marquis 2002) which was later
extended with other languages and their disjunctive closures (Fargier and Marquis 2008). We are in particular interested in languages based on conjunctive normal forms
(CNF) which are used to encode various constraints into
SAT. Since unit propagation is a basic procedure used in
DPLL based SAT solvers including CDCL solvers, it has
become a common practice to require that unit propagation
maintains at least some level of local consistency in the constraints being encoded into a CNF formula.
Close connection between unit propagation in SAT
solvers and maintaining generalized arc consistency (GAC)
was investigated for example by Bacchus (2007); Bessiere
et al. (2009). A stronger notion of propagation complete
(PC) encodings was introduced by Bordeaux and MarquesSilva (2012) as a generalization of unit refutation complete
(URC) encodings (del Val 1994). A formula ϕ is propagation complete, if its consistency with a partial assignment
can be checked by unit propagation and in case the formula
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3832

