The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FCFR-Net: Feature Fusion based Coarse-to-Fine Residual Learning for
Depth Completion
Lina Liu1,2 , Xibin Song2,3 , Xiaoyang Lyu1 , Junwei Diao1 , Mengmeng Wang1 , Yong Liu1∗ and
Liangjun Zhang2,3
1

Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University, China
2
Baidu Research, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China
{linaliu, shawlyu, djw, mengmengwang}@zju.edu.cn, {songxibin, liangjunzhang}@baidu.com, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
Abstract
Depth completion aims to recover a dense depth map from a
sparse depth map with the corresponding color image as input. Recent approaches mainly formulate depth completion
as a one-stage end-to-end learning task, which outputs dense
depth maps directly. However, the feature extraction and supervision in one-stage frameworks are insufficient, limiting
the performance of these approaches. To address this problem, we propose a novel end-to-end residual learning framework, which formulates the depth completion as a two-stage
learning task, i.e., a sparse-to-coarse stage and a coarse-tofine stage. First, a coarse dense depth map is obtained by a
simple CNN framework. Then, a refined depth map is further
obtained using a residual learning strategy in the coarse-tofine stage with a coarse depth map and color image as input.
Specially, in the coarse-to-fine stage, a channel shuffle extraction operation is utilized to extract more representative
features from the color image and coarse depth map, and
an energy based fusion operation is exploited to effectively
fuse these features obtained by channel shuffle operation, thus
leading to more accurate and refined depth maps. We achieve
SoTA performance in RMSE on KITTI benchmark. Extensive experiments on other datasets future demonstrate the superiority of our approach over current state-of-the-art depth
completion approaches.

Color Image

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Comparison with SoTA approaches. (a) STD (Ma,
Cavalheiro, and Karaman 2019), (b) DeepLidar (Qiu et al.
2019), (c) CSPN++ (Cheng et al. 2020), (d) Ours.
In order to obtain a dense and accurate depth map at
a low cost, the task of depth completion draws more and
more attention. Depth completion aims to recover a dense
depth map from a sparse depth map obtained from Lidar or other depth sensors. Recently, various of effective
depth completion approaches have been proposed, including sparse depth based approaches (Uhrig et al. 2017)(Chodosh, Wang, and Lucey 2018)(Lu et al. 2020)(Eldesokey
et al. 2020) and image-guided based approaches (Ma, Cavalheiro, and Karaman 2019)(Qiu et al. 2019)(Yang, Wong,
and Soatto 2019)(Imran et al. 2019)(Qu, Nguyen, and Taylor 2020)(Tang et al. 2019)(Cheng et al. 2020)(Li et al.
2020)(Liu et al. 2021). However, due to lack of complementary cues of color information, the resulting depth maps of
sparse depth based approaches are inevitably blurred with
unclear boundaries. More recent image-guided based approaches explore color images to guide depth completion
and various features fusion strategies have been proposed.
However, image-guided based approaches mainly take depth
completion as a one-stage task, and the feature extraction
and information supervision are insufficient. Thus depth details are failed to be recovered. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a) to
(c), the obtained depth maps either suffer from blurred edges
or lose depth details.
To solve these problems, we propose an effective framework, named FCFR-Net, which tackles depth completion as
a two-stage task, i.e., a sparse-to-coarse stage and a coarseto-fine stage. The sparse-to-coarse stage first interpolates
the sparse depth maps using simple CNN frameworks, and

Introduction
Depth is considered as one of the most fundamental information in many applications, including robotics (Liao
et al. 2017)(Song et al. 2019), augmented reality (Dey et al.
2012)(Song et al. 2020), virtual reality (Armbrüster et al.
2008) and SLAM (Wang et al. 2016). Various depth sensors such as 3D Lidar, depth cameras and stereo cameras
have been developed to obtain depth information. For autonomous driving, 3D Lidar is commonly used because it
can obtain accurate depth information in centimeter-level accuracy. However, due to the inherent characteristics of Lidar
devices, the captured depth information is usually sparsely
distributed, which largely limits the performances of Lidarbased applications.
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2136

