The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Style-transfer and Paraphrase: Looking for a Sensible Semantic Similarity Metric
Ivan P. Yamshchikov,1 Viacheslav Shibaev, 2 Nikolay Khlebnikov 2 Alexey Tikhonov3
1

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstraße 22, Leipzig, Germany 04103
2
Ural Federal University, Mira 19, Ekaterinburg, Russia, 620002
3
Yandex, Oberwallstr. 6, Berlin, Germany, 10117
ivan@yamshchikov.info

Abstract

it as a machine translation problem; see, for example, (Subramanian et al. 2018). However, independently of a chosen
architecture, one has to control the semantic component of
the output text. It is expected to stay the same as the system changes the style of the input. This aspect makes the
problem of style transfer naturally related to the problem of
paraphrase (Prakash et al. 2016), (Gupta et al. 2018), (Roy
and Grangier 2019). It also raises the question of how one
could automatically measure the semantic similarity of two
texts in these problems.
As with every NLP task that is relatively new, the widely
accepted baselines and evaluations metrics are still only
emerging. There are ongoing discussions on which aspects
of the texts are stylistic and could be changed by the style
transfer system and which are semantic and therefore are
technically out of the scope of the style transfer research
(Tikhonov and Yamshchikov 2018). This paper refrains
from these discussions. It instead attempts to systematize
existing methods of quality assessment for the tasks of style
transfer that are used in different state of art research results.
We also put these methods into the perspective of paraphrase
tasks. To our knowledge, that was not done before. The contribution of the paper is four-fold:

The rapid development of such natural language processing
tasks as style transfer, paraphrase, and machine translation
often calls for the use of semantic similarity metrics. In recent years a lot of methods to measure the semantic similarity of two short texts were developed. This paper provides a comprehensive analysis for more than a dozen of such
methods. Using a new dataset of fourteen thousand sentence
pairs human-labeled according to their semantic similarity,
we demonstrate that none of the metrics widely used in the
literature is close enough to human judgment in these tasks.
A number of recently proposed metrics provide comparable
results, yet Word Mover Distance is shown to be the most
reasonable solution to measure semantic similarity in reformulated texts at the moment.

Introduction
Style transfer and paraphrase are two tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Both of them are centered around
the problem of an automated reformulation. Given an input
text, the system tries to produce a new rewrite that resembles
the old text semantically. In the task of paraphrase, semantic similarity is the only parameter that one tries to control.
Style transfer usually controls more aspects of the text and
could, therefore, be regarded as an extension of a paraphrase.
Intuitive understanding of style transfer problem is as follows: if an input text has some attribute A, say, politeness, a
system generates new text similar to the input semantically
but with attribute A changed to the target Ã. For example,
given a polite sentence ”could you be so kind, give me a
hand” and a target ”not polite” the system produces a rewrite
”God damn, help me”.
The significant part of current works perform style transfer via an encoder-decoder architecture with one or multiple style discriminators to learn disentangled representations
(Hu et al. 2017). This basic architecture can have various
extensions, for example, can control POS-distance between
input and output (Tian, Hu, and Yu 2018), or have additional
discriminator or an extra loss term to improve the quality of
the latent representations (Yamshchikov et al. 2019). There
are also other approaches to this problem that do not use
ideas of disentangled latent representations but rather treat

• it compares more than a dozen of existing semantic similarity metrics used by different researchers to measure the
performance of different style transfer methods;
• using human assessment of 14 thousand pairs of sentences
it demonstrates that there is still no optimal semanticpreservation metric that could be comparable with human
judgment in context of paraphrase and textual style transfer, however Word Mover Distance (Kusner et al. 2015)
seems to be the most promising one;
• it proposes a simple necessary condition that a metric
should comply with to be a valid semantic similarity metric for the task of style transfer;
• it shows that some metrics used in style transfer literature
should not be used in the context of style transfer at all.

Measuring Semantic Preservation
Style transfer, as well as a paraphrase, naturally demands the
preservation of the semantic component as the input sentence is transformed into the desired output. Different re-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14213

