The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepSynth: Automata Synthesis for Automatic Task Segmentation
in Deep Reinforcement Learning
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Natasha Yogananda Jeppu,
Alessandro Abate, Tom Melham, Daniel Kroening*
Computer Science Department, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom, OX1 3QD
{hosein.hasanbeig, natasha.yogananda.jeppu, alessandro.abate, tom.melham}@cs.ox.ac.uk and daniel.kroening@magd.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

A well-known example is the Atari game Montezuma’s Revenge, in which DQN (Mnih et al. 2015) failed to score. Interestingly, Montezuma’s Revenge and other hard problems
often require learning to accomplish, possibly in a specific
sequence, a set of high-level objectives to obtain the reward.
These objectives can often be identified with passing through
designated and semantically distinguished states of the system. This insight can be leveraged to obtain a manageable,
high-level model of the system’s behaviour and its dynamics.
Contribution: In this paper we propose DeepSynth, a
new algorithm that automatically infers unknown sequential
dependencies of a reward on high-level objectives and exploits this to guide a deep RL agent when the reward signal
is history-dependent and significantly delayed. We assume
that these sequential dependencies have a regular nature, in
formal language theory sense (Gulwani 2012). The identification of dependency on a sequence of high-level objectives
is the key to breaking down a complex task into a series of
Markovian ones. In our work, we use automata expressed
in terms of high-level objectives to orchestrate sequencing
of low-level actions in deep RL and to guide the learning
towards sparse rewards. Furthermore, the automata representation allows a human observer to easily interpret the deep
RL solution in a high-level manner, and to gain more insight
into the optimality of that solution.
At the heart of DeepSynth is a model-free deep RL algorithm that is synchronised in a closed-loop fashion with an
automaton inference algorithm, enabling our method to learn
a policy that discovers and follows high-level sparse-reward
structures. The synchronisation is achieved by a product construction that creates a hybrid architecture for the deep RL.
When dealing with raw image input, we assume that an offthe-shelf unsupervised image segmentation method, e.g. (Liu
et al. 2019), can provide enough object candidates in order
to identify semantically distinguished states. We evaluate the
performance of DeepSynth on a selection of benchmarks with
unknown sequential high-level structures. These experiments
show that DeepSynth is able to automatically discover and
formalise unknown, sparse, and non-Markovian high-level reward structures, and then to efficiently synthesise successful
policies in various domains where other related approaches
fail. DeepSynth represents a better integration of deep RL and
formal automata synthesis than previous approaches, making
learning for non-Markovian rewards more scalable.

This paper proposes DeepSynth, a method for effective training of deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents when the
reward is sparse and non-Markovian, but at the same time
progress towards the reward requires achieving an unknown
sequence of high-level objectives. Our method employs a
novel algorithm for synthesis of compact automata to uncover
this sequential structure automatically. We synthesise a humaninterpretable automaton from trace data collected by exploring
the environment. The state space of the environment is then
enriched with the synthesised automaton so that the generation
of a control policy by deep RL is guided by the discovered
structure encoded in the automaton. The proposed approach is
able to cope with both high-dimensional, low-level features
and unknown sparse non-Markovian rewards. We have evaluated DeepSynth’s performance in a set of experiments that
includes the Atari game Montezuma’s Revenge. Compared
to existing approaches, we obtain a reduction of two orders
of magnitude in the number of iterations required for policy
synthesis, and also a significant improvement in scalability.

Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL) is the key enabling technique
for a variety of applications of artificial intelligence, including advanced robotics (Polydoros and Nalpantidis 2017),
resource and traffic management (Mao et al. 2016; Sadigh
et al. 2014), drone control (Abbeel et al. 2007), chemical engineering (Zhou et al. 2017), and gaming (Mnih et al. 2015).
While RL is a very general architecture, many advances in
the last decade have been achieved using specific instances
of RL that employ deep neural networks to synthesise optimal policies. A deep RL algorithm, AlphaGo (Silver et al.
2016), played moves in the game of Go that were initially
considered glitches by human experts, but secured victory
against the world champion. Similarly, AlphaStar (Vinyals
et al. 2019) was able to defeat the world’s best players at the
real-time strategy game StarCraft II, and to reach top 0.2% in
scoreboards with an “unimaginably unusual” playing style.
While deep RL can autonomously solve many problems in
complex environments, tasks that feature extremely sparse,
non-Markovian rewards or other long-term sequential structures are often difficult or impossible to solve by unaided RL.
* The work in this paper was done prior to joining Amazon.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7647

