The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consistent-Separable Feature Representation for Semantic Segmentation
Xingjian He,1,2 Jing Liu,1,2 * Jun Fu,2 Xinxin Zhu,2 Jinqiao Wang,2 Hanqing Lu1,2
1

2

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xingjian.he, jliu, jun.fu, xinxin.zhu, jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

ity, the intra-class consistency and the inter-class separability are equally important for classification.
To enhance the intra-class consistency, some works adopt
feature aggregation with self-attention mechanism, which
implicitly alleviates the intra-class diversity, enhancing the
discriminative ability of feature representations. For example, Nonlocal (Wang et al. 2018b) introduces a self-attention
mechanism to capture pair-wise relationships and utilizes
the relationships to guide feature fusion, so that similar features tend to be more similar, which enhances the intraclass consistency implicitly. CPNet (Yu et al. 2020b) models the intra-class dependency through aggregating the pixels belonging to the same category, shrinking the intra-class
variance and achieving good segmentation performance.
ACFNet (Zhang et al. 2019a) builds class-aware context
features through adaptively combining different context according to the category of each pixel, reducing the intra-class
variation. These previous methods adopt an implicit feature
learning scheme to enhance the similar or intra-class features by themselves along a bottom-up direction.
In this paper, we propose a Consistent-Separable Feature Representation Network (CSFRN) to obtain discriminative features for per-pixel semantic prediction. Different
from the previous works based on feature aggregation, we
adopt a top-down supervised scheme to explicitly learn the
intra-class consistent and inter-class separable features for
the per-pixel semantic prediction. Specifically, we design
a Consistent-Separable Feature Learning Module (CSFLM)
on the top of the dilated FCN. The process of this module
could be divided into three steps. First, we generate the feature embedding for each pixel from the output feature of
the dilated FCN. And we build class-wise semantic centers
by using the feature embeddings and ground truth information. Second, we design a new loss function, namely ClassAware Consistency (CAC) loss, to simultaneously minimize
the distances from the feature embedding of each pixel to
its corresponding class semantic center, and maximize the
distances from the feature embedding of each pixel to other
class semantic centers. Considering the degree of intra-class
compactness of different categories should be different, in
this loss function, we introduce a class-aware margin mechanism to adaptively adjust the degree for different categories. With the supervision of CAC loss, we could obtain
the Consistent-Separable (C-S) features. Third, we fuse the

Cross-entropy loss combined with softmax is one of the
most commonly used supervision components in most existing segmentation methods. The softmax loss is typically
good at optimizing the inter-class difference, but not good
at reducing the intra-class variation, which can be suboptimal for semantic segmentation task. In this paper, we propose a Consistent-Separable Feature Representation Network
to model the Consistent-Separable (C-S) features, which are
intra-class consistent and inter-class separable, improving the
discriminative power of the deep features. Specifically, we
develop a Consistent-Separable Feature Learning Module to
obtain C-S features through a new loss, called Class-Aware
Consistency loss. This loss function is proposed to force the
deep features to be consistent among the same class and apart
between different classes. Moreover, we design an Adaptive
feature Aggregation Module to fuse the C-S features and original features from backbone for the better semantic prediction. We show that compared with various baselines, the proposed method brings consistent performance improvement.
Our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art performance
on Cityscapes (82.6% mIoU in test set), ADE20K (46.65%
mIoU in validation set), COCO Stuff (41.3% mIoU in validation set) and PASCAL Context (55.9% mIoU in test set).

Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most challenging and
fundamental problems in computer vision, which aims to assign per-pixel class label for a given image. It has been applied to various challenging fields, such as autonomous driving, image editing and human parsing, etc. Benefiting from
the Fully Convolution Networks (FCN) (Long, Shelhamer,
and Darrell 2015), recent approaches achieve promising performance. FCN-based methods usually adopt softmax loss
as an optimization function to learn discriminative features
for pixel-level semantic segmentation. However, the softmax loss typically does well in enlarging the inter-class difference (i.e. separating different classes), but not good at
shrinking the intra-class diversity (Wang et al. 2018a; Liu
et al. 2017a). This may cause inconsistent predictions of the
same category. From the view of feature discriminative abil* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1531

