The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Twitter Event Summarization by Exploiting Semantic Terms and Graph
Network
Quanzhi Li, Qiong Zhang
Alibaba Group, US
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{quanzhi.li@alibaba-inc.com, qz.zhang@alibaba-inc.com}

choose only one to three tweets as event summary. Other
applications may want to select more tweets as summary.
To find the best tweets to represent an event, we first need
to understand the event characteristics. An event is usually
defined by the 4Ws questions: who, what, where and when
(Mohd 2007). An event tweet usually contains terms corresponding to these aspects, and these terms can be classified
into different semantic classes/types, such as entity names
(who), location (where), hashtag (topic & what), temporal
expression (when), verb & noun (what), and mention (who).
Different semantic types have different degrees of importance for describing an event, and this will have implications on both event detection and event summarization algorithms. Previous studies on event summarization from social
media have not explicitly exploited this type of information.
They do not classify the terms into different semantic classes; they just treat them equally important in their algorithms, e.g. in Hybrid TF-IDF (Inouye and Kalita 2016) and
sumBasic (Vanderwende et al. 2007). In the first approach,
we take the semantic type of a term into consideration when
determining its weight. We hypothesize that classifying
tweet terms into their corresponding semantic classes, assigning different weights to them, and then integrating them
together will improve the event summarization performance. Therefore, in the first approach, we split the term
space into groups of terms, or semantic classes.
In the second approach, we consider the tweet event
summarization task as a special multi-document summarization problem, and utilize graph-based neural networks.
The tweets selected as the summary should be both representative and informative. To be representative in an event
cluster, a tweet needs to convey similar information with
other tweets in this cluster. We use a tweet relation graph to
measure how representative a tweet is. In this graph, each
node is a tweet, and the edge weight measures how similar
two nodes are. To reflect the informative aspect, we calculate a score for each node in the relation graph, using the
semantic terms the tweet contains. A tweet having more

Abstract
Twitter is a fast communication channel for gathering and
spreading breaking news, and it generates a large volume of
tweets for most events. Automatically creating a summary for
an event is necessary and important. In this study, we explored
two extractive approaches for summarizing events on Twitter.
The first one exploits the semantic types of event related
terms, and ranks the tweets based on the score computed from
these semantic terms. The second one utilizes a graph convolutional network built from a tweet relation graph to generate
tweet hidden features for tweet salience estimation. And the
most salient tweets are selected as the summary of the event.
Our experiments show that these two approaches outperform
the compared methods.

Introduction
Social media services, such as Twitter, generate a large volume of content (tweets) for most events. This study aims at
exploring new summarization methods for real-time events
detected from Twitter. Text summarization methods can be
classified into two categories. Extractive methods select a
subset of words, phrases, or sentences from the original document to generate a summary. In contrast, abstractive approaches generate a summary by using words and phrases
that may not appear in the source text. Our approaches belong to the extractive method category. We choose one or
more tweets from a event cluster to represent the event. Usually, only one or two tweets are selected. One reason of selecting only a couple of tweets is that many applications prefer a very short summary, due to their limited UI space or
other reasons. The proposed approaches have been adapted
in three production systems, which need to monitor realtime events on different topics. They prefer selecting only
one to three tweets per event as summary, in order to have
more events displayed on one screen. In this study, our experiment also shows that human annotators usually also
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15347

