The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Out-of-Town Recommendation with Travel Intention Modeling
Haoran Xin,1, 2 Xinjiang Lu,2, 3 * Tong Xu,1 Hao Liu,2, 3 Jingjing Gu,4 Dejing Dou,2, 3 Hui Xiong5
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Business Intelligence Lab, Baidu Research
3
National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China
4
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
5
Rutgers University
xinhaoran@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {luxinjiang, liuhao30, doudejing}@baidu.com, tongxu@ustc.edu.cn, gujingjing@nuaa.edu.cn,
hxiong@rutgers.edu
Abstract

Out-of-town recommendation problem suffers from the
cold-start issue a lot due to the insufficiency of out-of-town
check-ins (Ference, Ye, and Lee 2013). Traditional POI recommender systems (POI RSs) fail to make appropriate recommendations to tackle such severe cold start issues. The
reasons are: 1) Individual’s home-town preferences cannot
be used for out-of-town recommendations directly due to
the gap between home-town preferences and out-of-town
behaviors (i.e. interest drifts); and 2) The travel intention,
which tends to affect the out-of-town check-in behaviors, is
often ignored in these POI RSs.

Out-of-town recommendation is designed for those users who
leave their home-town areas and visit the areas they have
never been to before. It is challenging to recommend Pointof-Interests (POIs) for out-of-town users since the out-oftown check-in behavior is determined by not only the user’s
home-town preference but also the user’s travel intention.
Besides, the user’s travel intentions are complex and dynamic, which leads to big difficulties in understanding such
intentions precisely. In this paper, we propose a T RAvelIN tention-aware Out-of-town Recommendation framework,
named T RAIN OR. The proposed T RAIN OR framework distinguishes itself from existing out-of-town recommenders in
three aspects. First, graph neural networks are explored to
represent users’ home-town check-in preference and geographical constraints in out-of-town check-in behaviors. Second, a user-specific travel intention is formulated as an aggregation combining home-town preference and generic travel
intention together, where the generic travel intention is regarded as a mixture of inherent intentions that can be learned
by Neural Topic Model (NTM). Third, a non-linear mapping
function, as well as a matrix factorization method, are employed to transfer users’ home-town preference and estimate
out-of-town POI’s representation, respectively. Extensive experiments on real-world data sets validate the effectiveness of
the T RAIN OR framework. Moreover, the learned travel intention can deliver meaningful explanations for understanding a
user’s travel purposes.

In the literature, some research efforts have been made
to attack the out-of-town recommendation problem. For instance, (Pham, Li, and Cong 2017) recommends out-oftown region of POIs instead of individual POIs by exploiting the proximity of human mobility. (Ference, Ye, and Lee
2013) proposes a recommender for out-of-town users by taking into account user preference, social influence and geographical proximity. Besides, some researchers have also
paid attentions to interest drifts when addressing the outof-town recommendation problem (Yin et al. 2014, 2016;
Wang et al. 2017). However, none of these approaches comprehensively integrate users’ preferences, interest drifts and
complex travel intentions as a whole.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a T RAvel-INtentionaware Out-of-town Recommendation framework, named
T RAIN OR. Specifically, we first devise a user’s preference
representation module based on Gated Graph Neural Network (G-GNN) to explore the underlying structural information encoded in user’s home-town check-ins. After being
aggregated via an attention network, the user’s home-town
preference is further transferred into out-of-town preference
through a non-linear mapping function, i.e. multi-layer perceptron (MLP). In this way, the interest drifts from hometown to out-of-town can be captured directly. Besides, we
devise a travel intention discovery module by developing a
Neural Topic Model (NTM) followed by user-specific travel
intention aggregation. In particular, we assume that each
out-of-town check-in activity can be drawn from a latent
topic mixture which can be further generated by Gaussian
Softmax construction, then we adopt variational inference
to uncover users’ generic travel intention without extra su-

Introduction
Point-of-Interest (POI) recommendation is an important task
in location-based services (LBS), which tends to act as a
more pivotal part in people’s daily life. Recently, since the
POI check-in data having accumulated rapidly over time, a
more refined recommendation problem, out-of-town recommendation, is coming into focus. To be specific, out-of-town
recommendations are designed for those users who travel
from their home-town areas to out-of-town areas they have
seldom been to before.
* Corresponding author. This work was done when Haoran Xin
was an intern at the Baidu Research.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4529

