The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-driven Natural Language Understanding
of English Text and its Applications*
Kinjal Basu,1 Sarat Chandra Varanasi,1 Farhad Shakerin,1 Joaquin Arias,2 Gopal Gupta1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas, USA
Artificial Intelligence Research Group, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain
{Kinjal.Basu, Sarat-Chandra.Varanasi, Farhad.Shakerin, Gopal.Gupta}@utdallas.edu, joaquin.arias@urjc.es
2

Abstract

assistant understands the user’s intended task and asks questions to the user about the required information to successfully carry-out the task. Also, to hold a goal oriented conversation, a human remembers all the details given in the past
and most of the time performs non-monotonic reasoning to
accomplish the assigned task. We believe that an automated
QA system or a goal oriented closed domain chatbot should
work in a similar way.

Understanding the meaning of a text is a fundamental challenge of natural language understanding (NLU) research. An
ideal NLU system should process a language in a way that
is not exclusive to a single task or a dataset. Keeping this
in mind, we have introduced a novel knowledge driven semantic representation approach for English text. By leveraging the VerbNet lexicon, we are able to map syntax tree of
the text to its commonsense meaning represented using basic
knowledge primitives. The general purpose knowledge represented from our approach can be used to build any reasoning
based NLU system that can also provide justification. We applied this approach to construct two NLU applications that we
present here: SQuARE (Semantic-based Question Answering and Reasoning Engine) and StaCACK (Stateful Conversational Agent using Commonsense Knowledge). Both these
systems work by “truly understanding” the natural language
text they process and both provide natural language explanations for their responses while maintaining high accuracy.

If we want to build AI systems that emulate humans,
then understanding natural language sentences is the foremost priority for any NLU application. In an ideal scenario,
an NLU application should map the sentence to the knowledge (semantics) it represents, augment it with commonsense knowledge related to the concepts involved–just as
humans do—then use the combined knowledge to do the
required reasoning. In this paper, we introduce our novel
algorithm for automatically generating the semantics corresponding to each English sentence using the comprehensive verb-lexicon for English verbs - VerbNet (Kipper et al.
2008). For each English verb, VerbNet gives the syntactic
and semantic patterns. The algorithm employs partial syntactic matching between parse-tree of a sentence and a verb’s
frame syntax from VerbNet to obtain the meaning of the sentence in terms of VerbNet’s primitive predicates.

Introduction
The long term goal of natural language understanding
(NLU) research is to make applications, e.g., chatbots and
question answering (QA) systems, that act exactly like a human assistant. A human assistant will understand the user’s
intent and fulfill the task. The task can be answering questions about a story, giving directions to a place, or reserving
a table in a restaurant by knowing user’s preferences. Human level understanding of natural language is needed for
an NLU application that aspires to act exactly like a human.
To understand the meaning of a natural language sentence,
humans first process the syntactic structure of the sentence
and then infer its meaning. Also, humans use commonsense
knowledge to understand the often complex and ambiguous
meaning of natural language sentences. Humans interpret a
passage as a sequence of sentences and will normally process the events in the story in the same order as the sentences. Once humans understand the meaning of a passage,
they can answer questions posed, along with an explanation
for the answer. Moreover, by using commonsense, a human

This matching is motivated by denotational semantics of
programming languages and can be thought of as mapping
parse-trees of sentences to knowledge that is constructed out
of semantics provided by VerbNet. The VerbNet semantics
is expressed using a set of primitive predicates that can be
thought of as the semantic algebra of the denotational semantics.
We also show two applications of our approach.
SQuARE, a question answering system for reading comprehension, is capable of answering various types of reasoning questions asked about a passage. SQuARE uses knowledge in the passage augmented with commonsense knowledge. Going a step further, we leverage SQuARE to build a
general purpose closed-domain goal-oriented chatbot framework - StaCACK (pronounced as stack). Our work reported
here builds upon our prior work in natural language QA as
well as visual QA (Pendharkar and Gupta 2019; Basu 2019;
Basu, Shakerin, and Gupta 2020; Basu et al. 2020).

* Authors partially supported by NSF grants IIS 1718945, IIS
1910131, and IIP 1916206
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12554

