The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Solving Common-Payoff Games with Approximate Policy Iteration
Samuel Sokota,1∗ Edward Lockhart, 2∗ Finbarr Timbers,2 Elnaz Davoodi,2 Ryan D’Orazio,3 Neil
Burch,2 Martin Schmid,2 Michael Bowling,1, 2 Marc Lanctot 2
1

Universtiy of Alberta
2
DeepMind
3
Mila, Université de Montréal
sokota@ualberta.ca, locked@google.com, finbarrtimbers@google.com, elnazd@google.com, ryan.dorazio@mila.quebec,
burchn@google.com, mschmid@google.com, bowlingm@google.com, lanctot@google.com
Abstract

Despite involving multiple agents, the decentralized control problem bears relatively little similarity to general
game-theoretic settings (Powers and Shoham 2004), in
which agents possess adversarial incentives and there is not
a generally agreed upon notion of optimality. It is also distinct from other problem settings operating under commonpayoff game formalisms, such as ad-hoc coordination (Stone
et al. 2010), in which some of the agents are externally specified, or emergent communication (Lazaridou, Peysakhovich,
and Baroni 2017), in which coordination must arise naturally (not from precoordinated learning procedures). Instead,
in the decentralized control problem, the entity seeking to
maximize return specifies all agents, including possibly precoordinated learning procedures.
While the decentralized control problem bears resemblance to the classical reinforcement problem in that both
involve maximizing expected return, decentralized control
presents challenges that do not arise in classical reinforcement learning. Most notably, dynamic programming is not
directly applicable to agents in decentralized control problems because the value of an agent’s information state depends on the policies of its teammates. One way to circumvent this issue is by alternating maximization (Nair et al.
2003). Each agent maximizes its policy in turn, holding
the policies of its teammates fixed. This procedure guarantees convergence to a Nash equilibrium, but can be arbitrarily far away from an optimal joint policy, as measured by
expected return. Independent reinforcement learning (IRL)
(Tan 1997), a paradigm in which all agents concurrently execute reinforcement learning algorithms, is another approach
to dealing with decentralized control problems that has been
the subject of attention in the deep multi-agent reinforcement learning community. However, the convergence guarantees of IRL are less well-understood than those of alternating maximization and those that do exist show convergence
only to local optima (Bono et al. 2018; Claus and Boutilier
1998).
Arguably the most exciting line of research over the last
decade in the pursuit of optimal joint policies for commonpayoff games stems from the seminal insight of Nayyar,
Mahajan, and Teneketzis (Nayyar, Mahajan, and Teneket-

For artificially intelligent learning systems to have
widespread applicability in real-world settings, it is
important that they be able to operate decentrally. Unfortunately, decentralized control is difficult—computing even an
epsilon-optimal joint policy is a NEXP complete problem.
Nevertheless, a recently rediscovered insight—that a team of
agents can coordinate via common knowledge—has given
rise to algorithms capable of finding optimal joint policies in
small common-payoff games. The Bayesian action decoder
(BAD) leverages this insight and deep reinforcement learning
to scale to games as large as two-player Hanabi. However, the
approximations it uses to do so prevent it from discovering
optimal joint policies even in games small enough to brute
force optimal solutions. This work proposes CAPI, a novel
algorithm which, like BAD, combines common knowledge
with deep reinforcement learning. However, unlike BAD,
CAPI prioritizes the propensity to discover optimal joint
policies over scalability. While this choice precludes CAPI
from scaling to games as large as Hanabi, empirical results
demonstrate that, on the games to which CAPI does scale,
it is capable of discovering optimal joint policies even when
other modern multi-agent reinforcement learning algorithms
are unable to do so.

Introduction
In reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 2018), an agent
seeks to learn a policy that extracts a large return from an
environment, making it an algorithmic formulation of choice
for many control problems. However, the standard reinforcement learning framework assumes that decision making is
centralized. In general, a control problem may require multiple decision makers to act in a setting that bars complete information sharing, often in practice because decision makers
are spatially separated. This problem is known as decentralized control and has been studied by a number of different
communities using varying formalisms (Yu-Chi Ho 1980;
Oliehoek and Amato 2016; Littman 1994), which we collectively refer to as common-payoff games (Leyton-Brown
and Shoham 2008). 1
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.
1
Cooperative game is sometimes used as an umbrella term for
the same purpose. This work uses common-payoff game to avoid

conflation with cooperative game theory, in which cooperative
game carries a distinct meaning.

9695

