The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Novel AI-based Methodology for Identifying Cyber Attacks in Honey Pots
Muhammed AbuOdeh1 , Christian Adkins1 , Omid Setayeshfar2 , Prashant Doshi1 , Kyu H. Lee2
1

THINC Lab,
Institute for Cyber Security and Privacy
Department of Computer Science, University of Georgia, Athens GA 30606
pdoshi@uga.edu
2

Abstract
We present a novel AI-based methodology that identifies
phases of a host-level cyber attack simply from system call
logs. System calls emanating from cyber attacks on hosts such
as honey pots are often recorded in audit logs. Our methodology first involves efficiently loading, caching, processing, and
querying system events contained in audit logs in support of
computer forensics. Output of queries remains at the system
call level and is difficult to process. The next step is to infer
a sequence of abstracted actions, which we colloquially call
a storyline, from the system calls given as observations to
a latent-state probabilistic model. These storylines are then
accurately identified with class labels using a learned classifier. We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate methods
and models for each step of the methodology using 114 different attack phases collected by logging the attacks of a red
team on a server, on some likely benign sequences containing
regular user activities, and on traces from a recent DARPA
project. The resulting end-to-end system, which we call Cyberian, identifies the attack phases with a high level of accuracy illustrating the benefit that this machine learning-based
methodology brings to security forensics.

Introduction
Automatically identifying the phases of a cyber attack on a
host is of significant import. It facilitates automated forensics,
which leads to faster attack discovery, damage assessment,
and ultimately prevention. It also represents a key step toward
better understanding the intent of the attacker. This paves the
way for the defender to engage the attacker in more effective
cyber-deception techniques on honey pots. However, this
capability is made difficult by the fact that the individual
attack steps are often common between different types of
attacks, and the attack activity, if logged, is buried within
massive system call logs that are hard to sift through.
A step toward addressing this challenge is development of
host-based intrusion and anomaly detection systems (Chevalier 2019), which alert defenders about anomalies in system
behavior that may indicate malicious activity. For example,
a recent technique named DeepLog (Du et al. 2017) demonstrated feasibility of using deep learning to detect anomalous
behavior based on low-level log data. However, DeepLog and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15224

similar systems generally lack the capability to identify attack
phases, which is usually left to a human security analyst.
We present a novel machine learning (ML) based methodology that automatically identifies phases of cyber attacks
on a single host system such as a honey pot. Our methodology involves the following general steps: (i) Efficiently load,
cache, process, query, and display system events from audit
logs to support computer forensics. Output of queries should
be provenance graphs, which can be processed for further
analysis. (ii) Resulting trace is often still hard to parse and
in need of further abstraction to facilitate analyses. Utilize a
latent-state probabilistic model, which allows us to infer the
most likely sequence of higher-level actions, which we call
an attack storyline, while modeling system calls as observations. (iii) Finally, we seek to identify the attack phase based
on the sequence of high-level actions inferred in the previous
step. We view this step as a multi-class classification problem
where each label is a phase of an attack.
Classifying cyber attacks has been explored before. In
early work, Lippmann et al. (2000) analyzed intrusion detection performances of various rule-based systems on network
log data containing both benign and malicious activity, which
included labeling segments corresponding to low-level attack
types. The results highlight the limitations facing rule-based
detection toward attack identification. Bolzoni, Etalle, and
Hartel (2009) paired anomaly detection with machine learning to classify attack types based on n-gram analysis of attack
payloads. These and other similar works classifying types of
attacks tend to be rule based and ignore the significant overlap
between various attacks, which often share steps. Many face
the well-documented rule-based limitation of being inflexible
to changes in both benign and malicious behaviors in the dynamic realm of cyber security. Others focus on classifying an
entire attack campaign (instead of intermediate attack phases)
where accurate identification of later-occurring phases relies
on successful identification of earlier phases.
Another system named HOLMES (Milajerdi et al. 2019)
focuses on detecting anomalies as phases of advanced and
persistent threats. HOLMES also uses a rule-based system
for classifying attack phases and relies on a large amount of
benign log training data to reduce false positives in the testing
data. In contrast to the rigidity of such rule-based systems,
our ML-based methodology can learn and adapt to identify
several attack phases as long as some system call logs for

