The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Strategy and Benchmark for Converting Deep Q-Networks to Event-Driven
Spiking Neural Networks
Weihao Tan, 1 * Devdhar Patel, 1 Robert Kozma1, 2
1

Biologically Inspired Neural and Dynamical Systems Laboratory (BINDS), College of Computer and Information Sciences,
140 Governors Drive, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA
2
Center for Large-Scale Integrated Optimization and Networks (CLION) Department of Mathematical Sciences, 373 Dunn
Hall, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152, USA
{weihaotan, devdharpatel}@cs.umass.edu, rkozma55@gmail.com
Abstract

mation via many discrete events. This makes SNNs more
power-efficient. SNNs can be implemented on dedicated
hardware, such as IBM’s TrueNorth (Merolla et al. 2014),
and Intel’s Loihi (Davies et al. 2018). They are reported to be
1000 times more energy-efficient than conventional chips.
Thus, SNNs have the potential to answer the fast-growing
demand toward AI as it finds its applications in many sectors of the society.
Theoretical analysis shows that SNNs are as computationally powerful as conventional neuronal models (Maass
and Markram 2004), nevertheless, the use of SNNs is very
limited at present. The main reason is that training multilayer SNNs is a challenge, as the activation functions of
SNNs are usually non-differentiable. Thus, SNNs cannot be
trained with gradient-descent based methods, as opposed to
ANNs. There are various alternative methods for training
SNNs, such as using stochastic gradient descent (O’Connor
and Welling 2016), treating the membrane potentials as differentiable (Lee, Delbruck, and Pfeiffer 2016), event-driven
random backpropagation (Neftci et al. 2017), and other approaches (Tavanaei and Maida 2019; Kheradpisheh et al.
2018; Mozafari et al. 2018). These methods have a competitive performance on MNIST (LeCun et al. 1998) with shallow networks compared with ANNs. However, none of them
have a competitive performance on more realistic and complicated datasets, such as CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012) and ImageNet (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
Recently, (Wu et al. 2019) and (Lee et al. 2020) used spikebased backpropagation to achieve more than 90% accuracy
on CIFAR-10, which is great progress for directly training
SNNs.
To avoid the difficulty of training SNNs, at the same time
taking advantage of the SNN processing, we follow an alternative approach of converting ANNs to SNNs proposed by
(Pérez-Carrasco et al. 2013). This method takes the parameters of a pre-trained ANN and maps them into an equivalent
SNN with the same architecture (Diehl et al. 2015; Rueckauer et al. 2017; Sengupta et al. 2019). As there are many
high-performance training methods of ANNs, our goal to
is directly convert state-of-the-art ANNs into SNNs without
degradation in the performance. Recent work by (Sengupta
et al. 2019) demonstrated that this conversion is indeed possible. Namely, they showed that even very deep ANNs, like

Spiking neural networks (SNNs) have great potential for
energy-efficient implementation of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) on dedicated neuromorphic hardware. Recent studies
demonstrated competitive performance of SNNs compared
with DNNs on image classification tasks, including CIFAR10 and ImageNet data. The present work focuses on using
SNNs in combination with deep reinforcement learning in
ATARI games, which involves additional complexity as compared to image classification. We review the theory of converting DNNs to SNNs and extending the conversion to Deep
Q-Networks (DQNs). We propose a robust representation of
the firing rate to reduce the error during the conversion process. In addition, we introduce a new metric to evaluate the
conversion process by comparing the decisions made by the
DQN and SNN, respectively. We also analyze how the simulation time and parameter normalization influence the performance of converted SNNs. We achieve competitive scores on
17 top-performing Atari games. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first to achieve state-of-the-art performance on
multiple Atari games with SNNs. Our work serves as a benchmark for the conversion of DQNs to SNNs and paves the way
for further research on solving reinforcement learning tasks
with SNNs.

Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made
tremendous successes in image recognition in recent years
(LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; He et al. 2016). CNNs
trained by deep reinforcement learning reached and even
surpassed human-level performance in many RL tasks(Mnih
et al. 2015; Vinyals et al. 2019). However, deep reinforcement learning combined with DNNs requires massive resources, which may not be available in certain practical
problems. For example, in many real-life scenarios, the processing system is required to be power-efficient and to have
low latency (Cheng et al. 2016).
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) provide an attractive solution to reduce latency and load of computation. As opposed to artificial neural networks (ANNs) processing continuous activation values, SNNs use spikes to transmit infor* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9816

