The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gradient Descent Averaging and Primal-dual Averaging
for Strongly Convex Optimization
Wei Tao1,2 , Wei Li2 , Zhisong Pan2,∗ , Qing Tao3,4,∗
1

Institute of Evaluation and Assessment Research, Academy of Military Science, Beijing 100091, China
2
Command and Control Engineering College, Army Engineering University, Nanjing 210007, China
3
Department of Information Engineering, Army Academy of Artillery and Air Defense, Hefei 230031, China
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
wtao plaust@163.com, liwei public@qq.com, hotpzs@hotmail.com, qing.tao@ia.ac.cn
Abstract

has been elaborated by Xiao and also earned test of time
award at NeurIPS (Xiao 2009).
Recently, averaging has also been frequently employed
in training deep neural networks. WA averages weights
of the networks based on training epochs (Izmailov et al.
2018). Since then, a series of contribution: SWALP (Yang
et al. 2019), Fast-SWA (Athiwaratkun et al. 2018), SWAGaussian (Maddox et al. 2019) have been successfully applied to a wide range of applications. Besides, exponential
moving average (EMA), which has been used to exponentially decay the weights for previous iterate, can be regarded
as a particular example of WA (Kingma and Ba 2014; Reddi,
Kale, and Kumar 2019; Ma and Yarats 2018).
OA is a classical way about how to output the final solution of iterative algorithms. Existing convergence analyses
mostly center on it due to some superior theoretical guarantees (Dimitri P., Angelia., and Asuman E. 2003). Running algorithms for t iterations, and returning the last iterate, is a very intuitive idea in practice. Therefore, there
are still some gaps about individual output between theoretical analyses and practical implementations. Several works
on stochastic gradient descent (SGD) develop different OA
techniques to achieve the optimal convergence rate, especially for strongly convex optimization, such as suffix averaging (Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2011), non-uniform
averaging (Lacoste-Julien, Schmidt, and Bach 2012; Harvey,
Liaw, and Randhawa 2019), increasing weighted averaging
(Guo et al. 2020), etc.
The optimal convergence for strongly convex problems
has become a challenging problem after the well-known
work (Hazan et al. 2006). This is because conventional
SGD cannot attain the optimal convergence even when we
take the uniform average of all past iterates. An open question early posed by Shamir (Shamir 2012) is whether OA
is needed at all to attain optimal convergence rate. Partially addressing this question, Shamir et al. (Shamir and
Zhang 2013) showed that
√ SGD with polynomial-decay averaging has an O(log t/ t) individual convergence rate in
the general strongly convex cases and an O(log t/t) rate in
strongly convex cases, respectively. Recent works (Harvey
et al. 2019; Jain, Nagaraj, and Netrapalli 2019) provide the
affirmative answer that the logarithmic term in the convergence bound is necessary for any plain SGD in both gen-

Averaging scheme has attracted extensive attention in deep
learning as well as traditional machine learning. It achieves
theoretically optimal convergence and also improves the empirical model performance. However, there is still a lack of
sufficient convergence analysis for strongly convex optimization. Typically, the convergence about the last iterate of gradient descent methods, which is referred to as individual convergence, fails to attain its optimality due to the existence
of logarithmic factor. In order to remove this factor, we first
develop gradient descent averaging (GDA), which is a general projection-based dual averaging algorithm in the strongly
convex setting. We further present primal-dual averaging for
strongly convex cases (SC-PDA), where primal and dual averaging schemes are simultaneously utilized. We prove that
GDA yields the optimal convergence rate in terms of output
averaging, while SC-PDA derives the optimal individual convergence. Several experiments on SVMs and deep learning
models validate the correctness of theoretical analysis and effectiveness of algorithms.

Introduction
Averaging scheme has been widely adopted from different angles. It always helps to reduce variance and improve
generalization of learning algorithms. In fact, there exist
various averaging techniques, such as dual averaging (DA)
(Nesterov 2009), weight averaging (WA) (Izmailov et al.
2018), output averaging (OA) (Nemirovsky and Yudin 1983;
Polyak and Juditsky 1992), primal averaging (PA) (Nesterov
and Shikhman 2015; Tao et al. 2020), etc.
DA has its origin in the work of (Nesterov 2009), which
averages all past gradient information at each iteration. In
comparison with gradient descent (GD) and mirror descent
(MD) (Beck and Teboulle 2003), it avoids new gradients to
be considered with less weight than previous ones (Flammarion and Bach 2017). DA has been successfully extended
to the stochastic composite scenario and it’s well-suited
for large-scale learning problems (Xiao 2009; Dekel et al.
2012). The superiority of regularized dual averaging (RDA)
in efficiently promoting regularizer structure (e.g., sparsity)
∗

Corresponding authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9843

