The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Federated Block Coordinate Descent Scheme for Learning Global and
Personalized Models
Ruiyuan Wu1 , Anna Scaglione2 , Hoi-To Wai3 , Nurullah Karakoc2 ,
Kari Hreinsson2 , Wing-Kin Ma1
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
School of Electrical Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
3
Dept. Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
1
{rywu, wkma}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, 2 {Anna.Scaglione, nkarakoc, khreinss}@asu.edu, 3 htwai@se.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract

provider to better understand customer preferences. What distinguishes federated learning from conventional distributed
learning (where the optimization often happens in stable data
centers) are the following aspects (Li et al. 2020):

In federated learning, models are learned from users’ data that
are held private in their edge devices, by aggregating them in
the service provider’s “cloud” to obtain a global model. Such
global model is of great commercial value in, e.g., improving
the customers’ experience. In this paper we focus on two
possible areas of improvement of the state of the art. First,
we take the difference between user habits into account and
propose a quadratic penalty-based formulation, for efficient
learning of the global model that allows to personalize local
models. Second, we address the latency issue associated with
the heterogeneous training time on edge devices, by exploiting
a hierarchical structure modeling communication not only
between the cloud and edge devices, but also within the cloud.
Specifically, we devise a tailored block coordinate descentbased computation scheme, accompanied with communication
protocols for both the synchronous and asynchronous cloud
settings. We characterize the theoretical convergence rate of
the algorithm, and provide a variant that performs empirically
better. We also prove that the asynchronous protocol, inspired
by multi-agent consensus technique, has the potential for large
gains in latency compared to a synchronous setting when the
edge-device updates are intermittent. Finally, experimental
results are provided that corroborate not only the theory, but
also show that the system leads to faster convergence for
personalized models on the edge devices, compared to the
state of the art.

• the heterogeneity of the data and of the computational
power available in the users’ different edge devices;
• the intermittent (and costly) nature of the communication
between edge devices and the cloud.
To explain it in mathematical terms, the following problem
is prototypical in federated learning:
X
min
gi (xi ), s.t. xi = z, ∀i ∈ Q,
(1)
xi ,z∈X
i∈Q

Introduction
Over the past few years, federated learning, an emerging
branch of distributed learning, has attracted increasing attention (McMahan et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018; Bonawitz et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2019). It focuses on scenarios where users’
data are processed for training machine learning models locally, i.e. on users’ edge devices such as cell phones and
wearable devices, so that the data remain private. Data privacy is, in fact, a top priority; users are willing to share trained
models with reliable service providers, but not necessarily the
raw data. In this context, the service provider seeks a global
model—which can, in turn, enhance the performance for the
users—by aggregating these local models. Such global model
reflects the “wisdom of the crowd” and helps the service
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10355

where Q is the set of edge devices, xi and gi are the model parameter and cost function on the ith edge device that depend
on the local data, and X is the
P feasible region. Specifically,
we can write gi (xi ) := |S1i | r∈Si h(xi ; sr ), where h is the
training loss function, Si the index set of training data on
the ith edge device, |Si | the number of elements in the set
Si , and sr one of such samples. To solve problem (1), federated learning methods typically adopt a recursive mechanism:
edge devices process their own training data to update local
models xi ’s, and a cloud is introduced to aggregate xi ’s for a
global model z and synchronize all the local models with the
updated z. This process is considered standard in the current
development (McMahan et al. 2016; Li et al. 2018). However,
we notice that two facts leave some space for improvement:
(i) Is it efficient to maintain the same model everywhere?
Data are generally non-independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) on edge devices, since they reflect the usage
habits of different users. In light of this, edge-device models
that work well on data of their users’ interest (which are also
non-i.i.d.) may suffice—in other words, personalized models
may be better at the tasks they are primarily used for. When a
sole model is maintained, users may sacrifice their customer
experience in order to improve the global model that is more
beneficial to the service provider to boost new users’ models.
(ii) Is the synchronous cloud model effective? The cloud consists of a cluster of servers that work in parallel, and an
edge device only needs to talk with one such cloud server.
When regarding the cloud as a sole computation resource,

