The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Instrumental Variable-based Identification for Causal Effects using Covariate
Information
Yuta Kawakami
Department of Mathematics, Physics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Yokohama National University
79-5 Tokiwadai, Hodogaya-ku, Yokohama 240-8501 JAPAN
kawakami-yuta-yd@ynu.jp
Abstract
This paper deals with the identification problem of causal
effects in randomized trials with noncompliance. In this
problem, generally, causal effects are not identifiable and
thus have been evaluated under some strict assumptions, or
through the bounds. Different from existing studies, we propose a novel identification condition of joint probabilities
of potential outcomes, which allows us to derive a consistent estimator of the causal effect. Regarding the identification conditions of joint probabilities of potential outcomes,
the assumptions of monotonicity (Pearl 2009), independence
between potential outcomes (Robins and Richardson 2011),
gain equality (Li and Pearl 2019) and specific functional relationships between cause and effect (Pearl 2009) have been
utilized. In contrast, without such assumptions, the proposed
condition enables us to evaluate joint probabilities of potential outcomes using an instrumental variable and a proxy variable of potential outcomes. The result of the present paper extends the range of solvable identification problems in causal
inference.

Fig. 1: Graphical representation of causal dependencies in a
randomized trial with noncompliance
and Tchetgen 2018). However, these approaches generally
require various strict assumptions. An alternative approach
is to construct nonparametric bounds for the causal effect
(Robins 1989; Manski 1990; Balke and Pearl 1997). Since
this approach is based on the simple assumptions of the
instrumental variable (Greenland 2000), it is applicable to
most randomized trials where the treatment assignment can
serve as a perfect instrumental variable. However, such parsimonious assumptions may sometimes result in rather wide
bounds, which might be useless for decision making. One
reason may be that these bounds are calculated using only
the information on the randomized assignment, the treatment received and the outcome. When we examine most
randomized trials in the practical sciences, we notice that
not only the measurements of the randomized assignment,
the treatment received and the outcome are available, but
also some measurements of covariates such as age, gender
and race (Cai, Kuroki, and Sato 2007; Lui 2011). When we
are in possession of such covariate measurements, our purpose is to find out when and how we can use this information to identify causal effects in randomized trials with noncompliance.

Introduction
Practical Background
Evaluation of causal effects from randomized trials is a central aim in practical sciences. Randomized trials have been
regarded as a more reliable and powerful tool for evaluating
causal effects, compared with observational studies, where
confounding, information bias and selection bias all hinder the evaluation of causal effects from observational data.
When compliance with treatment assignment is perfect, the
standard intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis provides valid estimation of the causal effect, by simply computing the effect
of assignment on the outcome. However, it is well known
that noncompliance is often present in randomized trials. In
such cases, ITT analysis may introduce a biased causal effect (Sheiner and Rubin 1995).
The limitation of an analysis which ignores noncompliance has received growing concern in the practical sciences,
and many researchers and practitioners have proposed various approaches for dealing with noncompliance. Some of
these include point estimators for the causal effect (Mark
and Robins 1993; Angrist, Imbens, and Rubin 1996; Wang

Problem Description
To motivate our dicussion, we consider randomized clinical
trials with the purpose to examine causal effects of an experimental treatment in comparison with a controlled treatment. We describe the problem with the graph shown in Fig.
1. For the graph-theoretic terminology and basic theory of
the structural causal models used in the present paper, we
refer readers to Pearl (2009).
Intuitively, in Fig. 1, a directed edge from X to Y indicates that X could have a direct effect on Y . In addition, the
absence of a directed edge from Y to X indicates that Y cannot be a direct cause of X, and a directed path from C to Y

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12131

