The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Analysis of Approval-Based Committee Rules for 2D-Euclidean Elections
Michał T. Godziszewski,1 Paweł Batko,2 Piotr Skowron,1 Piotr Faliszewski2
1

University of Warsaw, Poland,
AGH University, Kraków, Poland
mtgodziszewski@uw.edu.pl, batkop@agh.edu.pl, p.skowron@mimuw.edu.pl, faliszew@agh.edu.pl
2

Abstract

sidered by Elkind and Lackner (2015) are one-dimensional).
We check if these polynomial-time results can be extended
to the two-dimensional case.
We consider voting rules that seek committees of different
types. In particular, we consider Multiwinner Approval Voting (AV), which focuses on individual excellence, Proportional Approval Voting (PAV), Phragmén’s Sequential rule
(Phr), and Rule X, which focus on proportionality, and Approval Chamberlin–Courant (CC), which focuses on diversity. Additionally, we also consider Minimax Approval Voting (MAV), which is based on the egalitarian principle.
Approval-Based Euclidean Elections. Briefly put, in a
Euclidean model each candidate and each voter is represented as his or her ideal point, i.e., a point in some Euclidean space R` , whose coordinates are interpreted as a
given candidate’s or voter’s positions on some ` issues (for
example, in a two-dimensional model these two issues may
correspond to the extents to which an individual supports
personal and economic freedom). To derive the voters’ approval sets, we use the following two principles:

We study approval-based committee elections for the case
where the voters’ preferences come from a 2D-Euclidean
model. We consider two main issues: First, we ask for the
complexity of computing election results. Second, we evaluate election outcomes experimentally, following the visualization technique of Elkind et al. (2017). Regarding the first
issue, we find that many NP-hard rules remain intractable for
2D-Euclidean elections. For the second one, we observe that
the behavior and nature of many rules strongly depend on the
exact protocol for choosing the approved candidates.

Introduction
The idea of committee elections is that a group of agents
(typically referred to as the voters) wants to choose a fixedsized subset of candidates (typically referred to as a committee). For example, the voters may be choosing the finalists of some competition, the members of some governing
body, or the products to offer in an online store (see, e.g., the
overview of Faliszewski et al. (2017) for a discussion of various types of committee elections). The committee should
reflect the preferences of the voters, and its selection should
follow the principles underlying its purpose (for example,
the finalists of a competition should be individually excellent, members of a governing body should represent the voters proportionally, and a store’s portfolio should be diverse).
We consider the approval preference model, i.e., we assume that each voter specifies a subset of candidates that
he or she finds suitable for the committee, and we focus on
the case where these approval sets are derived from some
(two dimensional) Euclidean model. We do so for two reasons. First, the results of 2D-Euclidean elections can be easily interpreted and we want to verify if various approvalbased committee rules (ABC rules, for short) indeed implement the desired principles in choosing the committees. To
this end, we use the visualization technique of Elkind et al.
(2017). Second, for many prominent ABC rules it is known
that computing their results is NP-hard in general, but becomes tractable if the preferences are, in some sense, onedimensional (for example, all the domain restrictions con-

1. In the voter-range model, if a voter approves some candidate then he or she also approves all the closer ones.
2. In the candidate-range model, if a candidate is approved
by a voter, all the voters closer to this candidate also approve him or her.
For the one-dimensional case, these models correspond to
the candidate interval and voter interval models of Elkind
and Lackner (2015). We also consider what we call a
voter/candidate range model, which generalizes both approaches, and using it we generalize/strengthen some results
from the literature.
Main Contributions. We seek to understand the structure of the committees produced by the considered rules and
whether these committees can be computed efficiently.
In our first set of results, we show that all our rules that are
NP-hard in the general approval setting (e.g., MAV, CC, and
PAV) remain NP-hard for 2D-Eucludiean elections, both for
the voter and candidate range models. Our proofs hold under
the assumption that we are given the ideal points and radii
of the candidates and voters; this is important as otherwise
even recognizing if an election comes from a 2D-Euclidean

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5448

