The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

VIVO: Visual Vocabulary Pre-Training for Novel Object Captioning
Xiaowei Hu, Xi Yin, Kevin Lin, Lei Zhang,
Jianfeng Gao, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu
Microsoft Corporation
{xiaowh, keli, lijuanw, leizhang, jfgao, zliu}@microsoft.com, yinxi.whu@gmail.com

Abstract

VIVO Pre-training

It is highly desirable yet challenging to generate image captions that can describe novel objects which are unseen in
caption-labeled training data, a capability that is evaluated in
the novel object captioning challenge (nocaps). In this challenge, no additional image-caption training data, other than
COCO Captions, is allowed for model training. Thus, conventional Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) methods cannot be applied. This paper presents VIsual VOcabulary pretraining (VIVO) that performs pre-training in the absence of
caption annotations. By breaking the dependency of paired
image-caption training data in VLP, VIVO can leverage large
amounts of paired image-tag data to learn a visual vocabulary.
This is done by pre-training a multi-layer Transformer model
that learns to align image-level tags with their corresponding
image region features. To address the unordered nature of image tags, VIVO uses a Hungarian matching loss with masked
tag prediction to conduct pre-training.
We validate the effectiveness of VIVO by fine-tuning the
pre-trained model for image captioning. In addition, we perform an analysis of the visual-text alignment inferred by our
model. The results show that our model can not only generate fluent image captions that describe novel objects, but also
identify the locations of these objects. Our single model has
achieved new state-of-the-art results on nocaps and surpassed
the human CIDEr score.

dog

+

o +

o ++

oo
++

oo

(image, tags)

accordion,
instrument

Fine-tuning

visual vocabulary

couch

man, person

Inference
A person holding a
dog sitting on a
couch.

A person holding a
black umbrella and
an accordion.

(image, sentence, tags)

Figure 1: VIVO pre-training uses paired image-tag data to
learn a rich visual vocabulary where image region features
and tags of the semantically similar objects are mapped into
vectors that are close to each other. Fine-tuning is conducted
on paired image-caption data that only cover a limited numbers of objects (in blue). During inference, our model can
generalize to describe novel objects (in yellow) that are
learnt during VIVO pre-training.

trained on such datasets with limited visual concepts generalize poorly to in-the-wild images (Tran et al. 2016).
To improve image captioning in the wild, the nocaps
benchmark (Agrawal et al. 2019) is developed to evaluate
Novel Object Captioning (NOC)1 at scale. The training data
for nocaps is the COCO dataset consisting of image-caption
pairs and the Open Images dataset (Kuznetsova et al. 2020)
containing bounding boxes and image-level tags. The test
data consists of images selected from Open Images, containing nearly 400 objects that are not or rarely seen in the
COCO dataset. This raises the challenge of how to generate captions that describe novel objects unseen in the paired
image-caption training data. A common strategy is to resort
to alternative data sources without caption supervision. Prior
works on NOC (Lu et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2018) propose to
generate template sentences that can be filled in with detected visual concepts for NOC. However, the relationship
between image and text is not fully explored in their frameworks. We will show that the performance of NOC can be

Introduction
Image captioning is a long-standing task in artificial intelligence (Farhadi et al. 2010; Kulkarni et al. 2013; Kuznetsova
et al. 2012; Mitchell et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2011; Fang
et al. 2015). The task is challenging in that it requires visual perception and recognition, and natural language generation grounded in perception and real-world knowledge
(Kuznetsova et al. 2012; Yang et al. 2011). With recent
progress in computer vision (He et al. 2017; Ren et al. 2015),
natural language processing (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford
2018; Vaswani et al. 2017), and vision-language understanding (Li et al. 2020; Sharma et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2020a),
the performance on image captioning has been substantially
improved on public benchmarks like COCO (Chen et al.
2015) and Flickr30k (Young et al. 2014). However, models

1
We use “NOC” to represent the task of novel object captioning
and “nocaps” to refer to the nocaps benchmark.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1575

