The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchically and Cooperatively Learning Traffic Signal Control
†

Bingyu Xu1 , Yaowei Wang1 , Zhaozhi Wang2 , Huizhu Jia2 , Zongqing Lu2
1

Peng Cheng Laboratory
2
Peking University

Abstract

However, there are still several challenges we have to address before we can successfully apply deep RL to traffic
signal control. One major challenge is the discrepancy between the target of RL method and the objective of traffic
signal control. Basically, the objective of traffic signal control is to optimize average travel time of all vehicles in a
road network, which is a delayed reward in a long time horizon in the context of RL. However, existing work simplifies the problem and tailors its own target by using queue
length, waiting time, delay, etc., as the reward. For example,
IntelliLight (Wei et al. 2018) uses a combination of these
as the reward. Nevertheless, optimizing the cumulative rewards of such is not equivalent to minimizing average travel
time. These targets can be aligned with the objective, but
they can also substantially deviate from it in different road
networks with various traffic patterns, which leads to the
sub-optimality of existing RL methods.
Another major challenge is how to cooperatively control
traffic signals to optimize average travel time. Many existing
RL methods independently control traffic signals, such as IntelliLight (Wei et al. 2018) and MetaLight (Zang et al. 2020).
Some cooperatively control traffic signals, such as CoLight
(Wei et al. 2019b), PressLight (Wei et al. 2019a), and MPLight (Chen et al. 2020). At each intersection, CoLight uses
additional information from neighboring intersections to optimize the queue length, while PressLight and MPLight implicitly consider the cooperation between neighboring intersections by minimizing the pressure which is loosely defined as the number of vehicles in incoming lanes minus
the number of vehicles on outgoing lanes at an intersection.
However, how to cooperatively and directly optimize average travel time in a road network is unclear.
To address these challenges, we propose a hierarchical
and cooperative reinforcement learning method, HiLight, for
traffic signal control. To ease the difficulty of directly optimizing average travel time, HiLight enables each agent to
learn a high-level policy that minimizes average travel time
locally by selecting between the learned sub-policies that
respectively optimize different short-term targets, such as
queue length, waiting time, and delay. By such a hierarchy,
the high-level policy can easily learn to align the target of
each sub-policy with its own objective while avoiding the
difficulty of directly optimizing average travel time. To enable agents to cooperate on optimizing average travel time

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been applied to traffic signal control recently and demonstrated superior performance to conventional control methods. However, there are
still several challenges we have to address before fully applying deep RL to traffic signal control. Firstly, the objective of
traffic signal control is to optimize average travel time, which
is a delayed reward in a long time horizon in the context
of RL. However, existing work simplifies the optimization
by using queue length, waiting time, delay, etc., as immediate reward and presumes these short-term targets are always
aligned with the objective. Nevertheless, these targets may
deviate from the objective in different road networks with
various traffic patterns. Secondly, it remains unsolved how to
cooperatively control traffic signals to directly optimize average travel time. To address these challenges, we propose a
hierarchical and cooperative reinforcement learning method–
HiLight. HiLight enables each agent to learn a high-level policy that optimizes the objective locally by selecting among
the sub-policies that respectively optimize short-term targets.
Moreover, the high-level policy additionally considers the objective in the neighborhood with adaptive weighting to encourage agents to cooperate on the objective in the road network. Empirically, we demonstrate that HiLight outperforms
state-of-the-art RL methods for traffic signal control in real
road networks with real traffic.

Introduction
Traffic signals coordinating traffic movements are the key
for transportation efficiency. However, conventional traffic
signal control that heavily relies on pre-defined rules and
assumptions on traffic conditions is far from intelligence.
Recently, researchers have started to apply deep reinforcement learning (RL) to traffic signal control and some studies (Wei et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019; Wei et al. 2019b,a)
have obtained superior performance to conventional control methods (Mirchandani and Head 2001; Roess, Prassas,
and McShane 2004; Varaiya 2013; Cools, Gershenson, and
D’Hooghe 2013). The main advantage of RL is directly interacting with highly dynamic environment to learn to reach
a long-term goal for traffic signal control.
†

Correspondence to Zongqing Lu <zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn>
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

669

