The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On-the-fly Synthesis for LTL over Finite Traces
Shengping Xiao1 , Jianwen Li1∗ , Shufang Zhu2,3 , Yingying Shi1 , Geguang Pu1∗ and Moshe Vardi4
1

East China Normal University,
Sapienza Università di Roma,
3
Shanghai Trusted Industrial Control Platform Co., Ltd,
4
Rice University
2

reduced the planning problem with LTLf goals to the synthesis problem for LTLf (Camacho et al. 2017; Camacho,
Bienvenu, and McIlraith 2018; Aminof et al. 2018, 2019;
Zhu et al. 2020), which makes the logic very attractive in
this domain. We focus on LTLf synthesis in this paper.
Given an LTLf formula φ with input/output atomic proposition sets X , Y such that X ∩ Y = ∅ and P = X ∪ Y is
the set of atomic propositions of φ, the synthesis problem
asks whether every finite trace generated as the result of a
game between the environment controlling the input propositions and the system controlling the output propositions
can satisfy the formula φ (see Definition 1 for details). Extant solutions rely on a reduction from LTLf synthesis to
DFA (Deterministic Finite Automata) games (Giacomo and
Vardi 2015). Explicitly, the DFA that recognizes the same
language as the LTLf formula has to be constructed at first.
Then a backward fixpoint calculation is performed on the
generated DFA from the set of accepting states. The calculation initially marks the accepting states as the winning
states, and recursively extends this winning set based on the
current information. If finally the initial state of the DFA is
included in the winning set, we conclude that the formula
φ is realizable w.r.t. the input/output sets X and Y. Otherwise, the formula is unrealizable. It is well-known that the
LTLf -to-DFA translation is the most demanding part of the
computation, as the size of the generated DFA can be doubly
exponential to the size of the formula (Kupferman and Vardi
2001). Indeed, the DFA construction is the main bottleneck
in the current approach (Zhu et al. 2017).
Several optimizations for DFA construction have been
proposed. (Zhu et al. 2017) has shown using MONA (Henriksen et al. 1995; Elgaard, Klarlund, and Möller 1998) to
symbolically construct the minimal DFA can be much faster
than using Spot (Duret-Lutz and Poitrenaud 2004), which
employs an explicit construction. Later, (Zhu, Pu, and Vardi
2019) performed an extensive comparison over different encodings from LTLf to the input format of MONA to look
for the best-performing encoding, and showed the outperformance of First Order Logic (FOL) encoding. (Tabajara
and Vardi 2019) introduced a partitioning technique to decompose the generation of a large DFA into small ones
(Meyer, Sickert, and Luttenberger 2018). Recently, (Bansal
et al. 2020) combined both of the explicit and symbolic DFA
state-space representations and successfully achieved a bet-

Abstract
We present a new synthesis framework based on the on-thefly DFA construction for LTL over finite traces (LTLf ). Extant
approaches rely heavily on the construction of the complete
DFA w.r.t. the input LTLf formula, whose size can be doubly
exponential to the size of the formula in the worst case. Under those approaches, the synthesis cannot be conducted unless the whole DFA is completely constructed, which is not
only inefficient but also not scalable in practice. Indeed, the
DFA construction is the main bottleneck of LTLf synthesis in
prior work. To mitigate this challenge, we follow two steps
in this paper: Firstly, we present several light-weight preprocessing techniques such that the synthesis result can be obtained even without DFA construction; Secondly, we propose
to achieve the synthesis together with the on-the-fly DFA construction such that the synthesis result can be obtained before
constructing the whole DFA. The on-the-fly DFA construction is implemented using the SAT-based techniques for automata generation. We compared our new approach with the
traditional ones on extensive LTLf synthesis benchmarks. Experimental results showed that the pre-processing techniques
have a significant advantage on the synthesis performance in
terms of scalability, and the on-the-fly synthesis is able to
complement extant approaches on both realizable and unrealizable cases.

Introduction
Synthesis for Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces, i.e.,
LTLf (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013), has emerged as a popular research topic in the AI community due to applications
such as motion planning (Zhu et al. 2020; Rintanen 2004).
LTLf is a formal logic that has received considerable concerns from the AI community, due to its simplicity and ability to formalize and validate behaviors of AI systems (De
Giacomo and Vardi 2013; Giacomo and Vardi 2015). While
standard Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) is interpreted on infinite traces (Pnueli 1977), LTLf is interpreted over finite
traces (De Giacomo and Vardi 2013). Since first introduced
in 2013, the fundamental problems of LTLf , e.g., satisfiability (Li et al. 2014, 2019) and synthesis (Giacomo and Vardi
2015; Zhu et al. 2017), have been extensively studied in
prior work. Towards applications, researchers successfully
∗

Both are corresponding authors (lijwen2748@gmail.com).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6530

