The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Model Robustness by Adaptively Correcting
Perturbation Levels with Active Queries
Kun-Peng Ning∗ , Lue Tao∗ , Songcan Chen, Sheng-Jun Huang†
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 211106

Abstract

during the process of data collection and editing (e.g. Gaussian noise (Chapelle et al. 2001), motion blur (Hendrycks
and Dietterich 2019)).
In this paper, we focus on the latter case and try to handle
corruption perturbations for improving the model robustness.
Corruption perturbation problem is becoming a ubiquitous
challenge in various applications (Hendrycks and Dietterich
2019; Michaelis et al. 2019). More and more systems based
on deep learning have been deployed to real-world applications. They are typically trained and evaluated in laboratory
environments. However, extensive and unexpected noises exist in real environments, which may cause serious failures if
the models are not robust enough. For example, autonomous
vehicles need to be able to cope with wildly varying outdoor
conditions such as fog, frost, snow, sand storms, or falling
leaves (Michaelis et al. 2019). Likewise, speech recognition
systems should perform well regardless of the additive noise
or convolutional distortions (Qian et al. 2016).
Training DNNs on perturbed examples is the primal approach to improve the model robustness (Carlini et al. 2019;
Hendrycks et al. 2019b). Representative methods include
noise injection (Grandvalet, Canu, and Boucheron 1997) and
PGD-based robust training (Madry et al. 2017). However,
most of the existing methods assign a fixed level of perturbations (e.g. fixed radius in `p norm-bounded perturbations
or bandwidth in Gaussian noise) to all examples, ignoring
the fact that each example has its own intrinsic tolerance
to noises. In fact, excessive perturbations would destroy the
class-distinguishing feature of an example, while deficient
perturbations may fail to provide helpful information for improving the robustness. Intuitively, some examples are closer
to the decision boundary, where tiny perturbations could
change their labels, while some others are far away from the
decision boundary and may tolerate higher levels of perturbation. As shown in Figure 1, under the same perturbation,
the discriminability of the corrupted images is significantly
different, if the original images have different intrinsic robustness. A higher-quality image is likely to be able to tolerate
heavier perturbations.
Several recent works in the literature seek to adjust the perturbation levels for different examples according to prediction
loss (Cheng et al. 2020; Sitawarin, Chakraborty, and Wagner
2020; Zhang et al. 2020). While it is intuitively reasonable to
assign higher perturbations to examples with smaller losses,

In addition to high accuracy, robustness is becoming increasingly important for machine learning models in various applications. Recently, much research has been devoted to improving the model robustness by training with noise perturbations.
Most existing studies assume a fixed perturbation level for all
training examples, which however hardly holds in real tasks.
In fact, excessive perturbations may destroy the discriminative
content of an example, while deficient perturbations may fail
to provide helpful information for improving the robustness.
Motivated by this observation, we propose to adaptively adjust
the perturbation levels for each example in the training process.
Specifically, a novel active learning framework is proposed to
allow the model to interactively query the correct perturbation
level from human experts. By designing a cost-effective sampling strategy along with a new query type, the robustness can
be significantly improved with a few queries. Both theoretical
analysis and experimental studies validate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in many tasks with high accuracy (Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2015; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le
2014; Silver et al. 2017). On the other hand, deep models
are less robust when applied to datasets with noise perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2013; Alzantot et al. 2018; Hendrycks
and Dietterich 2019). Much research has been devoted to mitigating this issue in recent years (Geirhos et al. 2018; Rusak
et al. 2020; Tramer et al. 2020; Hendrycks et al. 2019a; Mao
et al. 2019; Hendrycks et al. 2019b; Zhang 2019). Roughly
speaking, existing studies are trying to improve the model
robustness by handling two different categories of perturbations. One is adversarial perturbations, which are maliciously designed to fool the models under some distance
constraint (e.g. `∞ distance (Madry et al. 2017) or Wasserstein distance (Wong, Schmidt, and Kolter 2019)), while the
appearance contents are preserved. The other one is corruption perturbations, which are usually incidentally generated
∗

Equal contribution.
Correspondence to: Sheng-Jun Huang (huangsj@nuaa.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

9161

