The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Epistemic Logic of Know-Who
Sophia Epstein,1 Pavel Naumov2
1

Claremont McKenna College
2
King’s College
sepstein22@cmc.edu, pgn2@cornell.edu

Abstract

Ransacker” and “Golden State Killer”. It also was discovered that the same person was known to California police
as sergeant DeAngelo serving in Auburn, California police
forces from August 1976 to July 1979, when he was arrested
and sentenced to six months probation for shoplifting a hammer and dog repellent (Levine 2018; Serna and Oreskes
2018). Did the sentencing judge know who the shoplifter
really was?
As the example above shows, the same person might be
known under different names and knowing one of the person’s names does not necessarily imply knowing all of them.
To define the meaning of “know who” one needs to fix a
name space. Knowing the person under one name space
does not imply knowing the same person under another.
For example, Birchim knew who the murderer was using
a hypothetical name space consisting of “Night Stalker”,
“Morning Stalker”, “Day Stalker”, and “Evening Stalker”,
but did not know the murderer in a hypothetical space “East
Area Rapist”, “North Area Rapist”, “West Area Rapist”, and
“South Area Rapist”.
There are many other real-world situations with multiple
name spaces. Knowing an author under a pen name might
not mean knowing the author’s birth name. Knowing students by face is very different then knowing their names or
ID numbers. Children separated at birth might know each
other, but not know that they are related.
Aloni refers to name spaces as “conceptual covers” (2005;
2018). In this paper, we describe the universal properties of
“know-who”’ that are true for any fixed name space.

The paper suggests a definition of “know who” as a modality
using Grove-Halpern semantics of names. It also introduces
a logical system that describes the interplay between modalities “knows who”, “knows”, and “for all agents”. The main
technical result is a completeness theorem for the proposed
system.

Introduction
The ability of artificial agents to properly identify humans
and other machines is critical in many AI applications from
online and checkout-less shopping, robotic nurses, and unmanned aircraft systems to security, law-enforcement, and
lethal autonomous weaponry. Most of the current systems
rely on physical identifiers such as facial images, fingerprints, signatures, government-issued IDs, iris recognition,
credit card security chips, passwords, and radio signals.
Knowing one of these identifiers does not imply knowing
the others or knowing who the person (or a machine) “really” is. In this paper we propose a formal framework for
defining and reasoning about “knowing (somebody) who”.

The Night Stalker
On July 27th, 1981, a real estate agent came to see a house
for sale near Santa Barbara, California. Inside the house
at 449 Toltec Way in Goleta, the agent found the bodies
of 35-year-old Cheri Domingo, who was house-sitting the
place, and of her former boyfriend, 27-year-old Gregory
Sanchez (Hardy 1981). Within several days, the Santa Barbara County sheriff’s spokesman Russ Birchim announced
that the police knew who the killer was. He was the same
man who committed a nonfatal knife attack on another couple in the same neighborhood 22 months ago. Birchim said
that the deputies dubbed the killer “Night Stalker” (Hurst
1981).
Did Birchim really know who the murderer was? It took
almost 40 years for the police to find out that “Night Stalker”
is actually “East Area Rapist” who raped 50 people in Northern California in the 1970s, almost 400 miles away from
Santa Barbara. The same person was also known as “Visalia

Outline
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section we introduce and discuss Grove-Halpern epistemic
models with names. Then, we describe syntax of our logical
system and give its formal semantics. After this we highlight
a possible extension of our logic by explicit names, discuss
connection between our semantics and de dicto/de re knowledge, and review the related literature. In the next two sections, we introduce the axioms of the Logic of Know-Who
and prove their soundness. Section Completeness Overview
highlights the key steps in the proof of the completeness.
The actual proof of the completeness is given in the full version of this paper (Epstein and Naumov 2020). The last section concludes.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11479

