The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Rethinking Graph Regularization for Graph Neural Networks
Han Yang, Kaili Ma, James Cheng
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
hyang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, klma@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jcheng@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

Many GNNs (Kipf and Welling 2017; Veličković et al.
2018; Wu et al. 2019; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017;
Pei et al. 2020; Li et al. 2015) have been proposed, which encode graph structure information directly into their model as
f (A, X) : (RN ×N , RN ×F ) → RN ×C , where A ∈ RN ×N
is the adjacency matrix of a graph. Then, they simply train
the model by minimizing the supervised classification loss,
without using graph regularization. However, in this work we
ask the question: Can graph regularization also boost the performance of existing GNN models as it does for traditional
node classification models?
We give an affirmative answer to this question. We show
that existing GNNs already capture graph structure information that traditional graph Laplacian regularization
can offer. Thus, we propose a new graph regularization,
Propagation-regularization (P-reg), which is a variation of
graph Laplacian-based regularization that provides new supervision signals to nodes in a graph. In addition, we prove
that P-reg possesses the equivalent power as an infinite-depth
GCN, which means that P-reg enables each node to capture
information from nodes farther away (as a deep GCN does,
but more flexible to avoid over-smoothing and much less
costly to compute). We validate by experiments the effectiveness of P-reg as a general tool for boosting the performance
of existing GNN models. We believe our work could inspire
a new direction for GNN framework designs.

The graph Laplacian regularization term is usually used in
semi-supervised representation learning to provide graph structure information for a model f (X). However, with the recent
popularity of graph neural networks (GNNs), directly encoding graph structure A into a model, i.e., f (A, X), has become
the more common approach. While we show that graph Laplacian regularization brings little-to-no benefit to existing GNNs,
and propose a simple but non-trivial variant of graph Laplacian
regularization, called Propagation-regularization (P-reg), to
boost the performance of existing GNN models. We provide
formal analyses to show that P-reg not only infuses extra information (that is not captured by the traditional graph Laplacian
regularization) into GNNs, but also has the capacity equivalent to an infinite-depth graph convolutional network. We
demonstrate that P-reg can effectively boost the performance
of existing GNN models on both node-level and graph-level
tasks across many different datasets.

Introduction
Semi-supervised node classification is one of the most popular and important problems in graph learning. Many effective
methods (Zhu, Ghahramani, and Lafferty 2003; Zhou et al.
2003; Belkin, Niyogi, and Sindhwani 2006; Ando and Zhang
2007) have been proposed for node classification by adding
a regularization term, e.g., Laplacian regularization, to a feature mapping model f (X) : RN ×F → RN ×C , where N is
the number of nodes, F is the dimensionality of a node feature, C is the number of predicted classes, and X ∈ RN ×F is
the node feature matrix. One known drawback of these methods is that the model f itself only models the features of each
node in a graph and does not consider the relation among the
nodes. They rely on the regularization term to capture graph
structure information based on the assumption that neighboring nodes are likely to share the same class label. However,
this assumption does not hold in many real world graphs as
relations between nodes in these graphs could be complicated,
as pointed out in (Kipf and Welling 2017). This motivates
the development of early graph neural network (GNN) models such as graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and
Welling 2017).

Propagation-Regularization
The notations used in this paper and their description are
also given in Appendix A1 . We use a 2-layer GCN model
f1 as an example of GNN for convenience of presentation. A GCN model f1 can be formulated as f1 (A, X) =
Â(σ(ÂXW0 ))W1 , where W0 ∈ RF ×H and W1 ∈ RH×C
are linear mapping matrices, and H is the size of hidden
units. Â = D−1 A is the normalized adjacency matrix,
where D ∈ RN ×N is the diagonal degree matrix with
PN
Dii = j=1 Aij and Dij = 0 if i 6= j. σ is the activation function. f1 takes the graph structure and node features
as input, then outputs Z = f1 (A, X) ∈ RN ×C . Denote
exp(Zij )
Pij = PC exp(Z
for i = 1, . . . , N and j = 1, . . . , C as
)
k=1

ik

1
The appendices of this paper can be found at https://arxiv.org/
abs/2009.02027

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4573

