The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Doubly Residual Neural Decoder:
Towards Low-Complexity High-Performance Channel Decoding
Siyu Liao, Chunhua Deng, Miao Yin, Bo Yuan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
siyu.liao@rutgers.edu, chunhua.deng@rutgers.edu, miao.yin@rutgers.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Recently deep neural networks have been successfully applied in channel coding to improve the decoding performance. However, the state-of-the-art neural channel decoders
cannot achieve high decoding performance and low complexity simultaneously. To overcome this challenge, in this paper
we propose doubly residual neural (DRN) decoder. By integrating both the residual input and residual learning to the
design of neural channel decoder, DRN enables significant
decoding performance improvement while maintaining low
complexity. Extensive experiment results show that on different types of channel codes, our DRN decoder consistently
outperform the state-of-the-art decoders in terms of decoding
performance, model sizes and computational cost.

0,1,1,0,…

Encoder

Noisy Channel

Decoder 0,1,1,0,…

Figure 1: A channel codec uses one encoder and one decoder
to recover the information after noisy transmission.

cases, channel decoder is much more expensive than encoder in terms of both space and computational complexity. This is because in encoding phase only simple exclusive
OR operations are needed at the bit level; while in decoding phase the more advanced but complicated algorithms are
needed to correct the errors occurred by noisy transmission.
To date, the most popular and powerful channel decoding algorithm is iterative belief propagation (BP) (Fossorier, Mihaljevic, and Imai 1999).
Deep Learning for Channel Decoder. From the perspective of machine learning, the role of channel decoder can be
interpreted as a special multi-label binary classifier or denoiser. Based on such observation and motivated by the current unprecedented success of deep neural network (DNN)
in various science and engineering applications, recently
both information theory and machine learning communities are beginning to study the potential integration of deep
neural network into channel codec, especially for the highperformance channel decoder design. A simple and natural idea along this direction is to use the classical deep autoencoder to serve as the entire channel codec (O’Shea and
Hoydis 2017). Although this domain knowledge-free strategy can work for very short channel codes (e.g. less-than10 code length), it cannot provide satisfied decoding performance for moderate and long channel codes, which are
much more important and popular in the practical industrial
standard and commercial systems.
The State of the Art: NBP & HGN Decoders. Recently,
several studies (Nachmani, Be’ery, and Burshtein 2016;
Cammerer et al. 2017; Gruber et al. 2017; Lugosch and
Gross 2017; Nachmani et al. 2018) have shown that, by integrating the existing mathematical structure and character-

Introduction
Starting from Claude Shannon’s 1948 seminal paper (Shannon 1948), channel codes, also known as error correction
codes, have provided data reliability for communication and
storage systems in the last seven decades. Historically, every ten years or so information theorists discovered a new
channel code that approaches the ultimate channel capacity closer than the prior ones, thereby reshaping the way
that we transmit and store data. For instance, low-density
parity check (LDPC) codes (Gallager 1962; MacKay and
Neal 1996) that was re-discovered in 1996 and polar codes
(Arikan 2009) that was invented in 2009 have become the
adopted channel codes solution in 5G standard. Nowadays,
channel codes have served as the key enablers for the dramatic advances of modern high-quality data transmission
and high-density storage systems, including but not limited
to 5G air interface, deep space communication, solid-state
disk (SSD), high-speed Ethernet etc.
Channel Encoding & Decoding. In general, the key idea
of channel coding is to first encode certain redundancy into
the bit-level message that will be transmitted over noisy
channel, and then at the receiver end to decode the corrupted
message for recovery via utilizing the redundancy information. Based on such underlying mechanism, a channel codec
consists of one encoder and one decoder at the transmitter
end and receiver end, respectively (see Figure 1). In most
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8574

