The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforcement Learning Based Multi-Agent Resilient Control: From Deep Neural
Networks to an Adaptive Law
Jian Hou1 , Fangyuan Wang1 , Lili Wang2* , Zhiyong Chen3
1

School of Information Science & Technology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China, 310018
Corresponding Author, Division of Systems Engineering, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA, 02215
3
School of Electrical Engineering and Computing, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2308
changeleap@163.com, wfy11235813@gmail.com, lili.wang.zj@gmail.com, zhiyong.chen@newcastle.edu.au
2*

Abstract

ing global agreement with only local but possibly false data
injection interactions, is one of the fundamental concerns.
In the closely related field of Multi-agent Reinforcement
Learning (MARL), each agent interacts with the environment and other agents by selecting proper actions to maximize the total rewards. Recent advances in MARL have
made it possible to implement various tasks. It therefore
seems quite natural to ask whether the MARL techniques
can also be beneficial for Multi-agent Resilient Consensus
(MARC) problem.
However, MARC presents several challenges from an
MARL perspective. Firstly, most successful MARL applications to date adopt the framework of centralized training
with decentralized execution, while in MARC, only the local
information from neighboring agents in a distributed manner
is available for a global target. Secondly, the identities of all
the agents as either teammate or opponent are known a prior
for each agent in MARL such that properly-designed strategies can be implemented. Nevertheless, the main objective
in MARC is to distinguish the identities of all the agents. In
addition, the unpredictable behaviors of faulty agents may
imply non-stationary environment and violate the Markovian assumptions, that is a frequent but tough problem in
MARL.
This paper adopts the idea of trial and error from MARL
as well as the natural characteristics of the MARC system
for consensus to overcome these challenges, aiming at adjusting the adjacent weights, and hence mitigating the influences of the faulty nodes. Firstly, the MARC problem is
transformed into a typical MARL problem in which each
agent executes DDPG strategy individually to avoid the centralized training, that we call Distributed-DDPG (D-DDPG).
By means of consensus for the final objective, a reward function can be well designed via relative state difference, so that
teammates and opponents are gradually identified. After the
training process for actor and critic networks is completed,
MARC can be achieved in just few steps. Secondly, to get rid
of neural networks and their time-consuming training process, a Q-learning based algorithm, named Q-consensus, is
presented by building a proper reward function and a credibility function for each pair of neighboring agents. And thus,
each node (agent) updates its adjacent weights in an adaptive
way. Lastly, we apply the proposed Q-consensus algorithm
to achieve resilient velocity synchronization in a smart-car

Recent advances in Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
(MARL) have made it possible to implement various tasks in
cooperative as well as competitive scenarios through trial and
error, and deep neural networks. These successes motivate us
to bring the mechanism of MARL into the Multi-agent Resilient Consensus (MARC) problem that studies the consensus problem in a network of agents with faulty ones. Relying
on the natural characteristics of the system goal, the key component in MARL, reward function, can thus be directly constructed via the relative distance among agents. Firstly, we
apply Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) on each
single agent to train and learn adjacent weights of neighboring agents in a distributed manner, that we call DistributedDDPG (D-DDPG), so as to minimize the weights from suspicious agents and eliminate the corresponding influences. Secondly, to get rid of neural networks and their time-consuming
training process, a Q-learning based algorithm, called Qconsensus, is further presented by building a proper reward
function and a credibility function for each pair of neighboring agents so that the adjacent weights can update in an
adaptive way. The experimental results indicate that both algorithms perform well with appearance of constant and/or
random faulty agents, yet the Q-consensus algorithm outperforms the faulty ones running D-DDPG. Compared to the traditional resilient consensus strategies, e.g., Weighted-MeanSubsequence-Reduced (W-MSR) or trustworthiness analysis,
the proposed Q-consensus algorithm has greatly relaxed the
topology requirements, as well as reduced the storage and
computation loads. Finally, a smart-car hardware platform
consisting of six vehicles is used to verify the effectiveness
of the Q-consensus algorithm by achieving resilient velocity
synchronization.

Introduction
In recent years, multi-agent Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs)
are ubiquitous in modern infrastructure systems, and attract
increasing attention, for instance, in transportation systems,
electrical power grids, wireless communication networks,
health-care devices and so on (Humayed et al. 2017). The
unpredictable and possibly hostile running environments
and internal agent faults have brought many challenges,
among which fault-tolerance resilient consensus, i.e., reachCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7737

