The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gene Regulatory Network Inference using 3D Convolutional Neural Network
Yue Fan, Xiuli Ma∗
Department of Machine Intelligence, School of EECS, Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University,
Beijing, China
fanyue@pku.edu.cn, xlma@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

ment dropouts, which bring great challenges to the analysis
of the scRNA-seq data.
Genes are the key to all biological processes, therefore figuring out how genes interact with each other has become an
important and attracting scRNA-seq study. Gene regulatory
networks (GRNs) are used to depict regulatory relationships
among genes, aiming to simplify the analysis of complex
biological systems (Chasman, Fotuhi Siahpirani, and Roy
2016). A GRN is composed of transcription factors (TFs),
genes and regulations. Each node of the GRN represents a
TF or a gene. The edges connecting TFs and target genes indicate regulations. The edges are either labeled as activation
or inhibition, showing the regulatory function of the TFs on
their target genes.
ScRNA-seq based GRN inference algorithms are computational methods of reconstructing GRNs using scRNA-seq
datasets. Given the datasets, the task is to find out all possible regulations among genes. Methods have been proposed
from different computational perspectives, such as regressions, mutual information, correlations, etc. But most existing methods suffer from the drawback of low accuracy. The
following factors may account for it.

Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) consist of gene regulations
between transcription factors (TFs) and their target genes.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) brings both opportunities and challenges to the inference of GRNs. On the one
hand, scRNA-seq data reveals statistic information of gene
expressions at the single-cell resolution, which is conducive
to the construction of GRNs; on the other hand, noises and
dropouts pose great difficulties on the analysis of scRNA-seq
data, causing low prediction accuracy by traditional methods.
In this paper, we propose 3D Co-Expression Matrix Analysis
(3DCEMA), which predicts regulatory relationships by classifying 3D co-expression matrices of gene triplets using a 3D
convolutional neural network. We found that by introducing
a third gene as a comparison factor, our method can avoid the
disturbance of noises and dropouts, and significantly increase
the prediction accuracy of regulations between gene pairs.
Compared with other existing GRN inference algorithms on
both in-silico datasets and scRNA-Seq datasets, our algorithm
based on deep learning shows higher stability and accuracy in
the task of GRN inference.

Introduction

Zero-Inflation and Noise Zero-inflation and low signalto-noise ratio are two main characteristics of scRNA-seq
data. Large percentage of dropouts, up to 80% for instance,
poses difficulties on traditional computational methods such
as regression and correlation. Besides, noises may overwhelm the exact expression values of genes, making it hard
for algorithms to recognize true regulations.

Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a technique of
high-resolution transcriptomic analysis of individual cells
(Kolodziejczyk et al. 2015). The first scRNA-seq method
was proposed by Fuchou Tang et al (Tang et al. 2009). In
contrast with bulk transcriptomic data which provide the average gene expression values of all cells within each sample, scRNA-seq data provide a two-dimensional matrix of
cells and genes, with each value representing a gene’s expression level in a cell. The variation of the gene expression
values across cells provides new research perspectives. By
observing gene expression level at the single-cell resolution,
scRNA-seq brings new computational biology topics such
as cell-clustering (Tasic et al. 2016) and cell-differentiation
(Xie et al. 2020), helping people understanding cell heterogeneity, dynamic biological processes (Deng et al. 2014) and
diseases such as cancer (Nam, Chaligne, and Landau 2021).
However, scRNA-seq data suffer from features such as low
signal-to-noise ratio and high sparsity caused by measure-

Cascade Effect Tools such as SLINGSHOT (Kelly et al.
2018) take raw scRNA-seq data as input, aiming at giving cells the timestamps to indicate the differential order.
Models have been proposed to infer GRNs using temporal
scRNA-seq data with pseudotime order. However, cascade
effect on accuracy occurs when the tool fails to generate the
precise pseudotime order, causing poor performance of prediction tasks.
Assumption Dependence Most algorithms work on their
own assumptions to infer GRNs. For instance, some methods construct GRNs by estimating an ordinary differential equation given the pseudotime information. However,
whether these assumptions depict the very nature of gene

∗

Corresponding author: Xiuli Ma
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

99

