The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Copy That! Editing Sequences by Copying Spans
Sheena Panthaplackel,1 * Miltiadis Allamanis,2 Marc Brockschmidt2
1

The University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
spantha@cs.utexas.edu, {miallama, mabrocks}@microsoft.com

Abstract

with a facility to copy entire spans of the input to the output
in a single step, greatly reducing the number of decoder steps
required to generate an output. This is illustrated in Fig. 1,
where our model inserts two new words into a sentence by
copying two spans of (more than) twenty tokens each.
However, this decoder extension exacerbates a wellknown problem in training decoders with a copying facility:
a target sequence can be generated in many different ways
when an output token can be generated by different means.
In our setting, a sequence of tokens can be copied token-bytoken, in pairs of tokens, in triplets, etc. or in just a single
step. In practice, we are interested in copying the longest
spans possible, as copying longer spans both speeds up decoding at inference time and reduces the potential for making mistakes. To this end, we derive a training objective that
marginalises over all different generation sequences yielding the correct output, which implicitly encourages copying
longer spans. At inference time, we solve this problem by a
variation of beam search that “merges” rays in the beam that
generate the same output by different means.
In summary, this paper (i) introduces a sequence decoder
able to copy entire spans (Sect. ); (ii) derives a training objective that encourages our decoder to copy long spans when
possible; (iii) discusses a variation of beam search which
matches our new training objective; and (iv) presents extensive experiments showing that the span-copying decoder
improves on editing tasks on natural language and program
source code (Sect. ).

Neural sequence-to-sequence models are finding increasing
use in editing of documents, for example in correcting a text
document or repairing source code. In this paper, we argue
that common seq2seq models (with a facility to copy single
tokens) are not a natural fit for such tasks, as they have to
explicitly copy each unchanged token. We present an extension of seq2seq models capable of copying entire spans of the
input to the output in one step, greatly reducing the number
of decisions required during inference. This extension means
that there are now many ways of generating the same output,
which we handle by deriving a new objective for training and
a variation of beam search for inference that explicitly handles this problem. In our experiments on a range of editing
tasks of natural language and source code, we show that our
new model consistently outperforms simpler baselines.

Introduction
Intelligent systems that assist users in achieving their goals
have become a focus of recent research. One class of such
systems are intelligent editors that identify and correct errors
in documents while they are written. Such systems are usually built on the seq2seq (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014)
framework, in which an input sequence (the current state
of the document) is first encoded into a vector representation and a decoder then constructs a new sequence from
this information. Many applications of the seq2seq framework require the decoder to copy some words in the input.
An example is machine translation, in which most words are
generated, but rare elements such as names are copied from
the input. This can be implemented in an elegant manner
by equipping the decoder with a facility that can “point” to
words from the input, which are then copied into the output (Vinyals, Fortunato, and Jaitly 2015; Grave, Joulin, and
Usunier 2017; Gulcehre et al. 2016; Merity et al. 2017).
Editing sequences poses a different problem from other
seq2seq tasks, as in many cases, most of the input remains
unchanged and needs to be reproduced. When using existing
decoders, this requires painstaking word-by-word copying
of the input. In this paper, we propose to extend a decoder

Model
The core of our new decoder is a span-copying mechanism that can be viewed as a generalisation of pointer networks used for copying single tokens (Vinyals, Fortunato,
and Jaitly 2015; Grave, Joulin, and Usunier 2017; Gulcehre
et al. 2016; Merity et al. 2017). Concretely, modern sequence decoders treat copying from the input sequence as
an alternative to generating a token from the decoder vocabulary, i.e. at each step, the decoder can either generate a
token t from its vocabulary or it can copy the i-th token of
the input. We view these as potential actions the decoder can
perform and denote them by Gen(t) and Copy(i).
Formally, given an input sequence in = in 0 . . . in n−1 ,
the probability of a target sequence o = o0 . . . om−1 is commonly factorised into sequentially generating all tokens of

* Work done during an internship in Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13622

