The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MangaGAN: Unpaired Photo-to-Manga Translation Based on
the Methodology of Manga Drawing
Hao Su1 , Jianwei Niu1,2,3∗ , Xuefeng Liu1 , Qingfeng Li1 , Jiahe Cui1 , Ji Wan1
1

State Key Lab of VR Technology and System, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
Industrial Technology Research Institute, School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
{bhsuhao, niujianwei, liu xuefeng, liqingfeng, cuijiahe, wanji}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

Although these recent researches have achieved good performances in their applications, they have difficulties to generate a high-quality manga face due to the following four
challenges. First, in the manga domain, humans’ faces are
abstract, geometrically exaggerated, and are far from those
in the photo domain. The facial correspondences between
the two domains are hard to be established by networks. Second, for different facial features, manga artists always use
different drawing styles. These independent features (i.e.,
appearance, location, size, style) are unable to be extracted and concluded by a network simultaneously. Third, the
generated manga face has to preserve the identity of a user
without compromising the abstract manga style. It is a challenge to keep both of them with high performances. Therefore, the existing studies of image stylization (e.g., (Gatys,
Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Isola et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017a;
Yi et al. 2019)) are unable to generate high-quality manga
face images.
To address these challenges, we present MangaGAN, the
first GAN-based method for translating frontal face photos to the manga domain with preserving the attractive style
of a popular manga work Bleach1 . We observed the following important steps of an experienced artist in drawing manga: first outlining the exaggerated face and locating the geometric distributions of facial features, and then
fine-drawing each of them. MangaGAN follows the above
process and employs a multi-GANs architecture to translate
different facial features, and maps their geometric features
by another developed GAN model. Furthermore, we present
a Similarity-Preserving (SP) module to improve the similarity between domains of photo and manga, and leverage a
structural smoothing loss to avoid artifacts.
To summarize, our main contributions are three-fold:

Manga is a world popular comic form originated in Japan,
which typically employs black-and-white stroke lines and
geometric exaggeration to describe humans’ appearances,
poses, and actions. In this paper, we propose MangaGAN,
the first method based on Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) for unpaired photo-to-manga translation. Inspired by
the drawing process of experienced manga artists, MangaGAN generates geometric features and converts each facial
region into the manga domain with a tailored multi-GANs
architecture. For training MangaGAN, we collect a new dataset from a popular manga work with extensive features. To
produce high-quality manga faces, we propose a structural smoothing loss to smooth stroke-lines and avoid noisy pixels,
and a similarity preserving module to improve the similarity
between domains of photo and manga. Extensive experiments
show that MangaGAN can produce high-quality manga faces
preserving both the facial similarity and manga style, and outperforms other reference methods.

1

Introduction

Manga, originated in Japan, is a worldwide popular comic
form of drawing on serialized pages to present long stories.
Typical manga is printed in black-and-white (as shown in
Fig. 1 left), which employs abstract stroke lines and geometric exaggeration to illustrate humans’ appearances, poses, and actions. Drawing manga is a time-consuming process, and even a professional manga artist requires several
hours to finish one page of high-quality work. Therefore, automatically translating a face photo to manga in an attractive
style is desirable. This task can be described as image translation that is a hot topic in the computer vision area. In recent years, deep learning-based image translation has undergone remarkable progress and a series of systematic methods have been proposed. For instance, the Neural Style Transfer (NST) methods (e.g.,(Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016; Li
and Wand 2016a; Chen et al. 2017b)) use tailored CNNs and
objective functions to stylize images, and the methods based
on Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (e.g., (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Isola et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017a; Liu,
Breuel, and Kautz 2017)) map paired or unpaired images
from the original domain to the stylized domain.

• We propose MangaGAN, the first GAN-based method for
unpaired photo-to-manga translation. MangaGAN adopts
a novel network architecture to simulate the drawing process of manga artists, and can produce attractive manga
faces preserving facial similarity of the input photo.
• We propose a similarity-preserving module that substantially improves the performances on preserving both the
facial similarity and manga style. We also propose a structural smoothing loss to generate smooth stroke-lines and

∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

2611

Written and illustrated by Tite Kubo, 2001-2016.

