The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Domain Invariant Single Image Dehazing
Pranjay Shyam1 , Kuk-Jin Yoon 2 , Kyung-soo Kim 1
1

Mechatronics, Systems and Control Lab
2
Visual Intelligence Lab
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, Republic of Korea, 34141
{pranjayshyam, kjyoon, kyungsookim}@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract

image from its degraded version. Common approaches rely
upon haze estimation using atmospheric scattering model
(McCartney 1976; Narasimhan and Nayar 2000, 2002)(Eq.
1) to recover haze affected regions, that establishes a pixelwise (x) relationship between ambient light intensity (A)
and transmission matrix t(x) = e−βd(x) (representing fraction of light reaching camera sensor) by using scene depth
(d(x)) and scattering coefficient (β), to generate a hazy image (I(x)) from a clean image (J(x)).

Presence of haze in images obscures underlying information,
which is undesirable in applications requiring accurate environment information. To recover such an image, a dehazing
algorithm should localize and recover affected regions while
ensuring consistency between recovered and its neighboring
regions. However owing to fixed receptive field of convolutional kernels and non uniform haze distribution, assuring
consistency between regions is difficult. In this paper, we utilize an encoder-decoder based network architecture to perform the task of dehazing and integrate an spatially aware
channel attention mechanism to enhance features of interest
beyond the receptive field of traditional conventional kernels.
To ensure performance consistency across diverse range of
haze densities, we utilize greedy localized data augmentation
mechanism. Synthetic datasets are typically used to ensure a
large amount of paired training samples, however the methodology to generate such samples introduces a gap between
them and real images while accounting for only uniform haze
distribution and overlooking more realistic scenario of nonuniform haze distribution resulting in inferior dehazing performance when evaluated on real datasets. Despite this, the
abundance of paired samples within synthetic datasets cannot
be ignored. Thus to ensure performance consistency across
diverse datasets, we train the proposed network within an adversarial prior-guided framework that relies on a generated
image along with its low and high frequency components to
determine if properties of dehazed images matches those of
ground truth. We preform extensive experiments to validate
the dehazing and domain invariance performance of proposed
framework across diverse domains and report state-of-the-art
(SoTA) results. The source code with pretrained models will
be available at https://github.com/PS06/DIDH.

I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x))
(1)
Traditional computer vision based dehazing algorithms
relied upon handcrafted priors such as dark channel (He,
Sun, and Tang 2010), color attenuation (Zhu, Mai, and Shao
2015), bi-channel (Jiang et al. 2017) and color lines (Fattal 2014; Berman, treibitz, and Avidan 2016) to estimate
atmospheric light or transmission map to recover dehazed
image, following atmospheric scattering model. However
strong reliance on priors makes these methods vulnerable
in scenarios when these priors don’t hold. To avoid dependence on priors, different models leveraging the feature extraction capabilities of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) were proposed, following either atmospheric scattering model (He, Sun, and Tang 2010; Cai et al. 2016;
Zhang and Patel 2018) or end-to-end approach (Ren et al.
2018; Li et al. 2017; Mei et al. 2018a; Chen et al. 2019;
Engin, Genç, and Kemal Ekenel 2018) to estimate dehazed
images.
Although learning based approaches represent current
state-of-the-art (SoTA), they require large number of training samples accurately representing haze scenarios in different outdoor settings. Constructing such a large scale real
dataset is both expensive and time consuming, thus atmospheric scattering model is used to generate synthetic haze
corresponding to a clean image. However such approaches
are limited in considering the effect of airborne particles on
different wavelengths (Li et al. 2020) apart from presence
of wind, resulting in difference between real and synthetic
images in form of domain difference and haze distribution.
This results in performance gap arising between real and
synthetic haze trained models when evaluated upon either
of the datasets.
To overcome the dual challenge of varying haze distribution and domain difference. In this paper, we propose a

Introduction
Visibility degradations arising from environmental variations such as haze, smoke and fog affect image quality by
concealing underlying information which is undesirable in
applications where accurate surrounding information is necessary for safe operation such as autonomous vehicles, aerial
robots and intelligent infrastructure. To overcome complications arising from deteriorations such as haze and fog, image dehazing has been extensively studied to recover clean
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9657

