The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fast PCA in 1-D Wasserstein Spaces via B-splines Representation and
Metric Projection
Matteo Pegoraro1 and Mario Beraha2, 3
1

MOX - Department of Mathematics, Politecnico di Milano
2
Department of Mathematics, Politecnico di Milano
3
Department of Computer Science, Università di Bologna
{matteo.pegoraro, mario.beraha}@polimi.it

Abstract

by projecting the data into the Euclidean space of the scores
relative to the principal components, one can apply well established machine learning techniques, defined on multivariate data, also to more complex data such as distributions.
Optimal Transport (OT) defines a natural framework to
compare different probability measures, as testified by the
huge interest sparkled on different topics related to OT in recent years, especially in the field of machine learning (Cuturi
and Doucet 2014; Genevay, Peyré, and Cuturi 2018; Cuturi,
Teboul, and Vert 2019). Closely related to OT, lies the definition of Wasserstein distances and, henceforth, Wasserstein
spaces (Villani 2008; Ambrosio, Gigli, and Savaré 2008).
PCA in Wasserstein spaces has already been investigated
in (Bigot et al. 2017; Cazelles et al. 2017), where the authors
define the concepts of geodesic and log PCA, in analogy to
the definitions for Riemannian manifolds. In their work, it
is clearly shown how the log PCA loses its effectiveness as
soon as data is not well concentrated around the barycenter. On the other hand, the geodesic PCA is less sensitive to
this kind of issues, but can become impractical due to the
complex optimization problems that need to be solved.
The contribution of this work is two-folded. First we
show how by employing a suitable B-spline representation
of the space of quantile functions, the optimization problems required for the geodesic PCA can be solved in a much
more efficient manner. Despite the improvements obtained
with this representation, the computational cost to perform
geodesic PCA on a real dataset can still be burdensome. This
motivates our second contribution, that is an alternative definition of PCA in Wasserstein spaces, that we call projected
PCA. Our methodology is substantially different from both
the geodesic and log PCA, while being connected to both. In
particular, our insight is that our projected PCA shares the
same spirit of the geodesic approach in preserving the metric structure, while leading to a much simpler optimization
problem required to find the principal components, as in the
case of log PCA.

We address the problem of performing Principal Component
Analysis over a family of probability measures on the real
line, using the Wasserstein geometry. We present a novel representation of the 2-Wasserstein space, based on a well known
isometric bijection and a B-spline expansion. Thanks to this
representation, we are able to reinterpret previous work and
derive more efficient optimization routines for existing approaches. As shown in our simulations, the solution of these
optimization problems can be costly in practice and thus pose
a limit to their usage. We propose a novel definition of Principal Component Analysis in the Wasserstein space that, when
used in combination with the B-spline representation, yields
a straightforward optimization problem that is extremely fast
to compute. Through extensive simulation studies, we show
how our PCA performs similarly to the ones already proposed
in the literature while retaining a much smaller computational
cost. We apply our method to a real dataset of mortality rates
due to Covid-19 in the US, concluding that our analyses are
consistent with the current scientific consensus on the disease.

1

Introduction

In many fields of machine learning and statistics, comparing, averaging, and, broadly speaking, performing inference
on a set of distributions is an ubiquitous but arduous task. In
some cases, the single datum itself can be seen as a distribution, as in the analysis of images (Cuturi and Doucet 2014),
census data (Cazelles et al. 2017), econometric surveys (Potter et al. 2017) and process monitoring (Hron et al. 2014). In
others, distributions could be the output of different machine
learning models, and one wants to aggregate the outputs as
in (Srivastava et al. 2015).
The possibility to carry out meaningful statistical analysis
on distributions depends on the tools that can be employed,
with a focus on the ability to scale to big dataset and the interpretability of the obtained results. Along this line, among
the statistical tools which can be defined on a space, Principal Components Analysis (PCA) is one of the richest ones.
One of the key features of PCA, which contributes to its
popularity among practitioners, is its interpretability, since it
provides insights into the variability of the data. Moreover,

2

Related Works

As already mentioned, at least two definitions of PCA on
distributions are available using the geometry of the Wasserstein space. However, several other works have proposed different PCAs on distributions, outside the domain of Wasserstein spaces. Here, we make a brief review of these methods.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9342

