The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CARPe Posterum: A Convolutional Approach for Real-Time
Pedestrian Path Prediction
Matı́as Mendieta, Hamed Tabkhi
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
mmendiet@uncc.edu, htabkhiv@uncc.edu

Abstract
Pedestrian path prediction is an essential topic in computer vision and video understanding. Having insight into the movement of pedestrians is crucial for ensuring safe operation in
a variety of applications including autonomous vehicles, social robots, and environmental monitoring. Current works in
this area utilize complex generative or recurrent methods to
capture many possible futures. However, despite the inherent real-time nature of predicting future paths, little work
has been done to explore accurate and computationally efficient approaches for this task. To this end, we propose a
convolutional approach for real-time pedestrian path prediction, CARPe . It utilizes a variation of Graph Isomorphism
Networks in combination with an agile convolutional neural
network design to form a fast and accurate path prediction
approach. Notable results in both inference speed and prediction accuracy are achieved, improving FPS considerably
in comparison to current state-of-the-art methods while delivering competitive accuracy on well-known path prediction
datasets.

t1 t2

tβ

Figure 1: A high-level illustration of our proposed method,
CARPe . Past pedestrian positions from t1 to the current time
step tβ are fed into the model. This information is propagated through a graph and convolutional neural network in
an end-to-end fashion, producing future predicted trajectories for the next T time steps. In the depicted output, we
show potential examples of intrinsic non-linearities (green),
as well as social effects resulting from collision avoidance
(yellow) and traveling groups (cyan and red).

1995; Pellegrini et al. 2009a; Yamaguchi et al. 2011). These
approaches relied mainly on hand-crafted rules, and were
often limited in scale and function. More recent works have
focused on developing data-driven approaches to tackle the
path prediction problem. Social LSTM (Alahi et al. 2016)
formed a pooling mechanism with recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) to provide social context to the prediction. Since
then, many approaches have added the use of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) within
such frameworks, aiming to model the distribution of possible future trajectories (Gupta et al. 2018; Li 2019; Sadeghian
et al. 2019). Most recently, the work of Kosaraju et al.
(Kosaraju et al. 2019) utilized a graph neural network to
model the social situation in addition to an RNN-based GAN
architecture. However, the existing approaches often have
two major shortcomings. First, they rely on very complex
models with many parameters, which makes the real-time
execution on embedded devices nearly impossible. Second
and more importantly, they use multiple runs over video
frames that inherently violate the real-time nature of path
prediction and limit applicability to real-world problems.
To address the challenges of real-time path prediction, this
paper proposes CARPe Posterum. CARPe is a data-driven
approach which effectively captures both intrinsic and social non-linearities of human trajectories, within real-time

Introduction
Enabling algorithms with the ability to predict future trajectories of pedestrians has received increasing attention in
recent years (Rudenko et al. 2019). Such work is well warranted, with applications in societally impactful technologies like self-driving cars, social robotics, and environmental
monitoring systems. However, this task has many challenging properties: 1) When choosing their future steps, pedestrians typically have an intrinsic goal from which they plan accordingly. Capturing this intent from outside observation requires a fundamental understanding of human movement. 2)
Person-to-person social interactions often influence the future path of a pedestrian, for example, when avoiding collisions or traveling in groups. Therefore, modeling this social
effect is imperative for robust path prediction. 3) Predicting
the future is inherently time-sensitive, as the information is
only useful for decision making if obtained quickly. Therefore, meeting real-time processing constraints is essential for
the safety and usefulness of a path prediction algorithm.
Pioneering works have attempted to incorporate social effects in pedestrian trajectory prediction (Helbing and Molnár
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2346

