The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Hybrid Attention Mechanism for Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action
Localization
Ashraful Islam1 , Chengjiang Long 2 , Richard Radke 1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
JD Digits AI Lab
islama6@rpi.edu, chengjiang.long@jd.com, rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Weakly supervised temporal action localization is a challenging vision task due to the absence of ground-truth temporal
locations of actions in the training videos. With only videolevel supervision during training, most existing methods rely
on a Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) framework to predict
the start and end frame of each action category in a video.
However, the existing MIL-based approach has a major limitation of only capturing the most discriminative frames of
an action, ignoring the full extent of an activity. Moreover,
these methods cannot model background activity effectively,
which plays an important role in localizing foreground activities. In this paper, we present a novel framework named
HAM-Net with a hybrid attention mechanism which includes
temporal soft, semi-soft and hard attentions to address these
issues. Our temporal soft attention module, guided by an auxiliary background class in the classification module, models
the background activity by introducing an “action-ness” score
for each video snippet. Moreover, our temporal semi-soft and
hard attention modules, calculating two attention scores for
each video snippet, help to focus on the less discriminative
frames of an action to capture the full action boundary. Our
proposed approach outperforms recent state-of-the-art methods by at least 2.2% mAP at IoU threshold 0.5 on the THUMOS14 dataset, and by at least 1.3% mAP at IoU threshold
0.75 on the ActivityNet1.2 dataset.

(a)
(b)
(a)

Ground-Truth

(b)

Prediction from MIL-based framework

Figure 1: The existing MIL framework does not necessarily capture the full extent of an action instance. In this example of a diving activity. (a) shows the ground-truth localization, and (b) shows the prediction from an MIL-based
WTAL framework. The MIL framework only captures the
most discriminative part of the diving activity, ignoring the
beginning and ending parts of the full action.
and Roy-Chowdhury 2018; Liu, Jiang, and Wang 2019; Islam and Radke 2020). In this paradigm, a video consists
of several snippets; snippet-level class scores, commonly
known as Class Activation Sequences (CAS), are calculated and then temporally pooled to obtain video-level class
scores. The action proposals are generated by thresholding
the snippet-level class scores. However, this framework has
a major issue: it does not necessarily capture the full extent of an action instance. As training is performed to minimize the video-level classification loss, the network predicts
higher CAS values for the discriminative parts of actions,
ignoring the less discriminative parts. For example, an action might consist of several sub-actions (Hou, Sukthankar,
and Shah 2017). In the MIL paradigm, only a particular subaction might be detected, ignoring the other parts of the action.
An illustrative example of a diving activity is presented in
Figure 1. We observe that only the most discriminative location of the full diving activity is captured by the MIL framework. Capturing only the most distinctive part of an action is
sufficient to produce a high video-level classification accuracy, but does not necessarily result in good temporal localization performance. Another issue with the existing framework is modeling the background activity effectively so that
background frames are not included in the temporal localization prediction. It has been shown previously that background activity plays an important role in action localization

Introduction
Temporal action localization refers to the task of predicting the start and end times of all action instances in a video.
There has been remarkable progress in fully-supervised temporal action localization (Tran et al. 2020; Zhao et al. 2017;
Chao et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2020). However,
annotating the precise temporal ranges of all action instances
in a video dataset is expensive, time-consuming, and errorprone. On the contrary, weakly supervised temporal action
localization (WTAL) can greatly simplify the data collection
and annotation cost.
WTAL aims at localizing and classifying all action instances in a video given only video-level category label during training stage. Most existing WTAL methods rely on
the multiple instance learning (MIL) paradigm (Paul, Roy,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1637

