The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Non-invasive Self-attention for Side Information Fusion in Sequential
Recommendation
Chang Liu1 , Xiaoguang Li2∗ , Guohao Cai2 , Zhenhua Dong2 , Hong Zhu2 , Lifeng Shang2
1

The University of Hong Kong,
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
lcon7@connect.hku.hk, {lixiaoguang11, caiguohao1, dongzhenhua, zhuhong8, shang.lifeng}@huawei.com
Abstract
Sequential recommender systems aim to model users’ evolving interests from their historical behaviors, and hence make
customized time-relevant recommendations. Compared with
traditional models, deep learning approaches such as CNN
and RNN have achieved remarkable advancements in recommendation tasks. Recently, the BERT framework also
emerges as a promising method, benefited from its selfattention mechanism in processing sequential data. However,
one limitation of the original BERT framework is that it only
considers one input source of the natural language tokens. It
is still an open question to leverage various types of information under the BERT framework. Nonetheless, it is intuitively
appealing to utilize other side information, such as item category or tag, for more comprehensive depictions and better
recommendations. In our pilot experiments, we found naive
approaches, which directly fuse types of side information into
the item embeddings, usually bring very little or even negative effects. Therefore, in this paper, we propose the NOninVasive self-Attention mechanism (NOVA) to leverage side
information effectively under the BERT framework. NOVA
makes use of side information to generate better attention distribution, rather than directly altering the item embeddings,
which may cause information overwhelming. We validate the
NOVA-BERT model on both public and commercial datasets,
and our method can stably outperform the state-of-the-art
models with negligible computational overheads.

1

(a) Invasive fusion approaches

(b) Non-invasive fusion approaches

Figure 1: An illustration of invasive and non-invasive methods. (a) Invasive methods fuse all kinds of information irreversibly, and then feed them into sequential models. (b) In
the non-invasive method, the side information only participants in the attention matrix calculation, while item information is kept in an independent vector space.

Introduction

Recommender systems aim to model users’ profiles for personalized recommendations. They are challenging to design
yet business valuable. The sequential recommendation task
is to predict the next item a user would be interested in, given
his historical behaviors (Fang et al. 2019). Compared with
user-level or similarity-based static methods, sequential recommender systems also model the users’ varying interests,
hence are considered more appealing for real applications.
Recently, there is a trend to apply neural network approaches for sequential recommendation tasks, such as
RNN and CNN frameworks (Fang et al. 2019). The neural networks are now widely applied and generally perform

stronger than traditional models such as (Davidson et al.
2010), (Linden, Smith, and York 2003), (Rendle et al. 2012),
(Koren, Bell, and Volinsky 2009), (Rendle, Freudenthaler,
and Schmidt-Thieme 2010) and (He and McAuley 2016).
As stated in (Fang et al. 2019), within the family of
artificial neural networks, the transformer-based models
(Vaswani et al. 2017) are considered more advanced in handling sequential data, for their self-attention mechanism.
Studies like (Sun et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019b,a) that apply transformers for sequential recommendation tasks have
proved their superiority over other frameworks such as CNN
and RNN (Hidasi et al. 2015). The BERT (Bidirectional
Encoder Representations from Transformers) (Devlin et al.
2018) is a leading bidirectional self-attention transformer

∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4249

