The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Recommend from Sparse Data via Generative User Feedback
Wenlin Wang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
wlwang616@gmail.com

Abstract
Traditional collaborative filtering (CF) based recommender
systems tend to perform poorly when the user-item interactions/ratings are highly scarce. To address this, we propose a
learning framework that improves collaborative filtering with
a synthetic feedback loop (CF-SFL) to simulate the user feedback. The proposed framework consists of a “recommender”
and a “virtual user”. The “recommender” is formulated as a
CF model, recommending items according to observed user
preference. The “virtual user” estimates rewards from the
recommended items and generates a feedback in addition to
the observed user preference. The “recommender” connected
with the “virtual user” constructs a closed loop, that recommends users with items and imitates the unobserved feedback
of the users to the recommended items. The synthetic feedback is used to augment the observed user preference and
improve recommendation results. Theoretically, such model
design can be interpreted as inverse reinforcement learning,
which can be learned effectively via rollout (simulation). Experimental results show that the proposed framework is able
to enrich the learning of user preference and boost the performance of existing collaborative filtering methods on multiple
datasets.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed CF-SFL framework
for collaborative filtering.

Unfortunately, the user-item pairs and user feedback are
extremely sparse as compared to the search space of items.
Moreover, when the recommendation systems are trained
on static observations, the user feedback is unavailable until it is deployed in real-world applications; in both training and validation phases, the target systems have no access
to any feedback because no one has observed the recommended items. Therefore, the recommendation systems may
suffer from overfitting, and their performance may degrade
accordingly, especially in the initial phase of deployment.
Although real-world recommendation systems are usually
updated in an online manner with the help of increasing observed user preference (Rendle and Schmidt-Thieme 2008;
Agarwal, Chen, and Elango 2010; He et al. 2016), introducing a feedback learning mechanism during their training
phases can potentially improve the system that is eventually
deployed. However, this aspect has largely been neglected
by the existing recommender system frameworks.
Motivated by these observations, we propose a novel
framework that achieves collaborative filtering with a synthetic feedback loop (CF-SFL). As shown in Figure 1, the
proposed framework consists of a “recommender” and a
“virtual user.” The recommender is a collaborative filtering
(CF) model, which predicts items based on observed user
preference. The observed user preference vector reflects intrinsic preferences of the user, while the recommended items

Introduction
Recommender systems are important modules for abundant
online applications, helping users explore items of potential
interest. As one of the most effective approaches, collaborative filtering (Sarwar et al. 2001; Koren and Bell 2015;
He et al. 2017) and its deep neural networks based variants (He et al. 2017; Wu et al. 2016; Liang et al. 2018; Li
and She 2017; Yang et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018) have
been widely studied. These methods leverage patterns across
similar users and items, predicting user preferences and
have demonstrated encouraging results in recommendation
tasks (Bennett, Lanning et al. 2007; Hu, Koren, and Volinsky 2008; Schedl 2016). Among these works, beside “useritem” pair data (e.g., ratings or interaction/purchase history),
side information, e.g., user reviews and scores on items, has
also been leveraged (Menon et al. 2011; Fang and Si 2011).
Such side information is a kind of user feedback to the recommended items, which is often useful for improving the
recommendation systems.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4436

