The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fact-Enhanced Synthetic News Generation
Kai Shu∗1 , Yichuan Li∗2 , Kaize Ding3 and Huan Liu3
1

Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA, USA
3
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
kshu@iit.edu, yli29@wpi.edu, {kaize.ding, huan.liu}@asu.edu
2

Abstract
The advanced text generation methods have witnessed
great success in text summarization, language translation, and synthetic news generation. However, these
techniques can be abused to generate disinformation
and fake news. To better understand the potential threats
of synthetic news, we develop a novel generation
method FACT G EN to generate high-quality news content. The majority of existing text generation methods
either afford limited supplementary information or lose
consistency between the input and output which makes
the synthetic news less trustworthy. To address these
issues, FACT G EN retrieves external facts to enrich the
output and reconstructs the input claim from the generated content to improve the consistency among the
input and the output. Experiment results on real-world
datasets demonstrate that the generated news contents
of FACT G EN are consistent and contain rich facts. We
also discuss an effective defending technique to identify these synthetic news pieces if FACT G EN was used
to generate fake news.

Claim

iran nuke framework agreement should be judged on
merits, not disinformation.

Content

The united states and its negotiating partners reached a
very strong framework agreement with iran in lausanne , switzerland , on thursday that limits iran ’s nuclear program in such a way as to effectively block
it from building a nuclear weapon. The debate that
has already begun since the announcement of the new
framework will likely result in more heat than light. It
will not be helped by the gathering swirl of dubious
assumptions and doubtful assertions.

Table 1: Example claim and the beginning part of a news
pieces from CNN/DailyMail dataset. The bold sentence
fragments are the consistent word and Itatic fragment is the
supplementary information.
propaganda2 . The wide dissemination of synthetic disinformation and fake news will bring new challenges to the news
ecosystem. Therefore, it becomes critical to understand synthetic fake news for further achieving accurate detection.
In the real-world scenario, fake news deliberately imitates the writing styles of real news, which makes it hard to
be identified by human and computational detection methods (Shu et al. 2020a). Both fake and real news usually contain additional facts3 that are consistent and supplementary
to the news claims. For example, in Table 1 , the news mainly
focuses on framework agreement with Iran, and provide additional facts like the location and time of the agreement. To
eventually identify synthetic disinformation, from an adversarial perspective, we attempt to build a powerful synthetic
news generation model by closing the inherent factual discrepancies between human and machine-generated text. Existing methods on generating synthetic news may fall short
with the following limitations: (1) factual inconsistency, indicating the generated news contradict or refute the news
claims; and (2) factual scarcity, meaning the generated news
content may miss essential details to supplement the claim.
However, directly using or fine-tuning language models does
not help as it is non-trivial to enhance factual consistency

Introduction
With the success of natural language processing, there
has been a significant performance improvement in text
generation applications, including document summarization (Gehrmann, Deng, and Rush 2018), machine translation (Johnson et al. 2017) and synthetic news generation (Leppänen et al. 2017). For example, we can use the
generative adversarial network (GAN) (Aghakhani et al.
2018) or sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) model (Yang et al.
2019b) to generate human-like comments. More recently,
one approach named Grover (Zellers et al. 2019) has
achieved promising result on synthetic news generation. It
generates news pieces conditioned on multiple attributes
such as headlines, authors, and website domains.
However, these methods could also be abused to generate and amplify disinformation and fake news. For example,
the machine generated fake review threaten business reputations1 and virtual characters sends generated story to spread
∗
Equal contributions.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://bit.ly/349tPW2

2

https://bit.ly/36if2e9
We follow the definition of fact as, according to Oxford Dictionary, the information used as evidence or as part of news article.
3

13825

