The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Attentive Neural Point Processes for Event Forecasting
Yulong Gu
Alibaba Group
guyulongcs@gmail.com

Abstract

even unfeasible in real-world scenarios, limit the capability
of capturing complex dependencies among events.
To alleviate the over-simplification problem, recurrent
marked temporal point processes (RMTPP, or Neural point
processes) (Du et al. 2016; Mei and Eisner 2017) utilize
recurrent neural networks (RNN) (Graves, Mohamed, and
Hinton 2013) to model the dynamics in the event sequence
and learn a conditional intensity function based on the hidden vector in RNN. They do not need any prior knowledge about the forms of the conditional intensity function,
and have achieved state-of-the-art performance. However,
they have following shortcomings: (1) They rely heavily on
RNN, which are sequential structures and are hard to model
the long-term dependencies in the sequence (Vaswani et al.
2017), even equipped with Long Short-Term Memory and
Gated Recurrent Units. When the historical event and target event are far away in the sequence, RMTPP based approaches are hard to capture the influence between them. (2)
They are hard to model the complex influence between every pair of historical events, which is crucial for event forecasting. For example, as shown in Figure 1, modeling influences between historical events can help us know that “Nail
Polish” and “Oils” are highly related because they are purchased in proximate time, and accordingly a “Nail Polish”
can be predicted correctly after the user’s last purchase. (3)
They have limited interpretation ability for their predictions.
To address these problems, we propose ANPP, an
Attentive Neural Point Processes framework, which exploits
time-aware self-attention layer to explicitly model the influence between each pair of historical events. Self-attention
have achieved state-of-the-art performance in Natural language Processing. However, it is naturally unable to model
the continuous time information in event sequence. In this
work, we propose the Inter-event duration bucket embedding method to embed the time intervals information between events. Firstly, ANPP embeds markers and time intervals in the event sequence into vectors. Then it leverages multi-head time-aware self-attention to model the influence between each pair of the events as attention scores,
and represent historical events as context vectors. Based on
the generated context vectors, the marker of the next event
can be predicted straightforwardly, and the conditional intensity function is calculated as well, which can be used to
further predict the timing of the next event. Compared with

Event sequence, where each event is associated with a marker
and a timestamp, is increasingly ubiquitous in various applications. Accordingly, event forecasting emerges to be a
crucial problem, which aims to predict the next event based
on the historical sequence. In this paper, we propose ANPP,
an Attentive Neural Point Processes framework to solve this
problem. In comparison with state-of-the-art methods like recurrent marked temporal point processes, ANPP leverages
the time-aware self-attention mechanism to explicitly model
the influence between every pair of historical events, resulting in more accurate predictions of events and better interpretation ability. Extensive experiments on one synthetic and
four real-world datasets demonstrate that ANPP can achieve
significant performance gains against state-of-the-art methods for predictions of both timings and markers. To facilitate future research, we release the codes and datasets at
https://github.com/guyulongcs/AAAI2021 ANPP.

Introduction
Event sequence is increasingly ubiquitous in various areas,
such as medical industry, finance, e-commerce and so on.
Accordingly, event forecasting, which aims to predict what
type of event will happen at what time, emerges to be a challenging but crucial problem. Figure 1 illustrates a real example of a customer’s purchase sequence in an E-commerce
site, and accurate predictions of users’ purchases would be
extremely important for personalized recommendation and
marketing (Gu et al. 2020a,b; Liu et al. 2020; Manzoor and
Akoglu 2017).
Temporal point processes (Daley and Vere-Jones 2007)
present a general mathematical framework to model the sequential event data according to the prior knowledge of the
application scenarios. Typical methods like Hawkes processes (Hawkes 1971) assume that the historical events have
independent influence on the next event, and specify a fixed
parametric conditional intensity function λ∗ (t) to formulate
the influence between each historical event (e.g., the first n
events in Figure 1) and the target one (e.g., the last event in
the figure) (Manzoor and Akoglu 2017; Bray and Schoenberg 2013). Their specialized parametric forms of the conditional intensity functions, which might be oversimplified or
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7592

