The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Supervised Self-Supervision by Combining Deep Learning and Probabilistic
Logic
Hunter Lang,1* Hoifung Poon 2
MIT 1
Microsoft Research 2
hjl@mit.edu, hoifung@microsoft.com

Abstract

labels as latent variables, and incorporates prior beliefs over
labels and their dependencies as virtual evidence in a graphical model. The marginal beliefs over the latent variables are
used as probabilistic labels to train a deep neural network for
the end prediction task. The trained neural network in turn
provides belief updates to refine the graphical model parameters, and the process continues, using variational EM.
Wang and Poon (2018) show that DPL can effectively
combine diverse sources of self-supervision in a coherent
probabilistic framework and subsume supervised and semisupervised learning as special cases. While promising, DPL
and related approaches still require human experts to manually specify self-supervision. This is particularly challenging
for self-supervision such as data programming and joint inference, which require domain expertise and extensive effort
to identify the many relevant virtual evidences for attaining
high accuracy in the end task.
In this paper, we propose Self-Supervised SelfSupervision (S4) as a general framework for learning
to add new self-supervision. In particular, we extend deep
probabilistic logic (DPL) with structure learning and active
learning capabilities (see Figure 1). After running DPL
using the pre-specified seed self-supervision, S4 iteratively
proposes new virtual evidence using the trained deep neural
network and graphical model, and determines whether to
add this evidence directly to the graphical model or ask
a human expert to vet it. The former can be viewed as
structured self-training, which generalizes self-training
(e.g., McClosky, Charniak, and Johnson 2006) by adding
not only individual labels but also arbitrary probabilistic
factors over them. The latter subsumes feature-based
active learning (Druck, Settles, and McCallum 2009) with
arbitrary features expressible using probabilistic logic. By
combining the two in a unified framework, S4 can leverage
both paradigms for generating new self-supervision and
subsume many related approaches as special cases.
We use transformer-based models for the deep neural network in DPL and explore various self-supervision proposal
mechanisms based on neural attention and label entropy.
Our method can learn to propose both unary potential factors over individual labels and joint-inference factors over
multiple labels. We conducted experiments on various natural language processing (NLP) tasks to explore the potential of our method. We held out gold labels for evaluation

Labeling training examples at scale is a perennial challenge
in machine learning. Self-supervision methods compensate
for the lack of direct supervision by leveraging prior knowledge to automatically generate noisy labeled examples. Deep
probabilistic logic (DPL) is a unifying framework for selfsupervised learning that represents unknown labels as latent variables and incorporates diverse self-supervision using probabilistic logic to train a deep neural network end-toend using variational EM. While DPL is successful at combining pre-specified self-supervision, manually crafting selfsupervision to attain high accuracy may still be tedious and
challenging. In this paper, we propose Self-Supervised SelfSupervision (S4), which adds to DPL the capability to learn
new self-supervision automatically. Starting from an initial
“seed,” S4 iteratively uses the deep neural network to propose new self supervision. These are either added directly (a
form of structured self-training) or verified by a human expert
(as in feature-based active learning). Experiments show that
S4 is able to automatically propose accurate self-supervision
and can often nearly match the accuracy of supervised methods with a tiny fraction of the human effort.

Introduction
Machine learning has made great strides in enhancing model
sophistication and learning efficacy, as exemplified by recent advances in deep learning (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). However, contemporary supervised learning techniques require a large amount of labeled data, which is expensive and time-consuming to produce. This problem is
particularly acute in specialized domains like biomedicine,
where crowdsourcing is difficult to apply. Self-supervision
has emerged as a promising paradigm to overcome the
annotation bottleneck by automatically generating noisy
training examples from unlabeled data. In particular, taskspecific self-supervision converts prior knowledge into selfsupervision templates for label generation, as in distant supervision (Mintz et al. 2009), data programming (Ratner
et al. 2016), and joint inference (Poon and Domingos 2008).
Deep probabilistic logic (DPL) is a unifying framework
for self-supervision that combines deep learning with probabilistic logic (Wang and Poon 2018). It represents unknown
* Work done while at Microsoft Research.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4978

