The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Newton Optimization on Helmholtz Decomposition for Continuous Games
Giorgia Ramponi, Marcello Restelli
Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informazione e Bioingegneria, Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32, 20133, Milano, Italy
{giorgia.ramponi, marcello.restelli}@polimi.it

Abstract

policy-gradient agents’ interaction has proven unsuccessful in learning a set of policies that converges to a (local)
Nash Equilibrium (Mertikopoulos, Papadimitriou, and Piliouras 2018; Papadimitriou and Piliouras 2016). More than
one agent leads to the failure of standard optimization methods in most games due to the non-stationarity of the environment and the lack of cooperation between the agents.
How to optimize multiple policy-gradient agents is a problem of theoretical interest and practical importance. Over
the past two years, a growing number of papers has addressed this problem by focusing on continuous (differentiable) games, i.e., games where the agent’s objective functions are twice differentiable with respect to the policy parameters (Mazumdar, Ratliff, and Sastry 2020). Some of
them only consider the competitive setting due to the success of GANs (Mescheder, Nowozin, and Geiger 2017). The
general case was considered only recently, where the gradient descent update rule was combined with second-order
terms (Balduzzi et al. 2018; Letcher et al. 2018; Foerster
et al. 2018; Schäfer and Anandkumar 2019). Some of them
guarantee linear convergence under specific assumptions.
In this paper, we study how to build a Newton-based algorithm (NOHD) for learning policies in multi-agent environments. First of all, we start by analyzing two specific game
classes: Potential Games and Hamiltonian Games (Section 3). In Section 4, we propose a Newton-based update for
these two classes of games, for which linear-rate algorithms
that guarantee convergence are known, proving quadratic
convergence rates. Then, we extend the algorithm to the
general case, neither Hamiltonian nor Potential. We show
that the proposed algorithm respects some desiderata, similar to those proposed in (Balduzzi et al. 2018): the algorithm
has to guarantee convergence to (local) Nash Equilibria in
(D1) Potential and (D2) Hamiltonian games; (D3) the algorithm has to be attracted by stable fixed points and (D4) repelled by unstable fixed points. Finally, in Section 6, we analyze the empirical performance of NOHD when agents optimize a Boltzmann policy in three bimatrix games: Prisoner’s
Dilemma, Matching Pennies, and Rock-Paper-Scissors. In
the last experiment, we study the learning performance of
NOHD in two continuous gridworld environments. In all
experiments, NOHD achieves great results confirming the
quadratic nature of the update. The proofs of all the results

Many learning problems involve multiple agents that optimize different interactive functions. In these problems,
standard policy gradient algorithms fail due to the nonstationarity of the setting and the different interests of each
agent. In fact, the learning algorithms must consider the complex dynamics of these systems to guarantee rapid convergence towards a (local) Nash equilibrium. In this paper, we
propose NOHD (Newton Optimization on Helmholtz Decomposition), a Newton-like algorithm for multi-agent learning problems based on the decomposition of the system dynamics into its irrotational (Potential) and solenoidal (Hamiltonian) components. This method ensures quadratic convergence in purely irrotational systems and pure solenoidal systems. Furthermore, we show that NOHD is attracted to stable fixed points in general multi-agent systems and repelled
by strict saddle ones. Finally, we empirically compare the
NOHD’s performance with state-of-the-art algorithms on
some bimatrix games and in a continuous Gridworld environment.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton,
Barto et al. 1998) methods with multiple agents (Buşoniu,
Babuška, and De Schutter 2010; Zhang, Yang, and Başar
2019) have made substantial progress in solving decisionmaking problems such as playing Go (Silver et al. 2016),
robotic control problems (Lillicrap et al. 2015), playing card
games (Brown and Sandholm 2019) and autonoumous driving (Shalev-Shwartz, Shammah, and Shashua 2016). Furthermore, in other machine learning fields, powerful algorithms that optimize multiple losses have recently been proposed. Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) is an example, which achieves successful results in Computer Vision (Isola et al. 2017; Ledig
et al. 2017) and Natural Language Generation (Nie, Narodytska, and Patel 2018; Yu et al. 2017). On the other
hand, thanks to their ability to learn in the stochastic policy
space and their effectiveness in solving high-dimensional,
continuous state and action problems, policy-gradient algorithms (Peters and Schaal 2006) are natural candidates for
use in multi-agent learning problems. Nonetheless, multiple
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11325

