The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalize a Small Pre-trained Model to Arbitrarily Large TSP Instances
Zhang-Hua Fu 1,2 , Kai-Bin Qiu 2 , Hongyuan Zha 1,3 *
1

2

Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen, China
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
fuzhanghua@cuhk.edu.cn, 220019002@link.cuhk.edu.cn, zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract

proposed for the TSP (briefly reviewed in the next section),
which attempt to automate the search process by learning
mechanisms. This type of methods do not rely heavily on
expert knowledge, can be easily generalized to various combinatorial optimization problems, thus become a promising
research direction.
For the TSP, existing ML based algorithms can be roughly
classified into two categories, i.e., (1) supervised learning
(SL) algorithms which attempt to discover common patterns
supervised by pre-computed TSP solutions. (2) reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms which try to learn during
the interaction with the environment (without pre-computed
solutions).
Once well trained, SL models are able to provide useful information that significantly speeds up the search of
high-quality TSP solutions. However, the performance of
a pre-trained model of fixed size may decrease drastically
while tackling TSP instances of different sizes, since the distributions of the training instances are very different from
the test instances. On the other hand, training SL models
generally requires a large number of pre-computed optimal
(at least high-quality) TSP solutions, being unaffordable for
large-scale TSP instances. These drawbacks seriously limit
the usage of SL on large-scale TSP instances.
However, we believe the idea of discovering common patterns in a supervised manner is valuable. If we can train a
small-scale SL model within reasonable time and find a way
to smoothly generalize it to large-scale cases (without precomputing a large number of solutions again), it is hopeful
to inherit the advantages of SL while avoiding its drawbacks.
Motivated by this idea, we develop a series of techniques,
in order to improve the generalization ability of the model
trained by SL. Furthermore, we combine SL and RL to form
a hybrid algorithm, which performs favorably with respect
to the existing ML based TSP algorithms. Overall, the main
contributions are summarized as follows.

For the traveling salesman problem (TSP), the existing supervised learning based algorithms suffer seriously from the
lack of generalization ability. To overcome this drawback,
this paper tries to train (in supervised manner) a small-scale
model, which could be repetitively used to build heat maps
for TSP instances of arbitrarily large size, based on a series
of techniques such as graph sampling, graph converting and
heat maps merging. Furthermore, the heat maps are fed into
a reinforcement learning approach (Monte Carlo tree search),
to guide the search of high-quality solutions. Experimental results based on a large number of instances (with up to 10,000
vertices) show that, this new approach clearly outperforms
the existing machine learning based TSP algorithms, and significantly improves the generalization ability of the trained
model.

Introduction
The travelling salesman problem (TSP) is a well-known combinatorial optimization problem with various real-life applications, such as transportation, robots routing, biology, circuit
design. Given n cities as well as the distance dij between
each pair of cities i and j, the TSP aims to find a cheapest tour
which starts from a beginning city (arbitrarily chosen), visits
each city exactly once, and finally returns to the beginning
city. This problem is NP-hard, thus being extremely difficult
from the viewpoint of theoretical computer science.
Due to its importance in both theory and practice, many
algorithms have been developed, mostly based on traditional
operations research (OR) methods. Among the existing TSP
algorithms, the best exact solver Concorde (Applegate et al.
2009) succeeded in demonstrating optimality of an Euclidean
TSP instance with 85,900 cities, while the leading heuristics
(Helsgaun 2017) and (Taillard and Helsgaun 2019) are capable of obtaining near-optimal solutions for instances with
millions of cities. However, these algorithms are very complicated, which consist of many hand-crafted rules and heavily
rely on expert knowledge, thus being difficult to generalize
to other combinatorial optimization problems.
To overcome those limitations, recent years have seen a
number of machine learning (ML) based algorithms being

• Methodologies: At first, we train a small-scale (with size
m) model by supervised learning, based on a graph convolutional residual network with attention mechanism (AttGCRN). Once well trained, given a TSP instance with m
vertices, the model is able to build a heat map over the
edges. Then, we try to smoothly generalize this model to
handle large instances. For this purpose, given a large-scale
TSP instance, we repeatedly use a graph sampling method

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7474

