The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Group Testing on a Network
Arlei Silva, Ambuj Singh
University of California, Santa Barbara
{arlei,ambuj}@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract

mar 2020) but Dorfman’s design remains attractive due to
its easy implementation. In particular, higher savings can be
achieved with more rounds and stages of testing at the cost
of more intricate procedures and/or longer wait times.
Dorfman assumed that groups were assembled at random.
Later studies have identified the importance of the grouping
step to minimize the use of testing resources. For instance,
when screening for a pathogen, a common guideline is to put
together family members and other closely connected subgroups (Fang et al. 2020; Augenblick et al. 2020). However,
we know that people tend to maintain a complex network
of contacts (Newman 2002; Salathé et al. 2010) and thus
effectively assembling the groups becomes a challenge.
This paper investigates the problem of designing groups
for testing based on a transmission network—e.g., discovered based on contact tracing. Individual tests are performed
only for samples belonging to positive groups. We formalize our problem as a graph partitioning problem, where the
goal is to select groups that will likely minimize the number of tests required to screen the entire network. Figure 1
illustrates how groups are assembled and tested.
COVID-19. A major motivation for this work is the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which has become one of the
worst healthcare crises in history. While many experts agree
that a vaccine is the only effective long-term solution, a combination of social-distancing, testing and contact-tracing has
been advocated as a viable alternative to control the spread
of the virus (Taipale, Romer, and Linnarsson 2020). However, most countries have failed to provide large-scale and
rapid testing for SARS-COVID-2 (the virus), as cases have
increased faster than the testing infrastructure. The most
widely used testing protocol, the qRT-PCR (Corman et al.
2020), costs approximately $100 per test and requires (1)
swab collection, (2) RNA purification, and (3) reverse transcription and quantitative PCR. Steps 2 and 3 are performed
in a lab, requiring a trained technician, reagents, and specialized equipment. Therefore, there is a significant effort by researchers and healthcare providers to speed-up and decrease
the cost of testing for SARS-COVID-2. Several countries are
using group testing with this purpose.12

Group testing—where multiple samples are tested together
using a single test kit and individual tests are performed only
for samples in positive groups—is a popular strategy to optimize the use of testing resources. We investigate how to effectively group samples for testing based on a transmission
network. We formalize the group assembling problem as a
graph partitioning problem, where the goal is to minimize the
expected number of tests needed to screen the entire network.
The problem is shown to be computationally hard and thus we
focus on designing effective heuristics for it. Using realistic
epidemic models on real contact networks, we show that our
approaches save up to 33% of resources—compared to the
best baseline—at 4% prevalence, are still effective at higher
prevalence, and are robust to missing transmission data.

Introduction
Cost-efficient, timely, and massive testing is a key challenge in many domains. Population-scale testing during a
pandemic is likely the first scenario with such a challenge
that comes to mind (Taipale, Romer, and Linnarsson 2020).
However, one could argue that testing plays an even bigger
role in manufacturing, for products ranging from resistors to
drugs (Du, Hwang, and Hwang 2000).
A popular approach to increase testing capacity is group
testing (Dorfman 1943), which was originally proposed to
test American soldiers for syphilis during WWII. The idea
was to pool multiple individuals into groups and test each
group using a single test kit. A negative test for the group
would indicate that none of the group members had the
pathogen. In case the group test returned positive, each individual in the corresponding group would be tested alone.
This strategy is provably effective when the prevalence (or
frequency) of the pathogen is low, as most groups will be
negative. Group sizes have to be optimized according to the
prevalence—large groups might be uninformative. In practice, larger groups also make it harder to detect the pathogen
at the group level due to dilution (Ghosh et al. 2020). Today,
group testing is also applied to problems outside of healthcare, such as in computer networks, and production lines
(Du, Hwang, and Hwang 2000). There are more recent approaches for group testing (Aldridge 2020; Broder and Ku-

1
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/coronavirus-testshortages-trigger-a-new-strategy-group-screening2/
2
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/07/opinion/coronavirusgroup-testing.html

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4348

