The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bigram and Unigram Based Text Attack via Adaptive Monotonic Heuristic Search
Xinghao Yang1 * , Weifeng Liu2 , James Bailey3 , Dacheng Tao4 , Wei Liu1
1

School of Computer Science, University of Technology Sydney, Australia, 2 School of Information and Control Engineering,
China University of Petroleum (East China), China, 3 School of Computing and Information Systems, The University of
Melbourne, Australia, 4 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
xinghao.yang@student.uts.edu.au, liuwf@upc.edu.cn, baileyj@unimelb.edu.au, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au,
wei.liu@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Original Input

Unigram Attack

Bigram Attack

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to
adversarial images, while their robustness in text classification are rarely studied. Several lines of text attack methods
have been proposed in the literature, such as character-level,
word-level, and sentence-level attacks. However, it is still a
challenge to minimize the number of word distortions necessary to induce misclassification, while simultaneously ensuring the lexical correctness, syntactic correctness, and semantic similarity. In this paper, we propose the Bigram and Unigram based Monotonic Heuristic Search (BU-MHS) method
to examine the vulnerability of deep models. Our method has
three major merits. Firstly, we propose to attack text documents not only at the unigram word level but also at the bigram level to avoid producing meaningless outputs. Secondly,
we propose a hybrid method to replace the input words with
both their synonyms and sememe candidates, which greatly
enriches potential substitutions compared to only using synonyms. Lastly, we design a search algorithm, i.e., Monotonic
Heuristic Search (MHS), to determine the priority of word
replacements, aiming to reduce the modification cost in an
adversarial attack. We evaluate the effectiveness of BU-MHS
on IMDB, AG’s News, and Yahoo! Answers text datasets by
attacking four popular DNNs models. Results show that our
BU-MHS achieves the highest attack success rate by changing the smallest number of words compared with baselines.

New York
Machine Learning
Primary School

Fresh York
Device Learning
Major School

Empire State
Data Mining
Elementary School

1

Table 1: Difference between unigram and bigram attacks.

and semantic similar. This will ensure the adversarial modifications are imperceptible to human readers. Secondly, the
words in text sequences are discrete tokens instead of continuous pixel values as in images. Therefore, it is infeasible
to directly compute the model gradient with respect to every word. Thirdly, making small perturbations on many pixels may still yield a meaningful image from human perception perspectives. However, any small changes, even a single
word, to text document can make a sentence meaningless.
Several text attack methods have been proposed, such
as character-level attack, sentence-level attack, and wordlevel attack (Wang et al. 2019). Character-level attack (e.g.,
noise → nosie) leads to lexical errors, and sentence-level attack (i.e., inserting a whole sentence into the original text)
often causes significant semantic changes. To avoid these
problems, many recent works focused on word-level attacks
that replace the original word with another carefully selected one (Zhang et al. 2019). However, existing methods mostly generate substitution candidates for every individual word (i.e., a unigram), which can easily break commonly used phrases, leading to meaningless outputs (e.g.,
high school → tall school). In addition, when sorting word
replacement orders, most algorithms calculate the word important score (WIS) and attack them via a descending order of the WIS. There are different definitions of WIS, such
as probability weighted word saliency (PWWS) (Ren et al.
2019) and the changes of DNNs’ predictions before and after
deleting a word (Jin et al. 2020), etc. One major drawback
of using such a static attack order is word substitution inflexibility, e.g., sequentially selecting the top-3 WIS words
{top1, top2, top3} may not fool a classifier but sometimes
the combination {top1, top3} can make it.
In this work, we propose a new word-level attack method
named Bigram and Unigram based Monotonic Heuristic
Search (BU-MHS) which effectively addresses all the draw-

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have exhibited brittleness towards adversarial attacks in the image domain, where an adversarial image is intentionally modified with a only small
number of pixel perturbations (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). This phenomenon raises
great interest in the Computer Vision community, while
the vulnerability of DNNs in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) field is generally underestimated, especially for those
security-sensitive NLP tasks, such as spam filtering, webpage phishing, and sentiment analysis (Atallah et al. 2001).
Compared to image attacks, there are non-trivial difficulties in crafting text adversarial samples. Firstly, the text adversarial samples should be lexical correct, syntactic correct,
* Corresponding Author (xinghao.yang@student.uts.edu.au).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

706

