The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Graph Neural Networks with Approximate Gradient Descent
Qunwei Li,1 Shaofeng Zou, 2 Wenliang Zhong 1
1

Ant Group, Hangzhou, China
University at Buffalo, the State University of New York
qunwei.qw@antgroup.com, szou3@buffalo.edu, yice.zwl@antgroup.com
2

Abstract

Although being successful in practical applications, theoretical understanding of GNNs is still lacking in the literature.
There is a strong need to theoretically understand why GNNs
work well on practical graph-structured data, and to further
design provably efficient learning algorithms for GNN.
However, even for commonly used DNN architectures, it
is in general challenging to develop theoretical understanding
of the learning dynamics and to learn simple neural networks
(Goel, Klivans, and Meka 2018). Specifically, if we assume
that the data is generated according to a teacher neural network, the goal is then to recover the true parameters of the
teacher neural network. The major challenge lies in the highly
non-convex nature of DNN’s objective function. For example, in the agnostic setting with bounded distributions and
square loss, learning a single ReLU with unit norm hidden
weight vectors is notoriously difficult (Goel et al. 2017). It
was proved by Brutzkus and Globerson (Gautier, Nguyen,
and Hein 2016) that the problem of distribution-free recover
of the unknown weight vector for learning one hidden layer
convolutional neural network (CNN) is NP-hard, even if nonoverlapping patch structure is assumed. At this point, a major
open problem is still to understand mildest conditions and design of provably efficient algorithms that lead to learnability
of neural networks in polynomial time.
In this paper, we focus on the parameter recovery problem
for learning GNNs where the training data is generated according to a teacher GNN. We design provably efficient algorithms to recover the true parameters of the teacher GNN. Our
focus is to develop a comprehensive framework for designing
and analyzing convergence of GNN training algorithms.

The first provably efficient algorithm for learning graph neural
networks (GNNs) with one hidden layer for node information
convolution is provided in this paper. Two types of GNNs
are investigated, depending on whether labels are attached
to nodes or graphs. A comprehensive framework for designing and analyzing convergence of GNN training algorithms
is developed. The algorithm proposed is applicable to a wide
range of activation functions including ReLU, Leaky ReLU,
Sigmod, Softplus and Swish. It is shown that the proposed algorithm guarantees a linear convergence rate to the underlying
true parameters of GNNs. For both types of GNNs, sample
complexity in terms of the number of nodes or the number of
graphs is characterized. The impact of feature dimension and
GNN structure on the convergence rate is also theoretically
characterized. Numerical experiments are further provided to
validate our theoretical analysis.

Introduction
Recent success of deep neural network (DNN) has dramatically boosted its application in various application domains,
e.g., computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012), natural language processing (Young et al. 2018) and
strategic reasoning with reinforcement learning (Sutton and
Barto 2018; Silver et al. 2017). Although DNN usually has
millions of parameters and a highly non-convex objective
function, simple optimization techniques, e.g., stochastic gradient descent and its variants, can efficiently train such a
complicated structure successfully. However, there are many
applications, where data is represented in the form of graphs.
For example, in social networks, a graph-based learning system can exploit the interconnection between the users to make
highly accurate inferences. DNN, when applied to graph
based structural data, has to face with some new challenges,
and cannot be directly applied. To address the new challenges,
graph neural network (GNN) has been proposed recently and
has been demonstrated to have massive expressive power on
graphs. GNNs have been shown to be successful in many
application domains, e.g., social networks, knowledge graph,
recommender systems, molecular fingerprint, and protein interface networks (Wu et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2018; Zhou et al.
2018).

Main Contributions
Our first contribution is the design and convergence analysis
of an approximate gradient descent algorithm for training
GNNs. The algorithm is based on the idea of inexact optimization and approximate training (Schmidt, Roux, and Bach
2011; Li et al. 2017; Cao and Gu 2019), and the major advantage is that it reduces computational complexity while
guaranteeing convergence and learnability at the same time.
We prove that the proposed algorithm recovers the underlying
true parameters of the teacher network with a linear convergence rate up to statistical precision. The assumptions are
mild, and can be easily satisfied in practice. Specifically, our
analysis is applicable to a wide range of activation functions

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8438

