The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Token-Aware Virtual Adversarial Training in Natural Language Understanding
Linyang Li, Xipeng Qiu
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{linyangli19, xpqiu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

substitution-based methods such as Ebrahimi et al. (2017);
Alzantot et al. (2018); Jin et al. (2019); Cheng, Jiang, and
Macherey (2019); Li et al. (2020), which use synonyms or
similar words/characters to replace the original ones in the
sequence. The process of these methods is inefficient since
finding proper substitutions requires massive calculations.
In most cases, it is not necessary to craft substitutionbased adversarial samples during the adversarial training
process. Instead, Miyato et al. (2017) propose a virtual adversarial training method that generates gradient-based perturbations on the embedding space as virtual adversarial
samples, which can help improve the generalization abilities
of NLP models in various tasks (Miyato, Dai, and Goodfellow 2016; Miyato et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2020).
Despite the success of virtual adversarial training in NLP
tasks, the perturbations generated from the virtual adversarial training method are rather rigid. The most obvious problem is two-fold:
(A) Initialization Problem:
During the virtual adversarial training process, the perturbations are randomly initialized in every mini-batch. Unlike
the computer vision fields where pixels in an image do not
possess information across instances, tokens in languages
possess similar information in different sequences. Therefore, randomly initializing the perturbations on the same tokens in different sequences may neglect the fact that tokens
could possess the same information and possible gradient direction across instances, which could be very helpful in generating fine-grained perturbations. That is, random initialization of the perturbations could cause unnecessary noise
during the virtual adversarial training.
(B) Constraint Problem:
On the other hand, traditional virtual adversarial training
method constrains the perturbations with normalization balls
which are usually Frobenius normalization. Such a constraint generates an instance-level perturbation: the normalization ball acts on the embeddings of the entire sequence.
Therefore the constraint is not sensitive to different tokens in
the sequence. In natural languages, some of the tokens in the
sequence play more important roles whiles others are relatively trivial in contributing valuable information to the task.
Therefore it is intuitive to construct token-level constraints
to construct token-level perturbation rather than sentencelevel constraints on the entire embedding space.

Gradient-based adversarial training is widely used in improving the robustness of neural networks, while it cannot be easily adapted to natural language processing tasks since the
embedding space is discrete. In natural language processing
fields, virtual adversarial training is introduced since texts are
discrete and cannot be perturbed by gradients directly. Alternatively, virtual adversarial training, which generates perturbations on the embedding space, is introduced in NLP tasks.
Despite its success, existing virtual adversarial training methods generate perturbations roughly constrained by Frobenius
normalization balls. To craft fine-grained perturbations, we
propose a Token-Aware Virtual Adversarial Training method.
We introduce a token-level accumulated perturbation vocabulary to initialize the perturbations better and use a tokenlevel normalization ball to constrain these perturbations pertinently. Experiments show that our method improves the
performance of pre-trained models such as BERT and ALBERT in various tasks by a considerable margin. The proposed method improves the score of the GLUE benchmark
from 78.3 to 80.9 using BERT model and it also enhances
the performance of sequence labeling and text classification
tasks.

Introduction
Neural networks are proved vulnerable to crafted adversarial
samples. Recent works have shown that adversarial training
is helpful in constructing robust neural networks (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Madry et al. 2018) against
adversarial samples. During adversarial training, gradients
are collected from the clean samples to generate small perturbations. The gradients are collected and constrained by
a normalization ball, then added to the original samples to
create adversarial samples. Then these adversarial samples
are used in the training process to improve the robustness
against gradient-based adversarial attacks.
However, in the natural language processing fields,
gradient-based adversarial attack and adversarial training
methods cannot be easily adapted since the embedding space
is discrete and gradients cannot be applied directly to form
a perturbation. Traditional methods used to generate adversarial samples for adversarial training usually incorporate
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8410

