The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Similarity Reasoning and Filtration for Image-Text Matching
Haiwen Diao,1 Ying Zhang,2 Lin Ma,3 Huchuan Lu1 *
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Meituan, Beijing, China
r1228240468@mail.dlut.edu.cn, yinggzhang@tencent.com,
forest.linma@gmail.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract

Global&Local Alignments
SGR

Image-text matching plays a critical role in bridging the vision and language, and great progress has been made by exploiting the global alignment between image and sentence,
or local alignments between regions and words. However,
how to make the most of these alignments to infer more
accurate matching scores is still underexplored. In this paper, we propose a novel Similarity Graph Reasoning and Attention Filtration (SGRAF) network for image-text matching. Specifically, the vector-based similarity representations
are firstly learned to characterize the local and global alignments in a more comprehensive manner, and then the Similarity Graph Reasoning (SGR) module relying on one graph
convolutional neural network is introduced to infer relationaware similarities with both the local and global alignments.
The Similarity Attention Filtration (SAF) module is further
developed to integrate these alignments effectively by selectively attending on the significant and representative alignments and meanwhile casting aside the interferences of nonmeaningful alignments. We demonstrate the superiority of
the proposed method with achieving state-of-the-art performances on the Flickr30K and MSCOCO datasets, and the
good interpretability of SGR and SAF modules with extensive qualitative experiments and analyses.

SAF

A child splashes in water

Figure 1: Illustration of the SGRAF. Nodes of red and
other colors encode image-text and region-word alignments
respectively. SGR module captures their relationships to
achieve comprehensive similarity reasoning and SAF module reduces the interferences of less-meaningful alignments

learn to measure their similarity under the guidance of a
matching criterion. For example, Wang et al. (Wang, Li, and
Lazebnik 2016) and Faghri et al. (Faghri et al. 2017) map
the whole image and the full sentence into a common vector
space, and compute the cosine similarity between the global
representations. To improve the discriminative ability of the
unified embeddings, many strategies such as semantic concept learning (Huang et al. 2018; Shi et al. 2019) and region relationship reasoning (Li et al. 2019) are developed
to enhance visual features by incorporating local region semantics. However, these approaches fail to capture the local interactions between image regions and sentence fragments, leading to limited interpretability and performance
gains. To address this problem, Karpathy et al. (Karpathy
and Li 2015) and Lee et al. (Lee et al. 2018) propose to discover all the possible alignments between image regions and
sentence fragments, which produce impressive retrieval results and inspire a surge of works (Wang et al. 2019c; Hu
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Chen et al. 2020; Wehrmann,
Kolling, and Barros 2020) to explore more accurate finegrained correspondence. Although noticeable improvements
have been made by designing various mechanisms to encode
more powerful features or capture more accurate alignments,
these approaches neglect the importance of similarity computation, which is the key to explore the complex matching
patterns between image and text.
To be more specific, there are three defects in previous
approaches. Firstly, these methods compute scalar-based co-

Introduction
Image-text matching refers to measuring the visual-semantic
similarity between image and text, which is becoming increasingly significant for various vision-and-language tasks,
such as cross-modal retrieval (Wang et al. 2020), image
captioning (Anderson et al. 2018), text-to-image synthesis
(Xu et al. 2018), and multimodal neural machine translation (Toyama et al. 2017). Although great progress has been
made in recent years, image-text matching remains a challenging problem due to complex matching patterns and large
semantic discrepancies between image and text.
To accurately establish the association between the visual and textual observations, a large proportion of methods
(Liu et al. 2017; Nam, Ha, and Kim 2017; Lee et al. 2018;
Song and Soleymani 2019; Wang et al. 2019c; Li et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2020) utilize deep neural networks to firstly encode image and text into compact representations, and then
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1218

