The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inference Fusion with Associative Semantics for Unseen Object Detection
Yanan Li1 , Pengyang Li2 , Han Cui3 , Donghui Wang2

∗

1

Zhejiang Lab
Zhejiang University
3
University of California, Los Angeles
liyn@zhejianglab.com, pyli@zju.edu.cn, elviscuihan@g.ucla.edu, dhwang@zju.edu.cn
2

Analogy with past
knowledge (seen objects)

Abstract
We study the problem of object detection when training and
test objects are disjoint, i.e. no training examples of the target classes are available. Existing unseen object detection
approaches usually combine generic detection frameworks
with a single-path unseen classifier, by aligning object regions with semantic class embeddings. In this paper, inspired
from human cognitive experience, we propose a simple but
effective dual-path detection model that further explores associative semantics to supplement the basic visual-semantic
knowledge transfer. We use a novel target-centric multipleassociation strategy to establish concept associations, to ensure that the predictor generalized to unseen domain can be
learned during training. In this way, through a reasonable
inference fusion mechanism, those two parallel reasoning
paths can strengthen the correlation between seen and unseen objects, thus improving detection performance. Experiments show that our inductive method can significantly boost
the performance by 7.42% over inductive models, and even
5.25% over transductive models on MSCOCO dataset.

unseen object

Unseen or
seen + unseen
Leaf butterfly

butterfly

Prying mantis
beetle
leaves

moth

Inference
Fusion
Final
judgment

……

Learned
associative
semantics

Matched text description or attributes
With wings closed, it closely
resembles a dry leaf with dark veins ...

Leaf butterfly

Figure 1: Existing ZSD models generally adopt single-path
label prediction for each RoI, realized by aligning RoI with
attributes (or text descriptions). Humans learn a previously
unseen concept by both inferring through auxiliary knowledge (e.g. attributes) and associating and analogizing with
seen objects. Inspired from this, we propose a two-path reasoning mechanism for ZSD and employ inference fusion to
obtain the final results.

Introduction

Wang 2020). In contrast with zero-shot recognition (Lampert, Nickisch, and Harmeling 2013; Wang et al. 2016; Li
et al. 2017; Sung et al. 2018; Zablocki et al. 2019; Luo et al.
2020), it requires the model to not only recognize the object
types but also localize the targets among millions of potential regions of interest (RoIs). Current ZSD models generally assume the localization process is class-agnostic (Wang
et al. 2020), i.e. capable of proposing high-confidence regions for unseen objects, and mainly focus on attaching a
zero-shot classifier within de facto detection networks. They
leverage shared semantic information (e.g. attributes, word
vectors, text descriptions) to enable the knowledge transfer
from seen objects to unseen ones. Specifically, it first learns
the visual-semantic mapping from visual features of RoIs to
class embeddings during training and then applies the mapping to test RoIs, whose labels are predicted by searching
the nearest neighbor class in the semantic embedding space.
Several studies (Zhao et al. 2020; Zhu, Wang, and Saligrama
2020) alternatively explore generative models to synthesize
unseen RoIs and then retrain a supervised unseen classifier.
Existing methods above generally adopt the basic knowledge transfer mechanism that builds up the feature-label correspondence merely from perceived visual features. For a

Object detection has shown great success in the deep learning era, relying on a huge amount of training data with accurate bounding box annotations (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon
et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2017; Liu et al. 2020). However, detectors can hardly generalize to novel target domain where
the labeled data are scarce or none, since some objects are
hard to collect, e.g. endangered animals or constantly emerging new products. In contrast, humans exhibit a remarkable
ability of learning new concepts quickly, even without seeing any visual instance. To bridge this gap between state-ofthe-art detection and human-level intelligence, empowering
detectors with the capability of detecting novel classes has
become a key area of interest.
Zero-shot object detection (ZSD) is a recently-proposed
solution that aims to detect novel (unseen) objects with
no annotated samples during training (Bansal et al. 2018;
Demirel, Cinbis, and Ikizler-Cinbis 2018; Rahman, Khan,
and Porikli 2018; Rahman, Khan, and Barnes 2019; Li
et al. 2019; Rahman, Khan, and Porikli 2020; Li, Shao, and
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1993

