The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Decision-Guided Weighted Automata Extraction from Recurrent Neural Networks
Xiyue Zhang,1 Xiaoning Du,2∗ Xiaofei Xie,3, 5 Lei Ma,4 Yang Liu,3 Meng Sun1∗
1

Peking University, China
Monash University, Australia
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Kyushu University, Japan
5
Hangzhou Xinzhou Network Technology Co., Ltd., China
{zhangxiyue, sunm}@pku.edu.cn, xiaoning.du@monash.edu, {xfxie, yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg, ma.lei@acm.org
2

Abstract

2017) and model checking (Baier and Katoen 2008)). Up
to present, existing attempts of stateful model extraction
largely fall into two directions: pedagogical approaches and
compositional approaches (Jacobsson 2005). Pedagogical
approaches usually leverage exact learning algorithms, such
as L* algorithm (Angluin 1987), to extract an exact behavior surrogate of an RNN. However, exact learning is mostly
unable to scale up to practical RNN models with large alphabet size or states. On the other hand, the compositional
approach first collects concrete state transitions of an RNN
(by profiling with the training data). Then through applying
state and transition abstraction, an automaton is built to approximate the behaviors of an RNN. This approach provides
better scalability, and has been applied to adversarial attack
and detection on industrial level tasks (Du et al. 2019; Dong
et al. 2020). However, the compositional approach is often
difficult to achieve a satisfactory approximation accuracy. In
addition, the automaton extraction process is also unstable,
highly depending on the abstraction configuration without
systematic guidance.
To summarize, the major challenges along the automata
extraction line are: (1) Scalibility: to handle RNN tasks
with high complexity. Due to the exact-learning nature, techniques based on L* algorithm are usually limited to dealing
with small synthetic tasks. However, RNNs used for practical applications are often of high complexity, which posts
challenges to the scalability of the extraction methods. (2)
Precision: to generate automaton with accurate behavior
approximation for the target RNN. In the case of deterministic automata extraction through compositional approach,
the extracted stateful model is usually with limited approximation accuracy. Besides, the lack of guidance on hyperparameter selection also impairs the exploration towards an
optimal surrogate automaton. If the extracted automaton is
inaccurate, i.e., largely inconsistent with the RNN, behavior
analysis w.r.t. the surrogate model can be unreliable to be
applied to the original RNNs.
To this end, we propose a decision-guided approach
for Weighted Finite Automaton (WFA) extraction from an
RNN. Generally, our approach takes the state abstraction
method aligned with the compositional approach to deal
with the scalability challenge, and leverages the weighted
automaton to characterize the transition rules quantitatively
for more precise extraction. To counteract the lack of config-

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have demonstrated their
effectiveness in learning and processing sequential data (e.g.,
speech and natural language). However, due to the black-box
nature of neural networks, understanding the decision logic
of RNNs is quite challenging. Some recent progress has been
made to approximate the behavior of an RNN by weighted
automata. They provide better interpretability, but still suffer
from poor scalability. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to extracting weighted automata with the guidance of
a target RNN’s decision and context information. In particular, we identify the patterns of RNN’s step-wise predictive
decisions to instruct the formation of automata states. Further, we propose a state composition method to enhance the
context-awareness of the extracted model. Our in-depth evaluations on typical RNN tasks, including language model and
classification, demonstrate the effectiveness and advantage of
our method over the state-of-the-arts. The evaluation results
show that our method can achieve accurate approximation of
an RNN even on large-scale tasks.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)
have achieved great success in learning tasks of sequential
data, such as natural language processing (Józefowicz et al.
2016; Mikolov et al. 2011) and speech recognition (Graves,
Mohamed, and Hinton 2013; Zweig et al. 2017). To reduce
impacts of vanishing gradient, the state-of-the-art RNNs
(e.g., LSTM, GRU) often adopt complex internal designs
(e.g., cell memory and gate control). However, the recursive
computation and complex internal control design make the
interpretation and understanding of RNNs rather challenging (Karpathy, Johnson, and Li 2015).
The stateful nature of RNNs inspired researchers to extract state transition rules through building an automaton to
simulate the RNN behaviors. The explicit states and transition rules provide a comprehensible interpretation of an
RNN’s decision logic. Automata extraction also paves a
practical way for RNN analysis by leveraging the extensive techniques for automata (e.g., logical formalism (Gastin
and Monmege 2018; Balle, Gourdeau, and Panangaden
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11699

