The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforcement Learning-based Product Delivery Frequency Control
Yang Liu, Zhengxing Chen, Kittipat Virochsiri,
Juan Wang, Jiahao Wu, Feng Liang
Facebook, Menlo Park, CA, USA, 94025
{yliu9, czxttkl, kittipat, juanw, jiahaowu, liangfeng}@fb.com

Abstract

Gupta, Liang, and Rosales 2017; Zhao et al. 2018a). However, the daily metrics were still defined based on short term
(e.g., user activeness in one day) or based on heuristics. In
the industry, companies care most about accumulated daily
metrics and resource consumption over the long term, which
we believe should be reflected in the optimization objective
in a more principled way. In this light, frequency control
should be a sequential decision problem as the user interacts with the recommender system continuously. We illustrate with the following motivating example where previous
methods fall short. An inactive user has low interest to recommendations that an constrained optimization algorithm
never considers it worth any system resources to deliver recommendation to the user. However, a sufficient amount of
recommendations in multiple waves would change the user
behavior, turning the user into a regular active one. Clearly,
an algorithm that can plan its decisions sequentially will win
in the long run.

Frequency control is an important problem in modern recommender systems. It dictates the delivery frequency of recommendations to maintain product quality and efficiency. For
example, the frequency of delivering promotional notifications impacts daily metrics as well as the infrastructure resource consumption (e.g. CPU and memory usage). There remain open questions on what objective we should optimize
to represent business values in the long term best, and how
we should balance between daily metrics and resource consumption in a dynamically fluctuating environment. We propose a personalized methodology for the frequency control
problem, which combines long-term value optimization using reinforcement learning (RL) with a robust volume control technique we termed “Effective Factor”. We demonstrate
statistically significant improvement in daily metrics and resource efficiency by our method in several notification applications at a scale of billions of users. To our best knowledge,
our study represents the first deep RL application on the frequency control problem at such an industrial scale.

This paper proposes a methodology for learning frequency control policies that optimize long-term accumulated measurements with the sequential nature of decisions
in mind. We leverage reinforcement learning (RL) to learn
the value of different frequencies, defined as the best possible accumulated daily metrics and resource consumption
since the product is delivered at the frequency. The accumulation measurements represent the potential performance of
a system in the long term and are closer to common business
metrics companies aim to lift. RL has been demonstrated
to be capable of learning long-term values of decisions in
complex sequential-decision domains such as games (Mnih
et al. 2015a) and robotics (Rajeswaran et al. 2017), where
accumulated rewards are more important than the immediate reward at any single step. Take Go for an example. It is
useful to evaluate a move based on whether it contributes to
the final victory but less useful (and sometimes deceptive) to
know whether the move brings short-term board advantage.
Similarly, the frequency control can also be formulated as a
sequential decision problem where a sequence of decisions
on delivery frequency would collectively optimize long-term
(accumulated) daily metrics and resource usage. In particular, we choose to apply Deep Q-Networks (DQN), an offpolicy value-based reinforcement learning algorithm (Sutton
and Barto 2018) to estimate the values of (user, frequency)
pairs.

Introduction
Frequency control is a common and essential problem in
recommender systems. A successful recommender system
should have careful control of the recommendation delivering frequency in order to foster an engaging interaction with
users while consuming infrastructure resources minimally.
For example, social media platforms use promotional Emails
to remind users of missed information but also aspire to minimize the delivery volume to avoid resource waste or creating spams (Gupta et al. 2016; Gupta, Liang, and Rosales
2017; Zhao et al. 2018a). Generally speaking, an increase of
delivery frequency is able to improve product metrics transiently at the cost of infrastructure resources. However, too
frequent recommendation may result in user fatigue in the
long term (Ma, Liu, and Shen 2016; Gupta et al. 2016) and
potential risks of shutting down of recommendation channels by users (Iqbal and Horvitz 2010).
Existing works converted the frequency control problem
into constrained optimization, putting daily metrics and resource consumption into the objective and constraints separately to counteract with each other (Gupta et al. 2016;
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15355

