The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Accelerating Ecological Sciences from Above:
Spatial Contrastive Learning for Remote Sensing
Johan Bjorck 1∗ , Brendan H. Rappazzo 1∗ , Qinru Shi 1 , Carrie Brown-Lima 2
Jennifer Dean 3 , Angela Fuller 2 4 5 , Carla Gomes 1
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Natural Resources and the Environment, Cornell University
3
New York Natural Heritage Program, College of Environmental Science and Forestry, SUNY
4
U.S. Geological Survey
5
New York Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit
{njb225, bhr54, qs63, cjb37}@cornell.edu, jennifer.dean@dec.ny.gov, angela.fuller@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu
2

Abstract
The rise of neural networks has opened the door for automatic
analysis of remote sensing data. A challenge to using this machinery for computational sustainability is the necessity of
massive labeled data sets, which can be cost-prohibitive for
many non-profit organizations. The primary motivation for
this work is one such problem; the efficient management of
invasive species – invading flora and fauna that are estimated
to cause damages in the billions of dollars annually. As an
ongoing collaboration with the New York Natural Heritage
Program, we consider the use of unsupervised deep learning
techniques for dimensionality reduction of remote sensing
images, which can reduce sample complexity for downstream
tasks and decreases the need for large labeled data sets. We
consider spatially augmenting contrastive learning by training neural networks to correctly classify two nearby patches
of a landscape as such. We demonstrate that this approach improves upon previous methods and naive classification for a
large-scale data set of remote sensing images derived from invasive species observations obtained over 30 years. Additionally, we simulate deployment in the field via active learning
and evaluate this method on another important challenge in
computational sustainability – landcover classification – and
again find that it outperforms previous baselines.

Figure 1: Invasive species management requires sending out
observers to suitable locations across a large landscape. To
effectively use limited resources it is imperative to send observers to the most important locations. In this work, we consider using unsupervised machine learning on remote sensing data to aid these efforts, using deep embedding techniques to improve sample complexity of species classification.

Introduction

the cold war, the first commercial satellite (IKONOS) was
only launched in 1999. Researchers have been increasingly
interested in applications of remote sensing to environmental questions (Jensen 2009; Lentile et al. 2006).
Machine learning for problems in computational sustainability is an active area of research (Gholami et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2016; Xue et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2015), and
one problem that stands to benefit from both access to highquality remote sensing data and machine learning methods
is invasive species management. As part of an ongoing collaboration with the New York Natural Heritage Program,
which manages and coordinates invasive species data in the
state of New York (Department of Environmental Conservation 2018), this work considers remote sensing data for
invasive species management. As part of the ImapInvasives

In recent years, neural networks have made impressive
strides in their potency and can now accurately predict faces
(Ye et al. 2020) and translate natural language (Devlin et al.
2018). Besides progress in network architecture and optimization, this progress has been driven by large data sets
such as Imagenet (Deng et al. 2009) and hugely parallel accelerators such as graphics processing units (GPUs) or tensor processing units (TPUs) (Jouppi et al. 2017). Besides
these advances in machine learning, another field that has
improved with more efficient data processing is remote sensing. While remote sensing via satellites has been used since
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14711

