The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Saturated Post-hoc Optimization for Classical Planning
Jendrik Seipp,1,2 Thomas Keller,1 Malte Helmert1
1

University of Basel, Switzerland
2
Linköping University, Sweden
jendrik.seipp@liu.se, tho.keller@unibas.ch, malte.helmert@unibas.ch

The post-hoc optimization heuristic (Pommerening,
Röger, and Helmert 2013) uses a linear program (LP) to determine a real-valued factor for each heuristic in a set of pattern database (PDB) abstractions (Edelkamp 2001), and the
cost partitioning is derived by multiplying the costs of all
operators that affect an abstraction with that factor. Operators that only induce self-loops in an abstraction are assigned
costs of zero. In the (equivalent) operator counting version
of the dual LP (Pommerening et al. 2014), there is a constraint for each PDB that specifies that the total contribution
of all operators in a heuristic multiplied with the operator
cost must at least sum up to the heuristic estimate. The fact
that every plan for the original problem must also be a plan
for each PDB allows us to use the same operator counting
variables for all abstractions.
In this paper, we strengthen the post-hoc optimization
constraints by combining them with the central idea of saturated cost partitioning. We observe that an operator never
contributes more than its saturated cost to the heuristic value
of an abstraction because all heuristic values remain the
same even if we were to reduce its cost to the possibly lower
saturated cost. We show that the resulting saturated posthoc optimization heuristic dominates post-hoc optimization
theoretically and confirm that the theoretical superiority carries over into practice in an experimental evaluation on the
domains of the International Planning Competitions.

Abstract
Saturated cost partitioning and post-hoc optimization are two
powerful cost partitioning algorithms for optimal classical
planning. The main idea of saturated cost partitioning is to
give each considered heuristic only the fraction of remaining
operator costs that it needs to prove its estimates. We show
how to apply this idea to post-hoc optimization and obtain a
heuristic that dominates the original both in theory and on the
IPC benchmarks.

Introduction
Methods for admissibly combining admissible heuristics
significantly improved the state of the art in optimal classical
planning. Early work that exploits the additivity of heuristics (Felner, Korf, and Hanan 2004; Edelkamp 2006) led to
the development of the canonical heuristic (Haslum et al.
2007), which computes all maximal subsets of pairwise independent pattern database (PDB) heuristics and then uses
the maximum of all sums over these subsets as the heuristic
value.
The additivity criterion has been replaced by a more general theory with the introduction of cost partitioning (Katz
and Domshlak 2008), which ensures that admissible heuristic estimates can be summed up admissibly as long as the
sum of the operator costs that are used to compute the heuristics does not exceed the original cost function. The computation of optimal cost partitionings (Katz and Domshlak 2010)
has — despite its polynomial time complexity — proven to
be too costly in practice (Pommerening, Röger, and Helmert
2013; Seipp, Keller, and Helmert 2017b). Suboptimal cost
partitionings that are efficiently computable both in theory
and practice have therefore received much attention.
The underlying observation of saturated cost partitioning (Seipp and Helmert 2014, 2018) is that we can often
reduce operator costs without affecting heuristic estimates.
The saturated cost partitioning algorithm considers a set of
heuristics in a given order. For the first heuristic h, it computes all heuristic values of h under the original cost function, computes the minimum cost function that preserves the
heuristic values, that is, the saturated cost function, and continues with the next heuristic with the remaining costs until
all heuristics have been considered.

Background
A classical planning task induces a transition system and
solving the task optimally implies finding a shortest path
from the initial state to a goal state. Formally, a transition
system T is a directed, labeled graph defined by a finite set
of states S(T ), a finite set of labels L(T ), a set T (T ) of
`

labeled transitions s −
→ s0 with s, s0 ∈ S(T ) and ` ∈ L(T ),
an initial state s0 (T ), and a set of goal states S? (T ).
A goal path from s ∈ S(T ) is a sequence of transitions
from s to any goal state s0 ∈ S? (T ). Goal paths are also
called plans.
A cost function for transition system T is a function
cost : L(T ) → R. A cost function cost is non-negative if
cost(`) ≥ 0 for all labels `. We write C(T ) for the set of
all cost functions for T . Our input planning tasks use nonnegative cost functions, but following Pommerening et al.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
11947

