The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Near-Optimal MNL Bandits Under Risk Criteria
Guangyu Xi, 1 Chao Tao, 2 Yuan Zhou 3
1

University of Maryland, College Park
2
Indiana University Bloomington
3
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
gxi@umd.edu, taochao@iu.edu, yuanz@illinois.edu

Abstract

a near-optimal sales strategy when the goal is changed, for
example to a kind of risk criteria, is a very practical problem and to the best of our knowledge, has not been studied
before.
Suppose a company has N products of a certain category
to sell during a sales season, which can be represented by
def
[N ], where [N ] = {1, 2, . . . , N } and each product corresponds to an element in [N ]. Let T be the total number of
times such products are searched during a sales season and
St be the assortment displayed by the website at tth time of
the request. The aforementioned sales activity can be modeled by the following game which runs in T time steps: at
time step 1 ⩽ t ⩽ T , when an assortment St ⊂ [N ] is displayed by the website, the online user will make a choice,
i.e., whether to buy a product in St or purchase nothing.
Following the previous motivation example, we add a cardinality constraint, which means the number of products in
St can not exceed a predefined number K ⩽ N . Let ct denote the choice of the online user at time t. When ct = i, it
means that the online user buys product i. For convenience,
we use ct = 0 to represent the situation when the online user
does not purchase anything. In general, ct can be viewed as
a random variable and there is no doubt that the multinomial
logit model (MNL) (Agrawal et al. 2019) has become the
most popular one to model the behavior of the online user,
i.e., ct , when St is provided. Dynamic assortment optimization with the MNL choice model is also called MNL bandits.
In this model, each product i is assumed to be related to an
unknown preference parameter vi and the probability that a
visiting online user chooses product i given assortment St is
defined by
v
def
Pi
P(ct = i) =
,
(1)
1 + j∈St vj

We study MNL bandits, which is a variant of the traditional
multi-armed bandit problem, under risk criteria. Unlike the
ordinary expected revenue, risk criteria are more general
goals widely used in industries and business. We design algorithms for a broad class of risk criteria, including but not
limited to the well-known conditional value-at-risk, Sharpe
ratio, and entropy risk, and prove that they suffer a nearoptimal regret. As a complement, we also conduct experiments with both synthetic and real data to show the empirical
performance of our proposed algorithms.

Introduction
Dynamic assortment optimization is one of the fundamental problems in online learning. It has wide applications in
industries, for example retailing and advertisement. To motivate the study of the problem, let us consider e-commerce
companies like Amazon and Wish who want to sell products
to online users when they visit the websites and search for
some type of products, for example, headphones. Such companies usually have a variety of products with that type in
a warehouse to sell. Due to the space constraints of a website, it is not possible to exhibit all of the available products. Hence, each time when an online user visits the website, only a limited number of products can be displayed.
When an online user buys a product, the company will get
some profit. So one natural goal for the company is to display on the website an assortment consisting of several products such that the expected revenue is maximized. However,
in practice, a company may have more complex strategies
other than simply maximizing its revenue, and general risk
criteria may be better choices to serve such goals. For example, in risk management, a very common risk criterion
called expected shortfall or conditional value at risk (CVaR)
is defined as the expected revenue under a certain percentile.
If we only consider the expected revenue, we may lead to
focus on recommending some products producing high revenue but purchased only by a small portion of users. If the
company wishes to maintain a higher level of active and diversified users, then CVaR is more appropriate. Whether it is
still possible for the sales manager of the company to design

where we set the preference parameter of no-purchase v0 =
1. Note that this assumption does not harm the model too
much since one can easily scale vi ’s to satisfy this condition.
Following the literature, we also assume no-purchase is the
most frequent choice i.e., 0 ⩽ vi ⩽ 1, which is often a
reasonable assumption in sales activities.
During the last decade, MNL bandits has attracted much
attention (Rusmevichientong, Shen, and Shmoys 2010;
Sauré and Zeevi 2013; Agrawal et al. 2017, 2019; Dong et al.
2020). However, all of the previous works consider maxi-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10397

