The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Low-Rank Registration Based Manifolds for Convection-Dominated PDEs
Rambod Mojgani,1,2 Maciej Balajewicz 1,3
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2
Rice University,
3
Siemens Technology
{mojgani2,mbalajew}@illinois.edu

Abstract

a broad range of applications, from Navier-Stokes equations (fluid dynamics) to Schrödinger equation (quantummechanical systems) (Mendible et al. 2020). In the machine learning community, the recognition of similar challenges dates back to the 1990s and attempts in classification of handwritten digits (Hinton, Revow, and Dayan 1995),
where presence of simple transformations such as translations and rotations in the data-set is well known to dramatically deteriorate the accuracy of linear methods such as
principle component analysis (PCA). Fundamentally, other
linear manifolds (subspaces) suffer from similar drawbacks,
examples include proper orthogonal decomposition (POD),
multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Cox and Cox 2008), factor analysis (Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani 2001) and
independent component analysis (ICA) (Friedman, Hastie,
and Tibshirani 2001). Therefore, the high dimensionality of
the data on any of these linear manifolds has incentivized
a slew of nonlinear manifold learning approaches, such as
Iso-map (Tenenbaum 1998), kernel PCA (Mika et al. 1999),
locally linear embedding (LLE) (Roweis 2000), Laplacian
eigenmaps (LEM) (Belkin and Niyogi 2003), semi-definite
embedding (SDE) (Weinberger, Sha, and Saul 2004), autoencoders (G.E and R.R 2006), t-SNE (Maaten and Hinton
2008), and diffeomorphic dimensionality reduction (Walder
and Schölkopf 2009).

We develop an auto-encoder-type nonlinear dimensionality
reduction algorithm to enable the construction of reduced
order models of systems governed by convection-dominated
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs), i.e. snapshots
of solutions with large Kolmogorov n-width. Although several existing nonlinear manifold learning methods, such as
LLE, ISOMAP, MDS, etc., appear as compelling candidates
to reduce the dimensionality of such data, most are not applicable to reduced order modeling of PDEs, because: (i)
they typically lack a straightforward mapping from the latent space to the high-dimensional physical space, and (ii)
the identified latent variables are often difficult to interpret.
In our proposed method, these limitations are overcome by
training a low-rank diffeomorphic spatio-temporal grid that
registers the output sequence of the PDEs on a non-uniform
parameter/time-varying grid, such that the Kolmogorov nwidth of the mapped data on the learned grid is minimized.
We demonstrate the efficacy and interpretability of our proposed approach on several challenging manufactured computer vision-inspired tasks and physical systems.

Introduction
Many physical phenomena of engineering interest are described using partial differential equations (PDEs). High accuracy simulations of these equations often require extensive
computational resources. Although cheaper and faster processors, as well as highly parallel architectures, have made
many large-scale computations viable, reduced order models (ROMs) of these systems remain attractive, especially in
many-query simulations and real-time control.
The goal of reduced order modeling is to leverage the
vast amount of data generated from high accuracy simulations to learn a low-dimensional model that can accurately
and efficiently approximate the underlying dynamical system. For many of theses systems a low-rank linear combination of the bases can represent the solution (Li et al. 2020),
however, such low-rank reconstructions are especially inaccurate for convection-dominated PDEs, where the Kolmogorov n-width of the snapshots of the solution is relatively large, i.e. the solution cannot be effectively reduced
on a linear subspace. Such problems emerge frequently in

Although many of the aforementioned nonlinear methods
provide the sought after low-dimensional manifold, only a
few provide a mapping from the learned low-dimensional
to the high-dimensional manifold, for a survey see (Lee
and Carlberg 2020). This is especially important in reduced
order modeling of PDEs, since the latent variables evolve
on a parameter/temporal space, followed by a mapping of
the latent variable from the low-dimensional to the highdimensional physical manifold. Auto-encoders (AE), specifically convolutional auto-encoders (CAEs) (Masci et al.
2011) and deep convolutional generative adversarial networks (DCGANs) (Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2016), are
among the successful methods used in dimensionality reduction of PDEs (Lee and Carlberg 2020; Cheng et al.
2020). However, linear manifolds such as proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) are still often preferred to the neural networkbased AEs, since they provide an interpretable framework
for analysis of the system, as well as controlling of the re-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

399

