The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ontology-Enriched Query Answering on Relational Databases
Shqiponja Ahmetaj1∗ , Vasilis Efthymiou2∗ , Ronald Fagin3 , Phokion G. Kolaitis3, 4 , Chuan Lei3 ,
Fatma Özcan5∗ , Lucian Popa3
1

TU Wien, Austria
FORTH, Greece
3
IBM Research - Almaden, USA
4
UC Santa Cruz, USA
5
Google, USA
ahmetaj@dbai.tuwien.ac.at, vefthym@ics.forth.gr, fagin@us.ibm.com, kolaitis@ucsc.edu, chuan.lei@ibm.com,
fozcan@google.com, lpopa@us.ibm.com
Abstract
When attempting to enrich query answers on a relational
database by using an external ontology, two main challenges
We develop a flexible, open-source framework for query ansurface: (i) how to identify and reuse only the parts of the exswering on relational databases by adopting methods and
ternal ontology that are relevant to the given database - this is
techniques from the Semantic Web community and the data
particularly acute when the external ontology is very large;
exchange community, and we apply this framework to a medand (ii) how to answer queries expressed over the vocabulary
ical use case. We first deploy module-extraction techniques to
of the external ontology using the underlying database.
derive a concise and relevant sub-ontology from an external
reference ontology. We then use the chase procedure from the
To address these challenges in a broader context, beyond
data exchange community to materialize a universal solution
our use case, we have developed a flexible open-source
that can be subsequently used to answer queries on an enframework, whose design allows using different implementerprise medical database. Along the way, we identify a new
tations for each component, with the aim of automating as
class of well-behaved acyclic EL-ontologies extended with
much as possible an otherwise labor-intensive process.
role hierarchies, suitably restricted functional roles, and domain/range restrictions, which cover our use case. We show
For challenge (i) above, our framework uses existing tools
that such ontologies are C-stratified, which implies that the
from different AI communities, such as data management,
chase procedure terminates in polynomial time. We provide
Semantic Web, and description logics (DL), to automatically
a detailed overview of our real-life application in the medical
generate an ontology from a relational database (Lei et al.
domain and demonstrate the benefits of this approach, such as
2018), semi-automatically match this ontology with an exdiscovering additional answers and formulating new queries.
ternal ontology (Knoblock et al. 2012; de Uña et al. 2018)
and then extract, from the external ontology, a module that
Introduction
is relevant to the database (Grau et al. 2009).
Ontology-Based Data Access (OBDA) (Xiao et al. 2018)
For challenge (ii) above, we follow an approach based on
and Ontology-Mediated Query Answering (OMQA) (Biendata exchange, where we use the chase procedure to materivenu 2016) are two closely related paradigms for answering
alize a universal solution; this makes it possible to compute
queries over a database in the presence of an ontology that
the certain answers of arbitrary conjunctive queries over the
embodies semantic knowledge about the metadata. Much of
schema of the ontology by evaluating such queries on the
the literature in OBDA/OMQA is devoted to the study of
materialized universal solution (Fagin et al. 2005). This apquery answering under the assumptions that the ontology is
proach bypasses the need to rewrite the queries (the queryavailable and the mappings between the database and the
rewriting approach) and fits the requirements of our target
ontology have already been derived. There are real-life apapplication, where we need to support ad-hoc queries that
plications, however, where these assumptions need not hold.
must be answered in real time. The underlying relational
A perusal of the query logs of a conversational sysdatabase is updated on only a monthly basis, hence the chase
tem (Quamar et al. 2020) that we built for the medical
needs to be re-run on only a monthly basis as well. Note that
database of IBM Micromedex R , used by medical experts
query-rewriting approaches have two drawbacks that are rel(e.g., doctors, nurses, pharmacists) revealed that the answers
evant in our setting: each query has to be rewritten before it
obtained were incomplete and, furthermore, that many user
is evaluated, and the rewriting may be of exponential size in
queries could not be answered in the first place. This motithe size of the input query (Hernich et al. 2018). This may be
vated enriching the medical database with an external referinefficient when a large number of ad-hoc queries is asked.
ence ontology, such as SNOMED CT, so that the aforemenWe evaluate our framework on a use case involving an entioned shortcomings could be addressed.
terprise, medical relational database (MDB), enriched with
∗
the SNOMED CT medical ontology. It is well known that,
Work done while at IBM Research.
for arbitrary ontologies, the chase procedure may not terCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
minate. Motivated by our use case, we identify acyclic
2

15247

