The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unchain the Search Space
with Hierarchical Differentiable Architecture Search
Guanting Liu, Yujie Zhong, Sheng Guo, Matthew R. Scott, Weilin Huang∗
Malong LLC
{gualiu, jaszhong, sheng, mscott, whuang}@malongtech.com

Abstract
Differentiable architecture search (DAS) has made great
progress in searching for high-performance architectures with
reduced computational cost. However, DAS-based methods
mainly focus on searching for a repeatable cell structure,
which is then stacked sequentially in multiple stages to form
the networks. This configuration significantly reduces the
search space, and ignores the importance of connections between the cells. To overcome this limitation, in this paper,
we propose a Hierarchical Differentiable Architecture Search
(H-DAS) that performs architecture search both at the cell
level and at the stage level. Specifically, the cell-level search
space is relaxed so that the networks can learn stage-specific
cell structures. For the stage-level search, we systematically
study the architectures of stages, including the number of
cells in each stage and the connections between the cells.
Based on insightful observations, we design several search
rules and losses, and mange to search for better stage-level architectures. Such hierarchical search space greatly improves
the performance of the networks without introducing expensive search cost. Extensive experiments on CIFAR10 and
ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed HDAS. Moreover, the searched stage-level architectures can be
combined with the cell structures searched by existing DAS
methods to further boost the performance. Code is available
at: https://github.com/msight-tech/research-HDAS

Figure 1: DARTS-series methods search for a repeatable cell
structure, which is stacked sequentially in multiple stages.
The proposed H-DAS enables a stage-specific search of both
cell-level and stage-level structures, allowing for a diversity
of cell structures, cell distribution and cell connections over
different stages. This results in a significant larger search
space with more meaningful architecture search.

been introduced to NAS, due to the discrete nature of the architecture space. However, these methods usually require up
to thousands of GPU days (Zoph and Le 2016). A few methods have been developed to reduce the computational cost,
such as (Cai, Zhu, and Han 2018; Xie et al. 2018; Dong
and Yang 2019; You et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2020). Among
them, differentiable architecture search (Liu, Simonyan, and
Yang 2018) attempted to approximate the discrete search
space into a continuous one, where gradient descent can
be used to optimize the architectures and model parameters
jointly. This line of search approaches, referred as DARTSseries methods (Chen et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2019; Chen and
Hsieh 2020), has made significant improvements in search
speed, while maintaining comparable performance.
However, these DARTS-series methods have two major
limitations in terms of search space. First, they commonly
perform a cell-level search and adopt the same searched
cell structure repeatedly for multiple stages (separated by
the reduction cells), which may make the cell structure suboptimal in the stages, since the optimal cell structures (including the connections and kernel sizes) at different stages
can be significantly different. For example, in the architectures searched by (Zoph and Le 2016; Cai, Zhu, and Han
2018), the operations in shallow layers are mainly 3 × 3 convolutions, while many larger kernels appear in the deeper
layers. Second, previous DARTS-series methods mainly fo-

Introduction
A large number of neural networks or architectures has been
designed for various computer vision tasks in the past years
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Simonyan and
Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Huang
et al. 2017), where human experts played an important role.
Such manually-designed architectures have been proved to
be effective, but heavily depend on human skills and experience. Recently, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has
attracted increasing attentions (Baker et al. 2016; Zoph and
Le 2016; Pham et al. 2018), and achieved the state-of-the-art
performance in various computer vision tasks.
Reinforcement learning (Zoph and Le 2016; Pham et al.
2018) or evolutionary algorithm (Real et al. 2019, 2017) has
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8644

