The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SKATE: A Natural Language Interface for Encoding Structured Knowledge
Clifton McFate, Aditya Kalyanpur, Dave Ferrucci,
Andrea Bradshaw, Ariel Diertani, David Melville, Lori Moon
Elemental Cognition
New York, NY, USA
{cjm, adityak, davef, andreab, arield, davidm, lorim}@elementalcognition.com

Abstract

can leave it in unstructured form for the system to interpret
later.
In the following sections, we first walk through the
SKATE architecture using an exemplar interaction from an
open-domain rule learning task. We then summarize our implementation of the core SKATE components. We demonstrate how SKATE has been integrated with a natural language rule generation model to interactively acquire structured rules for story understanding, and conclude with a current application that uses SKATE to build COVID-19 policy
diagrams.

In Natural Language (NL) applications, there is often a mismatch between what the NL interface is capable of interpreting and what a lay user knows how to express. This work
describes a novel natural language interface that reduces this
mismatch by refining natural language input through successive, automatically generated semi-structured templates. In
this paper we describe how our approach, called SKATE, uses
a neural semantic parser to parse NL input and suggest semistructured templates, which are recursively filled to produce
fully structured interpretations. We also show how SKATE integrates with a neural rule-generation model to interactively
suggest and acquire commonsense knowledge. We provide a
preliminary coverage analysis of SKATE for the task of story
understanding, and then describe a current business use-case
of the tool in a specific domain: COVID-19 policy design.

SKATE Overview
The SKATE architecture (Figure 1) is built around an interaction model of recursively: recognizing a concept, producing a partially interpreted template to instantiate the concept,
and allowing a user to refine the template. The result is text
annotated with semantic frames. These frames are processed
by the downstream application.
Each interaction begins by selecting a top-level,
application-specific semantic template. As an example, a
top-level frame for rule acquisition may be an “If/Then”
construction as in the first pane of Figure 2. These top-level
templates provide the initial scope of interaction, and can
be used to apply additional application-specific semantics as
needed (e.g. If/Then could produce a causal rule while After/Then might only imply temporal sequence).
As a user fills a slot, the concept recognizer processes
their text, selects a lexical trigger, and instantiates possible
semantic frames for that trigger. The frames are in the style
of FrameNet (Ruppenhofer et al. 2016): each defines a concept, a set of possible trigger phrases, and semantic arguments that may be instantiated as text spans. At each interaction, we use syntactic heuristics to select the trigger with
the widest syntactic scope.
For each instantiated frame, the template renderer receives the interpretations (frame predicates and optionally
argument labels/spans) from the concept recognizer and decorates that information (e.g., by adding display texts, examples etc) to send to the front-end UI. It also presents the user
with options for what frame to assign as the word sense of
the trigger. For example, in the second pane of Figure 2, the
template generator has built frame assignment options for
the word “take.” The resulting micro-dialogue is presented

Introduction
Interactive natural language applications typically require
mapping spoken or written language to a semi-formal structure, often represented using semantic frames with fillable
slots. This approach has been used in popular commercial
spoken dialogue systems (e.g., Google’s Dialogflow and
Amazon’s Alexa skills) through the developer-defined “intents.” Frame semantic parsing more broadly (e.g., Gildea
and Jurafsky 2002) has demonstrated benefit in a number of
downstream applications including dialogue systems (Chen,
Wang, and Rudnicky 2013) and question answering (Shen
and Lapata 2007).
Despite advances in frame semantic parsing (e.g.,
Swayamdipta et al. 2017), no semantic parser is perfect.
Accordingly, developers of natural language interfaces must
carefully curate correction dialogues to avoid frustrating interactions. This sort of mismatch between system and user
expectations is what we aim to resolve with SKATE (Structured Knowledge AcquisiTion and Extraction).
In SKATE, a user’s text is parsed in real time as they type.
The resulting partial semantic structures can be completed
with additional required slots and fillers, and are then recursively refined by the user through micro-dialogues. At
any point, the user can continue to give structured interpretations for a slot filler (e.g., a complex noun phrase), or they
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15362

