The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tri-level Robust Clustering Ensemble with Multiple Graph Learning
Peng Zhou, 1 2 Liang Du, 3 Yi-Dong Shen, 2∗ Xuejun Li 1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer and Information Technology, Shanxi University
zhoupeng@ahu.edu.cn, duliang@sxu.edu.cn, ydshen@ios.ac.cn, xjli@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract

since they use all data for ensemble while ignoring the noises on the data, they still suffer from the robustness problem.
To address this issue, some robust clustering ensemble
methods are proposed (Zhou et al. 2015a; Huang, Lai, and
Wang 2016; Tao et al. 2017, 2019). However, these methods just focus on one single level of robustness. For example, (Zhou et al. 2015a; Tao et al. 2017, 2019) concentrated on the noises on the connective matrices; (Huang, Lai,
and Wang 2016) paid attention on the graph level of robustness. Unfortunately, in clustering ensemble, the noises are
far more complicated. The noises may exist in the original
data, i.e., some instances are contaminated by noises or outliers. The noises may also be introduced when using inappropriate clustering methods. For example, we use k-means
to handle non-linear data, which may achieve poor base results. Therefore, it is not enough to characterize the robustness in one single level. Another problem of these robust
methods is that they only focus on contaminated data, or in
other words, they completely trust the uncontaminated data.
However, even for the uncontaminated data, some data are
easy to handle and some are difficult which need to be handled more carefully. For example, the data in the boundary
of two clusters, are difficult to assign to a cluster. If we deal
with these difficult data too early, the early model may have
not such ability to handle these difficult data and is easy to
be misled by them.
To tackle these two problems, in this paper, we propose a novel Tri-level Robust Clustering Ensemble (TRCE)
method. Since the clustering result reflects the relationship
between instances, we construct a graph for each base clustering result to represent such relationship. In the graph, each
node represents an instance, and if two instances belong to
the same cluster, there exists an edge between the two corresponding nodes. Then, we tackle the noises on these multiple graphs. Just as its name implies, TRCE deals with noises
on three levels: base clustering level, graph level, and instance level. Firstly, as introduced before, since inappropriate clustering methods may introduce noises, the quality of
base clusterings are different. In the base clustering level of
robustness, we will evaluate the quality of each base clustering, and aim to alleviate the side effects caused by the
bad base clusterings. Secondly, since the multiple graphs are
constructed by unreliable base clusterings, the graphs are also contaminated by noises (Kang et al. 2020a). To handle

Clustering ensemble generates a consensus clustering result by integrating multiple weak base clustering results. Although it often provides more robust results compared with
single clustering methods, it still suffers from the robustness
problem if it does not treat the unreliability of base results carefully. Conventional clustering ensemble methods often
use all data for ensemble, while ignoring the noises or outliers
on the data. Although some robust clustering ensemble methods are proposed, which extract the noises on the data, they
still characterize the robustness in a single level, and thus they
cannot comprehensively handle the complicated robustness
problem. In this paper, to address this problem, we propose a
novel Tri-level Robust Clustering Ensemble (TRCE) method
by transforming the clustering ensemble problem to a multiple graph learning problem. Just as its name implies, the proposed method tackles robustness problem in three levels: base
clustering level, graph level and instance level. By considering the robustness problem in a more comprehensive way, the
proposed TRCE can achieve a more robust consensus clustering result. Experimental results on benchmark datasets also
demonstrate it. Our method often outperforms other state-ofthe-art clustering ensemble methods. Even compared with the
robust ensemble methods, ours also performs better.

Introduction
Clustering ensemble provides an elegant framework to ensemble multiple weak base clustering results to generate a
consensus one, and attracts much attention in unsupervised
learning (Strehl and Ghosh 2003; Li, Ding, and Jordan 2007;
Yu et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2015, 2018; Wang et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2020; Kang et al. 2020b; Zhou,
Du, and Li 2020; Bai, Liang, and Cao 2020). For example, (Li, Ding, and Jordan 2007) applied nonnegative matrix factorization to learn a consensus clustering result; (Liu
et al. 2018) developed a de-noising auto-encoder for clustering ensemble; (Li et al. 2019) used the base clusterings to
evaluate the stability of each instance and assigned all the instances to some stable instances to form a cluster. Although
these clustering ensemble methods can alleviate the robustness problem in single clustering methods to some extent,
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11125

