The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Landmark Generation in HTN Planning
Daniel Höller,1 Pascal Bercher2
1

2

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
The Australian National University, College of Engineering and Computer Science, Canberra, Australia
hoeller@cs.uni-saarland.de, pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au

Abstract

the initial task, a planner chooses a single method (i.e. abstract tasks form OR nodes) and has to include all subtasks
into the plan (i.e. methods form AND nodes), and so on.
A concept that has been successful especially in classical
planning is that of landmarks (LMs). LMs are state features
(or actions) that are made true (contained) in every solution.
It was first used for problem decomposition (Porteous, Sebastia, and Hoffmann 2001; Hoffmann, Porteous, and Sebastia 2004) and later for creating non-admissible (see e.g. Zhu
and Givan (2003), Richter, Helmert, and Westphal (2008),
and Richter and Westphal (2010)) and admissible heuristics (see e.g. Karpas and Domshlak (2009) or Helmert and
Domshlak (2009)) for heuristic search. LMs have also been
introduced in hierarchical planning. First in form of task
LMs in hybrid planning (Elkawkagy, Schattenberg, and Biundo 2010) (an extension of HTN planning), later in form of
fact LMs in HGN planning, a formalism where the hierarchy
is defined on goals, not on tasks. The former can directly be
applied to HTN planning and will be the baseline for our
approach. While the latter can apply LM generation techniques from classical planning directly (Shivashankar et al.
2013, 2016a,b; Shivashankar, Alford, and Aha 2017), the
presented techniques are not applicable to HTN planning.
Work on LMs can be divided into two orthogonal categories (Keyder, Richter, and Helmert 2010): LM utilization
showing how to exploit LM information, and LM generation, showing how to find LMs. We focus on the latter.
Based on techniques from classical planning, we introduce a novel approach for LM generation in HTN planning
that elegantly combines the generation of fact, action, and
method LMs. It dominates the existing work (finding at least
the same LMs). Our approach is sound and incomplete. We
show that every (sound and) complete approach is as hard
as the co-class of the underlying plan existence problem,
i.e., in our setting – delete-effects and ordering-relations of
the HTN model are ignored during generation – coNP-hard
(while our approach is in P). On a widely used benchmark
set we find more than twice the number of LMs as related
work. We further show that the additional LMs bear valuable information for search guidance.

Landmarks (LMs) are state features that need to be made
true or tasks that need to be contained in every solution of
a planning problem. They are a valuable source of information in planning and can be exploited in various ways. LMs
have been used both in classical and hierarchical planning,
but while there is much work in classical planning, the techniques in hierarchical planning are less evolved. We introduce
a novel LM generation method for Hierarchical Task Network
(HTN) planning and show that it is sound and incomplete. We
show that every complete approach is as hard as the co-class
of the underlying HTN problem, i.e. coNP-hard for our setting (while our approach is in P). On a widely used benchmark set, our approach finds more than twice the number of
landmarks than the approach from the literature. Though our
focus is on LM generation, we show that the newly discovered landmarks bear information beneficial for solvers.

Introduction
Planning is the task of finding a sequence of actions that
change the environment to fulfill a certain objective. Two
widely used approaches to planning are classical planning
and Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning. In classical
planning, the environment is described using a set of (propositional) state features that are modified by actions, which
define valid state transitions. The objective is to find a sequence of actions transforming the initial state of the system
into one in which certain goal features hold.
In HTN planning there are two kinds of tasks: actions
like in classical planning (also primitive tasks) and abstract
tasks, which are not applicable directly, but are decomposed
into other (primitive or abstract) tasks by using decomposition methods. The objective in HTN planning is not to
fulfill a state-based goal condition, but to find an applicable decomposition of a given abstract task. Since there is
(usually) more than one method for an abstract task, the hierarchy implies a second combinatorial problem because a
planner has to choose the “right” one for a certain task. This
makes HTN planning more expressive (Erol, Hendler, and
Nau 1994, 1996; Höller et al. 2014, 2016). The process can
be seen as AND/OR tree (Kambhampati, Mali, and Srivastava 1998; Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). Starting with

Formal Framework
A classical planning problem P is a tuple (F, A, s0 , g, δ).
F is a set of propositional state features (or facts) used to

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11826

