The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Introduction to Machine Learning with Robots and Playful Learning
Viktoriya Olari,1 Kostadin Cvejoski,2 Øyvind Eide3
1,3

Department for Digital Humanities, University of Cologne, 50923 Cologne, Germany
1,2
Fraunhofer IAIS, 53757 Sankt Augustin, Germany
3
Center for Data and Simulation Science, University of Cologne, 50923 Cologne, Germany
viktoriya.olari@iais.fraunhofer.de, kostadin.cvejoski@iais.fraunhofer.de, oeide@uni-koeln.de

Abstract

is particularly crucial in creating the proper mental models
and avoiding misconceptions. However, few approaches focus on making the technical part of machine learning tangible for young learners (Williams, Park, and Breazeal 2019;
Williams et al. 2019; Lin et al. 2020). Most current approaches either resemble a black box or are complicated and
thus inaccessible to primary- or middle-school students
(Jatzlau et al. 2019).
With our approach, we seek to fill this gap. Inspired by
narrative techniques, designs of children’s books, and the
advantages of educational robotics and visual programming
languages, we developed two extensions1 for the opensource platform Open Roberta Labi:
• The Neural Network Playground allows the user to experiment with simple neural networks. The student can train
the network by modifying the weights and directly observing the effects on the simulated robot until it behaves
as desired. In this way, the student grasps the concept of
direct supervision – a process of adjusting the weights in
the neural network until the output is satisfactory.
• With the Q-learning Playground, the student can tinker
with the Q-learning algorithm by creating unique learning
environments for the robot and playing with the parameters of the algorithm. Step by step, the student can debug
the algorithm and explore how it is learning from the
agent’s perspective.
We also developed an unplugged activity to make unsupervised learning tangible by adapting the k-means algorithm. Our extensions are accompanied by a curriculum,
which introduces young learners to the respective machine
learning paradigms.
We tested our developments with 24 participants as representatives of three education levels: primary, middle, and
high school. In the evaluation, we examined how children

Inspired by explanations of machine learning concepts in
children’s books, we developed an approach to introduce supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning using a
block-based programming language in combination with the
benefits of educational robotics. Instead of using blocks as
high-end APIs to access AI cloud services or to reproduce the
machine learning algorithms, we use them as a means to put
the student “in the algorithm’s shoes.” We adapt the training
of neural networks, Q-learning, and k-means algorithms to a
design and format suitable for children and equip the students
with hands-on tools for playful experimentation. The children
learn about direct supervision by modifying the weights in
the neural networks and immediately observing the effects on
the simulated robot. Following the ideas of constructionism,
they experience how the algorithms and underlying machine
learning concepts work in practice. We conducted and evaluated this approach with students in primary, middle, and
high school. All the age groups perceived the topics to be
very easy to moderately hard to grasp. Younger students experienced direct supervision as challenging, whereas they
found Q-learning and k-means algorithms much more accessible. Most high-school students could cope with all the topics without particular difficulties.

Introduction
The guidelines and concrete proposals for AI curricula pay
special attention to the technological aspects of AI, especially to machine learning (Sloman 2009; Blakeley and
Breazeal 2019; Clarke 2019; Touretzky et al. 2019; Long
and Magerko 2020; Wong et al. 2020). Children of all levels, from primary to high school, are expected to be able to
cope with the central paradigms of machine learning: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement learning (Williams
et al. 2019; Kahn et al. 2018; Jatzlau et al. 2019; Michaeli,
Seegerer, and Romeike 2020). Lin et al. (2020) and Hitron
et al. (2019) argue that understanding the concrete processes

1
Codes, learning materials, and a video demonstrating the functionality of
the extensions are available at github.com/vlebedynska/openroberta-lab/,
retrieved: 17.12.2020.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15630

