The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MASKER: Masked Keyword Regularization for Reliable Text Classification
Seung Jun Moon∗1 , Sangwoo Mo∗1 , Kimin Lee2† , Jaeho Lee1 , Jinwoo Shin1
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
2
University of California, Berkeley, USA
{june1212,swmo,jaeho-lee,jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr kiminlee@berkeley.edu

Abstract

Class : Apple

Pre-trained language models have achieved state-of-the-art
accuracies on various text classification tasks, e.g., sentiment
analysis, natural language inference, and semantic textual similarity. However, the reliability of the fine-tuned text classifiers
is an often underlooked performance criterion. For instance,
one may desire a model that can detect out-of-distribution
(OOD) samples (drawn far from training distribution) or be robust against domain shifts. We claim that one central obstacle
to the reliability is the over-reliance of the model on a limited
number of keywords, instead of looking at the whole context.
In particular, we find that (a) OOD samples often contain indistribution keywords, while (b) cross-domain samples may
not always contain keywords; over-relying on the keywords
can be problematic for both cases. In light of this observation,
we propose a simple yet effective fine-tuning method, coined
masked keyword regularization (MASKER), that facilitates
context-based prediction. MASKER regularizes the model to
reconstruct the keywords from the rest of the words and make
low-confidence predictions without enough context. When
applied to various pre-trained language models (e.g., BERT,
RoBERTa, and ALBERT), we demonstrate that MASKER
improves OOD detection and cross-domain generalization
without degrading classification accuracy. Code is available at
https://github.com/alinlab/MASKER.

1

Original
Domain

Jobs returned to Apple in the late 1990s and
spent the years until his death in 2011
revamping the company, introducing the iPod,
iPhone, and iPad, transforming technology and
communication in the process.

CrossDomain

Tim Cook said the tablet market would
overtake the PC by 2015 and he saw a
tremendous opportunity in leading that charge.

Out-ofI ate an apple this morning. It was delicious.
Distribution

Figure 1: Out-of-distribution (OOD) and cross-domain examples, where class ‘Apple’ is the original domain. The OOD
sample contains the word ‘apple’ (red) but in a different context. The cross-domain sample does not share the words (e.g.,
‘Tim Cook’) with the original domain, but it still contains
some clues (yellow) to guess the correct class.

Introduction

Text classification (Aggarwal and Zhai 2012) is a classic yet
challenging problem in natural language processing (NLP),
having a broad range of applications, including sentiment
analysis (Bakshi et al. 2016), natural language inference
(Bowman et al. 2015), and semantic textual similarity (Agirre
et al. 2012). Recently, Devlin et al. (2019) have shown that
fine-tuning a pre-trained language model can achieve stateof-the-art performances on various text classification tasks
without any task-specific architectural adaptations. Thereafter, numerous pre-training and fine-tuning strategies to improve the classification accuracy further have been proposed
(Liu et al. 2019; Lan et al. 2020; Sanh et al. 2019; Clark
et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2019; Mosbach, Andriushchenko, and
Klakow 2020; Zhang et al. 2020). However, a vast majority
∗

Equal contribution
Work was done while the author was at KAIST
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13578

of the works have focused on evaluating the accuracy of the
models only and overlooked their reliability (Hendrycks et al.
2020), e.g., robustness to out-of-distribution (OOD) samples
drawn far from the training data (or in-distribution samples).
While pre-trained language models are known to be robust in some sense (Hendrycks et al. 2020), we find that
fine-tuned models suffer from the over-reliance problem,
i.e., making predictions based on only a limited number of
domain-specific keywords instead of looking at the whole
context. For example, consider a classification task of ‘Apple’
visualized in Figure 1. If the most in-distribution samples
contain the keyword ‘Apple,’ the fine-tuned model can predict the class solely based on the existence of the keyword.
However, a reliable classifier should detect that the sentence
“I ate an apple this morning” is an out-of-distribution sample
(Hendrycks and Gimpel 2017; Shu, Xu, and Liu 2017; Tan
et al. 2019). On the other hand, the sentence “Tim Cook said
that . . . ” should be classified as the topic ‘Apple’ although
it does not contain the keyword ‘Apple’ and the keyword
‘Tim Cook’ is not contained in the training samples. In other
words, the reliable classifier should learn decision rules that

