The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Efficient Allocations under Lexicographic Preferences
Hadi Hosseini,1 Sujoy Sikdar,2 Rohit Vaish,3 Lirong Xia4
1

Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA 16802
2
Binghamton University, Binghamton, New York 13902-6000
3
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India 400005
4
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York 12180
hadi@psu.edu, ssikdar@binghamton.edu, rohit.vaish@tifr.res.in, xial@cs.rpi.edu
Abstract

with strategyproofness (Amanatidis et al. 2017), which is another desirable property in the economic analysis of allocation problems.
The aforementioned limitations of EFX prompt us to explore the domain restriction approach in search of positive results (Elkind, Lackner, and Peters 2016). Specifically,
we deviate from the framework of cardinal preferences for
which EFX allocations have been most extensively studied,
and instead focus on the purely ordinal domain of lexicographic preferences.
Lexicographic preferences have been widely studied
in psychology (Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996), machine learning (Schmitt and Martignon 2006), and social
choice (Taylor 1970) as a model of human decision-making.
Several real-world settings such as evaluating job candidates
and the desirability of a product involve lexicographic preferences over the set of features. In the context of fair division, too, lexicographic preferences can arise naturally. For
example, when dividing an inheritance consisting of a house,
a car, and some home appliances, a stakeholder might prefer
any division in which she gets the house over one where she
doesn’t (possibly because of its sentimental value), subject
to which she might prefer any outcome that includes the car
over one that doesn’t, and so on.
On the computational side, lexicographic preferences provide a succinct language for representing preferences over
combinatorial domains (Saban and Sethuraman 2014; Lang,
Mengin, and Xia 2018), and have led to numerous positive
results at the intersection of artificial intelligence and economics (Fujita et al. 2018; Hosseini and Larson 2019). Motivated by these considerations, our work examines the existence and computation of fair (i.e., EFX) and efficient allocations from the lens of lexicographic preferences.

Envy-freeness up to any good (EFX) provides a strong and
intuitive guarantee of fairness in the allocation of indivisible
goods. But whether such allocations always exist or whether
they can be efficiently computed remains an important open
question. We study the existence and computation of EFX
in conjunction with various other economic properties under
lexicographic preferences–a well-studied preference model
in artificial intelligence and economics. In sharp contrast to
the known results for additive valuations, we not only prove
the existence of EFX and Pareto optimal allocations, but
in fact provide an algorithmic characterization of these two
properties. We also characterize the mechanisms that are, in
addition, strategyproof, non-bossy, and neutral. When the efficiency notion is strengthened to rank-maximality, we obtain
non-existence and computational hardness results, and show
that tractability can be restored when EFX is relaxed to another well-studied fairness notion called maximin share guarantee (MMS).

Introduction
Fair and efficient allocation of scarce resources is a fundamental problem in economics and computer science.
The quintessential fairness notion—envy-freeness—enjoys
strong existential and computational guarantees for divisible resources (Varian 1974). However, in notable applications such as course allocation (Budish 2011) and property
division (Pruhs and Woeginger 2012) that involve indivisible resources, (exact) envy-freeness could be too restrictive.
In these settings, it is natural to consider notions of approximate fairness such as envy-freeness up to any good (EFX)
wherein pairwise envy can be eliminated by the removal of
any good in the envied bundle (Caragiannis et al. 2019).
EFX is arguably the closest analog of envy-freeness in the
indivisible setting, and, as a result, has been actively studied
especially for the domain of additive valuations. However,
it also suffers from a number of limitations: First, barring
a few special cases, the existence and computation of EFX
allocations remains an open problem. Second, for additive
valuations, EFX can be incompatible with Pareto optimality
(PO)—a fundamental notion of economic efficiency (Plaut
and Roughgarden 2020). Finally, EFX could also be at odds

Our Contributions. Figure 1 summarizes our theoretical
contributions.
• EFX+PO: Our first result provides a family of
polynomial-time algorithms for computing EFX+PO allocations under lexicographic preferences. Furthermore, we
show that any EFX+PO allocation can be computed by some
algorithm in this family, thus providing an algorithmic characterization of such allocations (Theorem 1). This result establishes a sharp contrast with the additive valuations domain where the two properties are incompatible in general.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5472

