The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Clinical Risk Prediction with Temporal Probabilistic
Asymmetric Multi-Task Learning
A. Tuan Nguyen * † 1, 4 , Hyewon Jeong * 1 , Eunho Yang 1, 2, 3 , Sung Ju Hwang 1, 2, 3 ‡
1

School of Computing, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
AI Graduate School, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
3
Aitrics,
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
tuan.nguyen@cs.ox.ac.uk, {jhw162, eunhoy, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

2

Abstract
Although recent multi-task learning methods have shown to
be effective in improving the generalization of deep neural
networks, they should be used with caution for safety-critical
applications, such as clinical risk prediction. This is because
even if they achieve improved task-average performance, they
may still yield degraded performance on individual tasks,
which may be critical (e.g., prediction of mortality risk).
Existing asymmetric multi-task learning methods tackle this
negative transfer problem by performing knowledge transfer
from tasks with low loss to tasks with high loss. However,
using loss as a measure of reliability is risky since low loss
could result from overfitting. In the case of time-series prediction tasks, knowledge learned for one task (e.g., predicting the
sepsis onset) at a specific timestep may be useful for learning
another task (e.g., prediction of mortality) at a later timestep,
but lack of loss at each timestep makes it challenging to
measure the reliability at each timestep. To capture such dynamically changing asymmetric relationships between tasks
in time-series data, we propose a novel temporal asymmetric multi-task learning model that performs knowledge transfer from certain tasks/timesteps to relevant uncertain tasks,
based on the feature-level uncertainty. We validate our model
on multiple clinical risk prediction tasks against various deep
learning models for time-series prediction, which our model
significantly outperforms without any sign of negative transfer. Further qualitative analysis of learned knowledge graphs
by clinicians shows that they are helpful in analyzing the predictions of the model.

(a) Loss-based AMTL

(b) TPAMTL

Figure 1: Temporal Probabilistic Asymmetric Multi-Task Learning. (a) Existing AMTL models (Lee, Yang, and Hwang 2016,
2017) utilize task loss to perform static knowledge transfer (KT)
from one task to another; thus it cannot capture dynamically changing relationships between timesteps and tasks in the time-series domain. (b) Our model performs dynamic KT among tasks and across
timesteps based on the feature-level uncertainty (UC).

unreliable knowledge from other tasks adversely affects the
target task. This negative transfer could be fatal for safetycritical applications such as clinical risk prediction, where
we cannot risk losing performance on any of the tasks. To
prevent negative transfer, researchers have sought ways to
allow knowledge transfer only among closely related tasks,
by either identifying the task groups or learning optimal
sharing structures among tasks (Duong et al. 2015; Misra
et al. 2016). However, it is not only the task relatedness that
matters, but also the relative reliability of the task-specific
knowledge. Recent asymmetric multi-task learning (AMTL)
models (Lee, Yang, and Hwang 2016, 2017) tackle this challenge by allowing tasks with low loss to transfer more.
While the asymmetric knowledge transfer between tasks
is useful, it does not fully exploit the asymmetry in timeseries analysis, which has an additional dimension of the
time axis. With time-series data, knowledge transfer direction may need to be different depending on the timestep.
For instance, suppose that we predict an event of infection
or mortality within 48 hours of admission in intensive care
units (ICU) based on electronic health records (EHR). At
earlier timesteps, prediction of Infection may be more reli-

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) is a method to
train a model, or multiple models jointly for multiple tasks
to obtain improved generalization, by sharing knowledge
among them. One of the most critical problems in multi-task
learning is the problem known as negative transfer, where
* Equal contribution
†

This work was done while the author is in KAIST
Correspondence to: A. Tuan Nguyen, Hyewon Jeong, and
Sung Ju Hwang.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

9081

