The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CAKES: Channel-wise Automatic KErnel Shrinking for Efficient 3D Networks
Qihang Yu, Yingwei Li, Jieru Mei, Yuyin Zhou, Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University
{yucornetto, meijieru, zhouyuyiner, alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com, yingwei.li@jhu.edu

Abstract
3D Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have been widely
applied to 3D scene understanding, such as video analysis
and volumetric image recognition. However, 3D networks
can easily lead to over-parameterization which incurs expensive computation cost. In this paper, we propose Channelwise Automatic KErnel Shrinking (CAKES), to enable efficient 3D learning by shrinking standard 3D convolutions into
a set of economic operations (e.g., 1D, 2D convolutions). Unlike previous methods, CAKES performs channel-wise kernel
shrinkage, which enjoys the following benefits: 1) enabling
operations deployed in every layer to be heterogeneous, so
that they can extract diverse and complementary information to benefit the learning process; and 2) allowing for an
efficient and flexible replacement design, which can be generalized to both spatial-temporal and volumetric data. Further, we propose a new search space based on CAKES, so
that the replacement configuration can be determined automatically for simplifying 3D networks. CAKES shows superior performance to other methods with similar model size,
and it also achieves comparable performance to state-of-theart with much fewer parameters and computational costs on
tasks including 3D medical imaging segmentation and video
action recognition. Codes and models are available at https:
//github.com/yucornetto/CAKES.

Figure 1: CAKES shows better accuracy-cost trade-off to its
counterparts.
Despite their effectiveness for spatial-temporal information extraction, there are several limitations of existing alternatives to 3D convolutions. Firstly, these methods (e.g.,
P3D) are specifically tailored to video datasets, where data
can be explicitly separated into time and space. However,
for volumetric data such as CT/MRI where all three dimensions should be treated equally, conventional spatialtemporal operators can lead to biased information extraction. Moreover, existing operations are still insufficient even
for spatial-temporal data since they may exhibit certain levels of redundancy either along the temporal or the spatial dimension, as empirically suggested in Xie et al. (2018). Secondly, existing replacements are manually designed. Consequently, this process can be time-consuming and may lead
to sub-optimal results.
To address these issues, we introduce Channel-wise Automatic KErnel Shrinking (CAKES), as a general efficient
alternatives to existing 3D operations. Specifically, the proposed method simplifies conventional 3D operations by
adopting a combination of diverse and economic operations
(e.g., 1D, 2D convolutions), where these different operators
can extract complementary information to be utilized in the
same layer. Our approach is not tailored to any specific type
of input (e.g., videos), but can be generalized to different
types of data and backbone architectures to achieve a finegrained and efficient replacement.
As a proof test, our CAKES with a naive manual setting

Introduction
3D learning has attracted more and more research attention
with the recent advance of deep neural networks. However,
3D convolution layers typically result in expensive computation and suffer from convergence problems due to overfitting issues and the lack of pre-trained weights (Carreira
and Zisserman 2017; Tajbakhsh et al. 2016).
To resolve the redundancy in 3D convolutions, many efforts have been investigated to design efficient alternatives.
For instance, Qiu, Yao, and Mei (2017) and Tran et al. (2018)
propose to factorize the 3D kernel and replace the 3D convolution with Pseudo-3D (P3D) and (2+1)D convolution,
where 2D and 1D convolution layers are applied in a structured manner. Xie et al. (2018) suggest that replacing 3D
convolutions with low-cost 2D convolutions at the bottom
of the network significantly improves recognition efficiency.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3225

