The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Analogical Matching
Maxwell Crouse1∗ , Constantine Nakos1 , Ibrahim Abdelaziz2 , Ken Forbus1
1

Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
2
IBM Research, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
{mvcrouse, cnakos}@u.northwestern.edu, ibrahim.abdelaziz1@ibm.com, forbus@northwestern.edu

Abstract

Until now, the symbolic, structured nature of SMT has
made it a poor fit for deep learning. The representations produced by deep learning techniques are incompatible with offthe-shelf SMT implementations like the Structure-Mapping
Engine (SME) (Falkenhainer, Forbus, and Gentner 1989; Forbus et al. 2017), while the symbolic graphs that SMT assumes
as input are challenging to encode with traditional neural
methods. In this work, we describe how recent advances
in graph representation learning can be leveraged to create
deep learning systems that can learn to produce structural
analogies consistent with SMT.

Analogy is core to human cognition. It allows us to solve
problems based on prior experience, it governs the way we
conceptualize new information, and it even influences our visual perception. The importance of analogy to humans has
made it an active area of research in the broader field of artificial intelligence, resulting in data-efficient models that learn
and reason in human-like ways. While cognitive perspectives
of analogy and deep learning have generally been studied independently of one another, the integration of the two lines of
research is a promising step towards more robust and efficient
learning techniques. As part of a growing body of research
on such an integration, we introduce the Analogical Matching
Network: a neural architecture that learns to produce analogies
between structured, symbolic representations that are largely
consistent with the principles of Structure-Mapping Theory.

1

Contributions: We introduce the Analogical Matching
Network (AMN), a neural architecture that learns to produce
analogies between symbolic representations. AMN is trained
on purely synthetic data and is demonstrated over a diverse
set of analogy problems drawn from structure-mapping literature to produce outputs that are largely consistent with SMT.
With AMN, we aim to push the boundaries of deep learning
and extend them to an important area of human cognition; in
particular, by showing how to design a deep learning system
that conforms to a cognitive theory of analogical reasoning. It
is our hope that future generations of neural architectures can
reap the same benefits from analogy that symbolic reasoning
systems and humans currently do.

Introduction

Analogical reasoning is a form of inductive reasoning that
cognitive scientists consider to be one of the cornerstones of
human intelligence (Gentner 2003; Hofstadter 2001, 1995).
Analogy shows up at nearly every level of human cognition, from low-level visual processing (Sagi, Gentner, and
Lovett 2012) to abstract conceptual change (Gentner et al.
1997). Problem solving using analogy is common, with past
solutions forming the basis for dealing with new problems
(Holyoak, Junn, and Billman 1984; Novick 1988). Analogy
also facilitates learning and understanding by allowing people to generalize specific situations into increasingly abstract
schemas (Gick and Holyoak 1983).
Many different theories have been proposed for how humans perform analogy (Mitchell 1993; Chalmers, French, and
Hofstadter 1992; Gentner 1983; Holyoak, Holyoak, and Thagard 1995). One of the most influential theories is StructureMapping Theory (SMT) (Gentner 1983), which posits that
analogy involves the alignment of structured representations
of objects or situations subject to certain constraints. Key
characteristics of SMT are its use of symbolic representations and its emphasis on relational structure, which allow
the same principles to apply to a wide variety of domains.

2

Related Work

Many different computational models of analogy have
been proposed (Mitchell 1993; Holyoak and Thagard 1989;
O’Donoghue and Keane 1999; Forbus et al. 2017), each instantiating a different cognitive theory of analogy. The differences between them are compounded by the computational
costs of analogical reasoning, a provably NP-Hard problem
(Veale and Keane 1997). While these computational models
are often used to test cognitive theories of human behavior,
they are also useful tools for applied tasks. For instance, the
Structure-Mapping Engine (SME) has been used in questionanswering (Ribeiro et al. 2019), computer vision (Chen et al.
2019), and machine reasoning (Klenk et al. 2005).
Many of the early approaches to analogy were connectionist (Gentner and Markman 1993). The STAR architecture
of (Halford et al. 1994) used tensor product representations
of structured data to perform simple analogies of the form
R(x, y) ⇒ S(f (x), f (y)). Drama (Eliasmith and Thagard

∗

Correspondence to mvcrouse@u.northwestern.edu
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

809

