The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Maximum k-Plex Solver via Second-Order Reduction and Graph
Color Bounding
Yi Zhou1 , Shan Hu 1 , Mingyu Xiao 1 , Zhang-Hua Fu 2,3

∗

1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society, Shenzhen, China,
3
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
zhou.yi@uestc.edu.cn, hu.shan@std.uestc.edu.cn, myxiao@gmail.com, fuzhanghua@cuhk.edu.cn
2

Abstract

lem (Conte et al. 2018; Zhou et al. 2020; Zhu, Chen, and
Zeng 2020).
It is clear that MPLEX is equal to MCP when k = 1
and thus an NP-hard problem. Indeed, for any k > 1, MPLEX is still NP-hard (Lewis and Yannakakis 1980; Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011). So far, it is known that
MPLEX can be solved in time O(γ n ) where n is the number of vertices in the given graph and γ is a value related to
k but always slightly smaller than 2 (Xiao et al. 2017). Unless P=NP, there cannot be any polynomial time algorithm
that approximates the maximum k-plex within a factor better than O(n ), for any  > 0 (Lund and Yannakakis 1993).
Despite the fact that MPLEX is theoretically challenging,
there exists a considerable number of algorithms for solving MPLEX practically. In the literature, we mainly distinguish two types of algorithms for MPLEX, the heuristic algorithms and exact algorithms. The heuristic algorithms are
able to quickly provide a lower bound, but cannot guarantee the optimality of their solutions. Representative heuristic
approaches for MPLEX mainly use stochastic local search
(Zhou and Hao 2017; Chen et al. 2020) or the GRASP
method (Miao and Balasundaram 2017). Exact algorithms,
in contrary, ensure the optimality of their solution. Existing
exact algorithms for MPLEX include integer programming
methods (Balasundaram, Butenko, and Hicks 2011), branchand-bound algorithms (McClosky and Hicks 2012; Moser,
Niedermeier, and Sorge 2012; Xiao et al. 2017; Gao et al.
2018; Wu et al. 2019) and Russian Doll Search (Trukhanov
et al. 2013; Shirokikh 2013; Gschwind, Irnich, and Podlinski
2018).
In the paper, we investigate MPLEX by developing a new
practical solver, Maplex. Maplex is an exact algorithm which
is time-efficient and scalable for the ubiquitous large real world graphs. Compared with the existing exact solvers,
Maplex has two notable features.
First, due to the sheer sizes of real world graphs, it is
computationally expensive to directly manipulate them in
memory. Hence, existing algorithms like (Trukhanov et al.
2013; Zhou and Hao 2017; Gschwind, Irnich, and Podlinski
2018) used Peel to reduce the graph in preprocessing. Peel
is a linear-time algorithm which reduces low-degree vertices
without missing the optimality. However, in many cases, the
graphs after using Peel are still too large to fit the memory,
e.g., the facebook network socfb-A-anon has around 390144

In a graph, a k-plex is a vertex set in which every vertex
is not adjacent to at most k vertices of this set. The maximum k-plex problem, which asks for the largest k-plex from
the given graph, is a key primitive in a variety of real-world
applications like community detection and so on. In the paper, we develop an exact algorithm, Maplex, for solving this
problem in real world graphs practically. Based on the existing first-order and the novel second-order reduction rules,
we design a powerful preprocessing method which efficiently
removes redundant vertices and edges for Maplex. Also, the
graph color heuristic is widely used for overestimating the
maximum clique of a graph. For the first time, we generalize this technique for bounding the size of maximum k-plex
in Maplex. Experiments are carried out to compare our algorithm with other state-of-the-art solvers on a wide range of
publicly available graphs. Maplex outperforms all other algorithms on large real world graphs and is competitive with
existing solvers on artificial dense graphs. Finally, we shed
light on the effectiveness of each key component of Maplex.

Introduction
A clique of a graph is a set of vertices that are pairwise connected. The maximum clique problem (MCP), which is to
obtain the largest clique from the given graph, is a fundamental NP-hard problem. Applications of MCP algorithm
include coding theory, computer vision and multi-agent systems (Wu and Hao 2015; Tošić and Agha 2004). However,
for many other applications such as complex network analysis, where dense, not necessarily fully connected structures
are of particular interest, the clique model is over-restrictive
(Pattillo, Youssef, and Butenko 2012). Hence, the k-plex is
proposed as a relaxed form of clique (Seidman and Foster
1978). A k-plex is a vertex set that is nearly a clique but
each vertex of the k-plex is allowed to have k missing adjacent vertices in this vertex set, k being a positive integer. As
a basic problem of the k-plex model, the Maximum k-PLEX
problem (MPLEX) asks for the largest k-plex from the given
graph. Algorithms for the MPLEX are also important tools
in the analysis of complex networks (Pattillo, Youssef, and
Butenko 2013), especially in the community detection prob∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12453

