The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Fairness and Privacy in Selection Problems
Mohammad Mahdi Khalili,1 Xueru Zhang, 2 Mahed Abroshan, 3 Somayeh Sojoudi 4
1

CIS Department, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA
EECS Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
4
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
khalili@udel.edu, xueru@umich.edu, mabroshan@turing.ac.uk, sojoudi@berkeley.edu
2

Abstract

There are various potential causes for such discrimination. Bias can be introduced when the data is collected. For
instance, if a group (i.e., majority group) contributes more
to the dataset as compared to another group (i.e., minority
group), then the model trained based on the dataset could
be biased in favor of the majority group, and this group may
experience a higher accuracy. Even if the data collection procedure is unbiased, the data itself may be biased, e.g., labels
in the training dataset may exhibit bias if they are provided
based on an agent’s opinion (Jiang and Nachum 2019).
The fairness issue has been studied extensively in the literature. A variety of fairness notions have been proposed to
measure the unfairness, and they can be roughly classified
into two families: individual fairness and group fairness.
Individual fairness is in pursuit of equity in the individuallevel, that it requires any two similar individuals to be treated
similarly (Biega, Gummadi, and Weikum 2018; Jung et al.
2019; Gupta and Kamble 2019). Group fairness aims to
achieve a certain balance in the group-level, that the population is partitioned into a small number of protected groups
and it requires a certain statistical measure (e.g., positive
classification rates, true positive rates, etc.) to be approximately equalized across different protected groups (Zhang
et al. 2019; Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016; Conitzer et al.
2019; Zhang, Khalili, and Liu 2020; Zhang et al. 2020).
There are mainly three approaches to improving fairness
(Zhang and Liu 2020):

Supervised learning models have been increasingly used for
making decisions about individuals in applications such as
hiring, lending, and college admission. These models may inherit pre-existing biases from training datasets and discriminate against protected attributes (e.g., race or gender). In addition to unfairness, privacy concerns also arise when the use
of models reveals sensitive personal information. Among various privacy notions, differential privacy has become popular
in recent years. In this work, we study the possibility of using a differentially private exponential mechanism as a postprocessing step to improve both fairness and privacy of supervised learning models. Unlike many existing works, we
consider a scenario where a supervised model is used to select a limited number of applicants as the number of available positions is limited. This assumption is well-suited for
various scenarios, such as job application and college admission. We use “equal opportunity” as the fairness notion and
show that the exponential mechanisms can make the decisionmaking process perfectly fair. Moreover, the experiments on
real-world datasets show that the exponential mechanism can
improve both privacy and fairness, with a slight decrease in
accuracy compared to the model without post-processing.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms trained based on realworld datasets have been used in various decision-making
applications (e.g., job applications and criminal justice). Due
to the pre-existing bias in the datasets, the decision-making
process can be biased against protected attributes (e.g., race
and gender). For example, COMPAS (Correctional Offender
Management Profiling for Alternative Sanctions) recidivism
prediction tool used as part of inmate parole decisions by
courts in the United States has been shown to have a substantially higher false positive rate on African Americans
compared to White people (Dressel and Farid 2018). In
speech recognition, products such as Amazon’s Alexa and
Google Home can have accent bias, with Chinese-accented
and Spanish-accented English hardest to understand (Harwell 2018). Amazon had been using automated software
since 2014 to assess applicants resumes, which was found
to be biased against women (Dastin 2018).

i) Pre-processing: modifying the training datasets to remove
the discrimination before training an ML model (Kamiran
and Calders 2012; Zemel et al. 2013);
ii) In-processing: imposing certain fairness criterion or modifying the loss function during the training process (Agarwal et al. 2018; Zafar et al. 2019);
iii) Post-processing: altering the output of an existing algorithm to satisfy the fairness requirements (Hardt, Price,
and Srebro 2016; Pleiss et al. 2017).
In this work, we focus on group fairness and use the postprocessing approach to improving the fairness of a supervised learning algorithm.
In addition to unfairness issues, privacy concerns may incur when making decisions based on individuals’ sensitive
data. Consider a lending scenario where the loan approval
decision is made based on an applicant’s credit score. The

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8092

