The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Tractability of SHAP Explanations
Guy Van den Broeck,1 Anton Lykov,1 Maximilian Schleich,2 Dan Suciu2
1

University of California, Los Angeles
2
University of Washington, Seattle

Abstract

the S HAP explanation is effective in explaining predictions
in the medical domain; see Lundberg et al. (2020). More
recently there has been a lot of work on the tradeoffs of variants of the original S HAP explanations, e.g., Sundararajan
and Najmi (2020), Kumar et al. (2020), Janzing, Minorics,
and Bloebaum (2020), Merrick and Taly (2020), and Aas,
Jullum, and Løland (2019).
Despite all of this interest, there is considerable confusion about the tractability of computing S HAP explanations. The S HAP explanations determine the influence of
a given feature by systematically computing the expected
value of the model given a subsets of the features. As a
consequence, the complexity of computing S HAP explanations depends on the predictive model as well as assumptions on the underlying data distribution. Lundberg et al.
(2020) describe a polynomial-time algorithm for computing
the S HAP explanation over decision trees, but online discussions have pointed out that this algorithm is not correct as
stated. We present a concrete example of this shortcoming
in the supplementary material, in Appendix A. In contrast,
for fully-factorized distributions, Bertossi et al. (2020) prove
that there are models for which computing the S HAP explanation is #P-hard. A contemporaneous paper by Arenas
et al. (2020) shows that computing the S HAP explanation for
tractable logical circuits over uniform and fully factorized
binary data distributions is tractable. In general, the complexity of the S HAP explanation is open.
In this paper we consider the original formulation of the
S HAP explanation by Lundberg and Lee (2017) and analyze
its computational complexity under the following data distributions and model classes:

S HAP explanations are a popular feature-attribution mechanism for explainable AI. They use game-theoretic notions to
measure the influence of individual features on the prediction
of a machine learning model. Despite a lot of recent interest from both academia and industry, it is not known whether
S HAP explanations of common machine learning models can
be computed efficiently. In this paper, we establish the complexity of computing the S HAP explanation in three important settings. First, we consider fully-factorized data distributions, and show that the complexity of computing the S HAP
explanation is the same as the complexity of computing the
expected value of the model. This fully-factorized setting is
often used to simplify the S HAP computation, yet our results
show that the computation can be intractable for commonly
used models such as logistic regression. Going beyond fullyfactorized distributions, we show that computing S HAP explanations is already intractable for a very simple setting:
computing S HAP explanations of trivial classifiers over naive
Bayes distributions. Finally, we show that even computing
S HAP over the empirical distribution is #P-hard.

1

Introduction

Machine learning is increasingly applied in high stakes decision making. As a consequence, there is growing demand
for the ability to explain the prediction of machine learning models. One popular explanation technique is to compute feature-attribution scores, in particular using the Shapley values from cooperative game theory (Roth 1988) as a
principled aggregation measure to determine the influence
of individual features on the prediction of the collective
model. Shapley value based explanations have several desirable properties (Datta, Sen, and Zick 2016), which is why
they have attracted a lot of interest in academia as well as
industry in recent years (see e.g., Gade et al. (2019)).
Štrumbelj and Kononenko (2014) show that Shapley values can be used to explain arbitrary machine learning models. Datta, Sen, and Zick (2016) use Shapley-value-based explanations as part of a broader framework for algorithmic
transparency. Lundberg and Lee (2017) use Shapley values
in a framework that unifies various explanation techniques,
and they coined the term S HAP explanation. They show that

1. First, we consider fully-factorized distributions, which are
the simplest possible data distribution. Fully-factorized
distributions capture the assumption that the model’s features are independent, which is a commonly used assumption to simplify the computation of the S HAP explanations, see for example Lundberg and Lee (2017).
For fully-factorized distributions and any prediction
model, we show that the complexity of computing the
S HAP explanation is the same as the complexity of computing the expected value of the model.
It follows that there are classes of models for which the
computation is tractable (e.g., linear regression, decision

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6505

