The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Representations for Incomplete Time Series Clustering
Qianli Ma1,2 * , Chuxin Chen 1 * , Sen Li 1 * , Garrison W. Cottrell 3
1

2

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot (South China University of Technology), Ministry of Education
3
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA
qianlima@scut.edu.cn, {sherlockem,awslee}@foxmail.com, gary@ucsd.edu

Abstract

However, real-world time series usually contain missing values due to uncontrollable factors (e.g., device failure
and communication errors), which violates the completedata assumption of most state-of-the-art clustering methods. Incomplete data make any inference more difficult (Rubin 1976) and harms downstream applications’ performance (Cheema and J. 2014; Cao et al. 2018). On the other
hand, incomplete time series clustering is essential for analysis in some domains, where the data is often corrupted, and
re-recording them is expensive and impractical. For example, in precision medicine, it is meaningful to stratify the
patients and accordingly decide on the right type and time
point of therapy for an individual (de Jong et al. 2019). In
DNA microarray analysis, it is useful to cluster gene expression data to identify genes’ function (de Souto et al. 2008).
Under such circumstances, performing imputation first and
then clustering is a natural solution. However, this two-stage
strategy makes the clustering performance heavily depend
on the best combination of the imputation method and the
clustering method. In practical applications, there is usually
no category information to help pick the best combination.
Furthermore, two-stage approaches separate the imputation
and its downstream analysis, which may lead to sub-optimal
results (Che et al. 2018; Wells et al. 2013).

Time-series clustering is an essential unsupervised technique
for data analysis, applied to many real-world fields, such as
medical analysis and DNA microarray. Existing clustering
methods are usually based on the assumption that the data
is complete. However, time series in real-world applications
often contain missing values. Traditional strategy (imputing
first and then clustering) does not optimize the imputation
and clustering process as a whole, which not only makes performance dependent on the combination of imputation and
clustering methods but also fails to achieve satisfactory results. How to best improve the clustering performance on
incomplete time series remains a challenge. This paper proposes a novel unsupervised temporal representation learning
model, named Clustering Representation Learning on Incomplete time-series data (CRLI). CRLI jointly optimizes the imputation and clustering process to impute more discriminative values for clustering and make the learned representations possessed good clustering property. Also, to reduce the
error propagation from imputation to clustering, we introduce
a discriminator to make the distribution of imputation values
close to the true one and train CRLI in an alternating training manner. An experiment conducted on eight real-world incomplete time-series datasets shows that CRLI outperforms
existing methods. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the
learned representations and the convergence of the model
through visualization analysis. Moreover, we reveal that the
joint training strategy can impute values close to the true ones
in those important sub-sequences, and impute more discriminative values in those less important sub-sequences at the
same time, making the imputed sequence cluster-friendly.

Deep learning is a data-driven method that can learn effective representations for various tasks and has achieved
great success in recent years. Madiraju et al. (Madiraju et al.
2018) and Ma et al. (Ma et al. 2019) successfully applied
deep learning to time series clustering and achieved stateof-the-art performance. Also, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown potential for handling missing
data (Yoon, Jordon, and Der Schaar 2018; Li, Jiang, and
Marlin 2019; Ma, Li, and Cottrell 2020). Most recently, Jong
et al. (de Jong et al. 2019) proposed a deep learning-based
method, named VaDER, for clustering time series with missing values. However, these methods do not effectively prevent error propagation from imputation to clustering, leading to unsatisfactory performance. Moreover, VaDER uses
a generative variational auto-encoder framework to perform
the clustering, which requires a large amount of data to train
and performs poorly when the data amount is small. In this
paper, we propose a novel unsupervised incomplete time series clustering model, Clustering Representation Learning
on Incomplete time-series data (CRLI), which can gener-

Introduction
Time series data is ubiquitous in real life, and there are many
application scenarios, such as medicine (de Jong et al. 2019),
gene expression analysis (de Souto et al. 2008), and financial markets (Azoff 1994). When the data lacks category
labels, data analysts typically will apply clustering methods (Paparrizos and Gravano 2015; Zhang et al. 2018; Madiraju et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2019) to extract interesting patterns and valuable information from complex and massive
datasets (Aghabozorgi, Shirkhorshidi, and Wah 2015).
* These authors contributed equally to this work
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8837

