The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Top-k Ranking Bayesian Optimization
Quoc Phong Nguyen,1 Sebastian Tay,1 Bryan Kian Hsiang Low,1 Patrick Jaillet2
1

Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
2
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA
qphong@comp.nus.edu.sg, sebastian.tay@u.nus.edu, lowkh@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu

Abstract

et al. 2017) have attempted to replace direct (but noisy) function evaluations/values with noisy preferences between inputs. In particular, given two inputs, the higher the objective
function value at an input is, the more likely it is preferred.
The observation in these works is limited to a preference between a pair of inputs, i.e., a pairwise preference (Dewancker,
Bauer, and McCourt 2017; González et al. 2017). Furthermore, inputs in the pair are searched one after the other.
Ideally, we would like to search for the input pair jointly as
the function values at these inputs are correlated.
Regarding the model, the work of González et al. (2017)
directly applies a Gaussian process (GP) to model a latent
preference function whose input is a pair of the objective
function’s inputs. This model suffers from 3 disadvantages:
The input dimension of the GP is twice that of the objective
function, the objective function is not modeled directly, and
ties are not modeled. The second drawback leads to the use
of a computationally expensive soft-Copeland score to estimate the maximizer of the objective function. On the other
hand, the work of Dewancker, Bauer, and McCourt (2017)
employs the generalized Bradley-Terry model. Yet, it suffers
from a crude mean field approximation which implies that
the posterior beliefs of the function values at different inputs
are independent from one another. Note that there are several
works with preference-based observations in bandit literature
(Busa-Fekete, Hüllermeier, and Mesaoudi-Paul 2018). The
most relevant work to preferential BO is the work of Sui et al.
(2017) where there is an infinite number of dependent arms
modeled with a GP. However, it does not have a regret analysis like the other bandit algorithms. Besides, a probability
density is modeled with a GP which allows negative values.
This paper presents an approach that can resolve both existing issues on the model and the acquisition function. Our
model is inspired from the multinomial logit model and its
generalization to rankings and ties. Combining with a GP,
our model can be interpreted as a GP regression model with
an i.i.d. Gumbel noise. As the GP directly models the underlying objective function, the maximizer of the objective
function can be estimated with the maximizer of the GP posterior mean function like in the conventional BO, which is
less computationally intensive than the soft-Copeland score
in (González et al. 2017). Our model is capable of handling
the observation as a ranking of the top-k inputs in a finite set
of inputs, i.e., top-k rankings (Sec. 2.1), and the possibility

This paper presents a novel approach to top-k ranking
Bayesian optimization (top-k ranking BO) which is a practical
and significant generalization of preferential BO to handle
top-k ranking and tie/indifference observations. We first design a surrogate model that is not only capable of catering
to the above observations, but is also supported by a classic
random utility model. Another equally important contribution
is the introduction of the first information-theoretic acquisition
function in BO with preferential observation called multinomial predictive entropy search (MPES) which is flexible in
handling these observations and optimized for all inputs of
a query jointly. MPES possesses superior performance compared with existing acquisition functions that select the inputs
of a query one at a time greedily. We empirically evaluate
the performance of MPES using several synthetic benchmark
functions, CIFAR-10 dataset, and SUSHI preference dataset.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is an efficient approach to optimize expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective functions
(i.e., possibly noisy, non-convex, and/or with no closed-form
expression/derivative) (Brochu, Cora, and de Freitas 2010).
In practice, direct access to function evaluations may not be
always possible (González et al. 2017). For example, a diner
tasting two different dishes (i.e., inputs) can easily tell which
dish he/she prefers, but it is relatively difficult for the diner to
articulate a rigorous numeric value representing the taste of
each dish (i.e., a function). The difficulty in providing such
a value arises from the need to taste all possible dishes (i.e.,
inputs) and assess the difference in the flavors of these dishes.
On the other hand, specifying the preference between dishes
(i.e., inputs) is so natural that it becomes our daily dining
routine. Also, an inherent property of our preference, which
should be built into the model, is our inability to elucidate the
preference between very similar choices (i.e., indifference
or a tie). For example, it is hardly possible for us to tell the
difference between a cup of coffee with 20% of sugar and
another with 21% of sugar.
To boost the practicality of BO, recent works on preferential BO (Dewancker, Bauer, and McCourt 2017; González
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9135

