The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distilling Localization for Self-Supervised Representation Learning
Nanxuan Zhao,1? Zhirong Wu,2? Rynson W.H. Lau,1 Stephen Lin2
1

City University of Hong Kong, 2 Microsoft Research Asia
nanxuanzhao@gmail.com, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk, {wuzhiron,stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent progress in contrastive learning has revolutionized
unsupervised representation learning. Concretely, multiple
views (augmentations) from the same image are encouraged
to map to the similar embeddings, while views from different images are pulled apart. In this paper, through visualizing
and diagnosing classification errors, we observe that current
contrastive models are ineffective at localizing the foreground
object, limiting their ability to extract discriminative highlevel features. This is due to the fact that view generation
process considers pixels in an image uniformly. To address
this problem, we propose a data-driven approach for learning invariance to backgrounds. It first estimates foreground
saliency in images and then creates augmentations by copyand-pasting the foreground onto a variety of backgrounds.
The learning still follows the instance discrimination pretext
task, so that the representation is trained to disregard background content and focus on the foreground. We study a variety of saliency estimation methods, and find that most methods lead to improvements for contrastive learning. With this
approach (DiLo), significant performance is achieved for selfsupervised learning on ImageNet classification, and also for
object detection on PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO.

Figure 1: Motivation: for natural images with objects, backgrounds are usually shared across categories, while the distinctive region for determining the object is localized.
invariances are encoded and learned from low-level image
augmentations such as spatial cropping and color jittering.
In this paper, by visualizing and diagnosing errors made
by recent self-supervised contrastive models, we identify a
strong pattern which is overlooked by prior works. Specifically, we find that current self-supervised models lack the
ability to localize foreground objects, and the learned representation can be predominantly determined by background
pixels. This is actually unsurprising, as self-supervised
learning generally treats each spatial location as equally important, and it is well known that neural networks are prone
to “cheat” (Zhang, Isola, and Efros 2016) by taking advantage of unintended information. As a result, a network cannot be expected to discover objects unless it is driven to do
so (Arandjelović and Zisserman 2019).
In supervised visual recognition, localization has been
demonstrated to be a strong by-product of training on imagelevel labels. Strong object localization performance has been
shown using the gradient of the class score in the pixel
space (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013). It has also
been found that adding precise localization information does
not bring significant gains for PASCAL object classification
when transferred from ImageNet (Oquab et al. 2015). Moreover, object segments have been estimated using only imagelevel labels via a class activation mapping method (Zhou
et al. 2016). As suggested in Figure 1, we hypothesize that
the learning signal that drives localization comes from the

Introduction
Visual recognition has been revolutionized by deep learning in the fashion of assembling considerable amounts of labeled data (Deng et al. 2009) and training very deep neural
networks (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012). However, collection of supervisory signals, especially at a very
large scale, is constrained by budget and time. Due to this,
there has been a growing interest in self-supervised and unsupervised learning which do not face this practical limitation. For high-level visual recognition, previous approaches
in self-supervised learning define proxy tasks which do not
require human labeling but encode useful priors (Zhang,
Isola, and Efros 2016; Doersch, Gupta, and Efros 2015) for
object recognition. Recent advances in self-supervised contrastive learning rely on the proxy task of instance discrimination (Dosovitskiy et al. 2015b; Wu et al. 2018), where
∗

Equal Contributions.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10990

