The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predicting Flashover Occurrence Using Surrogate Temperature Data
Eugene Yujun Fu,1,2,* Wai Cheong Tam,1,* ,‡ Jun Wang,2 Richard Peacock,1
Paul A Reneke,1 Grace Ngai,2 Hong Va Leong,2 Thomas Cleary1
1

Fire Research Division, Engineering Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Maryland, USA
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
csyfu@comp.polyu.edu.hk, {waicheong.tam, jun.wang, richard.peacock, paul.reneke}@nist.gov,
{csgngai, cshleong}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, thomas.cleary@nist.gov

Abstract

increases exponentially, and exceed more than 800 °C
(Thomas et al. 1980). Figure 1a shows the compartment gas
temperature profile from a flashover fire. In such a high temperature condition, survival for any fully-equipped fire
fighter is rare (Dunn 2015).
Although typical indicators of the onset of flashover, such
as hot layer gas temperature achieving approximately
550 °C to 600 °C (Peacock et al. 1999) and/or average heat
flux at the floor level reaching 20 kW/m2 to 25 kW/m2 (Walton et al. 2016), are well known in the fire research community, this kind of detailed information about the interior thermal conditions is not available for nearly all fires. Thus, it is
rather difficult for fire fighters to realize the potential fire
hazards inside the fire room from outside.
In a structure fire, fire fighters rely on their experience in
recognizing the potential occurrence of flashover. According to the most updated fire fighting training manual (Stowell and Murnane 2017), rollover is one possible flashover
indicator. Visually, it can be seen as flames spreading across
the ceiling outside of the fire room. When rollover phenomenon is observed, a flashover is likely to occur. However,
this kind of experience-based indicator is not easy to recognize, and it could take many years of experience to build up
the necessary proficiency. Therefore, if fire fighters do not
have such a high level of situational awareness, the flashover threat presents itself as an unpredictable life-threatening
hazard.
One can save a significant number of lives by developing
a data-driven model based on temperature signals from heat
sensors within the compartment to warn fire fighters before
the flashover occurs. Yet, there are two primary challenges:
(1) temperature data in multi-compartment structures are

Fire fighter fatalities and injuries in the U.S. remain too high
and fire fighting too hazardous. Until now, fire fighters rely
only on their experience to avoid life-threatening fire events,
such as flashover. In this paper, we describe the development
of a flashover prediction model which can be used to warn
fire fighters before flashover occurs. Specifically, we consider the use of a fire simulation program to generate a set of
synthetic data and an attention-based bidirectional long shortterm memory to learn the complex relationships between
temperature signals and flashover conditions. We first validate the fire simulation program with temperature measurements obtained from full-scale fire experiments. Then, we
generate a set of synthetic temperature data which account for
the realistic fire and vent opening conditions in a multi-compartment structure. Results show that our proposed method
achieves promising performance for prediction of flashover
even when temperature data is completely lost in the room of
fire origin. It is believed that the flashover prediction model
can facilitate the transformation of fire fighting tactics from
traditional experience-based decision marking to data-driven
decision marking and reduce fire fighter deaths and injuries.

Introduction
Fire fighters face tremendous dangers on the fire ground.
Over the past ten years, nearly 750 fire fighters were killed
and approximately 250,000 fire fighters were injured
(Campbell et al. 2019; Fahy et al. 2020). Rapid fire progression, such as flashover, has been identified as one of the
leading causes for both fire fighter fatalities and injuries. In
a fire scenario, flashover is an extreme event. When it occurs, nearly all directly exposed combustible materials, such
as a sofa, mattress, and carpeting, in a compartment, such as
living room or bedroom, can be simultaneously ignited.
Consequently, gas temperature within the compartment
* These two authors contributed equally.

‡ Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14785

