The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Conditional Inference under Disjunctive Rationality
Richard Booth1 Ivan Varzinczak2,3,4
1

Cardiff University, United Kingdom
CRIL, Univ. Artois & CNRS, France
3
CAIR, Computer Science Division, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
4
ISTI-CNR, Italy
2

boothr2@cardiff.ac.uk, varzinczak@cril.fr
Abstract

ity too strong and has briefly advocated the weaker rule
of Disjunctive Rationality instead, which says that if one
may draw a conclusion from a disjunction of premises, then
one should be able to draw this conclusion from at least
one of these premises taken alone. This rule is implied by
Rational Monotonicity and may still be desirable in cases
where the latter does not hold. Quite surprisingly, the debate did not catch on, and, for lack of rivals of the same
stature, rational closure has since reigned alone as a role
model in non-monotonic inference. That used to be the case
until Rott (2014) reignited interest in Disjunctive Rationality by considering interval models in connection with belief contraction. Inspired by that, here we revisit disjunctive
consequence relations and introduce a suitable notion of disjunctive rational closure of a conditional knowledge base.
We start by giving a summary of the formal background
and of the rational closure construction. Then, in the following section, we make a case for weakening the rationality requirement and propose a semantics with an accompanying representation result for a weaker form of rationality
enforcing the rule of Disjunctive Rationality. After this we
investigate a notion of closure of (or entailment from) a conditional knowledge base under Disjunctive Rationality. Our
analysis is in terms of a set of postulates, all reasonable at
first glance, that one can expect a suitable notion of closure
to satisfy. Following that we propose a specific construction
for the Disjunctive Rational Closure of a conditional knowledge base and assess its suitability in the light of the postulates put forward in the previous section. We conclude with
some remarks on future directions of investigation.

The question of conditional inference, i.e., of which conditional sentences of the form “if α then, normally, β” should
follow from a set KB of such sentences, has been one of the
classic questions of AI, with several well-known solutions
proposed. Perhaps the most notable is the rational closure
construction of Lehmann and Magidor, under which the set
of inferred conditionals forms a rational consequence relation, i.e., satisfies all the rules of preferential reasoning, plus
Rational Monotonicity. However, this last named rule is not
universally accepted, and other researchers have advocated
working within the larger class of disjunctive consequence relations, which satisfy the weaker requirement of Disjunctive
Rationality. While there are convincing arguments that the rational closure forms the “simplest” rational consequence relation extending a given set of conditionals, the question of
what is the simplest disjunctive consequence relation has not
been explored. In this paper, we propose a solution to this
question and explore some of its properties.

Introduction
The question of conditional inference, i.e., of which conditionals of the form “if α then, normally, β” should follow
from a set KB of such sentences, has been one of the classic questions of AI, with several well-known solutions proposed (Goldszmidt, Morris, and Pearl 1993; Lehmann 1995;
Lehmann and Magidor 1992; Pearl 1990; Weydert 2003).
Since the work of Lehmann and colleagues in the early ’90s,
the so-called preferential approach to defeasible reasoning
has established itself as one of the most elegant frameworks
within which to answer this question. Central to the preferential approach is the notion of rational closure of a conditional knowledge base, under which the set of inferred conditionals forms a rational consequence relation, i.e., satisfies
all the rules of preferential reasoning, plus Rational Monotonicity. One of the reasons for accepting rational closure
is the fact it delivers a venturous notion of entailment that
is conservative enough. Given that, rationality has for long
been accepted as the core baseline for any appropriate form
of non-monotonic entailment.
Very few have stood against this position, including Makinson (1994), who considered Rational Monotonic-

Formal Preliminaries
Let P be a finite set of propositional atoms. We use p, q, . . .
as meta-variables for atoms. Propositional sentences are denoted by α, β, . . ., and are recursively defined as usual:
α ::= > | ⊥ | P | ¬α | α ∧ α | α ∨ α | α → α | α ↔ α.
We use L to denote the set of all propositional sentences.
def
With U =
{0, 1}P , we denote the set of all propositional
valuations, where 1 represents truth and 0 falsity. We use
v, u, . . ., possibly with primes, to denote valuations. We
shall sometimes represent valuations as sequences of atoms
(e.g., p) and barred atoms (e.g., p̄), where the presence of
an atom indicates that the atom is true (has the value 1) in
the valuation, while the presence of a barred atom indicates

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6227

