The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Market-Inspired Bidding Scheme for Peer Review Paper Assignment
Reshef Meir,1 Jérôme Lang,2 Julien Lesca,2 Nicholas Mattei,3 Natan Kaminsky1
1

Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
2
Université Paris Dauphine
3
Tulane University

Abstract

a more cooperative way. Thus we do not propose a new assignment algorithm but a new bidding scheme that improves
over current bidding schemes. Crucially, the improvements
we suggest are easy to implement: they only require revealing certain information to the reviewers about the current
paper demands. These suggestions are orthogonal to the assignment algorithm and other design choices which are specific to the conference or the platform in use.
Evaluating our bidding scheme comes with a difficulty:
each conference comes with its own assignment algorithm,
and we do not want a separate analysis for each of these.
However, we argue that what counts is not the precise assignment algorithm used, but a simple abstraction of it, representing what a reviewer believes about the possible assignments, based on what she can observe. For this we define a
simple algorithm (proportional mock assignment), based on
an adaptation of the trading post mechanism (Shapley and
Shubik 1977), which we use to analyze bidders incentives.
We next describe the current paper assignment process as
it is typically performed in large computer science conferences and demonstrate some of the problematic issues using
statistics from recent real-world conferences.

We propose a market-inspired bidding scheme for the assignment of paper reviews in large academic conferences. We provide an analysis of the incentives of reviewers during the bidding phase, when reviewers have both private costs and some
information about the demand for each paper; and their goal
is to obtain the best possible k papers for a predetermined k.
We show that by assigning ‘budgets’ to reviewers and a
‘price’ for every paper that is (roughly) proportional to its
demand, the best response of a reviewer is to bid sincerely,
i.e., on her most favorite papers, and match the budget even
when it is not enforced. This game-theoretic analysis is based
on a simple, prototypical assignment algorithm. We show via
extensive simulations on bidding data from real conferences,
that our bidding scheme would substantially improve both the
bid distribution and the resulting assignment.

Introduction
Academics spend much of their time and effort, that is, our
time and effort, on peer-review for journals and conferences.
This is an unpaid labor that academics perform out of sense
of duty, which serves several important purposes for all involved parties. It helps editors and program chairs make informed decisions on what papers to publish; it provides authors with valuable feedback on their work; and it keeps the
reviewer updated about recent advances in their fields.
While in journals the assignment of papers to reviewers
is typically handled manually by the editors, peer-reviewed
conferences often use automated assignment algorithms
based on the stated preferences of the program committee
members (reviewers). The program chairs intervene to solve
problems in the assignment, such as allocating papers that no
one asked to review. Though the frequency of these ‘orphan’
papers varies, they are a recurrent problem in the bidding
processes. Fiez, Shah, and Ratliff (2019) discuss this issue
and highlight the importance of studying and improving the
bidding process.
Our ultimate goal is to improve the assignment, to the benefit of all involved parties: reviewers, program chairs, and
authors. We argue that only designing new assignment algorithms will not help achieve this goal (or help marginally):
what we need before all is to incentivize reviewers to bid in

The Paper Assignment Process
A large CS conference such as AAAI, IJCAI, ICML, or
NeurIPS has some 1,000 – 10,000 submissions and 1,000 –
3,000 reviewers. The assignment process typically proceeds
through the following steps:
• The program chair recruits n program committee members (PCMs) to serve as reviewers.
• Authors submit their papers by a certain date. We denote
the set of papers by M and |M | = m.
• PCMs get access to papers’ titles and abstracts via an online platform such as EasyChair or Confmaster, and are
asked to “bid” on papers they want to review. It is typically possible to bid one of several levels (e.g. “want to
review”, “can review if needed” etc.) as well as to report a
conflict of interest (COI). Typically PCMs are asked (but
not enforced) to bid positively on a minimum number R
of papers, R being much higher than the actual number of
expected reviews (for senior PCMs at AAAI-21, R = 75).
• The final bids are fed as input to an assignment algorithm,
together with additional constraints such as a minimum

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4776

