The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Clinical Temporal Relation Extraction with Probabilistic Soft Logic
Regularization and Global Inference
Yichao Zhou1 , Yu Yan2 , Rujun Han3 , J. Harry Caufield2 ,
Kai-Wei Chang1 , Yizhou Sun1 , Peipei Ping2 and Wei Wang1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
Departments of Physiology, Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
{yz, kwchang, yzsun, weiwang}@cs.ucla.edu, rujunhan@usc.edu, {yuyan, jcaufield, pping}@mednet.ucla.edu
2

Abstract

The patient is a 47-year-old woman with
long-term use of glucocorticoids She was
confirmed with COVID-19 by tested positive
of antibody and admitted to the hospital.
Just a day later, she began to have a mild
cough and nasal congestion.

There has been a steady need in the medical community
to precisely extract the temporal relations between clinical
events. In particular, temporal information can facilitate a variety of downstream applications such as case report retrieval
and medical question answering. However, existing methods
either require expensive feature engineering or are incapable
of modeling the global relational dependencies among the
events. In this paper, we propose Clinical Temporal ReLation
Exaction with Probabilistic Soft Logic Regularization and
Global Inference (CTRL-PG), a novel method to tackle the
problem at the document level. Extensive experiments on two
benchmark datasets, I2B2-2012 and TB-Dense, demonstrate
that CTRL-PG significantly outperforms baseline methods
for temporal relation extraction.

(b)confirmed
with COVID-19

(a)glucocorticoids
(c)positive
of antibody
(f)nasal congestion
(g)a mild cough

(d)admitted to
the hospital

(e)a day later

Introduction
Before

Clinical case reports (CCRs) are written descriptions of the
unique aspects of a particular clinical case (Cabán-Martinez
and Garcı́a-Beltrán 2012; Caufield et al. 2018). They are intended to serve as educational aids to science and medicine,
as they play an essential role in sharing clinical experiences
about atypical disease phenotypes and new therapies (Caufield et al. 2018). There is a perennial need to automatically
and precisely curate the clinical case reports into structured
knowledge, i.e. extract important clinical named entities and
relationships from the narratives (Aronson and Lang 2010;
Savova et al. 2010; Soysal et al. 2018; Caufield et al. 2019;
Alfattni, Peek, and Nenadic 2020). This would greatly enable both doctors and patients to retrieve related case reports for reference and provide a certain degree of technical support for resolving public health crises like the recent COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical reports describe chronicle events, elucidating a chain of clinical observations and
reasoning (Sun, Rumshisky, and Uzuner 2013; Chen, Podchiyska, and Altman 2016). Extracting temporal relations
between clinical events is essential for the case report retrieval over the patient chronologies. Besides, medical question answering systems require the precise ordering of clinical events in a time series within each document.

Overlap

After

Figure 1: An illustration of a clinical case report with its
partial temporal graph where transitivity dependencies exist.

In this paper, we tackle the temporal relation extraction
problem in clinical case reports. Figure 1 illustrates a paragraph from a typical CCR document with three common
types of temporal relations, “Before”, “After”, and “Overlap”. Glucocortocoids was described as the medicine history of this patient, which happened before confirmed with
COVID-19 and positive of antibody. An “Overlap” temporal
relation exists between nasal congestion and a mild cough.
We consider the aforementioned clinical concepts as events,
while regarding a day later as a time expression. A temporal
relation may exist between event and event (E-E), event and
time (E-T) or time and time (T-T).
There is a consensus within the clinical community regarding the difficulty of temporal information extraction,
due to the high demand for domain knowledge and high
complexity of clinical language representations (Galvan
et al. 2018). Meng and Rumshisky (2018); Lee et al. (2016)
apply machine learning models with lexical, syntactic features, or pre-trained word representations to tackle the prob-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14647

