The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relation-aware Graph Attention Model With Adaptive Self-adversarial Training
Xiao Qin1∗ , Nasrullah Sheikh1∗ , Berthold Reinwald1 , Lingfei Wu2
1

IBM Almaden Research Center, 2 IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
{xiao.qin, nasrullah.sheikh}@ibm.com, {reinwald, wuli}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

paper focuses on the task of relationship prediction, i.e. predicting the types of relations between entities with rich attributes where the entities are nodes in a graph and the existing relationships form the edges between them. We propose two building blocks in an end-to-end solution for this
task, namely heterogeneous graph representation learning
with relation-aware attention and adaptive self-adversarial
negative sampling for model training.

This paper describes an end-to-end solution for the relationship prediction task in heterogeneous, multi-relational
graphs. We particularly address two building blocks in the
pipeline, namely heterogeneous graph representation learning and negative sampling. Existing message passing-based
graph neural networks use edges either for graph traversal
and/or selection of message encoding functions. Ignoring the
edge semantics could have severe repercussions on the quality of embeddings, especially when dealing with two nodes
having multiple relations. Furthermore, the expressivity of
the learned representation depends on the quality of negative
samples used during training. Although existing hard negative sampling techniques can identify challenging negative
relationships for optimization, new techniques are required to
control false negatives during training as false negatives could
corrupt the learning process. To address these issues, first, we
propose RelGNN– a message passing-based heterogeneous
graph attention model. In particular, RelGNN generates the
states of different relations and leverages them along with
the node states to weigh the messages. RelGNN also adopts
a self-attention mechanism to balance the importance of attribute features and topological features for generating the
final entity embeddings. Second, we introduce a parameter
free negative sampling technique – adaptive self-adversarial
(ASA) negative sampling. ASA reduces the false negative
rate by leveraging positive relationships to effectively guide
the identification of true negative samples. Our experimental
evaluation demonstrates that RelGNN optimized by ASA for
relationship prediction improves state-of-the-art performance
across established benchmarks as well as on a real industrial
dataset.

1

First, while knowledge graph embedding methods (Ji
et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2015; Sun et al. 2019; Hayashi
and Shimbo 2017; Dettmers et al. 2018) have achieved
great success for relationship prediction for heterogeneous
graphs, there has been an increasing interest in leveraging
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for this task (Schlichtkrull
et al. 2018). While early research on GNNs mainly focuses on homogeneous graphs (Kipf and Welling 2017;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Wu et al. 2019; Chen,
Wu, and Zaki 2020a,b), more recent variations and extensions (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Cen et al.
2019; Dong, Chawla, and Swami 2017; Zhang et al. 2019a;
Hu et al. 2020; Chen, Wu, and Zaki 2020c) cope with the
heterogeneity aspect of the nodes and edges. The main idea
of using GNNs for heterogeneous graphs is to learn dedicated, type-aware encoding functions for information propagation and aggregation (Yang et al. 2020a). However, existing research tends to ignore the semantics of the edges, that
is the edge information is only used either for graph traversal (e.g., meta-path based neighborhood sampling (Dong,
Chawla, and Swami 2017)) and/or selection of encoding
functions (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018). Ignoring the semantics of edges during aggregation decreases the expressivity
of the node embeddings as messages propagated even from
the same source may contribute quite differently to its neighbor’s embedding. For example, a buyer entity can have multiple relations with a product such as “purchase”, “has maintenance contract”, and “has warranty”. Besides the difference of messages sent by this product via multiple relations,
these messages may not be equally important to characterize
the buyer. Existing GNNs, message aggregation methods in
particular, tend to ignore such phenomenon missing out on
the opportunity to obtain more expressive node embeddings.
The key challenge is to design a mechanism for the aggregation function to generate differentiable signals from both
heterogeneous neighbors and edges.

Introduction

Modern data are often relational in nature with heterogeneous interactions between entities and complicated dependency structures. Knowledge graphs (Ji et al. 2020) (KGs),
as a prime example of heterogeneous graphs, model realworld objects, events or concepts as well as various relations among them. Making sense of data in such form has
gained tremendous attention in large enterprises as graph insights enable new capabilities or services. In particular, this
∗

authors contributed equally.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9368

