The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spectral Distribution Aware Image Generation
Steffen Jung, 1 Margret Keuper 2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
Data and Web Science Group, University of Mannheim
steffen.jung@mpi-inf.mpg.de, keuper@uni-mannheim.de

Abstract

they are penalized for deviating from the average frequency
spectrum of the real images during training. In fact, the proposed regularization not only allowed to produce more realistic frequency spectra but also had a stabilizing effect on the
training. However, the resulting spectra were still not able to
match the distribution of the real data.
In this paper, we address this problem in a different way.
Instead of introducing a regularization term, we propose to
use a second discriminator which directly acts on the power
spectra of real and generated images. This way, the generator network is not forced to produce images with average
power spectra as in (Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020) but
is enabled to learn the distribution of frequency spectra from
training data. Since the training of GANs is computationally
expensive we argue that an additional discriminator should
be lightweight so that diverse architectures can easily adopt
it. We therefore base our discriminator on one-dimensional
(1D) projections of the frequency spectra instead of acting
on the full two-dimensional data. We show that the resulting
model can be trained with different commonly used GAN
losses and evaluate its ability to fit the real images’ frequency spectra in terms of a proposed cloaking score as well
as in terms of the performance of frequency based generated
image detection (Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020).

Recent advances in deep generative models for photo-realistic
images have led to high quality visual results. Such models learn to generate data from a given training distribution
such that generated images can not be easily distinguished
from real images by the human eye. Yet, recent work on the
detection of such fake images pointed out that they are actually easily distinguishable by artifacts in their frequency
spectra. In this paper, we propose to generate images according to the frequency distribution of the real data by employing a spectral discriminator. The proposed discriminator is
lightweight, modular and works stably with different commonly used GAN losses. We show that the resulting models
can better generate images with realistic frequency spectra,
which are thus harder to detect by this cue.

Introduction
Image generation using generative adversarial networks has
made huge progress in recent years. Especially the generation of photo-realistic images at high resolution has arrived
at a level where it becomes hard for humans to distinguish
between real and generated images. While the training data
distribution appears to be well learned in the model’s latent space, it is surprising how reliably real and generated
images can be distinguished even when various cloaking
techniques such as blurring or compression are applied (Yu,
Davis, and Fritz 2019). In recent works on the detection of
generated images (Frank et al. 2020; Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020), it was argued that this effect, at least partially,
is due to artifacts introduced during the generation process
itself. Commonly used up-sampling schemes in fact seem
to generate these artifacts which are mostly in the high frequency domain and can not be corrected by the network itself (Frank et al. 2020; Durall, Keuper, and Keuper 2020;
Bai et al. 2020). Such artifacts are undesired, not only because generated images can easily be identified as such, but
also because they might be perceivable for example as grid
patterns on the generated images.
Durall, Keuper, and Keuper (2020) propose a GAN regularization approach as a remedy. They argue that a generator network, given a sufficient amount of convolutional layers, can generate images with realistic frequency spectra if

Related Work
Generative convolutional neural networks have recently
been successful in a wide range of applications, such as
the generation of photo-realistic images at high resolution
(Karras et al. 2017; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018a;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019a; Karras et al. 2019) to style
transfer (Isola et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2017a,b; Huang et al.
2018), or more generally image-to-image translation (Pathak
et al. 2016; Iizuka, Simo-Serra, and Ishikawa 2017; Zhu
et al. 2017b; Choi et al. 2018; Mo, Cho, and Shin 2019;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019b) and text-to-image translation
(Reed et al. 2016; Dai et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2017, 2018).
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) play a crucial role in this context. They aim to approximate a latent-space model of the underlying data distributions from training images in a zero-sum game between a
generator and a discriminator network. From this latent data
distribution model, new samples can be generated (drawn)
by sampling. Recent works towards improving GANs pro-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1734

