The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Window Loss for Bone Fracture Detection and Localization
in X-ray Images with Point-based Annotation
∗ †

Xinyu Zhang1 , ∗ Yirui Wang1 , Chi-Tung Cheng2 , Le Lu1 , Adam P. Harrison1 , Jing Xiao3 ,
Chien-Hung Liao2 , Shun Miao1
2

1
PAII Inc., Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan, ROC
3
Ping An Technology, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Object detection methods are widely adopted for computeraided diagnosis using medical images. Anomalous findings
are usually treated as objects that are described by bounding boxes. Yet, many pathological findings, e.g., bone fractures, cannot be clearly defined by bounding boxes, owing to
considerable instance, shape and boundary ambiguities. This
makes bounding box annotations, and their associated losses,
highly ill-suited. In this work, we propose a new bone fracture
detection method for X-ray images, based on a labor effective
and flexible annotation scheme suitable for abnormal findings
with no clear object-level spatial extents or boundaries. Our
method employs a simple, intuitive, and informative pointbased annotation protocol to mark localized pathology information. To address the uncertainty in the fracture scales annotated via point(s), we convert the annotations into pixel-wise
supervision that uses lower and upper bounds with positive,
negative, and uncertain regions. A novel Window Loss is subsequently proposed to only penalize the predictions outside
of the uncertain regions. Our method has been extensively
evaluated on 4410 pelvic X-ray images of unique patients.
Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art image classification and object detection
baselines by healthy margins, with an AUROC of 0.983 and
FROC score of 89.6%.

Figure 1: Fractures in PXRs where the numbers of instances
and their spatial extents are extremely ambiguous. The annotations of fractures can be represented by small/tight bounding boxes on fracture lines (green boxes), or relatively big
bounding boxes containing the entire fractured region (yellow boxes). To skirt this inherent subjectivity, we adopt and
learn from point-based annotations (red dots).

Spurred by the public release of large-scale datasets, chest
X-ray (CXR) CAD has received a great deal of recent attention, with many prominent methods treating the problem as a multi-label image classification problem (Rajpurkar
et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2017; Baltruschat et al. 2019). These
works typically report area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) scores, e.g., 0.817 (Baltruschat et al.
2019) on the NIH-ChestXray14 dataset (Wang et al. 2017)
and 0.930 (Pham et al. 2020) on the CheXPert dataset (Irvin
et al. 2019). Yet, in clinical diagnostic workflows, localization of the detected anomalies is also needed both to interpret the results and for verifiable decision making. While
class activation maps (CAMs) can provide a degree of localization under classification setups, they have limited localization power and tend to miss abnormal sites when multiple
pathological findings occur concurrently in an image.
To improve localization performance, several methods
use additional box-level annotations to facilitate the training
of image classifiers (Li et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019a; Huang
et al. 2020). For other CAD applications where localization
performance is more central, such as lung nodule and breast
mass/calcification detection, explicit object detection frameworks are widely adopted (Yan et al. 2018b, 2019; Jiang
et al. 2020). However, compared to image classifiers, object
detection methods focus predominantly on localization and

Introduction
Due to its efficiency, accessibility, and low cost, X-ray imaging is one of the most commonly performed diagnostic examinations in clinical practice. Conventional computer vision techniques have been extensively researched in the past
few decades to develop computer aided diagnosis (CAD) solutions, aiming to increase image reading efficiency and reduce misdiagnoses risks. Current state-of-the-art CAD systems widely adopt generic principles of image classification
and object detection to identify and localize the anomalies.
However, to provide both robust classification and localization in applications where pathologies have ambiguously defined extents, such as for pelvic X-rays (PXRs), alternative
solutions are needed. This is the topic of our work.
∗

X. Zhang and Y. Wang—Equal contribution.
This work was done when X. Zhang interned at PAII Inc.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

724

