The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Modality-Specific Representations with Self-Supervised
Multi-Task Learning for Multimodal Sentiment Analysis
Wenmeng Yu, Hua Xu, ∗ Ziqi Yuan, Jiele Wu
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
ywm18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuhua@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn,
ziqiyuan@bupt.edu.cn, 1120171196@bit.edu.cn
Abstract

“This movie is sick”

Representation Learning is a significant and challenging task
in multimodal learning. Effective modality representations
should contain two parts of characteristics: the consistency
and the difference. Due to the unified multimodal annotation, existing methods are restricted in capturing differentiated information. However, additional unimodal annotations
are high time- and labor-cost. In this paper, we design a label generation module based on the self-supervised learning
strategy to acquire independent unimodal supervisions. Then,
joint training the multimodal and uni-modal tasks to learn
the consistency and difference, respectively. Moreover, during the training stage, we design a weight-adjustment strategy to balance the learning progress among different subtasks. That is to guide the subtasks to focus on samples with
the larger difference between modality supervisions. Last, we
conduct extensive experiments on three public multimodal
baseline datasets. The experimental results validate the reliability and stability of auto-generated unimodal supervisions. On MOSI and MOSEI datasets, our method surpasses
the current state-of-the-art methods. On the SIMS dataset,
our method achieves comparable performance than humanannotated unimodal labels. The full codes are available at
https://github.com/thuiar/Self-MM.

Loud Voice
Smile
Figure 1: An example of unimodal labels and multimodal
labels, from Zadeh et al. (2017). The green dotted lines represent the process of backpropagation.

tions should contain both consistent and complementary information. According to the difference of guidance in representation learning, we classify existing methods into the
two categories: forward guidance and backward guidance.
In forward-guidance methods, researches are devoted to design interactive modules for capturing the cross-modal information (Zadeh et al. 2018a; Sun et al. 2020; Tsai et al.
2019). However, due to the unified multimodal annotation,
it is difficult for them to capture modality-specific information. Shown in Figure 1, the unified multimodal labels are
not always suitable for the unimodal learning. In backwardguidance methods, researches proposed additional loss function as prior constraint, which leads modality representations to contain both consistent and complementary information (Yu et al. 2020a; Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria
2020). However, the former needed additional labor costs,
and the latter were difficult to represent the modality-specific
difference with spatial differences.
In this paper, we focus on the backward-guidance method.
Motivated by the independent unimodal annotations and advanced modality-specific representation learning, we propose a novel self-supervised multi-task learning strategy.
Different from Yu et al. (2020a), our method does not need
human-annotated unimodal labels but uses auto-generated
unimodal labels. It is based on two intuitions. First, label
difference is positively correlated with the distance difference between modality representations and class centers.
Second, unimodal labels are highly related to multimodal labels. Hence, we design a unimodal label generation module
based on multimodal labels and modality representations.
The details are shown in Section .

Introduction
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis (MSA) attracts more and
more attention in recent years (Zadeh et al. 2017; Tsai et al.
2019; Poria et al. 2020). Compared with unimodal sentiment
analysis, multimodal models are more robust and achieve
salient improvements when dealing with social media data.
With the booming of user-generated online content, MSA
has been introduced into many applications such as risk
management, video understanding, and video transcription.
Though previous works have made impressive improvements on benchmark datasets, MSA is still full of challenges. Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and Morency (2019) identified five core challenges for multimodal learning: alignment, translation, representation, fusion, and co-learning.
Among them, representation learning stands in a fundamental position. In most recent work, Hazarika, Zimmermann, and Poria (2020) stated that unimodal representa∗

Hua Xu is the corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10790

