The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sample-Specific Output Constraints for Neural Networks
Mathis Brosowsky 1,2 , Florian Keck 2 , Olaf Dünkel 2 , Marius Zöllner 1,2
1

FZI Research Center for Information Technology,
2
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
{brosowsky, zoellner}@fzi.de, {florian.keck, olaf.duenkel}@student.kit.edu

Abstract

x

It is common practice to constrain the output space of a neural network with the final layer to a problem-specific value
range. However, for many tasks it is desired to restrict the
output space for each input independently to a different subdomain with a non-trivial geometry, e.g. in safety-critical applications, to exclude hazardous outputs sample-wise. We
propose ConstraintNet—a scalable neural network architecture which constrains the output space in each forward pass
independently. Contrary to prior approaches, which perform
a projection in the final layer, ConstraintNet applies an inputdependent parametrization of the constrained output space.
Thereby, the complete interior of the constrained region is
covered and computational costs are reduced significantly. For
constraints in form of convex polytopes, we leverage the vertex representation to specify the parametrization. The second
modification consists of adding an auxiliary input in form of a
tensor description of the constraint to enable the handling of
multiple constraints for the same sample. Finally, ConstraintNet is end-to-end trainable with almost no overhead in the
forward and backward pass. We demonstrate ConstraintNet on
two regression tasks: First, we modify a CNN and construct
several constraints for facial landmark detection tasks. Second,
we demonstrate the application to a follow object controller
for vehicles and accomplish safe reinforcement learning in
this case. In both experiments, ConstraintNet improves performance and we conclude that our approach is promising for
applying neural networks in safety-critical environments.

hθ (x, g(s))
g(s)

z
φ(z, s)

ŷ ∈ C(s)

s
Figure 1: Approach to construct ConstraintNet for a class of
constraints C = {C(s) ⊂ Y|s ∈ S}. A final layer φ without
learnable parameters maps the output of previous layers z =
hθ (x, g(s)) on the constrained output space C(s) depending
on the constraint parameter s. The previous layers hθ get a
representation g(s) of s as an additional input to the data
point x. This enables ConstraintNet to deal with different
constraints for the same x.

We focus on embedding sample-specific output constraints
in the NN architecture. Prior research is known from deep reinforcement learning with safe action sets (Dalal et al. 2018).
These approaches perform a projection on the constrained
region in the final layer by solving an optimization problem.
However, the projection layer maps output violations only on
the boundary of the constrained region and has a significant
computational overhead. With ConstraintNet, we propose an
NN architecture which overcomes this limitation and requires
almost no additional computational costs.
Instead of performing a projection, ConstraintNet applies
an input-dependent parametrization of the constrained output space in the final layer, the so-called constraint guard
layer (see Figure 1). Thereby, less computational costs are
required and the complete interior of the constrained region is
covered. The second crucial design choice of ConstraintNet
consists of an auxiliary input in form of a tensor description
of the chosen constraint. Thereby, we are to the best of our
knowledge the first proposing a method capable to handle
multiple constraints for the same input. This is beneficial
for many applications. E.g. constraints in form of bounding
boxes for a facial landmark detection do not need to be centered perfectly and may vary in size and shape. Altogether,
the constraint guard layer encodes a precise description of a
class of constraints in the NN architecture, e.g. convex poly-

Introduction
Deep neural networks (NNs) have become state-of-the-art
in many competitive learning challenges. Crucial for this
success is the learning of complex non-linear relationships
implicitly from data. However, frequently additional domain
knowledge exists in form of explicit relationships, e.g. symmetry conditions for human pose estimation (Márquez-Neila,
Salzmann, and Fua 2017) or identified sets of safe outputs
(Gros, Zanon, and Bemporad 2020). Imposing such relations
as constraints on NNs is promising to achieve safety (Gros,
Zanon, and Bemporad 2020), to reduce the black-box character (Cui et al. 2020), to stabilize the training (Lezcano-Casado
and Martínez-Rubio 2019), to upgrade the performance, or
to improve the data efficiency (Li and Srikumar 2019).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6812

