The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evidence Inference Networks for Interpretable Claim Verification
Lianwei Wu, Yuan Rao, Ling Sun, Wangbo He
Xi’an Key Lab. of Social Intelligence and Complexity Data Processing,
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
Shaanxi Joint Key Laboratory for Artifact Intelligence(Sub-Lab of Xi’an Jiaotong University), China
Research Institute of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shenzhen, China
{stayhungry, sunling}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, raoyuan@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, 744758858@qq.com
Claim: Here's a tip for disinfecting your face mask: Just heat it in the
microwave for three minutes.
R1: Falsely, overheating will destroy the internal structure of the mask,
Conflict 1
and the protective ability will be lost.
R2: Really? I'll try it at home.
R3: High temperature can kill the virus, may be useful, but not afraid that
Conflict 2
the mask will be ignited?
R4: It doesn't feel real. Can a microwave oven heated with a mask continue
Conflict 3
to bake food? It's not clean.

Abstract
Existing approaches construct appropriate interaction models to explore semantic conflicts between claims and relevant
articles, which provides practical solutions for interpretable
claim verification. However, these conflicts are not necessarily
all about questioning the false part of claims, which makes
considerable semantic conflicts difficult to be used as evidence
to explain the results of claim verification, especially those
that cannot identify the core semantics of claims. In this paper,
we propose evidence inference networks (EVIN), which focus
on the conflicts questioning the core semantics of claims and
serve as evidence for interpretable claim verification. Specifically, EVIN first captures the core semantic segments of claims
and the users’ principal opinions in relevant articles. Then, it
finely-grained identifies the semantic conflicts contained in
each relevant article from these opinions. Finally, EVIN constructs coherence modeling to match the conflicts that queries
the core semantic fragments of claims as explainable evidence.
Experiments on two widely used datasets demonstrate that
EVIN not only achieves satisfactory performance but also
provides explainable evidence for end-users.

Figure 1: A false claim from Twitter. Among the three semantic conflicts, only conflict 1 is able to provide an effective
explanation for the falsity of claim.

Introduction
The explosive growth of false claims and their erosion on
democracy, justice, and public trust greatly aggrandize the
demand for false claim verification. Especially with the popularity of social media, the low-cost, large-scale production
and dissemination of false claims by malicious rumormongers are unprecedented. Research indicates that although
false claims account for only 1% of total news consumption
on all platforms (Allen et al. 2020), while the proportion of
false claims on social media is more than 6% of total tweets.
Since the 2016 U.S. presidential election campaign (Grinberg et al. 2019), false claims have dominated the news cycle,
where the top twenty frequently discussed false election stories generated 8,711,000 shares, reactions, and comments on
Facebook (Silverman 2016). It has become quite critical to
detect the credibility of unverified claims on social media in
time to block their spread and refute them.
Claim verification is a tough and challenging task for industry and academia. Previous studies (Castillo, Mendoza,
and Poblete 2011; Jin et al. 2016) are devoted to extracting
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14058

various linguistic and hand-crafted semantic features for differentiating claims, which achieves excellent performance.
But it is difficult for these approaches to provide appropriate
explanations for the verification results of claims, i.e., why
claims are false. Thus, recent research has begun to focus on
interpretable claim verification, which generally establishes
interactive models to quest the difference (a.k.a. semantic
conflicts) between claims and their relevant articles (or comments) as evidence to explain the verified results. Specifically,
Popat et al. (2018) devise joint interactions between claims
and their web sources to collect salient conflict words as
word-level evidence for explaining the correctness of claims.
Ma et al. (2019) propose interactive attention networks based
on natural language inference (NLI) to learn the sequence
consistency, so as to obtain semantic conflicts among relevant
articles as sentence-level evidence to verify claims. Wu et
al. (2020) construct an interaction fusion network to survey
the emotional and semantic conflicts between news and its
comments as multi-perspective evidence for enhancing the
capability of verification results.
These interaction models acquire the semantic conflicts
between claims and relevant articles to explain the final verification results, which is a feasible interpretable idea. The
reason is that: different relevant articles, as the opinions of
different users on a specific claim, are usually prone to call
into question on the wrong parts of the false claims (similar to
crowdsourcing rumor refutation), even if they are sometimes
incapable of providing an exact conclusion. These query
voices are rich in conflicting semantics that may include
the reasons for the wrong parts of claims. In consequence,
capturing semantic conflicts contributes to strengthening in-

