The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GO Hessian for Expectation-Based Objectives
Yulai Cong,∗ Miaoyun Zhao,* Jianqiao Li, Junya Chen, Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University

An alternative framework, attracting increasing attention
recently, considers the form

Abstract
An unbiased low-variance gradient estimator, termed GO gradient, was proposed recently for expectation-based objectives
Eqγ (y) [f (y)], where the random variable (RV) y may be
drawn from a stochastic computation graph (SCG) with continuous (non-reparameterizable) internal nodes and continuous/discrete leaves. Based on the GO gradient, we present
for Eqγ (y) [f (y)] an unbiased low-variance Hessian estimator,
named GO Hessian, which contains the deterministic Hessian
as a special case. Considering practical implementation, we
reveal that the GO Hessian in expectation obeys the chain
rule and is therefore easy-to-use with auto-differentiation and
Hessian-vector products, enabling efficient cheap exploitation
of curvature information over deep SCGs. As representative examples, we present the GO Hessian for non-reparameterizable
gamma and negative binomial RVs/nodes. Leveraging the
GO Hessian, we develop a new second-order method for
Eqγ (y) [f (y)], with challenging experiments conducted to verify its effectiveness and efficiency.

1

Framework II: minγ L(γ) , Eqγ (y) [f (y)],

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be formulated as an
optimization problem involving an expectation. A classic
such setup (Robbins and Monro 1951) is of the form
Framework I: minϑ J (ϑ) , Eq(x) [h(x, ϑ)],

(1)

where the random variable (RV) x obeys a distribution q(x)
unrelated to the parameters ϑ of interest, and h(x, ϑ) is
a continuous function wrt ϑ. General assumptions making J (ϑ) (and the following L(γ)) a valid loss function
are omitted for simplicity. In practice one often encounPN
ters its finite-sum form minϑ N1 i=1 h(xi , ϑ) with q(x) =
PN
1
i=1 δ(x − xi ), where δ(·) is the Dirac delta function
N
(this discrete form is typically an approximation, based on N
observed samples drawn from the true underlying data distribution). A popular example of Framework I is maximumlikelihood learning with the data distribution q(x) and the
negative log-likelihood h(x, ϑ) = − log p(x; ϑ), where
p(x; ϑ) represents the model.
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to: Miaoyun Zhao,
miaoyun9zhao@gmail.com.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
12060

(2)

where parameters γ of interest determine the distribution
qγ (y) that, for example, models a stochastic computation
graph (SCG) (Schulman et al. 2015a; Parmas 2018; Weber
et al. 2019).1 Note in general the function f (·) may also be related to γ; however, as the generalization is straight-forward,
we focus on the setup in (2) for simpler derivations. Popular
examples of Framework II include the ELBO in variational
inference (Bishop 2006; Kingma and Welling 2014), the generator training objective of generative adversarial networks
(Goodfellow et al. 2014), and many objectives associated
with reinforcement learning (RL) (Schulman et al. 2015b;
Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Foerster et al. 2018).
Many optimization methods have been proposed for
Framework I, utilizing the first-order gradient information
(Allen-Zhu 2018; Jin et al. 2019) or exploiting the secondorder Hessian information (Tripuraneni et al. 2018; Zhou and
Gu 2020). Compared with first-order methods, second-order
ones are often characterized by convergence in fewer training
iterations to a second-order stationary point, requiring less
tweaking of meta-parameters (like learning rate), invariance
to linear parameter rescaling, and navigating better when facing pathological curvature in deep learning (Martens 2010;
Tripuraneni et al. 2018). For computation and memory efficiency in high-dimensions (like for deep neural networks),
recent second-order methods often resort to Hessian-free
techniques, i.e., Hessian-vector products (HVP), which can
be computed as efficiently as gradients (Pearlmutter 1994)
and remove the need to construct the full Hessian (Martens
2010; Kohler and Lucchi 2017; Kasai and Mishra 2018).
In contrast to the classic Framework I, few optimization
methods have been proposed for Framework II with general
SCG qγ (y), partially because of the significant challenge in
even estimating its gradient with low variance without bias in
general/non-reparameterizable (subsequently abbreviated as
“non-rep”) situations (Cong et al. 2019; Weber et al. 2019).
1

When the RV y is reparameterizable (rep) (Salimans, Knowles
et al. 2013; Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014), Framework II
can be rewritten as Framework I for optimization. To distinguish,
we focus on the challenging non-rep setup for Framework II by
default, despite the proposed GO Hessian also applies to rep RVs.

