The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Right for Better Reasons:
Training Differentiable Models by Constraining their Influence Functions
Xiaoting Shao, Arseny Skryagin, Wolfgang Stammer, Patrick Schramowski, Kristian Kersting
TU Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
{xiaoting.shao, arseny.skryagin, wolfgang.stammer, schramowski, kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract

In this case, the model’s underlying behavior is systematically wrong, and therefore may not generalize well to unseen data. Such systematic wrong behavior can be hard to
spot and do real harm when applied in a real-world setting.
For instance, Obermeyer et al. (2019) demonstrated that a
widely-used commercial model for predicting medical needs
exhibits significant racial bias—black patients are considerably sicker than white patients, at a given risk score. Obermeyer et al. attributed this to the fact that the model uses
medical expenses to predict medical needs, however, black
people have less access to medical care so that less medical
expenses are given to them compared to white people in the
same health condition. This racial bias in the model could
pose a real danger to black patients.

Explaining black-box models such as deep neural networks is
becoming increasingly important as it helps to boost trust and
debugging. Popular forms of explanations map the features to
a vector indicating their individual importance to a decision
on the instance-level. They can then be used to prevent the
model from learning the wrong bias in data possibly due to
ambiguity. For instance, Ross et al.’s “right for the right reasons” propagates user explanations backwards to the network
by formulating differentiable constraints based on input gradients. Unfortunately, input gradients as well as many other
widely used explanation methods form an approximation of
the decision boundary and assume the underlying model to
be fixed. Here, we demonstrate how to make use of influence
functions—a well known robust statistic—in the constraints
to correct the model’s behaviour more effectively. Our empirical evidence demonstrates that this “right for better reasons”(RBR) considerably reduces the time to correct the classifier at training time and boosts the quality of explanations
at inference time compared to input gradients. Besides, we
also showcase the effectiveness of RBR in correcting ”Clever
Hans”-like behaviour in real, high-dimensional domain.

These concerns and issues about machine learning (ML)
models have motivated recent work in correcting the models
based on user explanations such as training the models to be
right for the right reasons (Ross, Hughes, and Doshi-Velez
2017). However, (Ross, Hughes, and Doshi-Velez 2017), as
well as other work of its kind, rely on explanations showing how the prediction changes when the test point is perturbed (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Adler et al.
2018), assuming the model to be fixed. But how does the
model actually change when perturbing the training data?
This is answered well by the so-called influence function
(Cook and Weisberg 1980; Koh and Liang 2017), which explains a model’s predictions by tracing back to the training
process. Built upon Ross, Hughes, and Doshi-Velez’s “right
for the right reasons”, we therefore propose to improve its
effectiveness by leveraging the higher-order and robust explanations due to influence functions.

Introduction
Nowadays, with the success of deep neural networks, training a classifier to achieve high accuracy is relatively easy.
Even then, gaining trust from human is still difficult for
those models as the decision-making mechanism is often
non-transparent. Just because a machine learning model is
highly accurate on the given data does not mean it represents the correct mapping in that domain. Especially in high
dimensional, real-world domains, these “Clever Hans”-like
moments—making use of confounding factors within data
sets—are observable due to spurious artifacts, which could
be unwantedly learnt by the models.
More precisely, (Lapuschkin et al. 2019) reported that a
deep neural network trained on the PASCAL VOC 2007
data set (Everingham et al. 2007) focuses on image source
tags for classification, which only incidentally correlate with
the class labels. This ”Clever Hans”-like behavior (Sebeok
and Rosenthal 1981) happens when the model has learnt
the spurious artifact, also known as confounding factors.

Specifically, we make the following contributions: (1)
We propose the first interactive correction of (ML) models,
called “right for better reasons” (RBR), based on influence
functions. (2) We improve the adversarial robustness of machine learning models by constraining the influence function. (3) We demonstrate the effectiveness of RBR on both
synthetic and real-world data and compare it to RRR across
a number of data sets and model architectures.
To this end, we proceed as follows. We start off by reviewing related work on explainable ML. Afterwards, we
introduce RBR. Before concluding, we present our empirical results.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9533

