The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improved Penalty Method via Doubly Stochastic Gradients for Bilevel
Hyperparameter Optimization
Wanli Shi1 , Bin Gu1,2,3 *
1

Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
wanlishi@nuist.edu.cn, jsgubin@gmail.com

Abstract

of HO methods have emerged, such as grid search, random
search (Bergstra et al. 2011; Bergstra and Bengio 2012), solution path (Gu and Sheng 2017; Gu, Liu, and Huang 2017;
Bao, Gu, and Huang 2019; Gu and Ling 2015), and several Bayesian methods (Thornton et al. 2013; Brochu, Cora,
and De Freitas 2010; Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2014; Wu
et al. 2019).
In real-world applications, the number of hyperparameters increases shapely, especially in a deep learning problem.
In these problems, gradient-based methods are dominant in
bilevel problems with continuous hyperparameter set due
to their high scalability to the amount of hyperparameters.
The main idea of the gradient-based methods is to first approximate the solution on the training set and then compute
the gradient descent direction for hyperparameters, namely
hypergradient. However, calculating the exact hypergradient
needs the computation of the inverse Hessian of the lowerlevel problem, which makes it impractical for high dimensional data problem. To solve this problem, many methods
have been proposed to approximate the hypergradient by using some intermediate steps, such as solving a linear system
(the approximate methods (Domke 2012; Pedregosa 2016;
Rajeswaran et al. 2019)) or using reverse/forward mode differentiation (e.g. (Maclaurin, Duvenaud, and Adams 2015;
Domke 2012; Franceschi et al. 2017; Swersky, Snoek, and
Adams 2014)). Although these methods can avoid the computation of inverse Hessian, the intermediate steps usually
need extra loops which will affect the efficiency of these
gradient-based methods.
Recently, (Mehra and Hamm 2019) pointed out that the
intermediate steps are not necessary. They formulate the
bilevel problem as a single level constrained problem, by
replacing the lower-level objective with its first-order optimal necessary condition. Then the penalty framework can
be used to solve this constrained problem. With updating
the model parameters and hyperparameters alternately, the
penalty method can finally obtain the exact hypergradient. It
speeds up the gradient-based methods but brings a new problem in the meanwhile. Since the constraints are calculated
from the first order necessary condition of the lower-level
objective, it may lead to the optimization problem with a
large number of constraints, especially for high dimensional
datasets or deep learning methods. Calculating the gradient
of the penalty term in such a heavily constrained problem

Hyperparameter optimization (HO) is an important problem
in machine learning which is normally formulated as a bilevel
optimization problem. Gradient-based methods are dominant
in bilevel optimization due to their high scalability to the
number of hyperparameters, especially in a deep learning
problem. However, traditional gradient-based bilevel optimization methods need intermediate steps to obtain the exact or approximate gradient of hyperparameters, namely hypergradient, for the upper-level objective, whose complexity
is high especially for high dimensional datasets. Recently,
a penalty method has been proposed to avoid the computation of the hypergradient, which speeds up the gradient-based
BHO methods. However, the penalty method may result in a
very large number of constraints, which greatly limits the efficiency of this method, especially for high dimensional data
problems. To address this limitation, in this paper, we propose
a doubly stochastic gradient descent algorithm (DSGPHO) to
improve the efficiency of the penalty method. Importantly,
we not only prove the proposed method can converge to the
KKT condition of the original problem in a convex setting,
but also provide the convergence rate of DSGPHO which is
the first result in the references of gradient-based bilevel optimization as far as we know. We compare our method with
three state-of-the-art gradient-based methods in three tasks,
i.e., data denoising, few-shot learning, and training data poisoning, using several large-scale benchmark datasets. All the
results demonstrate that our method outperforms or is comparable to the existing methods in terms of accuracy and efficiency.

Introduction
Hyperparameter optimization problems (HO) are at the center of several important machine learning problems, which
are usually formulated as bilevel optimization problems
(Feurer and Hutter 2019). Any machine learning algorithms
crucially depend on the choice of their hyperparameters.
However, manually tunning hyperparameters is often timeconsuming, and depends heavily on human’s prior knowledge, which makes it difficult to find the optimal hyperparameters. Therefore, to choose the set hyperparameters automatically has attracted great attention, and large amounts
* Corresponding Authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9621

