The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Probabilistic Imaging: Uncertainty Quantification and
Multi-modal Solution Characterization for Computational Imaging
He Sun, Katherine L. Bouman,
California Institute of Technology
1200 E California Blvd, Pasadena, California 91125
hesun@caltech.edu, klbouman@caltech.edu

Abstract

In this paper, we propose Deep Probabilistic Imaging
(DPI), a new variational inference approach that employs a
deep generative model to learn a reconstructed image’s posterior distribution. More specifically, we represent the posterior probability distribution using an invertible flow-based
generative model. By training with a traditional maximum
a posteriori (MAP) loss, along with a loss that encourages
distribution entropy, the network converges to a generative
model that approximately samples from the image posterior; the model returns a posterior sample image as output
for a random Gaussian sample input. Our proposed approach
enables uncertainty quantification and multi-modal solution
characterization in non-convex inverse imaging problems.
We demonstrate our method on the applications of compressed sensing MRI and astronomical radio interferometric
imaging. High resolution radio interferometric imaging often requires a highly non-convex forward model, occasionally leading to multi-modal solutions.

Computational image reconstruction algorithms generally
produce a single image without any measure of uncertainty
or confidence. Regularized Maximum Likelihood (RML) and
feed-forward deep learning approaches for inverse problems
typically focus on recovering a point estimate. This is a serious limitation when working with underdetermined imaging
systems, where it is conceivable that multiple image modes
would be consistent with the measured data. Characterizing
the space of probable images that explain the observational
data is therefore crucial. In this paper, we propose a variational deep probabilistic imaging approach to quantify reconstruction uncertainty. Deep Probabilistic Imaging (DPI) employs an untrained deep generative model to estimate a posterior distribution of an unobserved image. This approach does
not require any training data; instead, it optimizes the weights
of a neural network to generate image samples that fit a particular measurement dataset. Once the network weights have
been learned, the posterior distribution can be efficiently sampled. We demonstrate this approach in the context of interferometric radio imaging, which is used for black hole imaging
with the Event Horizon Telescope, and compressed sensing
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI).

Related Work
Computational Imaging
The goal of a computational image reconstruction method is
to recover a hidden image from measured data. Imaging systems are often represented by a deterministic forward model,
y = f (x), where y are the observed measurements of a hidden image, x. A regularized maximum likelihood (RML)
optimization can be solved to reconstruct the image:
x̂ = arg min{L(y, f (x)) + λR(x)},
(1)

Introduction
Uncertainty quantification and multi-modal solution characterization are essential for analyzing the results of underdetermined imaging systems. In computational imaging, reconstruction methods solve an inverse problem to recover a
hidden image from measured data. When this inverse problem is ill-posed there are infinite image solutions that fit the
observed data. Occasionally these varied images lead to different scientific interpretations; thus it is important to be able
to characterize the distribution of possibilities. In a Bayesian
framework, this problem could ideally be addressed by accurately modeling the measurement noise, formulating an estimation problem, and computing the posterior distribution
of the hidden image. However, this analytical approach is
only tractable in simple cases. When the inverse problem is
non-convex or the measurement noise is complicated (e.g.,
non-Gaussian) the posterior distribution can quickly become
intractable to compute analytically.

x

where x̂ is the reconstructed image, L(·, ·) is the data fitting
loss between the measured data and the forward model prediction, R(·) is a regularization function on the image, and
λ is the hyper-parameter balancing the data fitting loss and
the regularization term. The regularization function is necessary for obtaining a unique solution in under-constrained
systems. Commonly used regularization functions include
L1 norm, total variation (TV) or total squared variation
(TSV) (Bouman and Sauer 1993; Kuramochi et al. 2018),
maximum entropy (MEM)(Skilling and Bryan 1984), multivariate Gaussian (Zoran and Weiss 2011), and sparsity in the
wavelet transformed domain (Candes and Romberg 2007).
Assuming the forward model and measurement noise
statistics are known, one can derive the probability of measurements, y, conditioned on the hidden image, x, as p(y|x).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2628

