The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Summarization for Chat Logs with Topic-Oriented
Ranking and Context-Aware Auto-Encoders
Yicheng Zou,1 Jun Lin,2 Lujun Zhao,2 Yangyang Kang,2 Zhuoren Jiang,3
Changlong Sun,3,2 Qi Zhang,1 Xuanjing Huang,1 Xiaozhong Liu4
1

School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Alibaba Group, China
3
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
4
Indiana University Bloomington, Bloomington, United States
{yczou18, qz, xjhuang}@fudan.edu.cn, {linjun.lj, lujun.zlj, yangyang.kangyy}@alibaba-inc.com,
jiangzhuoren@zju.edu.cn, changlong.scl@taobao.com, liu237@indiana.edu
Chat Log

Abstract

A: Is anyone there, please?
A: I want to buy this skirt, but I don't know what size suits me.
B: What's your height and weight?
A: 165cm and 55kg.
B: Well, size M suits you.

Automatic chat summarization can help people quickly grasp
important information from numerous chat messages. Unlike
conventional documents, chat logs usually have fragmented
and evolving topics. In addition, these logs contain a quantity
of elliptical and interrogative sentences, which make the chat
summarization highly context dependent. In this work, we
propose a novel unsupervised framework called RankAE to
perform chat summarization without employing manually labeled data. RankAE consists of a topic-oriented ranking strategy that selects topic utterances according to centrality and
diversity simultaneously, as well as a denoising auto-encoder
that is carefully designed to generate succinct but contextinformative summaries based on the selected utterances. To
evaluate the proposed method, we collect a large-scale dataset
of chat logs from a customer service environment and build
an annotated set only for model evaluation. Experimental results show that RankAE significantly outperforms other unsupervised methods and is able to generate high-quality summaries in terms of relevance and topic coverage.

A: How much? The store page says that coupons can be claimed.
B: 588 yuan. A coupon of 20 yuan is available for orders over 500.
A: Can I use it during shopping festival on November 11th?
B: Sorry. Not supported.
A: Okey. Which courier company?
B: We all use SF Express.
A: Free shipping?
B: Yeah. Free shipping is offered if you spend at least 300 yuan.
A: I have placed an order. When will it be delivered?
B: Tomorrow.

Summary
(Topic 1) The user wants to buy a skirt. Size M suits people of 165cm
and 55kg. (Topic 2) The skirt costs 588 yuan. A coupon of 20 yuan is
available, which is not supported during November 11th. (Topic 3) The
skirt will be delivered tomorrow by SF Express with free shipping.

Figure 1: Example of a chat log and its reference summary.
It has three topics: Skirt Size, Price and Logistics. Utterances
in the same color box describe the same topic. An interrogative sentence with its elliptical response is underlined.

Introduction
The goal of text summarization is to generate a succinct
summary while retaining a document’s essential information. From a participation viewpoint, most existing works
focus on single-party documents like news, reviews, and scientific articles (See et al. 2017; Nikolov et al. 2018; Narayan
et al. 2018; Chu and Liu 2019). Meanwhile, multi-party
chat conversations are generated online every day but have
not been fully explored. Despite the considerable research
on similar dialogues, like meetings and telephone records
(Zechner 2001; Gurevych and Strube 2004; Gillick et al.
2009; Shang et al. 2018), chat summarization has its own
characteristics. Compared with other dialogue forms, chat
logs are generally pure text without audio or transcription
information and tend to be much shorter, more unstructured, and contain more spelling mistakes, hyperlinks, and
acronyms (Uthus and Aha 2011; Koto 2016).

Most existing summarization works on conventional documents aim to extract salient sentences or form an abstractive expression that captures the main idea of a document
(See et al. 2017; Narayan et al. 2018; Liu and Lapata 2019).
Nevertheless, in chat conversations, chat topics can be diverse and switch frequently as the conversation progresses,
namely the ’Topic Shift’ (Arguello and Rosé 2006; Sood
et al. 2013) phenomenon. Figure 1 shows a chat log example
with three topics that have different user intentions and text
semantics. To address this problem, most previous works
have conducted clustering (Zhou and Hovy 2005), chat segmentation (Sood et al. 2012), and fine-grained topic modeling (Sood et al. 2013) to extract the utterances with different semantics. However, chat logs always contain numerous
elliptical and interrogative sentences that are highly dependent on their context. As shown in Figure 1, questions and

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14674

