The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Slimmable Generative Adversarial Networks
Liang Hou,1,2 * Zehuan Yuan,3† Lei Huang,4 Huawei Shen,1,2† Xueqi Cheng,1,2 Changhu Wang3
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
ByteDance AI Lab
4
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
{houliang17z, shenhuawei, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, {yuanzehuan, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com, huanglei@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

e.g., the high-performance mode and power-saving mode.
Consequently, numerous models need to be trained and deployed for a single task, which is also heavy work.
In this work, we are committed to developing a “oncefor-all” generator, which we only train and deploy once but
can flexibly switch the model size at runtime to address the
practical challenges. Inspired by slimmable neural networks
(SNNs) (Yu et al. 2019), we focus on developing a generator with configurable widths, where the width refers to the
number of channels in layers. In addition to saving inference
time, customization on width can reduce memory footprint
during the layer-by-layer inference, while reducing depth
cannot take this advantage.
Although several discriminative tasks such as image classification and object detection are well studied in SNNs,
applying slimmable operators to GANs suffers from three
following challenges: First, how to accurately and appropriately estimate the divergence between generators at different widths and the real data through discriminators? Second,
how to ensure consistency between generators of different
widths? Here, the consistency means that the generated images should be similar between these generators given the
same latent code. Third, how to incorporate the label information into generators at different widths in the classconditional generation?
In this paper, we propose slimmable generative adversarial networks (SlimGAN) to combat the aforementioned
problems. First, we present discriminators with partially
shared parameters to serve the generators at different widths.
Second, to improve the consistency between generators at
different widths, we introduce a novel stepwise inplace distillation technique, which encourages narrow generators to
learn from the wide generators. Third, we propose a sliceable conditional batch normalization (scBN) to incorporate the label information into different widths on the basis of switchable batch normalization (sBN) (Yu et al. 2019)
for the class-conditional generation. Extensive experiments
across several real-world datasets and two neural network
backbones demonstrate that SlimGAN can compete with or
even outperform the individually trained GANs. Remarkably, our proposed scBN achieves better performance with
fewer parameters. A systematic ablation study verifies the
effectiveness of our design, including network framework
and loss function.

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved remarkable progress in recent years, but the continuously growing scale of models makes them challenging to deploy widely
in practical applications. In particular, for real-time generation tasks, different devices require generators of different
sizes due to varying computing power. In this paper, we
introduce slimmable GANs (SlimGANs), which can flexibly switch the width of the generator to accommodate various quality-efficiency trade-offs at runtime. Specifically, we
leverage multiple discriminators that share partial parameters
to train the slimmable generator. To facilitate the consistency
between generators of different widths, we present a stepwise
inplace distillation technique that encourages narrow generators to learn from wide ones. As for class-conditional generation, we propose a sliceable conditional batch normalization
that incorporates the label information into different widths.
Our methods are validated, both quantitatively and qualitatively, by extensive experiments and a detailed ablation study.

Introduction
One of the main reasons for the tremendous success of deep
learning in recent years is the increasing scale of models.
In the branch of deep generative models, generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) have received widespread attention and evolved from the original
simple multi-layer perceptrons to the vast BigGAN framework (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019) with residual
blocks (He et al. 2016) and self-attention layers (Zhang et al.
2019) to synthesize realistic images nowadays. The arms
race on increasing the model size is endless, while the computational power and budget of devices are limited, especially for mobile phones. Several GAN applications such
as photograph (Kupyn et al. 2018) and autonomous driving (Zhang et al. 2018) require short response time and
hopefully run on devices with limited computing power. Recently, researchers began to develop lightweight GAN models. However, different devices usually require customized
models of different sizes to meet the given response time
budget. Moreover, even a single device needs models of different sizes due to several switchable performance modes,
* Work done as an intern at ByteDance AI Lab.
†

Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7746

