The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Symbolic Law Discovery: A Computer Vision Approach
Hengrui Xing, Ansaf Salleb-Aouissi, Nakul Verma
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA
h.xing@columbia.edu, ansafsalleb@columbia.edu, verma@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract

achieve this by searching in the space of mathematical expressions. Specifically, for a data pair (x, y), SR seeks to
identify a mapping f that best describes the relationship
x → y, i.e., that minimizes a certain loss function. f is required to be a symbolic expression assembled from mathematical operators, explanatory variables, and constants.
In conventional regression, one prescribes a parametric
model for f . This almost always suffers from the trade-off
between expressiveness and interpretability. Simple models (such as linear regression) can severely underfit a complex system. Composite models (such as neural network), on
the other hand, are not easily understood by humans (Fan,
Xiong, and Wang 2020). SR, in contrast, can fit to an arbitrarily complex target function and provide readily interpretable results. Even if it does not precisely uncover the
ground truth functional form, the result still offers useful insight to the development of scientific theory.
SR is classically implemented via genetic programming
(Koza 1994). The mapping f is expressed as a symbolic
tree. Each internal node of the tree is an operator and each
leaf node is either an explanatory variable or a constant.
The algorithm randomly initializes a population of symbolic
trees. These instances then fit the dataset through a series of
evolutionary steps, or generations. In each generation, new
trees are created by genetic operations, typically including
point mutation and crossover (subtree exchange). The bestperforming trees are then selected to proceed to the next generation, based on a fitness measurement on the training set
(e.g., root mean square error). Empirically, the performance
increases with each generation and we can obtain a plausible
symbolic relationship after sufficient rounds.
There is a serious bottleneck of this genetic approach
which is seldom discussed in other SR literature – the operator set. Before running the algorithm, one needs to define
the search space by providing a set of available operators
(add, log, sin, etc.). The model will fail to uncover the
true relationship x → y if the set lacks some constituent operator. On the other hand, the speed and performance of the
algorithm will be severely hindered if the set is too large.
This is because: 1) We need a larger population and/or more
generations for an exponentially large search space. 2) There
are more false optima of the loss function due to extraneous
operators. We will quantitatively evaluate the impact of operator set initialization in the subsequent sections.

One of the most exciting applications of modern artificial intelligence is to automatically discover scientific laws from experimental data. This is not a trivial problem as it involves
searching for a complex mathematical relationship over a
large set of explanatory variables and operators that can be
combined in an infinite number of ways.
Inspired by the incredible success of deep learning in computer vision, we tackle this problem by adapting various successful network architectures into the symbolic law discovery
pipeline. The novelty of our approach is in (1) encoding the
input data as an image with super-resolution, (2) developing
an appropriate deep network pipeline, and (3) predicting the
importance of each mathematical operator from the relationship image. This allows us to prior the exponentially large
search with the predicted importance of the symbolic operators, which can significantly accelerate the discovery process.
We apply our model to a variety of plausible relationships—
both simulated and from physics and mathematics domains—
involving different dimensions and constituents. We show
that our model is able to identify the underlying operators
from data, achieving a high accuracy and AUC (91% and
0.96 on average resp.) for systems with as many as ten independent variables. Our method significantly outperforms the
current state of the art in terms of data fitting (R2 ), discovery rate (recovering the true relationship), and succinctness
(output formula complexity). The discovered equations can
be seen as first drafts of scientific laws that can be helpful to
the scientists for (1) hypothesis building, and (2) understanding the complex underlying structure of the studied phenomena. Our approach holds a real promise to help speed up the
rate of scientific discovery.

Introduction
A persistent goal in the history of scientific research is to extract the relationship between variables from data. In most
scientific fields, these relationships can be reduced to simple
expressions composed from elementary mathematical operators. Physicists, for example, have formulated laws governing natural phenomena including motion, electricity, etc.
A key objective in modern artificial intelligence is to automate this process. Symbolic regression (SR) attempts to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

660

