The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Read, Retrospect, Select: An MRC Framework to Short Text Entity Linking
†

∗

Yingjie Gu, 1 Xiaoye Qu, 2 Zhefeng Wang, 2 Baoxing Huai, 2 Nicholas Jing Yuan, 2 Xiaolin Gui 1
1

†

Faculty of Electronics and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
2
Huawei Cloud & AI, China
gyj123wxc@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, xlgui@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
{quxiaoye, wangzhefeng, huaibaoxing, nicholas.yuan}@huawei.com
Original Short Text:
Li Na beat Cibulkova in Australian Open

Abstract
Entity linking (EL) for the rapidly growing short text (e.g.
search queries and news titles) is critical to industrial applications. Most existing approaches relying on adequate context
for long text EL are not effective for the concise and sparse
short text. In this paper, we propose a novel framework called
Multi-turn Multiple-choice Machine reading comprehension
(M3) to solve the short text EL from a new perspective: a
query is generated for each ambiguous mention exploiting its
surrounding context, and an option selection module is employed to identify the golden entity from candidates using the
query. In this way, M3 framework sufficiently interacts limited context with candidate entities during the encoding process, as well as implicitly considers the dissimilarities inside
the candidate bunch in the selection stage. In addition, we
design a two-stage verifier incorporated into M3 to address
the commonly existed unlinkable problem in short text. To
further consider the topical coherence and interdependence
among referred entities, M3 leverages a multi-turn fashion
to deal with mentions in a sequence manner by retrospecting historical cues. Evaluation shows that our M3 framework
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on five Chinese and
English datasets for the real-world short text EL.

Multiple-choice MRC (Local):

Query: Who beat Cibulkova in Australian Open ?

Option: A. Li Na (Singer) B. Li Na (Tennis Player) C. NIL ...

Multi-turn Multiple-choice MRC (Global):
Turns

Mention

Candidates

1

Cibulkova

Dominika Cibulkova

2

3

Australian
Open

Li Na

Australian Open (Golf)
Australian Open (Tennis)
Li Na (Singer)
Li Na (Tennis)

History Cues Flow
Dominika
Cibulkova
update

Dominika
Cibulkova
Australian Open
(Tennis)

Figure 1: An illustration of our M3 framework for short text
entity linking. The global disambiguation order depends on
the ambiguity degrees.

Introduction
The task of entity linking (EL), also known as entity disambiguation, aims to link a given mention that appears in
a piece of text to the correct entity in a specific knowledge
base (KB) (Shen, Wang, and Han 2014). Recently, with the
explosive growth of short text in the web, entity linking for
short text plays an important role in a wide range of industrial applications, such as parsing queries in search engines, understanding news titles and comments in social media (e.g. Twitter and Wechat).
In this paper, we focus on short texts entity linking problem. Under this circumstance, the input text is composed
of few tens of terms and the surrounding context of mentions is naturally scarce and concise (Ferragina and Scaiella
2010). Traditional entity linking methods (Gupta, Singh, and
Roth 2017; Newman-Griffis, Lai, and Fosler-Lussier 2018)

mainly employ encoded context and pre-trained candidate
entity embeddings to assess topic level context compatibility for entity disambiguation. In this way, the disambiguation process degrades into a semantic matching and entity
ranking problem. Specifically, recent state-of-the-art entity
linking models (Gillick et al. 2019; Logeswaran et al. 2019)
score each pair of mention context and candidate entity
based on their abstract representation. This means that the
model lacks fine-grained interaction between mention context and their candidate entities. Semantic matching operations between them are performed only at the encoder output layer and are relatively superficial. Therefore, it is difficult for these models to capture all the lexical, semantic,
and syntactic relations for precise entity disambiguation. Although these approaches that benefited from sufficient context achieve significant progress in long text, they fail to process sparse short text due to the inferiority of a restricted
context model. Thus, it would be favorable if an entity linking framework can make full use of limited context.

∗

This work was done during an internship at Huawei.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12920

