The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ACSNet: Action-Context Separation Network for Weakly Supervised
Temporal Action Localization
Ziyi Liu1 , Le Wang1 * , Qilin Zhang2 , Wei Tang3 , Junsong Yuan4 , Nanning Zheng1 , Gang Hua5
1

3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi‘an Jiaotong University 2 HERE Technologies
University of Illinois at Chicago 4 The State University of New York at Buffalo 5 Wormpex AI Research
liuziyi@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
tangw@uic.edu, jsyuan@buffalo.edu, {samqzhang, ganghua}@gmail.com

Feature Space

Abstract
The object of Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization (WS-TAL) is to localize all action instances in an
untrimmed video with only video-level supervision. Due to
the lack of frame-level annotations during training, current
WS-TAL methods rely on attention mechanisms to localize the foreground snippets or frames that contribute to the
video-level classification task. This strategy frequently confuse context with the actual action, in the localization result. Separating action and context is a core problem for
precise WS-TAL, but it is very challenging and has been
largely ignored in the literature. In this paper, we introduce an
Action-Context Separation Network (ACSNet) that explicitly
takes into account context for accurate action localization. It
consists of two branches (i.e., the Foreground-Background
branch and the Action-Context branch). The ForegroundBackground branch first distinguishes foreground from background within the entire video while the Action-Context
branch further separates the foreground as action and context. We associate video snippets with two latent components
(i.e., a positive component and a negative component), and
their different combinations can effectively characterize foreground, action and context. Furthermore, we introduce extended labels with auxiliary context categories to facilitate the
learning of action-context separation. Experiments on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet v1.2/v1.3 datasets demonstrate the
ACSNet outperforms existing state-of-the-art WS-TAL methods by a large margin.

1

dn

&

Decision Boundaries
Action
& Context

Feature Samples
Background

&

Figure 1: The illustration of action, context and background
in terms of frames and points in feature space. The green
dashed line is the desired boundary for the localization task.
However, based on the given video-level categorical labels,
the blue dashed line is learned, due to the high co-occurrence
and visual similarity of action and context. Existing methods
frequently identify both red and green dots as actions. The
main challenge in WS-TAL is how to isolate context from
action instances with merely video-level categorical labels

Introduction

2019), manually annotating the precise temporal boundaries
of action instances in untrimmed videos is time-consuming
and challenging. This limitation motivates the weakly supervised setting where only video-level categorical labels
are provided for model training. Compared with temporal
boundary annotations, video-level categorical labels are easier to collect, and they help avoid the localization bias introduced by human annotators.
Existing weakly-supervised temporal action localization
(WS-TAL) methods (Wang et al. 2017; Nguyen et al. 2018;
Paul, Roy, and Roy-Chowdhury 2018; Nguyen, Ramanan,
and Fowlkes 2019) leverage attention mechanisms to categorize snippets or sampled frames into foreground and background based on their contribution to the video-level classification task, i.e., to find the blue dashed line in Figure 1.

Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to localize temporal starts and ends of specific action categories in a
video. It serves as a fundamental tool for several practical applications such as action retrieval, intelligent surveillance and video summarization (Lee, Ghosh, and Grauman
2012; Vishwakarma and Agrawal 2013; Asadiaghbolaghi
et al. 2017; Kang and Wildes 2016; Yao, Lei, and Zhong
2019). Although fully supervised TAL methods have recently achieved remarkable progress (Buch et al. 2017; Xu,
Das, and Saenko 2017; Gao et al. 2017; Xu, Das, and Saenko
2017; Chao et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018, 2019; Zeng et al.
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2233

