The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multi-task Learning by Leveraging the Semantic Information
Fan Zhou1 , Brahim Chaib-draa1 , Boyu Wang2,3 *
1

Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada
3
Vector Institute, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada
fan.zhou.1@ulaval.ca, chaib@ift.ulaval.ca, bwang@csd.uwo.ca

2

Abstract
One crucial objective of multi-task learning is to align distributions across tasks so that the information between them
can be transferred and shared. However, existing approaches
only focused on matching the marginal feature distribution
while ignoring the semantic information, which may hinder
the learning performance. To address this issue, we propose to
leverage the label information in multi-task learning by exploring the semantic conditional relations among tasks. We first
theoretically analyze the generalization bound of multi-task
learning based on the notion of Jensen-Shannon divergence,
which provides new insights into the value of label information
in multi-task learning. Our analysis also leads to a concrete
algorithm that jointly matches the semantic distribution and
controls label distribution divergence. To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method, we first compare the algorithm
with several baselines on some benchmarks and then test the
algorithms under label space shift conditions. Empirical results demonstrate that the proposed method could outperform
most baselines and achieve state-of-the-art performance, particularly showing the benefits under the label shift conditions.

Introduction
General machine learning paradigms typically focus on learning individual tasks. Even though significant progress has
been achieved, recent successes in machine learning, especially in the deep learning area, usually rely on a large amount
of labelled data to obtain a small generalization error. In practice, however, acquiring labelled data could be highly prohibitive, e.g., when classifying multiple objects in an image
(Long et al. 2017), when analyzing patient data in healthcare
data analysis (Wang and Pineau 2015; Zhou et al. 2021b),
or when modelling users’ products preferences (Murugesan
and Carbonell 2017). Data hungry has become a long-term
problem for deep learning. Multi-task learning (MTL) aims
at addressing this issue by simultaneously learning from multiple tasks and leveraging the shared knowledge across them.
Many MTL approaches have been implemented in computer
vision (Zhao et al. 2018), natural language processing (Bingel and Søgaard 2017), medical data analysis (Moeskops
et al. 2016; Li, Carlson et al. 2018) or brain-computer interaction (Wang et al. 2020) problems etc. It has been shown
* The corresponding author: bwang@csd.uwo.ca (B. Wang)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11088

with benefits to reduce the amount of annotated data per task
to reach the desired performance.
The crucial idea behind MTL is to extract and leverage
the knowledge and information shared across the tasks to
improve the overall performances (Wang et al. 2019b), which
can be achieved by task-invariant feature learning (Maurer,
Pontil, and Romera-Paredes 2016; Luo, Tao, and Wen 2017)
or task relation learning (Zhang and Yeung 2012; Bingel and
Søgaard 2017; Zhou et al. 2021b). One major issue with most
of the existing feature learning approaches is that they only
align the marginal distributions P(x) to extract the shared
features without taking advantage of label information of
the tasks. Consequently, the features can lack discriminative
power for supervised learning even if their marginal features
have been matched properly (Dou et al. 2019). Furthermore,
only aligning P(x) cannot address the MTL problems when
the label space of each task differs from each other, i.e., label
shift problem (Redko et al. 2019).
While a few algorithms have been proposed to use semantic matching for MTL (Zhuang et al. 2017; Luo, Tao, and
Wen 2017) and have shown improved performances, the theoretical justifications for the value of labels remain elusive.
Most theoretical results (Shui et al. 2019; Mao, Liu, and Lin
2020) for MTL derive from the notion of H-divergence (BenDavid et al. 2010) or Wasserstein adversarial training (Redko,
Habrard, and Sebban 2017; Shen et al. 2018), which did not
take the label information into consideration. As a result,
they usually require additional assumptions, e.g., assuming
the combined error across tasks is small (Ben-David et al.
2010) to ensure the algorithms succeed, which may not hold
in practice.
To this end, we propose the first theoretical analysis for
MTL that considers semantic matching. Specifically, our results reveal that the MTL loss can be upper-bounded in terms
of the pair-wise discrepancy between the tasks, measured by
the Jensen-Shannon divergences of label distribution P(y)
and semantic distribution P(x|y).
The contributions of our work are trifold: 1. In contrast
to previous theoretical results (Shui et al. 2019; Mao, Liu,
and Lin 2020), which only consider the marginal distribution
discrepancy (e.g., H-divergence), we build a complete MTL
theoretical framework upon the joint distribution discrepancy
based on the Jensen-Shannon divergence. Thus, our result
provides a deeper understanding of the general problem of

