The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Training Spiking Neural Networks with Accumulated Spiking Flow
Hao Wu, Yueyi Zhang,† Wenming Weng, Yongting Zhang
Zhiwei Xiong, Zheng-Jun Zha, Xiaoyan Sun, Feng Wu
University of Science and Technology of China
National Engineering Laboratory for Brain-inspired Intelligence Technology and Application
{wuhao,wmweng,zytabcd}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey,zwxiong,zhazj,sunxiaoyan,fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract
The fast development of neuromorphic hardwares promotes
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) to a thrilling research avenue. Current SNNs, though much efficient, are less effective
compared with leading Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs)
especially in supervised learning tasks. Recent efforts further
demonstrate the potential of SNNs in supervised learning by
introducing approximated backpropagation (BP) methods. To
deal with the non-differentiable spike function in SNNs, these
BP methods utilize information from the spatio-temporal domain to adjust the model parameters. With the increasing of
time window and network size, the computational complexity
of spatio-temporal backpropagation augments dramatically.
In this paper, we propose a new backpropagation method for
SNNs based on the accumulated spiking flow (ASF), i.e. ASFBP. In the proposed ASF-BP method, updating parameters
does not rely on the spike train of spiking neurons but leverage
accumulated inputs and outputs of spiking neurons over the
time window, which reduces the BP complexity significantly.
We further present an adaptive linear estimation model to approach the dynamic characteristics of spiking neurons statistically. Experimental results demonstrate that with our proposed
ASF-BP method, light-weight convolutional SNNs achieve
superior performances compared with other spike-based BP
methods on both non-neuromorphic (MNIST, CIFAR10) and
neuromorphic (CIFAR10-DVS) datasets. The code is available
at https://github.com/neural-lab/ASF-BP.

Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) (LeCun, Bengio, and
Hinton 2015) have achieved a great success in diverse applications such as computer vision and natural language processing. But the success of ANNs is also accompanied by some
serious concerns on their huge demand of computational resources and power consumption. In contrast, biological brain
can provide excellent cognitive abilities with ultra-low natural power. The outstanding brain efficacy inspires researchers
to explore algorithms that mimic the brain’s operating mechanism at the neuron level.
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), as the third-generation
neural networks (Maass 1997), use biologically-realistic but
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10320

simplified models of neurons to carry out computation. Unlike ANNs that are activated using continuous values, SNNs
use sparse binary spikes in time and space dimensions in
an event-driven manner. The event-driven mechanism in
SNNs greatly reduce the occupation of computing resources
and avoids consuming excessive resources to a large extent.
Along with the development of SNN-specific hardwares,
such as Loihi (Davies et al. 2018) and TrueNorth (Merolla
et al. 2014), SNNs have received increasing attention in both
academia and industry.
Existing SNNs can be roughly divided into two categories,
converted SNNs (Cao, Chen, and Khosla 2015; Sengupta
et al. 2019) and directly trained SNNs. A converted SNN
model is transferred from certain pre-trained ANN model.
Its network architecture is usually consistent with the ANN
model and its model parameters are transformed from the pretrained ANN model by scale adjusting and other conversion
operations. Consequently, converted SNN models usually
lack biological interpret-ability.
For directly trained SNNs, supervised and unsupervised
learning are both attractive research topics. For unsupervised
learning, the mainstream learning method is the spike timing
dependent plasticity rule (STDP) (Caporale and Dan 2008;
Song, Miller, and Abbott 2000; Diehl and Cook 2015). STDP
uses synaptic plasticity and spike activity to learn features
of input data, which is biologically plausible. On the other
hand, the supervised SNNs can achieve much better performance given a large number of labeled training data. However, training this kind of SNNs is quite difficult. Due to the
non-differentiable spike functions, the error backpropagation
(BP) (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams 1986) mechanism
commonly adopted in conventional ANNs cannot be directly
transferred to SNNs.
There are some successful attempts that introduce BP into
SNN models, such as STBP (Wu et al. 2018), SLAYER
(Shrestha and Orchard 2018), BP-STDP (Tavanaei and Maida
2019; Luo et al. 2019), which achieve good performances
on some simple cognitive tasks. Existing spike-based BP
methods utilize the gradient descent method (Ruder 2016)
to adjust the model parameters. In this process, there are
two obstacles that hinder the development of BP in SNN.
First, the issue of non-differential activation function needs
to be addressed. Generally, there are two ways to address the
issue: (1) replacing the activation function with an estimated

