The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Reciprocal Embedding Framework For Modelling Mutual Preferences
R. Ramanathan,∗1 Nicolas K. Shinada,1 Michinobu Shimatani,2 Yuhei Yamaguchi,2
Junichi Tanaka,2 Yuta Iizuka,2 Sucheendra K. Palaniappan1
1

SBX Technologies Corporation, Tokyo, Japan
2
Tapple Inc., Tokyo, Japan
{ramanathan, shinada, suchee}@sbx-corp.com,
{shimatani michinobu, yamaguchi yuhei, junichi tanaka, yuta iizuka}@matchingagent.co.jp
Abstract

Second, unlike traditional recommendation systems
where users interact with static items, human interactions are
bidirectional. This means getting the right recommendations
to the right user at the right time is just not enough. More important is to also get the right target users who would reciprocate the subject users’ interests. This is called as the reciprocal recommendation problem. It pertains to encoding and
learning bidirectional preferences of users for serving recommendations that maximize the potential for mutual likes.
Third, we observe that the interaction network is often extemely sparse (density of 0.00001). Network density here is
defined as the fraction of actual interactions over all possible interactions across all possible pairs of users. This indicates that users are very selective about their preferences and
have fewer interactions, despite having similar tastes with
that of other users. Hence in addition to solving the information overload problem, reciprocal recommendation systems
should be careful not to overload the users with poor recommendations as rejection directly impacts user retention for
the application.
While a wide variety of methods have been developed
for learning latent representations in classical recommender
systems (Agarwal and Chen 2009), applying them to the reciprocal setting is challenging due to the bidirectional nature
of preferences. Collaborative filtering (Sarwar et al. 2001)
techniques in literature can be classified into neighborhoodbased methods (Xia et al. 2015, 2016; Pizzato et al. 2010)
and model-based methods (Kleinerman et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2017). Recently (Neve and Palomares 2019) proposed
a latent factor model based approach to compute the unidirectional preferences between two potential partners and
fuse them to derive a single mutual preference score. While
the modelling strategy of fusing preferences in our framework is closely related to this line of work, which the authors
developed for a matrix factorization based model, our framework is not limited by the choice of the preference modelling
algorithm.

Understanding the mutual preferences between potential dating partners is core to the success of modern web-scale personalized recommendation systems that power online dating
platforms. In contrast to classical user-item recommendation
systems which model the unidirectional preferences of users
to items, understanding the bidirectional preferences between
people in a reciprocal recommendation system is more complex and challenging given the dynamic nature of interactions. In this paper, we describe a reciprocal recommendation
system we built for one of the leading online dating applications in Japan. We also discuss the lessons learnt from designing, developing and deploying the reciprocal recommendation system in production.

Introduction
There has been a huge surge in people going online to seek
potential partners in recent years with the rapidly evolving
social media platforms on the internet. Owing to their easeof-use, low costs and privacy proposition, online dating apps
have become mainstream and are increasingly preferred over
traditional dating channels. However, there are several factors that make recommending partners an interesting and
challenging problem.
First, people have eclectic tastes and their preferences
change over time. For instance, at the time of registering
in an online dating app, people would hold a certain preconceived preference profile and start liking an initial set of
people recommended to them according to this preference
profile. However rejection may happen and in reacting to
the feedback they receive, they might broaden their preferences quickly when they find their interests are not converting into matches. On the other hand, it could also turn out
that their preference can become more concentrated towards
a set of users who have certain traits if the feedback they
receive reinforces their preconceived interests towards those
traits. Hence people’s preferences drift over time with every
interaction they have with the recommendation system and
as such it is hard to model user intent even when there is
sufficient training data.

Overview
Our embedding framework encompasses three fundamentally different preference modelling algorithms from matrix
factorization to learning-to-rank to neural network based algorithms. From a practical standpoint, this is critical for
three reasons. First, in contrast to a single model, our frame-

∗

R. Ramanathan is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15385

