The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Memory-Augmented Image Captioning
Zhengcong Fei1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
feizhengcong@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

To address these issues, numerous hybrid captioning models that combine with the retrieval-based memory mechanism are leveraged, in which outer recalled knowledge can
be directly revised and expanded, and its access can be inspected and interpreted (Weston, Chopra, and Bordes 2014).
In particular, inspired by the fact that humans benefit from
previous similar experiences when taking actions and related
examples from training data provide exemplary information
when describing a given image, previous works (Poghosyan
and Sarukhanyan 2017; Chen et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020)
usually first utilize an image-text matching model to retrieval top-k similar sentence candidates. Then, the target
caption will be created under the guide of input image plus
these related candidates with a specially designed network.
Although current retrieval-based captioning models have
achieved promising results, there still have the following
weakness: 1) Their performance is limited by the quality of
the caption retrieved model. Commonly, retrieval results are
less coherent and relevant with the query image than generative models’. Irrelevant retrieved results would even mislead the final caption generation. 2) These models can only
make use of individual sentence-level retrieved results, leading to a high variance in the performance (Zhang and Lu
2018). Moreover, the information from very few retrieved
results may not be sufficient to enrich the caption decoding.
Compared with methods matching based only on image features, our proposed word-level retrieval mechanism considers the complete history information, including given image
and previously generated words, which results in a more accurate and comprehensive knowledge application.

Current deep learning-based image captioning systems have
been proven to store practical knowledge with their parameters and achieve competitive performances in the public
datasets. Nevertheless, their ability to access and precisely
manipulate the mastered knowledge is still limited. Besides,
providing evidence for decisions and updating memory information are also important yet under explored. Towards this
goal, we introduce a memory-augmented method, which extends an existing image caption model by incorporating extra
explicit knowledge from a memory bank. Adequate knowledge is recalled according to the similarity distance in the
embedding space of history context, and the memory bank
can be constructed conveniently from any matched imagetext set, e.g., the previous training data. Incorporating such
non-parametric memory-augmented method to various captioning baselines, the performance of resulting captioners imporves consistently on the evaluation benchmark. More encouragingly, extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach holds the capbility for efficiently adapting to larger
training datasets, by simply transferring the memory bank
without any additional training.

1

Introduction

Automatic image captioning, which aims to describe a visual
content of a given image, is a core topic in the artificial intelligence area (Bai and An 2018; Fei 2020a). There is a boom
in research on image captioning systems due to the advance
of deep learning technology, and most existing models adopt
encoder-decoder frameworks (Vinyals et al. 2015; Xu et al.
2015; Yao et al. 2017; Anderson et al. 2018; Huang et al.
2019; Fei 2020b). Technically, CNN-based image encoder
extracts sufficient and useful visual features from the input
image; RNN-based caption decoder builds the semantic part
according to the picked visual information and decodes it
word by word. The above structures have been shown to
learn a substantial amount of in-depth relational knowledge
from training data using parameter optimization, without access to external memory. While this development is exciting,
such image captioning models do have some drawbacks (Fei
2019; Wang et al. 2020): they cannot easily expand or update
their prior memory, and can not straightforwardly provide
insight into their current predictions.

In this paper, we introduce a memory augmented approach that equips a trained image caption decoding with
considering extra word-level knowledge information, in
other words, linearly interpolating the original next word
distribution with a top-k matching approximation. The related knowledge in the memory bank is recalled according
to the similarity distance in the embedding space of history
context (i.e., the image feature and prefix of the caption) and
can be drawn from any image-text collection, including the
original training data or other extended datasets. We assume
that contxts which are close in representation space are more
likely to occur the same word. In this manner, our framework
does not incorporate additional parameters and allow effective knowledge to be memorized explicitly and interpretably,

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1317

