The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Searching for Machine Learning Pipelines Using a Context-Free Grammar
Radu Marinescu1 , Akihiro Kishimoto1 , Parikshit Ram1 , Ambrish Rawat1 , Martin Wistuba1 ,
Paulito P. Palmes1 , Adi Botea2∗
1

IBM Research
2
Eaton
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com, Akihiro.Kishimoto@ibm.com, parikshit.ram@ibm.com, Ambrish.Rawat@ie.ibm.com,
Martin.Wistuba@ibm.com, paulpalmes@ie.ibm.com, adi.botea@eaton.com
Abstract

integer-continuous non-linear programming (Liu et al. 2020),
hierarchical task networks (Mohr, Wever, and Hullermeier
2018) or Monte-Carlo tree search coupled with Bayesian
optimization (Rakotoarison, Schoenauer, and Sebag 2019).
Specifically, these approaches assume a fixed linear structure
of the pipeline and therefore have one variable for a preprocessing algorithm, one variable for the learning algorithm,
and one variable for each parameter of each algorithm which
leads to a solution space of fixed dimensionality. On the other
hand, approaches of the second category attempt to relax the
fixed structure of the pipeline. Consequently, these methods
are able to generate more flexible ML pipelines that allow
for complex preprocessing steps at the expense of exploring a much larger search space. More specifically, systems
like TPOT (Olson et al. 2016), RECIPE (de Sa et al. 2017)
and ML-PLAN-UL (Wever, Mohr, and Hullermeier 2018)
organize the search space in terms of a formal grammar that
naturally allows for recursive structures and employ evolutionary as well as planning techniques to explore the search
space more effectively. However, as in the previous category,
the use of the grammar is limited to chain-shaped (or at most
tree-shaped) data-flow graphs.

AutoML automatically selects, composes and parameterizes
machine learning algorithms into a workflow or pipeline of
operations that aims at maximizing performance on a given
dataset. Although current methods for AutoML achieved impressive results they mostly concentrate on optimizing fixed
linear workflows. In this paper, we take a different approach
and focus on generating and optimizing pipelines of complex directed acyclic graph shapes. These complex pipeline
structure may lead to discovering new synthetic features and
thus boost performance considerably. We explore the power
of heuristic search and context-free grammars to search and
optimize these kinds of pipelines. Experiments on various
benchmark datasets show that our approach is highly competitive and often outperforms existing AutoML systems.

Introduction
Automated Machine Learning (or AutoML for short) seeks
to automatically compose and parameterize machine learning
algorithms to maximize a given metric such as predictive
accuracy on a given dataset. It has received increasing attention over the past decades but it became even more acute in
light of the recent explosion in machine learning applications.
AutoML has gradually extended from hyper-parameter optimization (HPO) for the best configuration of a single machine
learning algorithm (Bergstra et al. 2011; Snoek, Larochelle,
and Adams 2012) to tackling the optimization of the entire
machine learning pipeline from data preparation to model
learning (Feurer et al. 2015). Several AutoML international
challenges have been organized in the last decade (Guyon,
Bennett, and Cawley 2015; Guyon and Tu 2018), spurring
the development of efficient AutoML systems such as AutoWEKA (Kotthoff et al. 2017), TPOT (Olson et al. 2016) and
the challenge winner Auto-sklearn (Feurer et al. 2015).
In this paper, we focus on this problem of automatic configuration of machine learning pipelines. Existing AutoML
systems can be divided into two main categories. First, the
AutoML problem is designed as an optimization problem
with a fixed number of decision variables, which then is
solved in many different ways, including standard Bayesian
optimization (Hutter, Hoos, and Leyton-Brown 2011), mixed

Contribution: We consider the second category of AutoML systems and show how to exploit the power of heuristic
search and context-free grammars to generate ML pipelines
of complex Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) shapes. Specifically, we propose a simple yet expressive context-free
grammar that allows us to construct arbitrarily complex
pipeline structures that extend well beyond the traditional
preprocessing-estimation linear workflow. These complex
pipelines allow naturally for stacking or concatenating the
outputs of multiple transformers/estimators in a DAG structure and using them as new “synthetic features” for downstream estimators in the pipeline. This in turn may translate
into improved performance. The proposed grammar defines
the search space of all possible DAG-shaped pipelines. For
a given number of transformers and estimators this search
space can be many orders of magnitude larger than that corresponding to fixed linear pipelines. Therefore, we develop
a greedy best-first search algorithm that traverses efficiently
the space of partial pipelines guided by an effective heuristic function to find the most promising pipeline structure.
Once the most promising pipeline structure is identified, we
subsequently optimize it by selecting the best configuration

∗

Work done while at IBM Research.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8902

