The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Group Fairness by Probabilistic Modeling with Latent Fair Decisions
YooJung Choi, Meihua Dang, Guy Van den Broeck
Computer Science Department
University of California, Los Angeles
{yjchoi,mhdang,guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Machine learning systems are increasingly being used to make
impactful decisions such as loan applications and criminal justice risk assessments, and as such, ensuring fairness of these
systems is critical. This is often challenging as the labels in
the data are biased. This paper studies learning fair probability distributions from biased data by explicitly modeling
a latent variable that represents a hidden, unbiased label. In
particular, we aim to achieve demographic parity by enforcing
certain independencies in the learned model. We also show
that group fairness guarantees are meaningful only if the distribution used to provide those guarantees indeed captures the
real-world data. In order to closely model the data distribution,
we employ probabilistic circuits, an expressive and tractable
probabilistic model, and propose an algorithm to learn them
from incomplete data. We show on real-world datasets that
our approach not only is a better model of how the data was
generated than existing methods but also achieves competitive
accuracy. Moreover, we also evaluate our approach on a synthetic dataset in which observed labels indeed come from fair
labels but with added bias, and demonstrate that the fair labels
are successfully retrieved.

1

Introduction

As machine learning algorithms are being used more and
more in real-world decision making scenarios, there is growing concern that these methods may produce decisions that
discriminate against particular groups of people. The relevant applications include online advertising, hiring, loan
approvals, and criminal risk assessment (Datta, Tschantz,
and Datta 2015; Barocas and Selbst 2016; Chouldechova
2017; Berk et al. 2018). To address these concerns, various
methods have been proposed to quantify and ensure fairness
in automated decision making systems (Chouldechova 2017;
Dwork et al. 2012; Feldman et al. 2015; Kusner et al. 2017;
Kamishima et al. 2012; Zemel et al. 2013). A widely used
notion of fairness is demographic parity, which states that
sensitive attributes such as gender or race must be statistically
independent of the class predictions.
In this paper, we study the problem of enforcing demographic parity in probabilistic classifiers. In particular, we
focus on the fact that class labels in the data are often biased, and propose a latent variable approach that treats the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12051

observed labels as biased proxies of hidden, fair labels that
satisfy demographic parity. The process that generated bias
is modeled by a probability distribution over the fair label,
observed label, and other features including the sensitive attributes. Moreover, we show that group fairness guarantees
for a probabilistic model hold in the real world only if the
model accurately captures the real-world data. Therefore,
the goal of learning a fair probabilistic classifier also entails
learning a distribution that achieves high likelihood.
Our first contribution is to systematically derive the assumptions of a fair probabilistic model in terms of independence constraints. Each constraint serves the purpose of
explaining how the observed, biased labels come from hidden
fair labels and/or ensuring that the model closely represents
the data distribution. Secondly, we propose an algorithm to
learn probabilistic circuits (PCs) (Vergari, Di Mauro, and
Van den Broeck 2019), a type of tractable probabilistic models, so that the fairness constraints are satisfied. Specifically,
this involves encoding independence assumptions into the
circuits and developing an algorithm to learn PCs from incomplete data, as we have a latent variable. Finally, we evaluate
our approach empirically on synthetic and real-world datasets,
comparing against existing fair learning methods as well as
a baseline we propose that does not include a latent variable. The experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
high likelihoods that indeed translate to more trustworthy
fairness guarantees. It also has high accuracy for predicting
the true fair labels in the synthetic data, and the predicted fair
decisions can still be close to unfair labels in real-world data.

2

Related Work

Several frameworks have been proposed to design fairnessaware systems. We discuss a few of them here and refer to
Romei and Ruggieri (2014); Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan
(2019) for a more comprehensive review.
Some of the most prominent fairness frameworks include individual fairness and group fairness. Individual fairness (Dwork et al. 2012) is based on the idea that similar
individuals should receive similar treatments, although defining similarity between individuals can be challenging. On the
other hand, group fairness aims to equalize some statistics
across groups defined by sensitive attributes. These include
equality of opportunity (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016) and
demographic (statistical) parity (Calders and Verwer 2010;

