The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair Representations by Compression
Xavier Gitiaux, Huzefa Rangwala
George Mason University
xgitiaux@gmu.edu, rangwala@gmu.edu

Abstract

coder, an encoder that aims for conciseness would not waste
code length to encode information related to S in the latent
factors Z. We show that in an information bottleneck framework (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000), this intuition is
theoretically founded: constraining the information flowing
from the data X to the representation Z forces the encoder to
control the dependencies between sensitive attributes S and
representations Z. It is sufficient to constraint the mutual information I(Z, X) between Z and X in order to minimize
the mutual information I(Z, S) between Z and S.
Therefore, instead of directly penalizing I(Z, S), we recast fair representation learning as a rate distortion problem
that controls explicitly the bit rate I(Z, X) encoded in the
latent factors Z. We model the representation Z as a binary
bit stream, which allows us to monitor the bit rate more effectively than floating point representations that may maintain redundant bit patterns. We estimate the entropy of the
code Z with an auxiliary auto-regressive network that predicts each bit in the latent code Z conditional on previous
bits in the code. One advantage of the method is that the
auxiliary network collaborates with the encoder to minimize
the cross-entropy of the code.
Empirically, we demonstrate that the resulting method,
Fairness by Binary Compression (henceforth, FBC) is competitive with state-of-the art methods in fair representation
learning. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We show that controlling for the mutual information
I(Z, X) is an effective way to remove dependencies between sensitive attributes and latent factors Z, while preserving in Z, the information useful for downstream tasks.
2. We find that compressing the data into a binary code as in
FBC generates a better accuracy-fairness trade-off than
limiting the information channel capacity by adding noise
(as in variants of β-VAE, (Higgins et al. 2017)).
3. We show that increasing the value of the coefficient on
the bit rate constraint I(Z, X) in our information bottleneck framework allows to move smoothly along both ratedistortion and rate-fairness curves.
Related work. The machine learning literature increasingly explores how algorithms can adversely impact protected demographic groups (e.g individuals self-identified as
Female or African-American) (see Chouldechova and Roth
(2018) for a review). Research questions revolve around how

Organizations that collect and sell data face increasing
scrutiny for the discriminatory use of data. We propose a
novel unsupervised approach to transform data into a compressed binary representation independent of sensitive attributes. We show that in an information bottleneck framework, a parsimonious representation should filter out information related to sensitive attributes if they are provided
directly to the decoder. Empirical results show that the
proposed method, FBC, achieves state-of-the-art accuracyfairness trade-off. Explicit control of the entropy of the representation bit stream allows the user to move smoothly and
simultaneously along both rate-distortion and rate-fairness
curves.

Introduction
A growing body of evidence has questioned the fairness of
machine learning algorithms across a wide range of applications, including judicial decisions (ProPublica 2016), face
recognition (Buolamwini and Gebru 2018), degree completion (Gardner, Brooks, and Baker 2019) or medical treatment (Pfohl et al. 2019). Of particular concerns are potential
discriminatory uses of data on the basis of racial or ethnic
origin, political opinion, religion, or gender.
Therefore, organizations that collect and sell data are increasingly liable if future downstream uses of the data are
biased against protected demographic groups. One of their
challenges is to anticipate and control how the data will be
processed by downstream users. Unsupervised fair representation learning approaches (Madras et al. (2018), Zemel
et al. (2013), Gitiaux and Rangwala (2020), Moyer et al.
(2018)) offers a flexible fairness solution to this challenge. A
typical architecture in fair representation learning includes
an encoder that maps the data into a representation and a
decoder that reconstructs the data from its representation.
The objective of the architecture is to extract from a data
X the underlying latent factors Z that correlate with unobserved and potentially diverse task labels, while remaining
independent of sensitive factors S.
This paper asks whether an encoder that filters out information redundancies could generate fair representations. Intuitively, if sensitive attributes S are direct inputs to the deCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11506

