The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inverse Reinforcement Learning with Natural Language Goals
Li Zhou, Kevin Small
Amazon Alexa
{lizhouml, smakevin}@amazon.com

Abstract

video game AI (Tucker, Gleave, and Russell 2018). Generally, task goals are specified intrinsically by the environment and an agent is trained for each task. To generalize
the learned policy to new goals, goal-conditioned imitation
learning (Ding et al. 2019) and reinforcement learning (RL)
algorithms (Kaelbling 1993; Schaul et al. 2015; Nair et al.
2018) have been proposed where the policy is explicitly conditioned on a goal. Normally, the goals either share the same
space with the states or can be easily mapped to the state
space. For example, in Ding et al. (2019), the goals and
states are both coordinates in the environment and the goals
are provided to the agent by specifying goal positions.
Fu et al. (2019) and Bahdanau et al. (2019) represent
two recent related works from the perspective of understanding NL goal specifications, where they propose learning a language-conditioned reward function under the maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (Ziebart et al.
2008) and generative adversarial imitation learning frameworks (Ho and Ermon 2016). However, the NL goals are
produced by a preset template-based grammar. Fu et al.
(2019)’s policy is optimized exactly in a grid environment
with known dynamics and when the policy is optimized
by sample-based reinforcement learning algorithms such as
deep Q-learning (Mnih et al. 2015), the model performance
drops significantly. This reveals a sample efficiency challenge in this setting and implies that when the NL goals
and the environments are complicated, generalization to new
goals and environments becomes a very difficult problem.
One potential method for addressing these shortcomings
are goal relabeling techniques such as hindsight experience
replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al. 2017) and latent goal
relabeling (Nair et al. 2018), which have been shown to improve sample efficiency in RL settings. However, when the
goals are NL and are in a different space than the state space,
goal relabeling cannot be applied directly as we cannot easily relabel a state to a NL goal. Cideron et al. (2019) proposes to build such a relabeling function with a S EQ 2S EQ
model that takes a trajectory as input and outputs a relabeled NL goal. However, this uses the ground-truth reward
function and their experiments are again based on simple
template-based NL goals. Moreover, as we will show in this
paper, applying HER to IRL with NL goals doesn’t significantly improve performance, as the reward function does not
generalize well to relabeled goals.

Humans generally use natural language (NL) to communicate
task requirements to each other. Ideally, NL should also be usable for communicating goals to autonomous machines (e.g.,
robots) to minimize friction in task specification. However,
understanding and mapping NL goals to sequences of states
and actions is challenging. Specifically, existing work along
these lines has encountered difficulty in generalizing learned
policies to new NL goals and environments. In this paper, we
propose a novel adversarial inverse reinforcement learning algorithm to learn a language-conditioned policy and reward
function. To improve generalization of the learned policy and
reward function, we use a variational goal generator to relabel trajectories and sample diverse goals during training. Our
algorithm outperforms multiple baselines by a large margin
on a vision-based NL instruction following dataset (Room-2Room), demonstrating a promising advance in enabling the
use of NL instructions in specifying agent goals.

1

Introduction

Humans use natural language (NL) to communicate with
each other. Accordingly, a desired method for conveying
goals or assigning tasks to an autonomous machine (e.g., a
robot) is also by NL. For example, in household tasks, when
asking an agent to pick up a toolbox from the garage, we
do not assign the coordinates of the toolbox to the robot.
Instead, we state to the agent retrieve my toolbox from the
garage. This requires the agent to understand the semantics
of the natural language goals, associate states and actions
with the natural language goals, and infer whether the natural language goals are achieved or not – all of which are
very challenging tasks. Furthermore, we want to be able to
learn policies that are robust to lexical variation in goals and
generalize well to new goals and environments.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) (Abbeel and Ng
2004; Fu, Luo, and Levine 2018), a form of imitation learning (Osa et al. 2018), is the task of learning a reward function and hence a policy based on expert demonstrations.
Imitation learning has been successfully applied to a wide
range of tasks including robot manipulation (Finn, Levine,
and Abbeel 2016), autonomous driving (Kuefler et al. 2017),
human behavior forecasting (Rhinehart and Kitani 2017),
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11116

