The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Style-Content Duality of Attractiveness:
Learning to Write Eye-Catching Headlines via Disentanglement
Mingzhe Li 1, 2,∗ , Xiuying Chen 1, 2,∗ , Min Yang 3 , Shen Gao 1 , Dongyan Zhao 1, 2 , Rui Yan 4,5, †
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University,Beijing,China
2
Center for Data Science, AAIS, Peking University,Beijing,China
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
5
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
{li mingzhe,xy-chen,shengao,zhaody}@pku.edu.cn, min.yang@siat.ac.cn, ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Eye-catching headlines function as the first device to trigger
more clicks, bringing reciprocal effect between producers and
viewers. Producers can obtain more traffic and profits, and
readers can have access to outstanding articles. When generating attractive headlines, it is important to not only capture the
attractive content but also follow an eye-catching written style.
In this paper, we propose a Disentanglement-based Attractive
Headline Generator (DAHG) that generates headline which
captures the attractive content following the attractive style.
Concretely, we first devise a disentanglement module to divide
the style and content of an attractive prototype headline into
latent spaces, with two auxiliary constraints to ensure the two
spaces are indeed disentangled. The latent content information
is then used to further polish the document representation and
help capture the salient part. Finally, the generator takes the
polished document as input to generate headline under the
guidance of the attractive style. Extensive experiments on the
public Kuaibao dataset show that DAHG achieves state-ofthe-art performance. Human evaluation also demonstrates that
DAHG triggers 22% more clicks than existing models.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of information spreading throughout
the Internet, readers get drown in the sea of documents, and
will only pay attention to those articles with attractive headlines that can catch their eyes at first sight. On one hand,
generating headlines that can trigger high click-rate is especially important for different avenues and forms of media to
compete for user’s limited attention. On the other hand, only
with the help of a good headline, can the outstanding article
be discovered by readers.
To generate better headlines, we first analyze what makes
the headlines attractive. By surveying hundreds of headlines
of popular websites, we found that one important feature
that influences the attractiveness of a headline is its content.
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Rui Yan (ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn)
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13252

For example, when reporting the same event, the headline
“Happy but not knowing danger: Children in India play on the
poisonous foam beach” wins over 1000 page views, while the
headline “Chennai beach was covered with white foam for
four days in India” only has 387 readers. The popular headline highlights the fact that “the beach is poisonous and affects children”, which will concern more people than “white
foam”. On the other hand, the style of the headline also has
a huge impact on attractiveness. For example, the headline
“Only two people scored thousand in the history of NBA Finals” attracts fewer people than the headline “How hard is
it to get 1000 points in the NBA finals? Only two people in
history!”, due to its conversational style that makes readers
feel the need to see the answer to this question.
Most of the recent researches regard the headline generation task merely as a typical summarization task (Shu et al.
2018). This is not sufficient because a good headline should
not only capture the most relevant content of an article but
also be attractive to the reader. However, attractive headline
generation tasks were paid less attention by researchers. Xu
et al. (2019) tackle this task by adversarial training, using an
attractiveness score module to guide the summarization process. Jin et al. (2020) introduce a parameter sharing scheme
to disentangle the attractive style from the attractive text.
However, previous works neglect the fact that attractiveness
is not just about style, but also about content.
Based on the above analysis, we propose a model
named Disentanglement-based Attractive Headline Generation (DAHG), which learns to write attractive headlines from
both style and content perspectives. These two attractiveness
attributes are learned from an attractive prototype headline,
i.e., the headline of the document in the training dataset that
is most similar to the input document. First, DAHG separates
the attractive style and content of the prototype headline into
latent spaces, with two auxiliary constraints to ensure the two
spaces are indeed disentangled. Second, the learned attractive content space is utilized to iteratively polish the input
document, emphasizing the parts in the document that are attractive. Finally, the decoder generates an attractive headline
from the polished input document representation under the

