The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Learning of Discourse Structures using a Tree Autoencoder
Patrick Huber, Giuseppe Carenini
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC, Canada
{huberpat, carenini}@cs.ubc.ca

oration)1 . While both discourse theories are of great value
to the field of NLP, and have stimulated much progress in
discourse parsing, there are major drawbacks when data is
annotated according to these theories:
(1) Since both theories rely on annotation-guidelines rather
than data-driven algorithms, the human factor plays a substantial role in generating treebanks, posing a difficult task
on linguistic experts. In this work, we are eliminating the human component from the annotation process by employing
a data-driven approach to generate discourse trees directly
from natural language, capturing commonly occurring phenomena in an unsupervised manner.
(2) The annotation process following human-generated
guidelines, especially following the RST discourse theory, is
expensive and tedious, as the annotation itself requires linguistic expertise and a full understanding of the complete
document. This limits available RST-style discourse corpora
in both, size and number of domains where gold-standard
datasets exist. Using an automated, data-driven approach as
described in this paper allows us to crucially expand the size
and domain-coverage of datasets annotated with RST-style
discourse structures.
With the rapidly growing need for robust and general discourse structures for many downstream tasks and real-world
applications (e.g. Gerani et al. (2014); Nejat, Carenini, and
Ng (2017); Ji and Smith (2017); Xiao, Huber, and Carenini
(2020); Huber and Carenini (2020a)), the current lack of
high-quality, high-quantity discourse treebanks poses a severe shortcoming.
Fortunately, more data-driven alternatives to infer discourse structures have been previously proposed. For example, our recently published MEGA-DT discourse treebank
(Huber and Carenini 2020b) with automatically inferred discourse structures and nuclearity attributes from large-scale
sentiment datasets already reached state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on the inter-domain discourse parsing task.
Similarly, Liu and Lapata (2018) infer latent discourse trees
from the text classification task, and Liu, Titov, and Lapata
(2019) employ the downstream task of summarization using a transformer model to generate discourse trees. Outside
the area of discourse parsing, syntactic trees have previously

Abstract
Discourse information, as postulated by popular discourse
theories, such as RST and PDTB, has been shown to improve an increasing number of downstream NLP tasks, showing positive effects and synergies of discourse with important real-world applications. While methods for incorporating
discourse become more and more sophisticated, the growing
need for robust and general discourse structures has not been
sufficiently met by current discourse parsers, usually trained
on small scale datasets in a strictly limited number of domains. This makes the prediction for arbitrary tasks noisy and
unreliable. The overall resulting lack of high-quality, highquantity discourse trees poses a severe limitation to further
progress. In order the alleviate this shortcoming, we propose
a new strategy to generate tree structures in a task-agnostic,
unsupervised fashion by extending a latent tree induction
framework with an auto-encoding objective. The proposed
approach can be applied to any tree-structured objective, such
as syntactic parsing, discourse parsing and others. However,
due to the especially difficult annotation process to generate discourse trees, we initially develop a method to generate
larger and more diverse discourse treebanks. In this paper we
are inferring general tree structures of natural text in multiple
domains, showing promising results on a diverse set of tasks.

Introduction
Discourse Parsing is a key Natural Language Processing
(NLP) task for processing multi-sentential text. Most research in the area focuses on one of the two main discourse theories – RST (Mann and Thompson 1988) or
PDTB (Prasad et al. 2008). The latter thereby postulates
shallow discourse structures, combining adjacent sentences
and mainly focuses on explicit and implicit discourse connectives. The RST discourse theory, on the other hand,
proposes discourse trees over complete documents in a
constituency-style manner, with tree leaves as so called Elementary Discourse Units (or EDUs), representing span-like
sentence fragments. Internal tree-nodes encode discourse relations between sub-trees as a tuple of {Nuclearity, Relation}, where the nuclearity defines the sub-tree salience in
the local context, and the relation further specifies the type
of relationship between the binary child nodes (e.g. Elab-

1
We only generate plain discourse structures in this work, not
considering nuclearity and relation labels.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13107

