The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Student Knowledge Prediction for Teacher-Student Interaction
Seonghun Kim, Woojin Kim, Yeonju Jang, Seongyune Choi, Heeseok Jung, Hyeoncheol Kim
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
{ryankim0409,woojinkim1021,spring0425,csyun213,poco2889,harrykim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
The constraint in sharing the same physical learning environment with students in distance learning poses difficulties
to teachers. A significant teacher-student interaction without
observing students’ academic status is undesirable in the constructivist view on education. To remedy teachers’ hardships
in estimating students’ knowledge state, we propose a Student Knowledge Prediction Framework that models and explains student’s knowledge state for teachers. The knowledge
state of a student is modeled to predict the future mastery
level on a knowledge concept. The proposed framework is
integrated into an e-learning application as a measure of automated feedback. We verified the applicability of the assessment framework through an expert survey. We anticipate that
the proposed framework will achieve active teacher-student
interaction by informing student knowledge state to teachers
in distance learning.

Figure 1: A screenshot of a landing page of the Toc-Toc
Math Expedition e-learning platform (left). A screenshot of
the student analysis page (right). The predicted student test
scores and suggestions for learning are generated using our
framework.

While the ideal learning of constructivism advocates for
active teacher-student interaction, distance learning contradicts constructivism with asynchronous teacher-student interaction. The constraint impedes teachers from thoroughly
understanding the knowledge state of students. It may be
demanding for teachers to provide suitable assignments depending on the students’ knowledge state, which creates difficulty in supporting students with meaningful feedback on
their academic performance.
There have been attempts to overcome the downside of
distance learning. However, these approaches are limited to
stimulating peer-to-peer interaction through online discussions (Bates 2008) or supporting knowledge construction
of students through quality online instructions (Ally 2004).
These approaches provide measures to remedy distance
learning’s side effects but do not present student knowledge
to teachers. Since an immediate understanding of the student knowledge state is restrained in distance learning due
to the limited teacher-student interaction time, it is necessary
to provide students’ current knowledge state for teachers to
apply in their teaching and learning methods.
We propose a Student Knowledge Prediction Framework
using Machine Learning models, and an eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) (Gunning 2017) method that models
and explains a student’s knowledge state. We used Machine
Learning models, the XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin 2016),
and the Deep Knowledge Tracing (DKT) (Piech et al. 2015)
to model the student’s current knowledge state and present
the predicted performance of the student to the teacher. We
applied the Shapley Value (Lipovetsky and Conklin 2001)

Introduction
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic led to an unprecedented shift of educational paradigm due to the school
closures, affecting all stages of public education (Estellés
and Fischman 2020). The primary education environment
migrated to distance learning, where teachers and students
do not share the same physical space (Kaplan and Haenlein 2016). Features of distance learning are asynchronous
teacher-student interaction, technology for active communication, and online learning resources to facilitate the learning process.
Asynchronous teacher-student interaction of distance
learning disadvantages students since teachers cannot
closely monitor students’ current knowledge states relative
to face-to-face learning. The addressed limitations of distance learning become a barrier to student learning from
the perspective of constructivism. Constructivism assumes
the learner’s construction of knowledge based on his or her
past knowledge and experience (Liu and Chen 2010; Hoover
1996). Constructivism regards teacher-student interactions
(e.g., teacher’s feedback) and the assignment of meaningful
and appropriate learning tasks as essential components of
learning (Greeno et al. 1996).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15560

