The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predicting Forest Fire Using
Remote Sensing Data And Machine Learning
Suwei Yang, 1 Massimo Lupascu, 2 Kuldeep S. Meel 1
1

2

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
Department of Geography, National University of Singapore

Abstract

Banks 2011). If peatland forests are burnt, the stored carbon
would be released into the atmosphere as CO2, CH4, CO,
etc. Indonesia is estimated to have 28.1 gigatons of carbon
pool (Warren et al. 2017) in its peatlands. Whenever there is
a large scale forest fire, the effects are devastating as shown
by previous events of 1998, 2015 and 2019. In 2015, 4.6M
hectares were burned and 0.89 gigatons of carbon dioxide
equivalent were released (Lohberger et al. 2018).
Existing forest fire prediction systems mainly take a modeling approach and use handcrafted features to perform predictions (Stocks et al. 1989; MA 2004; San-Miguel-Ayanz
et al. 2012). One such existing system is the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System (Stocks et al. 1989), which is
designed to evaluate environmental factors that influence the
ignition, spread, and behavior of wildland fire. The system is
managed by the Canadian government and has been adopted
by other organizations around the world such as the New
Zealand Forest Service (Fogarty et al. 1998) and European
Commission which oversees the European Forest Fire Information System (EFFIS) (López, San-Miguel-Ayanz, and
Burgan 2002).
Modeling-based approaches with handcrafted features
and closed-form equations suffer from two drawbacks.
Firstly, comprehensive fire prediction models have to deal
with numerous weather-related and soil variables and their
complex inter-relationships. It is difficult to describe all
these intricate relationships with a set of mathematical
equations. Consequently, scientists working on fire prediction systems approximate relationships between various
weather-related factors by introducing simplifying assumptions (Kloprogge, van der Sluijs, and Petersen 2011). This
might lead to a lack of robustness in the predictions, requiring system recalibration according to different deployment environments. Secondly, the models tend to rely on
data from instruments on the ground and this leads to high
operating costs. For example, the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System operates on data from over 750 weather
stations on the ground. Operating a similar system may be
challenging in terms of cost for a developing country such
as Indonesia. In light of the previously mentioned drawbacks coupled with recent advances in machine learning
techniques and availability of remote sensing data, we want
to answer Can machine-learning based techniques be used
for forest fire prediction using remote sensing data?

Over the last few decades, deforestation and climate change
have caused increasing number of forest fires. In Southeast
Asia, Indonesia has been the most affected country by tropical peatland forest fires. These fires have a significant impact
on the climate resulting in extensive health, social and economic issues. Existing forest fire prediction systems, such as
the Canadian Forest Fire Danger Rating System, are based on
handcrafted features and require installation and maintenance
of expensive instruments on the ground, which can be a challenge for developing countries such as Indonesia. We propose
a novel, cost-effective, machine-learning based approach that
uses remote sensing data to predict forest fires in Indonesia.
Our prediction model achieves more than 0.81 area under the
receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve, performing significantly better than the baseline approach which never exceeds 0.70 area under ROC curve on the same tasks. Our
model’s performance remained above 0.81 area under ROC
curve even when evaluated with reduced data. The results
support our claim that machine-learning based approaches
can lead to reliable and cost-effective forest fire prediction
systems.

1

Introduction

Over the last few decades, forest fires, especially peatland
forest fires, have been a major environmental issue in Southeast Asia, with significant impacts on the atmosphere, carbon cycle and various ecosystem services (Page et al. 2009).
Forest fires can affect a large portion of the population, causing economic difficulties and disruption to businesses and
short and long term health problems (Jaafar and Loh 2014;
Chisholm, Wijedasa, and Swinfield 2016; Huijnen et al.
2016; Stockwell et al. 2016). The smoke and haze produced
by the fires can also cause disruptions and economic losses
to neighbouring countries in hundreds of millions (Doerr
and Santı́n 2016; World Bank 2016). Thus it is important to
be able to predict forest fires and take mitigating measures
to reduce their devastating impacts.
We focus on Indonesia because it accounts for 83% of
total peatland forests by area in Southeast Asia (Page and
Rieley 2016). Peatland forests are important primarily because of their function as carbon storage (Page, Rieley, and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14983

