The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SHOT-VAE: Semi-supervised Deep Generative Models
With Label-aware ELBO Approximations
Hao-Zhe Feng,1 Kezhi Kong,2 Minghao Chen1
Tianye Zhang,1 Minfeng Zhu,1 Wei Chen1 *
1
Zhejiang University
University of Maryland, College Park
{fenghz, chenminghao, zhangtianye1026, minfeng zhu, chenvis}@zju.edu.cn, kong@cs.umd.edu
2

Abstract

et al. 2017). To address this problem, existing works introduce prior knowledge that needs to be set manually, e.g.,
the stacked VAE structure (M1+M2, Kingma et al. 2014;
Davidson et al. 2018), the prior domain knowledge (Louizos
et al. 2016; Ilse et al. 2019) and mutual information bounds
(Dupont 2018).
In this study, we investigate the training process of semisupervised VAE with extensive experiments and propose
two possible causes of the problem. (1) First, the ELBO cannot utilize label information directly. In the semi-supervised
VAE framework (Kingma et al. 2014), the classification loss
and ELBO learn from the labels and unlabeled data separately, making it difficult to improve the inference accuracy
with ELBO. (2) Second, an “ELBO bottleneck” exists, and
continuing to optimize the ELBO after a certain bottleneck
value will not improve inference accuracy. Thus, we propose
SmootH-ELBO Optimal InTerpolation VAE (SHOT-VAE)
to solve the “good ELBO, bad performance” problem without requiring additional prior knowledge, which offers the
following contributions:
• The smooth-ELBO objective that integrates the classification loss into ELBO.
We derive a new ELBO approximation named smoothELBO with the label-smoothing technique (Müller et al.
2019). Theoretically, we prove that the smooth-ELBO integrates the classification loss into ELBO. Then, we empirically show that a better inference accuracy can be
achieved with smooth-ELBO.
• The margin approximation that breaks the ELBO bottleneck.
We propose an approximation of the margin between the
real data distribution and the one from ELBO. The approximation is based on the optimal interpolation in data
space and latent space. In practice, we show this optimal interpolation approximation (OT-approximation) can
break the ”ELBO bottleneck” and achieve a better inference accuracy.
• Good semi-supervised performance.
We evaluate SHOT-VAE on 4 benchmark datasets and the
results show that our model achieves good performance
with 25.30% error rate on CIFAR-100 with 10k labels and
reduces the error rate to 6.11% on CIFAR-10 with 4k labels. Moreover, we find it can get strong results even with

Semi-supervised variational autoencoders (VAEs) have obtained strong results, but have also encountered the challenge
that good ELBO values do not always imply accurate inference results. In this paper, we investigate and propose two
causes of this problem: (1) The ELBO objective cannot utilize
the label information directly. (2) A bottleneck value exists,
and continuing to optimize ELBO after this value will not
improve inference accuracy. On the basis of the experiment
results, we propose SHOT-VAE to address these problems
without introducing additional prior knowledge. The SHOTVAE offers two contributions: (1) A new ELBO approximation named smooth-ELBO that integrates the label predictive
loss into ELBO. (2) An approximation based on optimal interpolation that breaks the ELBO value bottleneck by reducing the margin between ELBO and the data likelihood. The
SHOT-VAE achieves good performance with 25.30% error
rate on CIFAR-100 with 10k labels and reduces the error rate
to 6.11% on CIFAR-10 with 4k labels.

Introduction
Most deep learning models are trained with large labeled
datasets via supervised learning. However, in many scenarios, although acquiring a large amount of original data is
easy, obtaining corresponding labels is often costly or even
infeasible (Wei et al. 2020). Thus, semi-supervised variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma et al. 2014) is proposed
to address this problem by training classifiers with multiple
unlabeled data and a small fraction of labeled data.
Based on the latent variable assumption (Doersch 2016),
semi-supervised VAE models combine the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) and the classification loss as objective, so
that it can not only learn the required classification representations from labeled data, but also capture the disentangled factors which could be used for data generation. Although semi-supervised VAE models have obtained strong
empirical results on many benchmark datasets (e.g. MNIST,
SVHN, Yale B) (Narayanaswamy et al. 2017), it still encounters one common problem that good ELBO values
do not always imply accurate inference results (Zhao
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7413

