The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal Pyramid Network for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction with
Multi-Supervision
Rongqin Liang,1 Yuanman Li,1,∗ Xia Li,1 Yi Tang,1 Jiantao Zhou,2 Wenbin Zou1
1

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, College of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Shenzhen University
2
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City, Department of Computer and Information Science, University of
Macau
1810262064@email.szu.edu.cn, {yuanmanli, lixia, yitang, wzou}@szu.edu.cn, jtzhou@um.edu.mo
Abstract

Jointly modeling the complex social behaviors is rather challenging in reality.
Traditional pedestrian trajectory prediction algorithms
heavily rely on the handcrafted rules to describe human motions (Helbing and Molnar 1995; Pellegrini et al. 2009),
which are difficult to generalize in complex new scenes. Recently, the data-driven based algorithms have received significant attention in the community. Among them, RNN and
its variant LSTM have been widely adopted. Social-LSTM
(Alahi et al. 2016) as one of the earliest works on pedestrian
trajectory prediction, encoded the motion information using
a recurrent network. CIDNN (Xu, Piao, and Gao 2018) considered different importance of persons to a target pedestrian
in a crowd interaction module. The recent works PIF (Liang
et al. 2019) and SR-LSTM (Zhang et al. 2019) enhanced the
performance of Social-LSTM by taking the scene context
as side information. Though the RNN architecture endowed
above methods to learn and predict trajectories in a datadriven manner, they failed to capture the multimodal nature
of human.
In order to produce multiple socially-acceptable trajectories, some researchers suggested constructing the recurrent
models with generative settings, which led to learning the
distribution of the future trajectory rather than directly generating a deterministic path (Gupta et al. 2018; van der Heiden et al. 2019; Li, Ma, and Tomizuka 2019; Zhao et al.
2019; Xue, Huynh, and Reynolds 2019; Haddad et al. 2019).
Social-GAN (Gupta et al. 2018) is the pioneering trajectory prediction work incorporating the LSTM model with
the generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014), permitting to produce multiple plausible trajectories. SoPhie (Sadeghian et al. 2019) improved socialGAN through a scene feature extraction component. Some
researchers proposed to use graph to model the social interactions (Ma et al. 2019; Vemula, Muelling, and Oh 2018;
Kosaraju et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2019a; Ivanovic and
Pavone 2019; Shi et al. 2020; Mohamed et al. 2020). For
example, the most recent work Social-STGCNN (Mohamed
et al. 2020) modeled trajectories using the spatio-temporal
graph convolution neural network, and achieved promising
performance.
Though trajectory prediction has been studied from many
aspects, all the existing methods encoded and decoded the

Predicting human motion behavior in a crowd is important
for many applications, ranging from the natural navigation of
autonomous vehicles to intelligent security systems of video
surveillance. All the previous works model and predict the
trajectory with a single resolution, which is relatively ineffective and difficult to simultaneously exploit the long-range
information (e.g., the destination of the trajectory), and the
short-range information (e.g., the walking direction and speed
at a certain time) of the motion behavior. In this paper, we
propose a temporal pyramid network for pedestrian trajectory
prediction through a squeeze modulation and a dilation modulation. Our hierarchical framework builds a feature pyramid with increasingly richer temporal information from top
to bottom, which can better capture the motion behavior at
various tempos. Furthermore, we propose a coarse-to-fine fusion strategy with multi-supervision. By progressively merging the top coarse features of global context to the bottom
fine features of rich local context, our method can fully exploit both the long-range and short-range information of the
trajectory. Experimental results on two benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our method. Our code and models
will be available upon acceptance.

Introduction
Modeling the behaviors of pedestrians is an essential step for
many applications, including self-driving platforms for safe
decision making (Liang et al. 2019), socially-aware robots
for natural navigation (Monfort, Liu, and Ziebart 2015) and
surveillance systems to identify suspicious activities (Bastani, Marcenaro, and Regazzoni 2016). Trajectory prediction
as one of the most important future behavior modeling tasks,
aims to predict possible future trajectories according to historical paths in the last few seconds (Alahi et al. 2016; Gupta
et al. 2018; Mohamed et al. 2020; Xu, Yang, and Du 2020).
Despite its importance, predicting the trajectory is very challenging due to the inherent properties of pedestrians. First,
human motions are highly multimodal, which means that
there could be several socially-acceptable and distinct future
behaviors under the same historical trajectory. Second, human motions are highly affected by the people around them,
∗

The corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2029

