The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Depth Privileged Object Detection in Indoor Scenes via Deformation Hallucination
Zhijie Zhang, Yan Liu, Junjie Chen, Li Niu* , Liqing Zhang*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zzj506506, loseover, chen.bys, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
R-branch

RGB-D object detection has achieved significant advance, because depth provides complementary geometric information
to RGB images. Considering that depth images are unavailable in some scenarios, we focus on depth privileged object detection in indoor scenes, where the depth images are
only available in the training stage. Under this setting, one
prevalent research line is modality hallucination, in which
depth image and depth feature are common hallucination targets. In contrast, we choose to hallucinate depth deformation,
which benefits a lot from rich geometric information in depth
data. Specifically, we employ the deformable convolutional
layer with augmented offsets to perform geometric deformation, because the offsets enable flexibly sampling over the object and transforming to a canonical shape for ease of object
detection. In addition, we design a quality-based weighted
transfer loss to avoid negative transfer of depth deformation.
Experimental results on NYUDv2 and SUN RGB-D demonstrate the effectiveness of our method against the state-of-theart methods for depth privileged object detection.

Backbone

cls
reg

FPN

H-branch

Transfer Deformation

Backbone

FPN

D-branch

Figure 1: The overview of our framework. In the training stage, the geometric deformation is transferred from Dbranch to H-branch. In the testing stage without depth, Hbranch hallucinates the depth deformation to complement Rbranch. D-branch is pre-trained and frozen. The red squares
represent sampling locations.

line is modality hallucination. For instance, Hoffman et al.
(2016) used RGB input to hallucinate intermediate features
learned from depth modality, which can function as the unavailable depth modality during testing. Analogously, Cao
et al. (2016) directly hallucinated depth images to complement RGB images. Compared with modality hallucination,
multi-task learning implicitly distills knowledge from depth
images and depends on the relevance of multiple tasks, so we
tend to follow the research line of modality hallucination.
Modality hallucination requires an appropriate target to
hallucinate. The depth image chosen in (Cao, Shen, and
Shen 2016) and the depth feature chosen in (Hoffman,
Gupta, and Darrell 2016) have many redundancies and may
be difficult to hallucinate. In contrast, in this paper, we propose to hallucinate an elegant yet informative target: geometric deformation. On the one hand, the geometric deformation explicitly fits the object shape and transforms to
a canonical shape, which has shown a great advantage in
the object detection task (Dai et al. 2017; Zhu et al. 2019).
On the other hand, the geometric deformation learned from
RGB images is often confused by cluttered colors, which
can be mitigated by exploiting the rich geometric information from depth images. We refer to the deformation learned
from RGB (resp., depth) input as RGB (resp., depth) defor-

Introduction
Object detection in indoor scenes is a fundamental yet challenging step towards scene understanding. Up to now, cluttered objects remain difficult to be detected due to the large
variations (e.g., occlusion and illumination) in appearances
and boundaries. Fortunately, depth images provide colorinsensitive information in representing objects and boundaries, and the advantage of depth images for object detection
has been demonstrated in (Cadena and Košecka 2015; Gupta
et al. 2014; Li et al. 2018). However, depth data is not always
available because depth sensors are much less prevalent than
RGB capturing devices. To this end, we consider depth privileged object detection, in which depth (i.e., the privileged
information (Vapnik and Vashist 2009)) is only available in
the training stage yet unavailable in the testing stage.
As far as we know, there are only a few works on depthprivileged object detection. One research line is multi-task
learning. For example, ROCK (Mordan et al. 2018) simultaneously performed object detection and depth prediction, so
that the intermediate features are enriched. Another research
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3456

