The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

JEL: Applying End-to-End Neural Entity Linking in JPMorgan Chase
Wanying Ding, Vinay K. Chaudhri, Naren Chittar, Krishna Konakanchi
JPMorgan Chase & Co.
{wanying.ding, vinay.chaudhri, naren.chittar}@jpmchase.com, krishna.k.konakanchi@chase.com

Abstract
Knowledge Graphs have emerged as a compelling abstraction for capturing key relationship among the entities of interest to enterprises and for integrating data from heterogeneous sources. JPMorgan Chase (JPMC) is leading this trend
by leveraging knowledge graphs across the organization for
multiple mission critical applications such as risk assessment,
fraud detection, investment advice, etc. A core problem in
leveraging a knowledge graph is to link mentions (e.g., company names) that are encountered in textual sources to entities in the knowledge graph. Although several techniques
exist for entity linking, they are tuned for entities that exist in Wikipedia, and fail to generalize for the entities that
are of interest to an enterprise. In this paper, we propose a
novel end-to-end neural entity linking model (JEL) that uses
minimal context information and a margin loss to generate
entity embeddings, and a Wide & Deep Learning model to
match character and semantic information respectively. We
show that JEL achieves the state-of-the-art performance to
link mentions of company names in financial news with entities in our knowledge graph. We report on our efforts to
deploy this model in the company-wide system to generate
alerts in response to financial news. The methodology used
for JEL is directly applicable and usable by other enterprises
who need entity linking solutions for data that are unique to
their respective situations.

Introduction
Knowledge Graphs are being used for a wide range of
applications from space, journalism, biomedicine to entertainment, network security, and pharmaceuticals. Within JP
Morgan Chase (JPMC), we are leveraging knowledge graphs
for financial applications such as risk management, supply chain analysis, strategy implementation, fraud detection, investment advice, etc. While leveraging a knowledge
graph, Entity Linking (EL) is a central task for semantic
text understanding and information extraction. As defined in
many studies (Zhang et al. 2010; Eshel et al. 2017; Kolitsas,
Ganea, and Hofmann 2018), in an EL task we link a potentially ambiguous Mention (such as a company name) with
its corresponding Entity in a knowledge graph. EL can facilitate several knowledge graph applications, for example,
the mentions of company names in the news are inherently

ambiguous, and by relating such mentions with an internal
knowledge graph, we can generate valuable alerts for financial analysts. In Figure 1, we show a concrete example in
which the name “Lumier” has been mentioned in two different news items. “Lumier”s are two different companies in
the real world, and their positive financial activities should
be brought to the attention of different stakeholders. With a
successful EL engine, these two mentions of “Lumier”s can
be distinguished and linked to their corresponding entities in
a knowledge graph.
Prior work on EL has been driven by a number of standard datasets, such as CoNLYAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and
Weikum 2007), TAC KBP1 , DBpedia2 , and ACE3 . These
datasets are based on Wikipedia, and are therefore, naturally
coherent, well-structured and rich in context (Eshel et al.
2017). We face the following problems when we use these
methods for entity linking for our internal knowledge graph:
1) Wikipedia does not cover all the entities of financial interest. For example, as of this writing, the startup “Lumier”
mentioned in Figure 1 is not present in Wikipedia, but it
is of high financial interest as it has raised critical investment from famous investors.
2) Lack of context information. Many pre-trained models
achieve great performance by leveraging rich context data
from Wikipedia (Ganea and Hofmann 2017). For JPMC
internal data, we do not have information comparable to
Wikipedia to support re-training or fine-tuning of existing
models.
To address the problems identified above, we built a novel
entity linking system, JEL, to link mentions of company
names in text to entities in our own knowledge graph. Our
model makes the following advancements on the current
state-of-the-art:
1) We do not rely on Wikipedia to generate entity embeddings. With minimum context information, we compute
entity embeddings by training a Margin Loss function.
2) We deploy the Wide & Deep Learning (Cheng et al. 2016)
to match character and semantic information respectively.
1

https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/collaborations/currentprojects/tac-kbp
2
https://wiki.dbpedia.org/develop/datasets
3
https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2006T06

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15301

