The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Are Adversarial Examples Created Equal?
A Learnable Weighted Minimax Risk for Robustness under Non-uniform Attacks
Huimin Zeng1∗ , Chen Zhu2∗ , Tom Goldstein2 , Furong Huang2
1

Technical University of Munich
University of Maryland, College Park
huimin.zeng@tum.de, {chenzhu,tomg,furongh}@cs.umd.edu
2

Abstract

mada, and Negahban 2018; Zhang et al. 2019a,b), adversarial training has demonstrated great success in the attackdefense game.
A major issue with adversarial training is that it seeks
a model that is robust to adversarial perturbations on the
training set. Adversarial training attempts to solve a robust optimization problem against a point-wise adversary
that independently perturbs each example(Staib and Jegelka
2017). The traditional optimization objective is usually (unweighted) average of robust losses over all training data
points; the robust loss for each training data point is evaluated on adversarial example that is independently generated
for each training data point
h
i
E(x,y)∼Dn robust loss(f, x, y, )
(1)

Adversarial Training is proved to be an efficient method to
defend against adversarial examples, being one of the few
defenses that withstand strong attacks. However, traditional
defense mechanisms assume a uniform attack over the examples according to the underlying data distribution, which is
apparently unrealistic as the attacker could choose to focus
on more vulnerable examples. We present a weighted minimax risk optimization that defends against non-uniform attacks, achieving robustness against adversarial examples under perturbed test data distributions. Our modified risk considers importance weights of different adversarial examples
and focuses adaptively on harder examples that are wrongly
classified or at higher risk of being classified incorrectly. The
designed risk allows the training process to learn a strong defense through optimizing the importance weights. The experiments show that our model significantly improves state-ofthe-art adversarial accuracy under non-uniform attacks without a significant drop under uniform attacks.

where Dn is the empirical distribution and the
robust loss(f, x, y, ) could be any loss function that
characterizes the risk of mis-classification of adversarial
examples under the threat model of bounded  perturbation
on the input (x, y) to f (For instance, the 0-1 robust loss is
1{∃kδk ≤ , s.t. f (x + δ)y ≤ 0}).
This robust error in Equation (1) treats the adversarial examples generated around different training data points as
equally important when optimizing the training objective. In
other words, the training objective assumes that an attacker
chooses to attack the input examples uniformly, regardless
of how close these examples are to the decision boundary.
As a result, the above robust error would fail to measure
security against an attacker who focuses on the more vulnerable examples. As shown in Figure 1, the data points that
are closer to decision boundary, are more vulnerable to attacks, since the attacker needs a relatively smaller perturbation to move them to wrong side of the decision boundary.
Therefore, we aim to design robust neural networks against
non-uniform attacks.

Introduction
It is widely known that deep neural networks could be vulnerable to adversarially perturbed input examples (Szegedy
et al. 2013; Huang et al. 2017). Having strong defenses
against such attacks is of value, especially in high-stakes
applications such as autonomous driving and financial
credit/risk analysis. Adversarial defenses aim to learn a classifier that performs well on both the “clean” input examples
(accuracy) and the adversarial examples (robustness) (Zhang
et al. 2019b). Despite a large literature on studying adversarial defenses in machine learning, computer vision, natural language processing and more, one of the few defenses
against adversarial attacks that withstands strong attacks is
adversarial training (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Kannan,
Kurakin, and Goodfellow 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and
Bengio 2016; Shaham, Yamada, and Negahban 2018). In
adversarial training, adversarial examples generated via a
chosen attack algorithm are included in the training on the
fly. As is shown in many works (Carlini and Wagner 2017;
Kannan, Kurakin, and Goodfellow 2018; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016; Shafahi et al. 2019b; Shaham, Ya-

Our methodology Motivated by the idea that not all adversarial examples are equally important, we propose a
novel weighted minimax risk for adversarial training that
achieves both robustness against adversarial examples and
accuracy for clean data examples. Our modified risk considers importance weights of different adversarial examples and
adaptively focuses on vulnerable examples that are wrongly

∗

Equal Contributions
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10815

