The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Composite Adversarial Attacks
Xiaofeng Mao1 , Yuefeng Chen1 , Shuhui Wang2 * , Hang Su3 , Yuan He1 , Hui Xue 1
1

Alibaba Group, 2 Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS
3
Tsinghua University
{mxf164419, yuefeng.chenyf}@alibaba-inc.com, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, suhangss@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

70

Abstract
Adversarial attack is a technique for deceiving Machine
Learning (ML) models, which provides a way to evaluate the
adversarial robustness. In practice, attack algorithms are artificially selected and tuned by human experts to break a ML
system. However, manual selection of attackers tends to be
sub-optimal, leading to a mistakenly assessment of model security. In this paper, a new procedure called Composite Adversarial Attack (CAA) is proposed for automatically searching the best combination of attack algorithms and their hyperparameters from a candidate pool of 32 base attackers. We
design a search space where attack policy is represented as
an attacking sequence, i.e., the output of the previous attacker is used as the initialization input for successors. Multiobjective NSGA-II genetic algorithm is adopted for finding
the strongest attack policy with minimum complexity. The
experimental result shows CAA beats 10 top attackers on 11
diverse defenses with less elapsed time (6 × faster than AutoAttack), and achieves the new state-of-the-art on l∞ , l2 and
unrestricted adversarial attacks.

FGSM
PGD
CWLinf
ODI-PGD
Square
BIM

Robust Accuracy

65

MIM
MultiTargeted
DeepFool
APGD
FAB

AutoAttack
SPSA
CAA-1
CAA-5
CAA-7

60

55

50
Ours (CAA-1)
0

1000

2000

Ours (CAA-5)
3000

4000

Total number of gradient evaluation

5000

Ours
(CAA-7)
6000

Figure 1: Comparison between CAA and state-of-the-art
attackers on CIFAR-10 adversarial training model. CAAn represents the CAA attack with n restarts. Our method
achieves the best attack performance only with a small number of gradient evaluation.

Introduction
DNNs are vulnerable towards adversarial attacks, which aim
to fool a well trained model by producing imperceptibly perturbed examples. This serious security implication quickly
attracted a lot of attention from the machine learning community. With in-depth study of adversarial examples, a lot of
attack algorithms are proposed to validate the adversarial robustness. Meanwhile, several open source toolboxes, such as
Cleverhans (Papernot et al. 2016), FoolBox (Rauber, Brendel, and Bethge 2017) or AdverTorch (Ding, Wang, and Jin
2019), are developed and integrating most existing attack algorithms. All of them provide user friendly interface for attacking a model conveniently and quickly.
However, even if well-designed toolboxes are developed,
it still needs a lot of user experience or manual tuning of
hyper-parameters for attacking a model, especially when we
do not know the details of the defense mechanism. This userdependent characteristic also makes it hard for instrumentalization of adversarial attacks. On the other hand, manually selecting attackers is somewhat tendentious and suboptimal. It may arouse a mistakenly assessment of model

security, e.g., a well-known false sense of security is gradient obfuscation, which leads to illusory defense for gradientbased attacks.
In order to perform more comprehensive and stronger attacks, we first propose to automate the attack process by
searching an effective attack policy from a collection of attack algorithms. We name this procedure as Composite Adversarial Attacks (CAA). To demonstrate the key idea of
CAA, an example is presented in Fig. 2. Suppose that there
are two candidate ways of attacks, i.e., Spatial attack (Engstrom et al. 2019) and FGSM attack (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2014), the goal is choosing one or more of them
to compose a stronger attack policy. In Fig. 2 (b), the simplest way is selecting the best single attack as the final policy. However, single attacker is always not strong and generalized enough as shown in previous works (Tramèr and
Boneh 2019). A more promising solution (Croce and Hein
2020) is to find multiple attackers, and then ensemble them
by choosing the best output constantly that can successfully
fool the model (Fig. 2 (c)). Although higher attack success

* Shuhui Wang is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8884

