The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Counterfactual Fairness with Disentangled Causal Effect Variational Autoencoder
Hyemi Kim1 , Seungjae Shin1 , JoonHo Jang1 , Kyungwoo Song2 , Weonyoung Joo1 ,
Wanmo Kang3 and Il-Chul Moon1
1

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
2
Department of AI, University of Seoul, 3 Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST
{khm0308, tmdwo0910, adkto8093}@kaist.ac.kr, kyungwoo.song@uos.ac.kr, {es345, wanmo.kang, icmoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 0
𝑁𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤 𝐸𝑦𝑒𝑠 = 0
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ 𝑆𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑙𝑦 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛 = 0
𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒 = 0
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑑 = 0

𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 0
𝑁𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤 𝐸𝑦𝑒𝑠 = 0
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ 𝑆𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑙𝑦 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛 = 0
𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒 = 0
Q. What if she smile?
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑑 = 0

The problem of fair classification can be mollified if we develop a method to remove the embedded sensitive information from the classification features. This line of separating
the sensitive information is developed through the causal inference, and the causal inference enables the counterfactual
generations to contrast the what-if case of the opposite sensitive attribute. Along with this separation with the causality, a frequent assumption in the deep latent causal model
defines a single latent variable to absorb the entire exogenous uncertainty of the causal graph. However, we claim that
such structure cannot distinguish the 1) information caused
by the intervention (i.e., sensitive variable) and 2) information correlated with the intervention from the data. Therefore, this paper proposes Disentangled Causal Effect Variational Autoencoder (DCEVAE) to resolve this limitation by
disentangling the exogenous uncertainty into two latent variables: either 1) independent to interventions or 2) correlated
to interventions without causality. Particularly, our disentangling approach preserves the latent variable correlated to interventions in generating counterfactual examples. We show
that our method estimates the total effect and the counterfactual effect without a complete causal graph. By adding a fairness regularization, DCEVAE generates a counterfactual fair
dataset while losing less original information. Also, DCEVAE generates natural counterfactual images by only flipping
sensitive information. Additionally, we theoretically show the
differences in the covariance structures of DCEVAE and prior
works from the perspective of the latent disentanglement.

CEVAE

Real

Eye
glasses

Young

Bald
𝒅𝒆𝒔𝒄𝒆𝒏𝒅𝒂𝒏𝒕
𝒂𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒃𝒖𝒕𝒆𝒔
(𝒙𝒅 ) ∈ 𝑿

𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 1
𝑁𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤 𝐸𝑦𝑒𝑠 = 0
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ 𝑆𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑙𝑦 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛 = 0
𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒 = 0
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑑 = 0

𝒊𝒓𝒓𝒆𝒍𝒆𝒗𝒂𝒏𝒕
𝒂𝒕𝒕𝒓𝒊𝒃𝒖𝒕𝒆𝒔 (𝒙𝒓 ) ∈ 𝑿
Wearing
Male
Lipstick

Mustache
Mouth
Slightly
Open

Image
(𝒀)

Smiling
(𝒂)

mCEVAE
𝑆𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 1
𝑁𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑤 𝐸𝑦𝑒𝑠 = 0
𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡ℎ 𝑆𝑙𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑙𝑦 𝑂𝑝𝑒𝑛 = 1
𝑀𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒 = 0
𝐵𝑎𝑙𝑑 = 0

Narrow
Eyes

DCEVAE (Ours)

Figure 1: Counterfactual examples have a set of information
attributes that are either 1) maintained or 2) altered when the
intervention variable, a, is altered. For example, a counterfactually generated image for aSmiling = 0 should be labeled
as aSmiling = 1, and such change may cause the subsequent
change on descendant attributes of a, xd (i.e. Mouth Slightly
Open and Narrow Eyes) and maintaining the other attributes
intact, xr . CEVAE fails to change xd like Mouth Slightly
Open, while DCEVAE alters it. mCEVAE fails to maintain
attributes which is not caused by a, like hair color for the
counterfactual image, but DCEVAE maintains them.

sensitive variables, without prejudice. Then, the key question on the machine learning research becomes whether we
can separate such prejudices embedded in the data algorithmically or not.
Considering the prejudice by the sensitive variable, the
causal inference is an interesting tool to separate the factors
contributing to decision-making. The objective of causal inference is learning the causal effect of an intervention variable, a, on individual features, x, and an outcome, y. Here,
if we regard the intervention variable in causality as the sensitive variable in decision-making, the learning fairness can
be formulated as the causal inference task (Zhang, Wu, and
Wu 2018; Chiappa 2019; Wu, Zhang, and Wu 2019; Kilbertus et al. 2017). For example, a causal model estimates the
effect of sensitive variables, such as race and gender, on an
admission result (Kusner et al. 2017). Another study shows
a causal model enables a fair clinical risk prediction (Pfohl
et al. 2019). If we focus on modeling the exogenous uncertainty with Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Louizos et al.

Introduction
Machine learning has penetrated our lives so deep, and its
fairness and societal utilization have become a growing concern in our society (Aleo and Svirsky 2008; Kim, Ghorbani, and Zou 2019). The incident of COMPAS (Brennan,
Dieterich, and Ehret 2009) shows that the learning model
can be a source of unfairness in our judicial system by discriminating people by race. Given that the learners become
unfair only because of training data (Hardt, Price, and Srebro 2016), we ask the question of whether it is feasible to
correct its unfairness from the data or not. Particularly, our
concept of unfairness comes from our societal principle on
equal treatments across races, gender, religion, etc., a.k.a.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8128

