The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PANTHER: Pathway Augmented Nonnegative Tensor Factorization for
HighER-order Feature Learning
Yuan Luo∗ , Chengsheng Mao
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60611
{yuan.luo, chengsheng.mao}@northwestern.edu

Abstract

Genetic pathways are a valuable tool to assist in representing, understanding, and analyzing the complex interactions
between molecular mechanisms. The pathways encode genetic functions including regulations, genetic signaling, and
metabolic interactions. They have a wide range of applications including predicting cellular activity and inferring disease types and status. Individual pathways are themselves
part of the entire biological system and interact with each
other. For example, a signaling pathway sensing the environment may govern the expression of transcription factors in
another signaling pathway, which then controls the expression of proteins that play roles as enzymes in a metabolic
pathway. So it is important to model co-functioning molecular mechanisms (Alon 2019). Grouping pathways together
as features provides insights on interacting molecular mechanisms. Atomic features can potentially help to better correlate higher-order features (e.g., common genes help correlate pathways). Thus joint consideration of higher-order
features and atomic features is beneficial.
Clinicians often regard existing machine learning models
for genetics as hard-to-interpret black boxes. Existing machine learning approaches in genetics usually do not group
interacting genetic pathways together as features. In fact,
few machine learning algorithms jointly model higher-order
features and atomic features, and most algorithms adopt a
flat subject × feature matrix view. It is already challenging
to automate the exploration of interactions between atomicfeatures (for which a series of matrix and tensor factorization
methods were proposed (Wang and Zhang 2012; Kolda and
Bader 2009)), not to mention the exploration of interactions
between higher-order features. Although theoretically one
can add interactions as additional features or embed graphical models to account for feature interactions, the problem
quickly becomes intractable for multiple feature modalities
(e.g., higher-order and atomic features) and large feature dimensionality (e.g. at the genome scale).
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named
PANTHER: a Pathway Augmented Nonnegative Tensor
factorization for HighER-order feature learning to group
interacting higher-order genetic pathways as features. To
promote reproducibility, we share our source code at
https://github.com/yuanluo/panther. Contributions of this
paper are:

Genetic pathways usually encode molecular mechanisms that
can inform targeted interventions. It is often challenging for
existing machine learning approaches to jointly model genetic pathways (higher-order features) and variants (atomic
features), and present to clinicians interpretable models. In
order to build more accurate and better interpretable machine
learning models for genetic medicine, we introduce Pathway
Augmented Nonnegative Tensor factorization for HighERorder feature learning (PANTHER). PANTHER selects informative genetic pathways that directly encode molecular
mechanisms. We apply genetically motivated constrained tensor factorization to group pathways in a way that reflects
molecular mechanism interactions. We then train a softmax classifier for disease types using the identified pathway groups. We evaluated PANTHER against multiple stateof-the-art constrained tensor/matrix factorization models, as
well as group guided and Bayesian hierarchical models. PANTHER outperforms all state-of-the-art comparison models
significantly (p < 0.05). Our experiments on large scale Next
Generation Sequencing (NGS) and whole-genome genotyping datasets also demonstrated wide applicability of PANTHER. We performed feature analysis in predicting disease
types, which suggested insights and benefits of the identified
pathway groups.

Introduction
Genetic medicine aims to use similar patients’ genetic profiles to infer the disease status or the treatment options,
thus it is critical to accurately define patient similarity. Such
similarity can be captured not only by the atomic features
(e.g., genetic variants), but also by the higher-order features
(e.g., genetic pathways) describing the relationships among
the atomic features. Intuitively, the genetic pathways interact with each other and collectively drive pathogenesis, but
their knowledge largely relies on curation and is still evolving. In contrast, genetic variants are routinely analyzed for
robust statistical associations with diseases (Ellrott et al.
2018); however, they usually do not themselves correspond
to molecular mechanisms, which often leads to lack of functional interpretability.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• To our best knowledge, PANTHER is the first in jointly
371

