The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Turbocharging Treewidth-Bounded
Bayesian Network Structure Learning
Vaidyanathan Peruvemba Ramaswamy and Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
{vaidyanathan,sz}@ac.tuwien.ac.at

an optimal solution reasonably quickly with the exact method.
Although the basic idea sounds compelling and reasonably
simple, its realization requires several conceptual contributions and new results.
For the global solver, any heuristic algorithm for treewidthbounded BN learning, such as the recent algorithms
k-MAX (Scanagatta et al. 2018) or ETL (Benjumeda, Bielza,
and Larrañaga 2019). The local solver’s task is significantly
more complex than treewidth-bounded BN structure learning, as several additional constraints need to be incorporated.
Namely, it is not sufficient that the BN computed by the local
solver is acyclic. We need fortified acyclicity constraints that
prevent cycles that run through the other parts of the BN,
which have not been changed by the local solver. Similarly,
it is not sufficient that the local BN is of bounded treewidth.
We need fortified treewidth constraints that prevent the local
BN from introducing links between a diverse set of nodes
that, together with the other parts of the BN, which have not
been changed by the local solver, increase the treewidth.
Given these additional requirements, we propose a new
local solver BN-SLIM (SAT-based Local Improvement
Method), which satisfies the fortified constraints. We formulate a fortified version of the treewidth-bounded BN structure
learning problem. In Theorem 1, we show that we can express the fortified constraints with certain virtual arcs and
virtual edges. The virtual arcs represent directed paths that
run outside the local instance; with these virtual arcs we can
ensure fortified acyclicity. The virtual edges represent essential parts of a global tree decomposition using which we can
ensure bounded treewidth.
The new formulation of the local problem is well-suited to
be expressed as a MaxSAT (Maximum Satisfiability) problem
and hence allows us to harvest the power of state-of-the-art
MaxSAT solvers (which received a significant performance
gain over the last decade). A distinctive feature of our encoding is that, in contrast to the virtual edges, the virtual arcs are
conditional and depend on the local solver’s solution.

Abstract
We present a new approach for learning the structure of a
treewidth-bounded Bayesian Network (BN). The key to our
approach is applying an exact method (based on MaxSAT)
locally, to improve the score of a heuristically computed BN.
This approach allows us to scale the power of exact methods—
so far only applicable to BNs with several dozens of random
variables—to large BNs with several thousands of random
variables. Our experiments show that our method improves the
score of BNs provided by state-of-the-art heuristic methods,
often significantly.

Introduction
Bayesian network structure learning is the notoriously difficult problem of discovering a Bayesian network (BN) that
optimally represents a given set of training data (Chickering 2002). Since exact inference on a BN is exponential
in the BN’s treewidth (Kwisthout, Bodlaender, and van der
Gaag 2010), one is particularly interested in learning BNs
of bounded treewidth. However, learning a BN of bounded
treewidth that optimally fits the data (i.e., with the largest
possible score) is, in turn, an NP-hard task (Korhonen and
Parviainen 2013). This predicament caused the research on
treewidth-bounded BN structure learning to split into two
branches:
1. Heuristic Learning (see, e.g., Elidan and Gould (2009);
Nie, de Campos, and Ji (2015); Scanagatta et al. (2016,
2018); Benjumeda, Bielza, and Larrañaga (2019)), which
is scalable to large BNs with thousands of random variables but with a score that can be far from optimal, and
2. Exact Learning (see, e.g., Berg, Järvisalo, and Malone
(2014); Korhonen and Parviainen (2013); Parviainen, Farahani, and Lagergren (2014)), which learns optimal BNs
but is scalable only to a few dozen random variables.
In this paper, we combine heuristic and exact learning and
take the best of both worlds.
The basic idea for our approach is to first compute a BN
with a heuristic method (the global solver), and then to apply
an exact method (the local solver) to parts of the heuristic
solution. The parts are chosen small enough that they allow

Results. We implement BN-SLIM and evaluate it empirically on a large set of benchmark data sets, consisting between 64 and 10,000 random variables and for the treewidth
bounds 2, 5, and 8. As the global solver, we use the state-ofthe-art heuristic algorithms for treewidth-bounded BN learning k-MAX (Scanagatta et al. 2018), and two variants of ETL
(Benjumeda, Bielza, and Larrañaga 2019). k-MAX improves

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
3895

