The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weighting-based Variable Neighborhood Search for Optimal Camera Placement∗
Zhouxing Su, 1 Qingyun Zhang, 1 Zhipeng Lü, 1† Chu-Min Li, 2 Weibo Lin, 3 Fuda Ma3
1

SMART, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
MIS, University of Picardie Jules Verne, France
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., China
zhipeng.lv@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2019), which received much attention from the computational geometry community, recent advances usually focus on the combinatorial models (Liu, Sridharan, and Fookes
2016). By properly discretizing the target space into a set of
sample points, we can represent the sight of each candidate
camera position by a subset of sample points. Therefore, the
problem of filling the target space with geometric shapes becomes finding a union of subsets to cover all sample points.
Due to the close relation between the optimal camera
placement and the set covering problem (SCP), the computational experiments for OCP were usually performed on the
SCP instances in the OR-Library (Beasley 1990). However,
most of these instances are randomly generated and do not
respect the specific geometric properties in the context of
OCP, which are not very objective for evaluating OCP solution methods. Recently, Brévilliers et al. (2018) proposed
a dedicated benchmark dataset for OCP and tested their
hybrid differential evolution algorithm on these instances.
Their experimental results show that their algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art general USCP solvers in the literature, indicating that there is huge room for improvement to
the dedicated OCP solvers. Furthermore, the GECCO 2020
Competition on OCP and USCP introduces more real-world
datasets and provides an opportunity to make fair comparison among various approaches.
The unicost set covering problem is one of the most classical NP-hard problems (Gao et al. 2015). It can be used
to formulate many real-world optimization problems, such
as logical function minimization (Seda 2007; Steinbach and
Posthoff 2012), sensor placement (Rui et al. 2017), software test suite reduction (Chi et al. 2017), team formation
(Demirović et al. 2018), and facility location (Zhang et al.
2020). In addition, several well-known NP-hard problems
can be reduced to USCP, including dominating set (Cai et al.
2020) and vertex cover (Cai, Su, and Sattar 2011). As a
specialization of the set covering problem, USCP can be
tackled by any algorithm for SCP. Caprara, Toth, and Fischetti (2000) presented a comprehensive benchmark on different approaches for SCP. Their computational results indicate that solving the mixed integer programming model by
general solvers like CPLEX is highly competitive comparing to the dedicated exact methods. Moreover, the state-ofthe-art heuristic algorithms are able to effectively tackle the
instances which are too massive for the exact methods.

The optimal camera placement problem (OCP) aims to accomplish surveillance tasks with the minimum number of
cameras, which is one of the topics in the GECCO 2020 Competition and can be modeled as the unicost set covering problem (USCP). This paper presents a weighting-based variable
neighborhood search (WVNS) algorithm for solving OCP.
First, it simplifies the problem instances with four reduction
rules based on dominance and independence. Then, WVNS
converts the simplified OCP into a series of decision unicost
set covering subproblems and tackles them with a fast local search procedure featured by a swap-based neighborhood
structure. WVNS employs an efficient incremental evaluation
technique and further boosts the neighborhood evaluation by
exploiting the dominance and independence features among
neighborhood moves. Computational experiments on the 69
benchmark instances introduced in the GECCO 2020 Competition on OCP and USCP show that WVNS is extremely
competitive comparing to the state-of-the-art methods. It outperforms or matches several best performing competitors on
all instances in both the OCP and USCP tracks of the competition, and its advantage on 15 large-scale instances are over
10%. In addition, WVNS improves the previous best known
results for 12 classical benchmark instances in the literature.

Introduction
The optimal camera placement problem (OCP) aims to minimize the cost for performing surveillance tasks, which can
be modeled as the unicost set covering problem (USCP).
Each sample point (element) in the target area (universal set)
is covered by several candidate camera positions (subsets)
and we need to cover all samples (elements) by picking the
minimum number of candidates (subsets) to place cameras.
The optimal camera placement problem is one of the topics of the GECCO 2020 Competition, which consists of
two tracks: OCP track and USCP track. The difference between them lies in the fact that the geometric information
of samples and candidates are available in the OCP track,
while it is modeled as a general unicost set covering problem in the USCP track. Although the early researches on
OCP start from the surveillance of continuous space (Kritter
∗

Research partially supported by Alkaid lab of Huawei Cloud.
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

12400

