The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predicting Livelihood Indicators from Community-Generated Street-Level
Imagery
Jihyeon Lee, 1 Dylan Grosz, 1 Burak Uzkent, 1 Sicheng Zeng, 1
Marshall Burke, 2 David Lobell, 2 Stefano Ermon 1
1

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2
Department of Earth Science, Stanford University
{jihyeon,dgrosz,buzkent}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

conducted infrequently or may only capture an extremely
small proportion of households (Yeh et al. 2020). Satellite
images and machine learning have been proposed as an alternative (Ayush et al. 2020b,a; Uzkent, Yeh, and Ermon 2020;
Uzkent et al. 2019; Jean et al. 2016), but high-resolution imagery is expensive and obscures details of the ground level.

Major decisions from governments and other large organizations rely on measurements of the populace’s well-being, but
making such measurements at a broad scale is expensive and
thus infrequent in much of the developing world. We propose an inexpensive, scalable, and interpretable approach to
predict key livelihood indicators from public crowd-sourced
street-level imagery. Such imagery can be cheaply collected
and more frequently updated compared to traditional surveying methods, while containing plausibly relevant information for a range of livelihood indicators. We propose two approaches to learn from the street-level imagery: (1) a method
that creates multi-household cluster representations by detecting informative objects and (2) a graph-based approach
that captures the relationships between images. By visualizing what features are important to a model and how they
are used, we can help end-user organizations understand the
models and offer an alternate approach for index estimation
that uses cheaply obtained roadway features. By comparing our results against ground data collected in nationallyrepresentative household surveys, we demonstrate the performance of our approach in accurately predicting indicators of
poverty, population, and health and its scalability by testing
in two different countries, India and Kenya. Our code is available at https://github.com/sustainlab-group/mapillarygcn.

We introduce a scalable, interpretable approach that uses
street-level imagery for livelihood prediction at a local level.
We utilize Mapillary, a global citizen-driven street-level imagery database (Neuhold et al. 2017). Although Mapillary
cannot match the consistent quality of commercial imagery,
its widespread and growing availability in developing regions make it an appealing candidate as a passively collected data source for predicting livelihood indicators. In
eight months, the Mapillary dataset doubled in size from 500
million images to 1 billion, with users capturing and verifying imagery from mobile devices 3 .
We show how to capture information from Mapillary imagery to accurately predict livelihood indicators in India and
Kenya, some of the most populous and economically diverse countries in the world. We present two complementary
approaches: (1) The first creates representations for multihousehold clusters by segmenting street-level images and
aggregating informative objects, trains models, and interprets them using the most predictive features. (2) While the
strength of the first approach is interpretability, we also propose a second to learn the relationships between images and
leverage the inherent spatial structure of clusters by representing them as graphs, where each image is a feature-rich
node connected by edges based on spatial distance.

Introduction
In 2015, all member states of the United Nations adopted
17 Sustainable Development Goals 1 , including eliminating
poverty, achieving good health, and stimulating economic
growth by 2030. To evaluate countries’ progress toward
these goals, national governments and international organizations conduct nationally-representative household surveys that collect information on a range of livelihood indicators from households distributed throughout a given country.
These surveys, such as the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) Program, provide critical insight into local economic and health conditions 2 . However, they are costly and
time-consuming, particularly when surveying remote populations linked by poor infrastructure. As a result, surveys are

Our approaches predict three indicators — poverty, population, and women’s body mass index (BMI, a key nutritional indicator) — in villages and urban neighborhoods.
They achieve high classification accuracy and strong r2
scores for regression in India and Kenya. Our method is a
cheap, scalable, and effective alternative to traditional surveying to measure the well-being of developing regions.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://sdgs.un.org
2
https://dhsprogram.com/What-We-Do/Survey-Types

3
https://help.mapillary.com/hc/en-us/articles/115001478065Equipment-for-capturing-and-example-imagery

268

