The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A SAT-based Resolution of Lam’s Problem
Curtis Bright,1,2 Kevin K. H. Cheung,2 Brett Stevens,2 Ilias Kotsireas,3 Vijay Ganesh4
1

University of Windsor, 2 Carleton University, 3 Wilfrid Laurier University, 4 University of Waterloo

Abstract

solve large but finite decision problems like Lam’s problem: special purpose solvers, constraint satisfaction solvers,
and satisfiability (SAT) solvers. They note that recently SAT
solvers have become so strong that they are “the best solution in most cases”. Even still, they note that some problems
such as Lam’s problem have only been solved by specialpurpose means:
An example where only a solution by [special purpose
solvers] is known is the determination that there is no
projective plane of order 10. . .
We remedy this situation by using a SAT solver to resolve
the most challenging subcase of Lam’s problem. Together
with the recent SAT-based results of (Bright et al. 2020a,b)
this provides a complete resolution of Lam’s problem with
all of the exhaustive search work completed by SAT solvers.
The previous searches done in Lam’s problem remain fantastic achievements, but a SAT-based resolution has two primary advantages. First, it is more verifiable: a third party can
check the nonexistence certificates for themselves and (once
they believe in the encoding) be convinced in the nonexistence of a projective plane of order ten without having
to trust a search procedure. Second, using well-tested SAT
solvers to perform the search is less error-prone than writing
special-purpose search code—a reality of developing software for computer-assisted proofs is that it is extremely difficult to make custom-written code both correct and efficient (Lam 1990).
Indeed, our results uncover discrepancies with both the
original 1989 search and its 2011 independent verification. As we detail in section 2, the first two steps of
Lam et al.’s search are to enumerate what are known as A1s
and A2s. Our work agrees with the previous searches that up
to isomorphism there are 66 possibilities for the A1s. However, our count for the A2 possibilities disagrees with both
of the counts of (Lam, Thiel, and Swiercz 1989) and (Roy
2011)—works which differ between themselves as well (see
Section 5). We generate certificates that demonstrate our
A2 search is complete (see Section 4) and verify the certificates with a proof verifier. These certificates were generated with the assistance of the symbolic computation library
Traces (McKay and Piperno 2014)—but we describe how
one can verify the certificates without needing to trust the
output of the library.
Our work does not provide a completely formal proof of

In 1989, computer searches by Lam, Thiel, and Swiercz
experimentally resolved Lam’s problem from projective
geometry—the long-standing problem of determining if a
projective plane of order ten exists. Both the original search
and an independent verification in 2011 discovered no such
projective plane. However, these searches were each performed using highly specialized custom-written code and did
not produce nonexistence certificates. In this paper, we resolve Lam’s problem by translating the problem into Boolean
logic and use satisfiability (SAT) solvers to produce nonexistence certificates that can be verified by a third party.
Our work uncovered consistency issues in both previous
searches—highlighting the difficulty of relying on specialpurpose search code for nonexistence results.

1

Introduction

Projective geometry was developed in the 1600s by renaissance artists and mathematicians in order to describe how
to project a three dimensional scene onto a two dimensional
canvas. Projective geometry has the counter-intuitive property that any two lines must meet. For example, a pair of
train tracks (parallel lines in three dimensions) when projected onto two dimensions will meet on the horizon.
Despite an intensive amount of study for over 200 years
some basic questions about projective geometry remain unsettled. For example—how many points can a projective geometry have? A geometry is said to be finite if it contains
a finite number of points and a finite geometry is said to
have order n if every line contains n + 1 points (Dembowski
1968).
All finite projective geometries have been classified with
the exception of those having exactly two dimensions—the
projective planes. The first order for which it is theoretically
uncertain if a projective plane exists is n = 10. Determining
if such a projective plane exists has become known as Lam’s
problem after the work of (Lam, Thiel, and Swiercz 1989)
experimentally showed that such a plane does not exist—
work that was later independently verified by (Roy 2011).
As pointed out by (Heule, Kullmann, and Marek 2017)
there are currently three kinds of solvers that are used to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3669

