The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

High-Confidence Off-Policy (or Counterfactual) Variance Estimation
Yash Chandak, Shiv Shankar, Philip S. Thomas
University of Massachusetts
{ychandak, sshankar, pthomas}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Many sequential decision-making systems leverage data collected using prior policies to propose a new policy. For critical applications, it is important that high-confidence guarantees on the new policy’s behavior are provided before deployment, to ensure that the policy will behave as desired. Prior
works have studied high-confidence off-policy estimation of
the expected return, however, high-confidence off-policy estimation of the variance of returns can be equally critical for
high-risk applications. In this paper we tackle the previously
open problem of estimating and bounding, with high confidence, the variance of returns from off-policy data.

Figure 1: Illustrative example of the distributions of returns
from a behavior policy β, and evaluation policy π, along
with the importance weighted returns ρ, discussed later.
Given trajectories from the behavior policy β, we aim to
estimate and bound the variance, σ 2 (π), of returns under
an evaluation policy π, with high confidence. Note that the
distribution of importance-weighted returns ρ has the mean
value µ(π), but might have variance not equal to σ 2 (π).

Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising
method for solving sequential decision-making problems
(Sutton and Barto 2018). Deploying RL to real-world applications, however, requires additional consideration of reliability, which has been relatively understudied. Specifically, it
is often desirable to provide high-confidence guarantees on
the behavior of a given policy, before deployment, to ensure
that the policy will behave as desired.
Prior works in RL have studied the problem of providing high-confidence guarantees on the expected return
of an evaluation policy, π, using only data collected from
a currently deployed policy called the behavior policy, β
(Thomas, Theocharous, and Ghavamzadeh 2015; Hanna,
Stone, and Niekum 2017; Kuzborskij et al. 2020). Analogously, researchers have also studied the problem of
counter-factually estimating and bounding the average treatment effect, with high confidence, using data from past treatments (Bottou et al. 2013). While these methods present
important contributions towards developing practical algorithms, real-world problems may require additional consideration of the variance of returns (effect) under any new policy (treatment) before it can be deployed responsibly.
For applications that have high stakes in the terms of financial cost or public well-being, only providing guarantees
on the mean outcome might not be sufficient. Analysis of
variance (ANOVA) has therefore become a de-facto standard for many industrial and medical applications (Tabachnick and Fidell 2007). Similarly, analysis of variance can

inform numerous real-world applications of RL. For example, (a) analysing the variance of outcomes in a robotics application (Kuindersma, Grupen, and Barto 2013), (b) ensuring that the variance of outcomes for a medical treatment is
not high, (c) characterizing the variance of customer experiences for a recommendation system (Teevan et al. 2009),
or (d) limiting the variability of the performance of an autonomous driving system (Montgomery 2007).
More generally, variance estimation can be used to account for risk in decision-making by designing objectives
that maximize the mean of returns but minimize the variance of returns (Sato, Kimura, and Kobayashi 2001; Di Castro, Tamar, and Mannor 2012; La and Ghavamzadeh 2013).
Variance estimates have also been shown to be useful for automatically adapting hyper-parameters, like the exploration
rate (Sakaguchi and Takano 2004) or λ for eligibility-traces
(White and White 2016), and might also inform other methods that depend on the entire distribution of returns (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017; Dabney et al. 2017).
Despite the wide applicability of variance analysis,
estimating and bounding the variance of returns with high
confidence, using only off-policy data, has remained an
understudied problem. In this paper, we first formalize the
problem statement; an illustration of which is provided
in Figure 1. We show that the typical use of importance
sampling (IS) in RL only corrects for the mean, and so

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6939

