The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fast and Scalable Adversarial Training of Kernel SVM
via Doubly Stochastic Gradients
Huimin Wu1 , Zhengmian Hu2 , Bin Gu1,3,4∗
1

School of Computer & Software, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, P.R.China
2
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
4
MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
wuhuimin@nuist.edu.cn, huzhengmian@gmail.com, jsgubin@gmail.com,
Abstract

2014), PGD (Madry et al. 2017), C&W (Carlini and Wagner
2017), ZOO (Chen et al. 2017) and so on. We give a brief
review of them in the section of related work.
The topic of adversarial attacks has also attracted much
attention in the field of SVM. In 2004, Dalvi et al. (2004)
and later Lowd and Meek (2005a; 2005b) studied the task
of spam filtering, showing that linear SVM could be easily tricked by few carefully crafted changes in the content
of spam emails, without affecting their readability. Some
other attacks such as label flipping attack (Biggio et al. 2011;
Xiao, Xiao, and Eckert 2012), poison attack (Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012; Xiao et al. 2015) and evasion attack
(Biggio et al. 2013) have also proved the vulnerability of
SVM to adversarial examples.
Due to the serious threat of these attacks, there is no doubt
that defense techniques that can improve adversarial robustness of learning models are crucial for secure machine learning. Most defensive strategies nowadays focus on DNNs,
such as defensive distillation (Papernot et al. 2016), gradient
regularization (Ross and Doshivelez 2018) and adversarial
training (Madry et al. 2017), among which adversarial training has been demonstrated to be the most effective (Athalye, Carlini, and Wagner 2018). This method focuses on a
min-max problem, where the inner maximization is to find
the most aggressive adversarial examples and the outer minimization is to find model parameters that minimize the loss
on the adversarial examples. Up till now, there have been
many forms of adversarial training on DNNs which further
improve their robustness and training efficiency compared
with standard adversarial training (Shafahi et al. 2019; Carmon et al. 2019; Miyato et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020).
Since SVM is a classical and important learning model
in machine learning, the improvement of its security and robustness is also critical. However, to the best of our knowledge, the only work of adversarial training for SVM is limited to linear SVMs. Specifically, Zhou et al. (2012) formulated a convex adversarial training formula for linear SVMs,
in which the constraint is defined over the sample space
based on two kinds of attack models. As we know, datasets
with complex structures can be hardly classified by linear
SVMs, but can be easily handled by kernel SVMs. We give
a brief review of adversarial training strategies of DNNs and
SVMs in Table 1. From this table, it is easy to find that how

Adversarial attacks by generating examples which are almost
indistinguishable from natural examples, pose a serious threat
to learning models. Defending against adversarial attacks is a
critical element for a reliable learning system. Support vector
machine (SVM) is a classical yet still important learning algorithm even in the current deep learning era. Although a wide
range of researches have been done in recent years to improve the adversarial robustness of learning models, but most
of them are limited to deep neural networks (DNNs) and the
work for kernel SVM is still vacant. In this paper, we aim at
kernel SVM and propose adv-SVM to improve its adversarial
robustness via adversarial training, which has been demonstrated to be the most promising defense techniques. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work that devotes to the
fast and scalable adversarial training of kernel SVM. Specifically, we first build connection of perturbations of samples
between original and kernel spaces, and then give a reduced
and equivalent formulation of adversarial training of kernel
SVM based on the connection. Next, doubly stochastic gradients (DSG) based on two unbiased stochastic approximations (i.e., one is on training points and another is on random
features) are applied to update the solution of our objective
function. Finally, we prove that our algorithm optimized by
DSG converges to the optimal solution at the rate of O(1/t)
under the constant and diminishing stepsizes. Comprehensive
experimental results show that our adversarial training algorithm enjoys robustness against various attacks and meanwhile has the similar efficiency and scalability with classical
DSG algorithm.

Introduction
Machine learning models have long been proved to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks which generate subtle perturbations to the inputs that lead to incorrect outputs. The perturbed inputs are defined as adversarial examples where the
perturbations that lead to misclassification are often imperceptible. This serious threat has recently led to a large influx of contributions in adversarial attacks especially for
deep neural networks (DNNs). These methods of adversarial attacks include FGSM (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
∗

Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10329

