The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Harnessing Social Media to Identify Homeless Youth At-Risk of Substance Use
Zi-Yi Dou,1 Anamika Barman-Adhikari,2 Fei Fang,1 Amulya Yadav3
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
University of Denver
3
Pennsylvania State University
zdou@cs.cmu.edu, Anamika.BarmanAdhikari@du.edu, feif@cs.cmu.edu, amulya@psu.edu

Abstract

report using social media weekly (only 9 percent do not
have a social media profile), and ∼90 percent of youth who
used social media prefer to use Facebook (Barman-Adhikari
et al. 2016; Guadagno, Muscanell, and Pollio 2013). More
importantly, studies suggest that youth’s online interactions
may be associated with their substance use behaviors (Rice,
Milburn, and Monro 2011). Barman-Adhikari et al. (2016)
find that almost one-third of youth report talking about drug
consumption on social media.As these youth are transient
and difficult to engage in place-based services (i.e., a physical location), social media may represent a novel venue for
screening and intervening upon homeless youth to prevent
and reduce their substance use behaviors.
In fact, research already suggests that social media may be
even more important for youth who are homeless because it
can be a significant resource for a population that is traditionally lacking in resources (Jones and Fox 2009). For example, research has found that youth who are homeless use
social media for instrumental purposes: 28 percent use it to
locate housing and 13 percent use it to look for social services (Rice et al. 2013). Thus, there is potential to leverage
social media to understand substance use among homeless
youth and provide interventions to those in need of help. To
achieve this goal, it is critical to first identify homeless youth
at-risk of substance use, a task that is typically done by collecting lengthy survey data from the target population, which
is time-consuming, has limited reliance due to self-reports
and retrospective recall, and it quickly becomes dated.
To the best of our knowledge, no published work exists
that has collected observational social media data on this extremely high-risk group of young adults to predict their patterns of substance use. In this paper, we address this limitation by collecting ∼135K social media posts and comments
that a group of homeless youth post within one year, together
with rich survey responses that indicate their substance use
behavior. We apply machine learning algorithms to identify
the ones who are at-risk of substance use by (i) using their
social media content only; and (ii) combining their social
media content with their answers to only four survey questions that are unrelated to their demographic characteristics
or substance use. To collect social media posts, we rely on
Facebook as that is by far the most popular social media
platform among homeless youth. Hopefully, our developed
methods can lead to tools that are easy-to-use and can 1) help

Homeless youth are a highly vulnerable population and report
highly elevated rates of substance use. Prior work on mitigating substance use among homeless youth has primarily relied
on survey data to get information about substance use among
homeless youth, which can then be used to inform the design
of targeted intervention programs. However, such survey data
is often onerous to collect, is limited by its reliance on selfreports and retrospective recall, and quickly becomes dated.
The advent of social media has provided us with an important
data source for understanding the health behaviors of homeless youth. In this paper, we target this specific population and
demonstrate how to detect substance use based on texts from
social media. We collect 135K Facebook posts and comments together with survey responses from a group of homeless youth and use this data to build novel substance use detection systems with machine learning and natural language
processing techniques. Experimental results show that our
proposed methods achieve ROC-AUC scores of 0.77 on identifying certain kinds of substance use among homeless youth
using Facebook conversations only, and ROC-AUC scores of
0.83 when combined with answers to four survey questions
that are not about their demographic characteristics or substance use. Furthermore, we investigate connections between
the characteristics of people’s Facebook posts and substance
use and provide insights about the problem.

Introduction
An estimated 1.5 to 3 million youth aged 18-25 experience
homelessness each year in the United States (Toro, Lesperance, and Braciszewski 2011), reporting elevated rates of
hard drug use, including street opioids (such as heroin), prescription opioids, and stimulants (such as cocaine, crack,
and methamphetamines) (Nyamathi et al. 2012; Kennedy
et al. 2010). For example, studies have reported lifetime
rates of use ranging from 24 percent to 69 percent for
methamphetamines (meth) and 12 percent to 15 percent for
heroin (Nyamathi et al. 2012) among homeless youth.
Social media sites such as Facebook present an important
data source for understanding the social context of homeless
youths’ health behaviors, including substance use behaviors.
Preliminary studies with these youth find surprisingly pervasive social media usage: ∼80 percent of homeless youth
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14748

