The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gaussian Process Priors for View-Aware Inference
Yuxin Hou1, , Ari Heljakka1,2,* , Arno Solin1
∗

1

Aalto University, Espoo, Finland,
2
GenMind Ltd., Finland
{yuxin.hou, ari.heljakka, arno.solin}@aalto.fi

Final pose B
Incl. rotating from
landscape to portrait

Abstract
While frame-independent predictions with deep neural networks have become the prominent solutions to many computer
vision tasks, the potential benefits of utilizing correlations
between frames have received less attention. Even though
probabilistic machine learning provides the ability to encode
correlation as prior knowledge for inference, there is a tangible
gap between the theory and practice of applying probabilistic
methods to modern vision problems. For this, we derive a
principled framework to combine information coupling between camera poses (translation and orientation) with deep
models. We proposed a novel view kernel that generalizes the
standard periodic kernel in SO(3). We show how this softprior knowledge can aid several pose-related vision tasks like
novel view synthesis and predict arbitrary points in the latent
space of generative models, pointing towards a range of new
applications for inter-frame reasoning.

Starting pose A
Brief standstill

Co n t i n u o u s

Gaussian processes (GPs, Rasmussen and Williams 2006)
provide a flexible probabilistic framework for combining
a priori knowledge with forecasting, noise removal, and explaining data. Their strengths are in many ways complementary to those of deep neural networks which perform best
in applications where large training data sets are available
and the test points reside close to the training samples. The
tremendous success of deep neural networks in solving many
fundamental computer vision tasks has largely dictated the
research in the past years, but recent interest in prediction
under incomplete inputs has motivated combining the extreme flexibility and expressive power of current computer
vision models with structured constraints encoded by GP priors. Application areas include uncertainty quantification (see
discussion in Blundell et al. 2015; Kendall and Gal 2017),
auxiliary data fusion, and prediction under scarce data. These
are instrumental for delivering practical methods and robustifying inference.
In this paper, we aim to fill a tangible gap between the
theory and practice of applying probabilistic methods to certain computer vision tasks. We propose a tailored Gaussian
process prior for encoding knowledge of camera poses into

A
A

Introduction

B

A

A

cam

B

B

(a) Translation cov

m
era

o ve

t
m en

B

(b) Orientation cov

Figure 1: We propose a GP prior for encoding known six
degrees-of-freedom camera poses into probabilistic models.
In region A, the phone starts from standstill with minor rotation (high overall covariance in (a)). Between A and B, it
moves to the right while rotating (low overall covariance in
(a) and (b)). In B, the phone firstly stands still (high overall covariance), then rotates from portrait to landscape (low
covariance in (b), higher in (a)), and is finally still again.
probabilistic models. In GPs, prior assumptions are encoded
by a covariance function. As illustrated in Fig. 1, we aim to
encode the notion of similarity of camera views given the
known camera movement.
In practice, the camera movement estimation is typically
fused with motion information from inertial sensors. New
consumer hardware in smartphones and cars typically have
these capabilities built-in—Apple iPhones/iPads run ARKit
and Android devices Google ARCore, both exposing realtime six degrees-of-freedom camera pose data. This readily
available motion information could be utilized as priors for
improving standard visual regression and classification tasks.

∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
7762

