The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Optimising Automatic Calibration of Electric Muscle Stimulation
Graeme Gange,1 Jarrod Knibbe2
1

Monash University, Victoria, Australia
The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
graeme.gange@monash.edu, jarrod.knibbe@unimelb.edu.au
2

Abstract

The bio-medical literature, however, reveals that more
complex movement patterns (i.e., non-ballistic, combining
agonist and antagonist muscles) can be achieved through
dense electrode arrays and combinations of complex signals (Popović-Bijelić et al. 2005; Popović and Popović
2011). As electrode numbers increase, however, so too does
the complexity of calibrating the system - determining what
electrode patterns and signal parameters will achieve the
desired movement. This is not prohibitive in the medical
and rehabilitation domain, where practitioners can take their
time to optimally calibrate bespoke electrode arrays for the
best outcomes for the patient (Bouton et al. 2016). The move
to HCI and interaction design, however, necessitates a simplified, general-purpose approach to system calibration.
Currently, the calibration problem remains unsolved (Knibbe et al. 2017). Previous work has explored
automated calibration techniques that demonstrate only
limited success (Knibbe et al. 2017), or don’t scale to
support complex stimulation patterns across multiple electrodes (Usman et al. 2020). Without a calibration solution,
the further exploration and use of EMS for human-machine
interaction remains heavily constrained. Such an automated
calibration system should be adaptable to different users,
and electrode configurations, with minimal effort. As
such we cannot rely on spatial information about muscle
positions or electrode layouts. However, a blind exploration
2
of O(2|E| ) activation patterns (for E electrodes) is also
clearly impractical. Instead, we need a calibration procedure
which carefully explores the search space, learning as much
as possible from its previous attempts.
We present a novel approach to auto-calibration of highdensity EMS systems. We use a fast, intelligent walkthrough of a sub-set of possible configurations, to identify
the total resolution of an EMS system. Through a subsequent
reduction of the walked-through space, we identify the specific patterns that trigger a given movement; both the agonist
and antagonist muscles involved. We report on a technical
evaluation of our calibration.

Electrical Muscle Stimulation (EMS) has become a popular interaction technology in Human-Computer Interaction;
allowing the computer to take direct control of the user’s
body. To date, however, the explorations have been limited
to coarse, generalised examples, due to the low resolution
of achievable control. To increase this resolution, the EMS
needs to increase significantly in complexity - using large
numbers of electrodes in complex patterns. The calibration
of such a system remains an unsolved challenge. We present
a new SAT-based black-box calibration method, which requires no spatial information about muscular or electrode positioning. The method encodes domain knowledge and observations in a constraint model, and uses these to prune the
space of feasible control signals. In a simulated environment
we find this method can scale reliably to large arrays while requiring only a modest number of trials, and preliminary tests
on real hardware show we can effectively calibrate an electrode array in a few minutes.

Introduction
Functional Electrical Stimulation (FES) has long been used
and explored for the upper limb rehabilitation of stroke and
spinal cord injury patients (e.g., (Usman et al. 2020; Bouton
et al. 2016; De Marchis et al. 2016)). More recently, FES
has also been adopted (under the guise of Electric Muscle
Stimulation - EMS) as a popular input-output modality in
Human Computer Interaction (HCI), affording the computer
physical control of the user. Through EMS, the computer can
dynamically alter the user’s physical actions, such as to improve drawing (Lopes et al. 2016), teach the use of new objects (Lopes, Jonell, and Baudisch 2015), or provide ’forced’
walking directions (Pfeiffer et al. 2015).
To date, EMS use in HCI has remained predominantly
conceptual, considering themes of opportunities within the
space of computer-human control (e.g., for ’proprioceptive
interaction’ or as haptics for VR (Lopes et al. 2015, 2017)),
rather than presenting real world, deployable systems with
tangible performance gains, per more traditional HCI. One
reason for this, we suggest, is the challenge of achieving
high-resolution and fine-grained control.

Background
We contribute a new automatic calibration technique for
Electric Muscle Stimulation (EMS) for interaction design.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3759

