The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Optimal Kidney Exchange with Immunosuppressants
Haris Aziz,1 Ágnes Cseh,2 John P. Dickerson,3 Duncan C. McElfresh3
2

1
UNSW Sydney and Data61 CSIRO
Hasso-Plattner-Institute, University of Potsdam and Institute of Economics, Centre for Economic and Regional Studies
4
University of Maryland
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au, agnes.cseh@hpi.de, john@cs.umd.edu, dmcelfre@umd.edu

Abstract

as Kidney Exchange with Immunosuppressants (KEI). Immunosuppressants (abbreviated as suppressants from here
onwards) have been successfully used in Japan and Korea
for several years, and increasingly being considered and utilized in other countries (Heo, Hong, and Chun 2020), even
though they are costly and may have side effects. Due to
these costs or side effects, it is desirable to match as many
recipients to kidneys while minimizing the number of recipients who are given immunosuppressants.
In this paper, the fundamental research problem that we
explore is that of designing mechanisms for kidney exchange with suppressants that satisfy desirable computational, incentive and monotonicity properties. A naive way
of using suppressants is to clear the classic kidney exchange
market without using them and then give suppressant to the
recipients who are left. However, there can be more efficient
ways of giving suppressant to particular recipients and then
implementing exchanges of kidneys to facilitate as many
transplants as possible, as we will demonstrate in Figure 1.
At first sight, the two-stage and connected process of using
foresight to first giving suppressants to suitable recipients
and then finding a matching that satisfies suitable social objectives appears to be a complex problem. We design a flexible algorithmic approach for the problem.

Algorithms for exchange of kidneys is one of the key successful applications in market design, artificial intelligence, and
operations research. Potent immunosuppressant drugs suppress the body’s ability to reject a transplanted organ up to
the point that a transplant across blood- or tissue-type incompatibility becomes possible. In contrast to the standard kidney
exchange problem, we consider a setting that also involves the
decision about which recipients receive from the limited supply of immunosuppressants that make them compatible with
originally incompatible kidneys. We firstly present a general
computational framework to model this problem. Our main
contribution is a range of efficient algorithms that provide
flexibility in terms of meeting meaningful objectives. Motivated by the current reality of kidney exchanges using sophisticated mathematical-programming-based clearing algorithms, we then present a general but scalable approach to
optimal clearing with immunosuppression; we validate our
approach on realistic data from a large fielded exchange.

Introduction
The deployment of centralized matching algorithms for efficient exchange of donated kidneys is a major success story
of market design (Biró et al. 2019a,b). The theory and
practice of kidney exchange have benefited from active research within artificial intelligence (e.g. Abraham, Blum,
and Sandholm 2007; Manlove and O’Malley 2014; McElfresh, Bidkhori, and Dickerson 2019; McElfresh and Dickerson 2018; Farina, Dickerson, and Sandholm 2017). The
standard model for kidney exchange involves information
about recipients’ compatibility with kidneys in the market. A
recipient can only be given a kidney that is compatible with
the recipient. The goal is to enable exchanges of kidneys via
a centralized algorithm to satisfy the maximum number of
recipients.
We consider a new kidney exchange model which has an
interesting feature that is informed by significant technological advances in organ transplant. The technology concerns
immunosuppressants which if given to a recipient can make
her receptive to kidneys which she is not receptive to by default (Montgomery et al. 2011). We will refer to the model

Contributions We formalize a general model of KEI that
features compatible, half-compatible, and incompatible kidneys, and which allows for allocations as a result of multiway exchanges. We then initiate a computational study of
kidney exchange with suppressants. Prior mechanism design
work on the subject either only allows pairwise exchanges or
focuses on a restricted model.
One of our central contributions is modeling important
KEI problems in terms of an underlying graph with different
classes of edges. One of the edge classes represents organ
compatibility that is dependent on administering immunosuppressants. Depending on how we set the edge weights in
the graph problem, we can find in polynomial time, allocations corresponding to several important objectives. The objectives include maximizing the total number of transplants
and given that, maximizing the number of compatible transplants. Among the list of objectives captured by our algorithmic framework, we defer the choice of the exact objective to
the policy-makers.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

21

