The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Treewidth-Aware Complexity in ASP:
Not all Positive Cycles are Equally Hard*
Jorge Fandinno1,2 and Markus Hecher2,3
1

University of Nebraska Omaha, USA
2
University of Potsdam, Germany
3
TU Wien, Austria
jfandinno@unomaha.edu, mhecher@gmail.com

Abstract

into this discrepancy is by means of parameterized complexity (Cygan et al. 2015), which conducts more fine-grained
complexity analysis in terms of parameters of a problem. For
ASP, several results were achieved in this direction (Gottlob,
Scarcello, and Sideri 2002; Lonc and Truszczynski 2003; Lin
and Zhao 2004; Fichte and Szeider 2015), some insights involve even combinations (Lackner and Pfandler 2012; Fichte,
Kronegger, and Woltran 2019) of parameters. More recent
studies focus on the influence of the parameter treewidth for
solving ASP (Jakl, Pichler, and Woltran 2009; Fichte et al.
2017; Fichte and Hecher 2019; Bichler, Morak, and Woltran
2018; Bliem et al. 2020). These works utilize treewidth to
solve, e.g., the consistency problem, in polynomial time in
the program size, while being superpolynomial only in the
treewidth. Recently, it was shown that for normal ASP deciding consistency is expected to be slightly superexponential
in the treewidth (Hecher 2020). More concretely, a lower
bound was established under the Exponential Time Hypothesis (ETH) (Impagliazzo, Paturi, and Zane 2001), saying that
consistency for any normal logic program of treewidth k
cannot be decided in time 2o(k·log(k)) · poly(n), where n is
the number of variables (atoms) of the program. This result
matches the known upper bound (Fichte and Hecher 2019)
and renders the consistency of normal ASP slightly harder
than the satisfiability (SAT) of a propositional formula, which
under the ETH cannot be decided in time 2o(k) · poly(n).
Contributions. We address this result and consider besides
treewidth, the size ` of the largest strongly-connected component (SCC) of the positive dependency graph as parameter.
1. First, we present a treewidth-aware reduction from headcycle-free ASP to tight ASP. Our reduction takes any HCF
program Π and creates a tight program, whose treewidth
is at most O(k · log(`)), where k is the treewidth of Π
and ` is the size of the largest SCC of the dependency
graph of Π. In general, the treewidth of the resulting tight
program cannot be in o(k · log(k)), unless ETH fails. Our
reduction forms a major improvement for the case `  k.
Besides, this reduction bijectively preserves answer sets
and can be used for counting and enumerating answer sets.
2. Then, we improve known results (Fichte and Hecher 2019;
Hecher 2020) for the consistency of head-cycle-free ASP.
We define a novel measure ι for the “level” tightness of pro-

It is well-known that deciding consistency for normal answer
set programs (ASP) is NP-complete, thus, as hard as the satisfaction problem for propositional logic (SAT). The exponential
time hypothesis (ETH) implies that the best algorithms to solve
these problems take exponential time in the worst case. However, accounting for the treewidth, the consistency problem for
ASP is slightly harder than SAT: while SAT can be solved by
an algorithm that runs in exponential time in the treewidth k,
normal ASP requires exponential time in k · log(k). This extra
cost is due to checking that there are no self-supported true
atoms because of positive cycles in the program. In this paper,
we refine this recent result and show that consistency for ASP
can be decided in exponential time in k · log(ι) where ι is a
novel measure, bounded by both treewidth k and the size ` of
the largest strongly-connected component of the positive dependency graph of the program. We provide a treewidth-aware
reduction from ASP to SAT that adheres to the above limit.

1

Introduction

Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Brewka, Eiter, and
Truszczyński 2011; Gebser et al. 2012) is a problem modeling and solving paradigm well-known in the area of knowledge representation and reasoning that is experiencing an
increasing number of successful applications (Balduccini,
Gelfond, and Nogueira 2006; Nogueira et al. 2001; Guziolowski et al. 2013). The flexibility of ASP comes with a
high computational complexity cost: its consistency problem, that is, deciding the existence of a solution (answer set)
for a given logic program is ΣP
2 -complete (Eiter and Gottlob 1995), in general. Fragments with lower complexity are
also known. For instance, the consistency problem for normal, head-cycle-free (HCF), or tight ASP is NP-complete.
Even for solving this class of programs, the best known algorithms require exponential time with respect to the size
of the program. Still, existing solvers (Gebser et al. 2012;
Alviano et al. 2017) are able to find solutions for many interesting problems in reasonable time. A way to shed light
* This work has been supported by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF), Grants Y698 and P32830, and the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund, Grant WWTF ICT19-065.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6312

