The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disentangled Information Bottleneck
Ziqi Pan, Li Niu,* Jianfu Zhang, Liqing Zhang*
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{panziqi ai, ustcnewly, c.sis}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Tishby 2010; Vera, Piantanida, and Vega 2018; Amjad and
Geiger 2019) and may be promising on explaining the learning behaviors of neural networks (Tishby and Zaslavsky
2015; Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017; Saxe et al. 2019).
Given random variables X, Y with their joint distribution
pdata (X, Y ), the IB method aims to compress X to a “bottleneck” random variable T keeping the information relevant
for predicting Y . Namely, seeking a probabilistic mapping
q (T |X) such that the Mutual Information (MI) I (X; T ) is
constrained while the information I (T ; Y ) is maximized,
which can be formally stated in terms of the constrained optimization problem

The information bottleneck (IB) method is a technique for extracting information that is relevant for predicting the target
random variable from the source random variable, which is
typically implemented by optimizing the IB Lagrangian that
balances the compression and prediction terms. However, the
IB Lagrangian is hard to optimize, and multiple trials for tuning values of Lagrangian multiplier are required. Moreover,
we show that the prediction performance strictly decreases as
the compression gets stronger during optimizing the IB Lagrangian. In this paper, we implement the IB method from the
perspective of supervised disentangling. Specifically, we introduce Disentangled Information Bottleneck (DisenIB) that
is consistent on compressing source maximally without target
prediction performance loss (maximum compression). Theoretical and experimental results demonstrate that our method
is consistent on maximum compression, and performs well in
terms of generalization, robustness to adversarial attack, outof-distribution detection, and supervised disentangling.

1

argmax I (T ; Y ) ,
T ∈∆

s.t. I (X; T ) ⩽ r,

(1)

where a level of compression (i.e., I (X; T ) ⩽ r) is provided
as the constraint, and ∆ is the set of random variables T that
obey the Markov chain Y ↔ X ↔ T (Witsenhausen and
Wyner 1975; Ahlswede and Korner 1975; Gilad-Bachrach,
Navot, and Tishby 2003). Optimal solutions to Eq. (1) for
r ∈ [0, +∞) form the IB curve (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek
2000; Rodrı́guez Gálvez, Thobaben, and Skoglund 2020),
which specifies the trade-off between the compression (i.e.,
I (X; T )) and prediction (i.e., I (T ; Y )) terms. In practice,
to avoid the non-linear constraint, Eq. (1) can be optimized
by minimizing the so-called IB Lagrangian (Tishby, Pereira,
and Bialek 2000; Gilad-Bachrach, Navot, and Tishby 2003;
Shamir, Sabato, and Tishby 2010; Rodrı́guez Gálvez, Thobaben, and Skoglund 2020)

Introduction

Compression is a ubiquitous task in machine learning (Cover
and Thomas 2012; MacKay and Mac Kay 2003). For example, over-parameterized deep networks are compressed with
pruning for the sake of computational efficiency (Han, Mao,
and Dally 2015; Dai et al. 2018), machines may transform
complex data into compressed representations that generalizes well (Alemi et al. 2017; Shwartz-Ziv and Tishby 2017).
It is important to determine which aspects of data should be
preserved and which should be discarded. The Information
Bottleneck (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000; Dimitrov and
Miller 2001; Samengo 2002) (IB) method provides a principled approach to this problem, which compresses the source
random variable to keep the information relevant for predicting the target random variable while discarding all irrelevant
information. The IB method has been applied to various domains such as classification (Hecht, Noor, and Tishby 2009),
clustering (Slonim et al. 2005), coding theory (Hassanpour,
Wübben, and Dekorsy 2018; Zeitler et al. 2008), and quantization (Strouse and Schwab 2017; Cheng et al. 2019). Recent research also demonstrate that the IB method can produce well-generalized representations (Shamir, Sabato, and

LIB [q (T |X) ; β] = −I (T ; Y ) + βI (X; T ) ,

(2)

where β is the Lagrange multiplier which controls the tradeoff and typically set in [0, 1] (Rodrı́guez Gálvez, Thobaben,
and Skoglund 2020).
Minimizing the IB Lagrangian encounters the following
two problems: 1) It is hard to obtain the desired compression
level r (Eq. (1)). In practice, a compression level is expected
to obtain via minimizing the IB Lagrangian with certain β.
However, recent works (Kolchinsky, Tracey, and Kuyk 2019;
Rodrı́guez Gálvez, Thobaben, and Skoglund 2020) pointed
out that β and the compression level are not causally related,
and therefore multiple optimizations for different β value are
required to achieve a specific compression level. 2) I (T ; Y )
given by the optimal solution to the IB Lagrangian is strictly

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9285

