The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Equitable Scheduling on a Single Machine
Klaus Heeger* 1 , Danny Hermelin2 , George B. Mertzios†3 ,
Hendrik Molter‡1 , Rolf Niedermeier1 , Dvir Shabtay2
1

TU Berlin, Faculty IV, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Germany
2
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel
3
Department of Computer Science, Durham University, UK
heeger@tu-berlin.de, hermelin@bgu.ac.il, george.mertzios@durham.ac.uk,
h.molter@tu-berlin.de, rolf.niedermeier@tu-berlin.de, dvirs@bgu.ac.il
Abstract

more important in all areas of resource allocation (Bredereck, Kaczmarczyk, and Niedermeier 2018; Fluschnik et al.
2019; Lang and Rothe 2016; Walsh 2020) and particularly scheduling (Kumar and Kleinberg 2006).1 For instance,
in their seminal work Baruah et al. (1996) introduced the
concept of proportionate progress, a fairness concept for
resource allocation problems. They applied it to periodic
scheduling by assigning resources to jobs according to their
rational weights between 0 and 1, thereby aiming to make
sure that a job never gets an entire slot (in the periodic schedule) ahead or behind. Nowadays, equity and fairness in resource allocation is a widely discussed topic, leading to considerations such as the “price of fairness” (Bertsimas, Farias,
and Trichakis 2011) or to discussions about the abundance
of fairness metrics (Gupta et al. 2020).
We study
P a very natural but seemingly novel extension of
the 1|| Uj problem, taking into account a very basic aspect of equity among the customers in order to guarantee
high customer satisfaction. Our task is to service n clients
for m days, where each client has a single job to be scheduled for every day. This should be done in an equitable fashion. We focus on a very simple notion of equity where, given
an integer parameter k, we request that each client receives
satisfactory service in at least k out of the m days. In what
follows, refer to k as equity parameter. It is important to note
here that since all scheduling requests for all days and clients
are assumed to be known in advance, we consequently still
face an offline scenario of scheduling.
Consider the following motivating example. Imagine that
a research group with n PhD students owns a single compute
server, where each student has to submit a plan for their experiments for the next m days. Typically, the needed computation time is known in advance. To make sufficient progress
on their research, all students need to have regular access to
the compute server for performing individual experiments.
All students request access to the server every day, but due to
high demand not all of them may be scheduled early enough
during the day so that the experiments can still be evaluated
the very same day. The chair of the group wants to guarantee
a schedule for the compute server such that every student can
evaluate their experiments on the same day in at least k out

We introduce a natural but seemingly yet unstudied generalization of the problem of scheduling jobs on a single machine
so as to minimize the number of tardy jobs. Our generalization lies in simultaneously considering several instances of
the problem at once. In particular, we have n clients over a
period of m days, where each client has a single job with
its own processing time and deadline per day. Our goal is
to provide a schedule for each of the m days, so that each
client is guaranteed to have their job meet its deadline in at
least k ≤ m days. This corresponds to an equitable schedule where each client is guaranteed a minimal level of service throughout the period of m days. We provide a thorough
analysis of the computational complexity of three main variants of this problem, identifying both efficient algorithms and
worst-case intractability results.

Introduction
One of the most basic and fundamental scheduling problems
is that of minimizing the number of tardy jobs on a single
machine. In this problem we are given n jobs, where each
job j has an integer processing time pj and an integer deadline dj , and the goal is to find a permutation of the jobs so
that the number of jobs exceeding their deadlines is minimized (a job j exceeds its deadline if the total processing
time of jobs preceding it in the schedule, including
P itself, is
larger than dj ). This problem is known as the 1|| Uj problem in the classical three-field notation for scheduling P
problems by Graham et al. (1979). It is well-known that 1|| Uj
is solvable in O(n log n) time (Maxwell 1970; Moore 1968;
Sturm 1970), but gets e.g. NP-hard in case of simple (chain)
precedence constraints even if all processing times pj are the
same (Lenstra and Rinnooy Kan 1980). There is also a more
recent survey concerning the minimization of the weighted
number of tardy jobs (Adamu and Adewumi 2014) and the
problem has also been thoroughly studied for parallel machines (Baptiste et al. 2004).
Due to the ever increasing importance of high customer
satisfaction, fairness-related issues are becoming more and
* Supported by DFG RTG 2434 “Facets of Complexity”.
†

Supported by the EPSRC grant EP/P020372/1.
Supported by the DFG, project MATE (NI 369/17).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

1
For instance, in 2018 ACM started its new conference series
on “Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT)”.

11818

