The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Partial Rank Aggregation for Personalized Attributes
Qianqian Xu 1 , Zhiyong Yang 2,3 , Zuyao Chen 4 , Yangbangyan Jiang 2,3 ,
Xiaochun Cao 2,3,6 , Yuan Yao 7 , Qingming Huang 1,4,5,6
1

Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
7
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, {yangzhiyong, jiangyangbangyan, caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn, chenzuyao17@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
yuany@ust.hk, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of how to aggregate pairwise personalized attributes (PA) annotations (e.g., Shoes A
is more comfortable than B) from different annotators on the
crowdsourcing platforms, which is an emerging topic gaining
increasing attention in recent years. Given the crowdsourced
annotations, the majority of the traditional literature assumes
that all the pairs in the collected dataset are distinguishable.
However, this assumption is incompatible with how humans
perceive attributes since indistinguishable pairs are ubiquitous for the annotators due to the limitation of human perception. To attack this problem, we propose a novel deep prediction model that could simultaneously detect the indistinguishable pairs and aggregate ranking results for distinguishable pairs. First of all, we represent the pairwise annotations
as a multi-graph. Based on such data structure, we propose
an end-to-end partial ranking model which consists of a deep
backbone architecture and a probabilistic model that captures
the generative process of the partial rank annotations. Specifically, to recognize the indistinguishable pairs, the probabilistic model we proposed is equipped with an adaptive perception threshold, where indistinguishable pairs could be automatically detected when the absolute value of the score difference is below the learned threshold. In our empirical studies, we perform a series of experiments on three real-world
datasets: LFW-10, Shoes, and Sun. The corresponding results
consistently show the superiority of our proposed model.

Figure 1: Examples of indistinguishable pairwise comparisons.

Bampis et al. 2018; Squalli-Houssaini et al. 2018). For example, estimating interestingness attribute (Fu et al. 2014)
from images/videos would be helpful for media-sharing
websites (e.g., Youtube); estimating attributes of consumer
goods such as shininess of shoes (Fu et al. 2016) plays a
central role in improving online shopping experiences; other
applications might include web advertising and video summarization. And the list goes on.
Given the importance of PA, our first problem starts with
how to measure the strength of such attributes quantitatively.
At the first glance, one can realize it by simply specifying
a discrete score. For example, one could score the interestingness of a movie as 1, 2, 3, · · · , 5, with 5 representing the
most interesting ones and 1 representing the least interesting ones. However, the potential issue is that different people often exhibit dissimilar interpretations of the score. For
instance, some annotators think score 3 is large enough for
good movies, while the others even give a boring movie the
same score. This makes such a scoring rule not suitable, especially when we are searching for a consensus over personalized opinions. In order to obtain more reliable annotations

Introduction
Personalized attributes (PA) are semantic features describable in words, such as texture, color, mood. Typical instances include comfortable or high heeled for shoes, and
smiling or crying for human faces, etc. Introducing PA to
multimedia/computer vision community opens up a number of interesting possibilities, as shown in recent literature
(Fu et al. 2014, 2016; Singh and Lee 2016; Kovashka and
Grauman 2017; Parikh and Grauman 2011; Jing et al. 2017;
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

678

