The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MultiTalk: A Highly-Branching Dialog Testbed for Diverse Conversations
Yao Dou,1 Maxwell Forbes,1 2 Ari Holtzman,1 Yejin Choi 1 2
1

University of Washington,
2
Allen Institute for AI
{douy, mbforbes, ahai, yejin}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract

Boris is telling his friend
Emanuel about his vacation in
Europe.
PROMPT

We study conversational dialog in which there are many possible responses to a given history. We present the MultiTalk
Dataset, a corpus of over 320,000 sentences of written conversational dialog that balances a high branching factor (10)
with several conversation turns (6) through selective branch
continuation. We make multiple contributions to study dialog generation in the highly branching setting. In order to
evaluate a diverse set of generations, we propose a simple
scoring algorithm, based on bipartite graph matching, to optimally incorporate a set of diverse references. We study multiple language generation tasks at different levels of predictive
conversation depth, using textual attributes induced automatically from pretrained classifiers. Our culminating task is a
challenging theory of mind problem, a controllable generation task which requires reasoning about the expected reaction of the listener.

Boris: I wouldn't mind visiting
again.
Emanuel: How was the food in
Europe? What's the best?
Boris: Germany has some
good beers.
Emanuel: France is way
better.
Boris: What’s your
favorite beer you
tried in France?

!

" !
Emanuel

Introduction
A range of work in artificial intelligence has studied natural
language generation in conversational dialog (Adiwardana
et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2018; Serban et al. 2016). Dialogs
provide rich scenarios for understanding social interaction
and real-world knowledge. But within a dialog, the question
often arises: What if a character had said something else?
Such counterfactuals can be powerful tools to learn from,
and children tend to naturally explore such possibilities naturally by asking “what if” questions (Bates 1976).
Inspired by these aims, we introduce the large-scale MultiTalk Dataset of highly-branching dialogs, where each character gives several (10) responses to the full conversation
history at that point. The high branching factor leads to many
different conversational paths, which we manage by continuing the dialog for only a subset of responses. In total, the
dataset contains over 320,000 sentences across 120 conversation trees, where each tree contains a unique prompt and
pair of characters that alternate responses.
To study model performance on this dataset, we introduce
a new scoring technique that accounts for the diversity of responses. Naively applying an evaluation metric like BLEU
(Papineni et al. 2002) would assign high points to a model
that repeatedly outputs a single well-scoring response. To

Boris: France
isn't known for
it's beer, you
drink wine when
you visit there.

$
!

#

#

"

Emanuel

#

Figure 1: We introduce the highly branching MultiTalk dialog dataset, with over 320k sentences. We study several tasks
in this new domain, including a theory of mind task, where
a model estimates how listeners will react to its output.

account for this, we propose a simple scoring algorithm
based on weighted bipartite graph matching. This technique
dynamically matches candidates to references, assigning the
maximum score to candidates while ensuring each reference
is used only once. The technique requires no changes to
models, can accept any individual scoring function to compare a candidate and reference (e.g., BLEU, BERT-Score
(Zhang et al. 2020), etc.), and is solvable in polynomial time
thanks to the Kuhn-Munkres algorithm (Kuhn 1955).
We also use the MultiTalk Dataset as an opportunity to
explore models that attempt to optimize for particular dialog
paths. First, we provide benchmark performances for a diverse response generation task, using MultiTalk Dataset as
a testbed. Then, we propose two tasks to study controllable
generation on a dialog tree using induced textual attributes.
The second of these tasks emulates a theory of mind setting,
where models must induce attribute-valued replies from a
conversation partner who lacks explicit attribute knowledge.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12760

