The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Semantics-Enhanced Pre-Training:
Can Lexicon Definitions Help Learning Sentence Meanings?
Xuancheng Ren,1 Xu Sun,1,2∗ Houfeng Wang,1 Qun Liu3
1

MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{renxc, xusun, wanghf}@pku.edu.cn, qun.liu@huawei.com
Abstract

People usually eat the [M] of the watermelon.
p(seeds) = 0.20 > p(flesh) = 0.06

Self-supervised pre-training techniques, albeit relying on
large amounts of text, have enabled rapid growth in learning
language representations for natural language understanding.
However, as radically empirical models on sentences, they
are subject to the input data distribution, inevitably incorporating data bias and reporting bias, which may lead to inaccurate understanding of sentences. To address this problem,
we propose to adopt a human learner’s approach: when we
cannot make sense of a word in a sentence, we often consult the dictionary for specific meanings; but can the same
work for empirical models? In this work, we try to inform
the pre-trained masked language models of word meanings
for semantics-enhanced pre-training. To achieve a contrastive
and holistic view of word meanings, a definition pair of two
related words is presented to the masked language model such
that the model can better associate a word with its crucial semantic features. Both intrinsic and extrinsic evaluations validate the proposed approach on semantics-orientated tasks,
with an almost negligible increase of training data.

Drinking too much [M] can make people drunk.
p(water) = 0.24 > p(alcohol) = 0.17
A ratchet is used for moving in [M] direction.
p(any) = 0.36 > p(one) = 0.34
A scapegrace is an [M] rascal.
p(innocent) = 0.11 > p(incompetent) = 0.03

Table 1: Masked words recovered by RoBERTa-large. Between the two syntactically plausible replacements, the
model prefers the semantically insensible one, which suggests that such models may not really understand the semantics of the sentence but rely more on distributional statistics.

the model seems to prefer the safer choices that are more
frequent in related context, neglecting the semantics of the
sentence or the low frequency words in the sentence.
This phenomenon could root from the entirely empirical approach adopted by BERT-like models. In theory, the
meaning of a word can be decided from all its use according to the hypothesis of distributional semantics (Wittgenstein 1953; Harris 1954; Weaver 1955; Firth 1957; Boleda
2020). However, in practice, the problems are three-fold: (a)
word contexts are sampled, since the use of a word is inexhaustible, which means the learning is inaccurate and artefacts in data will be exploited (Gururangan et al. 2018; Niven
and Kao 2019; McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019), which
can be remedied in part by enlarging the data scale (Liu
et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019; Raffel et al. 2020); (b) different
word types are not equally represented in data, which means
words of lower frequency are harder to learn in whatever
data scale; and more importantly (c) certain semantics are
not naturally expressed in sentences due to reporting bias,
which is a problem that cannot be addressed by empirical
approaches (Lucy and Gauthier 2017; Da and Kasai 2019;
Forbes, Holtzman, and Choi 2019; Kwon et al. 2019).
In contrast, words, which are basic semantic units of sentences, are countable and are equally represented in lexicons. Now that the pre-trained models can encode the sentence structure well, is it possible to improve the word coverage and correct the misconceptions of the model by directly

Introduction
Pre-trained language representations have evolved remarkably in recent years, from static word representations
(Mikolov et al. 2013; Pennington, Socher, and Manning
2014) to contextual word representations (Peters et al. 2018;
Radford et al. 2018; Howard and Ruder 2018; Devlin et al.
2019; Yang et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2020). Typically, they
are first pre-trained on large-scale unannotated data and then
used in downstream tasks. As computational realization of
distributional semantics, where the meaning of a word can
be decided from its linguistic context, they have proved
highly effective and produced state-of-the-art human-level
performances on several datasets in natural language understanding (Wang et al. 2019b).
However, recently studies have suggested that while pretrained models are adequate in capturing the syntax of language (Hewitt and Manning 2019; Clark et al. 2019), they
often produce inaccurate interpretation of a sentence (Niven
and Kao 2019; McCoy, Pavlick, and Linzen 2019). We collect several representative cases in Table 1. As we can see,
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13736

