The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Model-Based Privacy Protection under Budget Constraints
Junyuan Hong,1 Haotao Wang,2 Zhangyang Wang,2 Jiayu Zhou1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48823, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712, USA
hongju12@msu.edu, htwang@utexas.edu, atlaswang@utexas.edu, jiayuz@msu.edu
Abstract
Protecting privacy in gradient-based learning has become increasingly critical as more sensitive information is being used.
Many existing solutions seek to protect the sensitive gradients
by constraining the overall privacy cost within a constant budget, where the protection is hand-designed and empirically
calibrated to boost the utility of the resulting model. However,
it remains challenging to choose the proper protection adapted
for specific constraints so that the utility is maximized. To this
end, we propose a novel Learning-to-Protect algorithm that
automatically learns a model-based protector from a set of nonprivate learning tasks. The learned protector can be applied to
private learning tasks to improve utility within the specific privacy budget constraint. Our empirical studies on both synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can
achieve a superior utility with a given privacy constraint and
generalize well to new private datasets distributed differently
as compared to the hand-designed competitors.

Introduction
Trustworthy machine learning has recently drawn a great
attention in both industry and research communities (Tang
et al. 2017; Ding, Kulkarni, and Yekhanin 2017; Erlingsson,
Pihur, and Korolova 2014), due to the increasing awareness in
protecting the usage of sensitive data for training. Differential
Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al. 2006b; Dwork 2006) is considered
to be a de facto way to quantitatively protect the training data
and is widely studied in the machine learning community. In
DP, the privacy cost is measured by the probability difference
(i.e., privacy leakage) of a random mechanism aggregating
similar datasets. The smaller the difference becomes, the
less chance an attacker can get private information from the
output.
One major problem setting of DP studies is the differentially private model publishing (Yu et al. 2019), where model
parameters are published given a constant DP budget for accessing the private dataset. For gradient-based learning, one
way to achieve this goal is protecting the gradients by perturbation and constraining the accumulated privacy cost (Bassily,
Smith, and Thakurta 2014; Abadi et al. 2016; Wu et al. 2017).
Following the idea, variant protection strategies are proposed
with different model update rules (Wang, Ye, and Xu 2017),

Figure 1: Illustration of the model-based protector and the
Learning-to-Protect framework. Two RNN cells, σ and π,
represent the adaptive noise scheduler and the utility projector
in a protector, respectively.

dynamic perturbation (Yu et al. 2019) or both (Lee and Kifer
2018). Despite the technical differences in these approaches,
the same practical target is to find a protection strategy maximizing utility (the quality of the published model) under a
given privacy budget constraint.
Both empirically (Abadi et al. 2016) and analytically
(Wang and Xu 2019), it has been shown that the best protection strategy including hyper-parameters of update rules,
budget schedule and etc., significantly depends on the budget
constraint. For a specific classes of objective functions, the
upper bound on the utility loss can be analytically derived as a
function of the protection strategy (Wang, Ye, and Xu 2017).
Minimizing the upper bound directly outputs a protection
strategy (the step budget and learning rates) parameterized by
the budget. However, the principle fails when there is no tight

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7702

