The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Segmentation of Tweets with URLs and its Applications to Sentiment Analysis
Abdullah Aljebreen, 1 Weiyi Meng, 2 Eduard Dragut, 1
1

Temple University
Binghamton University
aaljebreen@temple.edu, meng@binghamton.edu, edragut@temple.edu
2

Abstract
An important means for disseminating information in social
media platforms is by including URLs that point to external
sources in user posts. In Twitter, we estimate that about 21%
of the daily stream of English-language tweets contain URLs.
We notice that NLP tools make little attempt at understanding
the relationship between the content of the URL and the text
surrounding it in a tweet. In this work, we study the structure of tweets with URLs relative to the content of the Web
documents pointed to by the URLs. We identify several segment classes that may appear in a tweet with URLs, such as
the title of a Web page and the user’s original content. Our
goals in this paper are: introduce, define, and analyze the segmentation problem of tweets with URLs, develop an effective
algorithm to solve it, and show that our solution can benefit
sentiment analysis on Twitter. We also show that the problem
is an instance of the block edit distance problem, and thus an
NP-hard problem.

Tweet (1)
[Tu]

Bloomberg rips Trump: ‘Totally incompetent’ https://t.co/...

Tweet (2)
[TBu]

Bloomberg rip #Trump: ‘#Totallyincompetent’. . . . New York billionaires, #MichaelBloomberg . . . https://t.co/...

Tweet (3)
[TBUu]

Bloomberg rips Trump: ‘Totally incompetent’ . . . This is a person who should not be
the #President . . . We’re paying the price for
. . . https://t.co/...

Figure 1: Example of URLtweets, showing segmentation
patterns (in square brackets on the left) and text segments
marked as follows: boldface for title, underline for body and
italic for user

Introduction

the proposed segmentation can improve sentiment analysis
on tweets.
First, we aim to show that the text of such tweets can be
naturally partitioned into segments, substrings, that relate to
the content of the web page pointed to by the URL, which
we will refer to as URLdoc. We define three classes of tweet
segments: title segment, denoted by T (this segment overlaps with a large portion of the title of the URLdoc); body
segment, denoted by B (the segment is an excerpt from the
body of the URLdoc); and user segment, denoted by U (the
segment is the user’s utterance). We denote the presence of
URL in a tweet by u. Figure 1 shows several examples of
URLtweets with their segments and patterns. In Tweet (1),
for instance, the entire text of the tweet, “Bloomberg rips
Trump: ‘Totally incompetent’ ”, is the title of the URLdoc.
In Tweet (2), the title is followed by an excerpt from the
body of the URLdoc. In Tweet (3), there are both title and
body segments, and a user’s original utterance, “We’re paying the price for . . . ”.
There are several challenges in the tweet segmentation
problem that we will describe later in the paper. One challenge is when substrings of the title or the body are replaced
with active Twitter-specific markups like in Tweet (2) (Figure 1). In that tweet “Trump” and “Totally Incompetent” are
replaced by #Trump and #Totallyincompetent, respectively.

Many applications built upon Twitter data require a robust
understanding of user exchanged messages (aka tweets),
such as named entity recognition (NER) (Li et al. 2015; Ritter et al. 2011; Schneider, Mukherjee, and Dragut 2018),
event detection and summarization (Hughes and Palen
2009), and sentiment analysis (SA) (Gezici et al. 2013;
Yang, Dragut, and Mukherjee 2020). The length restriction
on tweets encourages users to employ unconventional writing techniques when creating tweets. Thus, tweet analysis
remains challenging despite more than a decade long research effort (Li et al. 2015; Kong et al. 2014).
This paper presents, to our knowledge, the first attempt to
understand the text structure in a tweet that contains URLs.
We refer to these tweets as URLtweets throughout the paper. We show that about 1 in 5 English-language tweets contains a URL (see the section “Tweets with URLs”). Another
study (Suh et al. 2010) shows that 56.7% of retweets are
to URLtweets. Since URLtweets represent a significant portion of the overall Twitter stream traffic, we contend that this
class of tweets deserves its own attention. In this work, we
introduce the problem of URLtweets segmentation, analyze
its complexity, give an algorithm to solve it, and show that
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12480

