The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Margin of Victory in Tournaments: Structural and Experimental Results
Markus Brill,1 Ulrike Schmidt-Kraepelin,1 Warut Suksompong2
1

2

Research Group Efficient Algorithms, TU Berlin, Germany
School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{brill,u.schmidt-kraepelin}@tu-berlin.de, warut@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

as the minimum number of pairwise comparisons that need
to be reversed in order for the winner to drop out of the winner set. Analogously, the MoV of a non-winner is defined
as the negative of the minimum number of comparisons that
must be reversed for it to enter the winner set.1 In addition
to refining tournament solutions, the notion also has a natural interpretation in terms of bribery and manipulation: the
MoV of an alternative reflects the cost of bribing voters or
manipulating match outcomes so that the status of the alternative changes with respect to the winner set. For a number
of common tournament solutions, we studied the complexity of computing the MoV and provided bounds on its values
for both winners and non-winners (Brill et al. 2020b).
Our previous results paint an initial picture on the properties of the MoV in tournaments. Nevertheless, several important questions about the notion remain unanswered from
that work. For each tournament solution, how many different
values does the MoV take on average? How large is the set of
alternatives with the highest MoV in a random tournament?
If two alternatives dominate the same number of other alternatives, for which tournament solutions is it the case that
the MoV of both alternatives must be equal? If an alternative
“covers” another (i.e., the former alternative dominates the
latter along with all alternatives that the latter dominates),
for which tournament solutions is it always true that the
MoV of the former alternative is at least that of the latter?
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive answer to these
questions for several common tournament solutions using
axiomatic and probabilistic analysis (Section 3) as well as
through experiments (Section 4).

Tournament solutions are standard tools for identifying winners based on pairwise comparisons between competing alternatives. The recently studied notion of margin of victory
(MoV) offers a general method for refining the winner set
of any given tournament solution, thereby increasing the discriminative power of the solution. In this paper, we reveal
a number of structural insights on the MoV by investigating
fundamental properties such as monotonicity and consistency
with respect to the covering relation. Furthermore, we provide experimental evidence on the extent to which the MoV
notion refines winner sets in tournaments generated according to various stochastic models.

1

Introduction

Tournaments serve as a practical tool for modeling scenarios
involving a set of alternatives along with pairwise comparisons between them. Perhaps the most common example of
a tournament is a round-robin sports competition, where every pair of teams play each other once and there is no tie in
match outcomes. Another application, typical especially in
the social choice literature, concerns elections: here, alternatives represent election candidates, and pairwise comparisons capture the majority relation between pairs of candidates. In order to select the “winners” of a tournament in
a consistent manner, numerous methods—known as tournament solutions—have been proposed. Given the ubiquity
of tournaments, it is hardly surprising that tournament solutions have drawn substantial interest from researchers in
the past few decades (Laslier 1997; Woeginger 2003; Hudry
2009; Aziz et al. 2015; Dey 2017; Brandt, Brill, and Harrenstein 2018; Brandt et al. 2018; Han and van Deemen 2019).
While tournament solutions are useful for selecting the
best alternatives according to various desiderata, several solutions suffer from the setback that they tend to choose large
winner sets. For instance, Fey (2008) showed that the top
cycle, the uncovered set, and the Banks set are likely to include all alternatives in a large random tournament. To address this issue, we recently introduced the notion of margin
of victory (MoV) for tournaments (Brill, Schmidt-Kraepelin,
and Suksompong 2020b). The MoV of a winner is defined

1.1

Related Work

Despite their origins in social choice theory, tournament solutions have found applications in a wide range of areas including game theory (Fisher and Ryan 1995), webpage ranking (Brandt and Fischer 2007), dueling bandit problems (Ramamohan, Rajkumar, and Agarwal 2016), and philosophical
decision theory (Podgorski 2020). As is the case for social
choice theory in general, early studies of tournament solutions were primarily based on the axiomatic approach. With
1
In our previous paper (Brill et al. 2020b), we considered a
more general setting where each pairwise comparison can have a
weight representing the cost of reversing it, but here we will focus
on the unweighted setting.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5228

