The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FL-MSRE: A Few-Shot Learning based Approach to Multimodal Social Relation
Extraction
Hai Wan,1 Manrong Zhang, 1 Jianfeng Du, 2,4∗ Ziling Huang, 1 Yufei Yang, 1 Jeff Z. Pan 3
2

1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Multilingual Intelligent Processing, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou
510006, P.R.China
3
School of Informatics, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 510330, P.R.China
wanhai@mail.sysu.edu.cn, jfdu@gdufs.edu.cn, {zhangmr7, huangzling, yangyf35}@mail3.sysu.edu.cn,
jeff.z.pan@abdn.ac.uk

Abstract

et al. 2019b) mines social relations from the text of microposts. (Zhang et al. 2015) proposes to learn face representations to capture facial attributes and performs pairwise face
reasoning for relation prediction. All these studies address
SRE only from unimodal information and ignore the high
coupling in multimodal information.
To explain why SRE requires multimodal information, we
provide three examples in Figure 1. Consider Example (a).
From the mention of “the Obamas” in text we can easily infer that Malia and Sasha are family members. From the faces
of Malia and Sasha, we may find that they are girls with
similar ages. Thus, by utilizing both face information and
text information we can conclude that Malia and Sasha are
sisters. Consider Example (b) and Example (c). The word
“hug” in both two texts indicates a close relation between
two people. Taking the information of faces into account, we
may find that Barack is a man, Malia is a girl and Michelle
is a woman; moreover, there is a significant age gap between
Barack and Malia, while Barack and Michelle have similar
ages. Hence Barack is more likely to be the father of Malia,
whereas he is more likely to be the husband of Michelle.
Motivated by these examples, we focus on multimodal
SRE from both texts and images. In this line it is crucial
to clarify the following two questions:
• Can introducing face image information into a text-based
model improve the performance for SRE?
• Can facial features extracted from different images
achieve similar performance as from the same image?
Answering these questions calls for multimodal datasets
having both texts and face images. Since existing SRE
datasets (Zhang et al. 2015; Sun, Schiele, and Fritz 2017)
only contain unimodal information, we construct three
datasets from four classical masterpieces and corresponding
TV series. These datasets reflect a complete set of social relations in a certain period of Chinese society, but most social
relations therein only contain a few instances, in accord with
the relation imbalance characteristics (Li et al. 2017).
Existing methods for SRE overlook the serious unbalance distribution on real-life social relations. To cope with
the unbalance, we resort to few-shot learning techniques
(Koch, Zemel, and Salakhutdinov 2015; Vinyals et al. 2016;

Social relation extraction (SRE for short), which aims to infer
the social relation between two people in daily life, has been
demonstrated to be of great value in reality. Existing methods for SRE consider extracting social relation only from
unimodal information such as text or image, ignoring the
high coupling of multimodal information. Moreover, previous studies overlook the serious unbalance distribution on
social relations. To address these issues, this paper proposes
FL-MSRE, a few-shot learning based approach to extracting
social relations from both texts and face images. Considering
the lack of multimodal social relation datasets, this paper also
presents three multimodal datasets annotated from four classical masterpieces and corresponding TV series. Inspired by
the success of BERT, we propose a strong BERT based baseline to extract social relation from text only. FL-MSRE is empirically shown to outperform the baseline significantly. This
demonstrates that using face images benefits text-based SRE.
Further experiments also show that using two faces from different images achieves similar performance as from the same
image. This means that FL-MSRE is suitable for a wide range
of SRE applications where the faces of two people can only
be collected from different images.1

Introduction
Social relations are specific relations in human daily life.
They define the associations between two people in either
the physical or the virtual world. Social relation extraction
(SRE) aims to infer the social relation between two people from texts, personal albums, or films, etc.. It has been
demonstrated to be of great value in reality. For example, it
can capture social connections and enable machines better
understand human behaviors.
In the past years SRE has drawn increasing research interests. (Fairclough 2003) extracts social relations from the
text of microblogs. (Du et al. 2019a) extracts social relations
from four classical masterpieces of Chinese literature. (Du
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The code and datasets are available at https://github.com/
sysulic/FL-MSRE.

13916

