The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A General Offline Reinforcement Learning Framework for Interactive
Recommendation
Teng Xiao, Donglin Wang∗
Machine Intelligence Lab (MiLAB), AI Division, School of Engineering, Westlake University
tengxiao01@gmail.com, wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Discrete stochastic policy. In the testing, instead of recommending only one item, the RS requires generating a topk item list according a discrete policy. Training a deterministic policy violates the simple machine learning principle:
test and train conditions must match (see §4 for details). (b)
Extrapolation error. Extrapolation error is an error in offpolicy value learning which is introduced by the mismatch
between the dataset and true state-action visitation of the
current policy (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019; Siegel
et al. 2019). This problem is even more serious for the recommendation involving large numbers of discrete actions.
(c) Unknown logging policy. The feedbacks typically come
from a unknown mixture of previous policies. The method
that requires estimating logging policy are limited by their
ability to accurately estimate the unknown logging policy.
Recent effort (Chen et al. 2019a) for off-policy recommendation tries to alleviate the problem (a) by utilizing the
inverse propensity score (IPS) with model-free policy gradient algorithm. However the IPS suffers from high variance (Swaminathan and Joachims 2015a) and will still be
biased if the logging policy does not span the support of the
optimal policy (Sachdeva, Su, and Joachims 2020; Liu et al.
2019). Moreover, it cannot address other problems mentioned above, i.e., (b) and (c). Prior works (Zheng et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2018b) try to build RL-based recommendation algorithms by directly utilizing the vanilla Q-learning (Sutton
and Barto 2018), an off-policy RL algorithm. However the
Q-learning is a deterministic policy method and also suffers
from the extrapolation error due to no interaction with online
environments (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019).
To address the aforementioned defects, in this paper, we
propose a general and effective offline learning framework
for interactive RS. We first formalize the interactive recommendation as a probabilisitic inference problem, and then
propose a discrete stochastic actor-critic algorithm to maximize cumulative rewards based on the probabilistic formulation. In order to reduce the extrapolation error, we propose five regularization techniques: support constraints, supervised regularization, policy constraints, dual constraints
and reward extrapolation for offline learning, which can constrain the mismatch between the recommendation policy and
the unknown logging policy. Our approaches can be viewed
as a combination of supervised learning and off-policy reinforcement learning for recommendation with discrete ac-

This paper studies the problem of learning interactive recommender systems from logged feedbacks without any exploration in online environments. We address the problem
by proposing a general offline reinforcement learning framework for recommendation, which enables maximizing cumulative user rewards without online exploration. Specifically,
we first introduce a probabilistic generative model for interactive recommendation, and then propose an effective inference
algorithm for discrete and stochastic policy learning based on
logged feedbacks. In order to perform offline learning more
effectively, we propose five approaches to minimize the distribution mismatch between the logging policy and recommendation policy: support constraints, supervised regularization, policy constraints, dual constraints and reward extrapolation. We conduct extensive experiments on two public realworld datasets, demonstrating that the proposed methods can
achieve superior performance over existing supervised learning and reinforcement learning methods for recommendation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful paradigm for interactive or sequential recommender systems (RS), since it
can maximize users’ long-term satisfaction with the system
and constantly adapt to users’ shifting interest (state). However, training optimal RL algorithms requires large amounts
of interactions with environments (Kakade 2003), which is
impractical in the recommendation context. Performing online interaction (on-policy) learning would hurt users’ experiences and the revenue of the platform. Since logged feedbacks of users are often abundant and cheap, an alternative
is to make use of them and to learn a near-optimal recommendation policy offline before we deploy it online.
Although there are some offline (off-policy) RL algorithms have been proposed in the continuous robot control
domain (Fujimoto, Meger, and Precup 2019; Kumar et al.
2019), the problem that how to build an effective offline RL
framework for recommendation involving large numbers of
discrete actions and logged feedbacks remains an open one.
Learning an effective recommendation policy from logged
feedbacks faces the following challenges simultaneously:
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4512

