The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Question-Driven Span Labeling Model for Aspect–Opinion Pair Extraction
∗

∗

Lei Gao,1,3 Yulong Wang,1,3 Tongcun Liu,2,3 Jingyu Wang,1,3 Lei Zhang,1,3 Jianxin Liao1,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
School of Information Engineering, Zhejiang A & F University
3
EBUPT Information Technology Co., Ltd.
{gaolei 1, wangyulong, liutongcun, wangjingyu, zhanglei, liaojianxin}@ebupt.com

Abstract
Aspect term extraction and opinion word extraction are two
fundamental subtasks of aspect-based sentiment analysis.
The internal relationship between aspect terms and opinion
words is typically ignored, and information for the decisionmaking of buyers and sellers is insufficient. In this paper, we
explore an aspect–opinion pair extraction (AOPE) task and
propose a Question-Driven Span Labeling (QDSL) model
to extract all the aspect–opinion pairs from user-generated
reviews. Specifically, we divide the AOPE task into aspect
term extraction (ATE) and aspect-specified opinion extraction (ASOE) subtasks; we first extract all the candidate aspect terms and then the corresponding opinion words given
the aspect term. Unlike existing approaches that use the BIObased tagging scheme for extraction, the QDSL model adopts
a span-based tagging scheme and builds a question–answerbased machine-reading comprehension task for an effective
aspect–opinion pair extraction. Extensive experiments conducted on three tasks (ATE, ASOE, and AOPE) on four
benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.

Figure 1: Example showing the differences between ATE,
OWE, and AOPE tasks.

To solve these issues, the potential opinion information
in a sentence has been utilized to improve the performance
of the ATE task (Liu, Xu, and Zhao 2012; Liu et al. 2013;
Li and Lam 2017). Moreover, studies have shown that using
the information of the aspect terms and opinion words in
a sentence can help to mutually improve the performance of
ATE and OWE tasks (Wang and Wang 2008; Qiu et al. 2011;
Liu et al. 2013; Yu, Jiang, and Xia 2019). Although these
approaches outperform conventional ones, the objective is
to extract the aspect term set and/or opinion word set from
a given sentence, rather than extracting the aspect–opinion
pairs, which have great significance in reality.
Therefore, in this study, we focus on an aspect–opinion
pair extraction (AOPE) subtask for ABSA, which aims to
extract all the aspect–opinion pairs from a review text. For
instance, in the sentence “Great food, nice-looking menu
and great service.” the words “food”, “menu” and “service”
are aspect terms, whereas the words “great”, “nice-looking”
and “great” are their corresponding opinions; these can be
extracted by the ATE and OWE tasks, respectively. However, the AOPE task involves extracting the aspect–opinion
pairs set {<food, great>, <menu, nice-looking>, <service,
great>}. Figure 1 illustrates the detailed difference between
the ATE, OWE, and AOPE tasks.
The aspect–opinion pairs can ensure a more fine-grained
sentiment analysis for review texts and will benefit many
downstream applications such as opinion summarization
and product profiling (Zhao et al. 2020). By referring to the
aspect–opinion pairs in a review sentence, customers can
rapidly obtain a glimpse of the pros and cons of a product or service. Despite the significance of ABSA, few works
have studied AOPE tasks, owing to the following challenges:
(1) Pairing problems: for different aspect terms, the corre-

Introduction
An aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) task involves
identifying opinions expressed toward specific entities, e.g.,
the price of a laptop (Li and Lam 2017). This task involves
two closely related subtasks: Aspect term extraction (ATE)
and opinion word extraction (OWE). As a fundamental subtask of an ABSA, the objective of the ATE is to extract the
aspect term (i.e., a word or phrase) that describes an attribute
or feature of an entity in a given sentence (Pontiki et al.
2014, 2015, 2016). The purpose of the OWE is to extract
opinion words, which are expressions carrying subjective
emotions in a sentence (Liu, Xu, and Zhao 2014). Earlier
works focused only on the ATE task (Jakob and Gurevych
2010; Li et al. 2010; Liu, Xu, and Zhao 2012; Mukherjee
and Liu 2012), and did not consider the internal relationship between ATE and OWE subtasks. None of these works
could provide sufficient information for the decision-making
of buyers and sellers.
∗
Corresponding author and contributing equally with the first
author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12875

