The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deepening the Sense of Touch in Planetary Exploration with Geometric and
Topological Deep Learning
Yuzhou Chen,1,4 Yuliya Marchetti,2 Yulia R. Gel3, 4
1

Department of Statistical Science, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX 75275, USA
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
4
Energy Storage and Distributed Resources Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
yuzhouc@smu.edu, yuliya.marchetti@jpl.nasa.gov, ygl@utdallas.edu
2

Abstract

of in-situ sensors directly on the wheel, which enables direct
measurements of several key contact area parameters and
surface properties of potential scientific interest. This new
sensing modality has promise to become a primary planetary mission driver, especially for supporting exploration
and mapping efforts at cruising rather than crawling speeds
for the future rover missions to Mars and Moon and terrestrial mobility applications for ground vehicle support in
remote harsh environments. Knowing the current slip and
sink rates of each wheel could be used to halt a drive, while
knowing about rock composition and size below the wheel
could result in a better power distribution to the wheels for
avoiding damage and wear. This information can be highly
beneficial for scientific endeavors as well. Monitoring terrain change can trigger remote sensing from onboard science
instruments, when criteria of interest have been observed.
In-situ wheel instruments enable higher science yield, while
enabling safer vehicle operations. Combined with the visual
odometry, such tactile sensing will add “touch” to the “eyes”
of a rover.
A new concept developed in Marchetti et al. (2020) not
only incorporates in-situ sensors on a robotic wheel, but
also uses machine learning to extract meaningful metrics
from the interaction between the wheel and the terrain using the sensors. These include continuous slip estimation,
balance, and sharpness for engineering purposes and estimates of hydration, texture, and terrain patterns for science
applications. This tactile wheel carries an electrochemical
impedance spectrometer (EIS), for hydration detection, and
is wrapped in a 2D grid of pressure sensors, which give continual context for the pressure signature of the ground underneath the wheel (see Fig. 1). The pressure sensor supplies a conductivity “image” of the surface/wheel interface.
Marchetti et al. (2020) conduct numerous experiments and
collect data from the pressure and the EIS sensors, and consequently train classical machine learning models, such as
tree-based Stochastic Gradient Boosting (SGB) and random
forest (RF), with the derived features to infer engineering
conditions and predict various terrain properties.
New and One of a Kind Data for Future Planetary Terrain Exploration. The resulting dataset of raw conductivity
images from the pressure sensor mounted on a rolling wheel
is a first and unique collection of a new data type that has a

Tactile and embedded sensing is a new concept that has recently appeared in the context of rovers and planetary exploration missions. Various sensors such as those measuring
pressure and integrated directly on wheels have the potential to add a “sense of touch” to exploratory vehicles. We investigate the utility of deep learning (DL), from conventional
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to emerging geometric and topological DL, to terrain classification for planetary
exploration based on a novel dataset from an experimental
tactile wheel concept. The dataset includes 2D conductivity images from a pressure sensor array, which is wrapped
around a rover wheel and is able to read pressure signatures of
the ground beneath the wheel. Neither newer nor traditional
DL tools have been previously applied to tactile sensing data.
We discuss insights into advantages and limitations of these
methods for the analysis of non-traditional pressure images
and their potential use in planetary surface science.

Introduction
Planetary rovers, like the Mars Exploration Rovers (MER)
and the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover, have enabled
exploration and collection of invaluable science data across
the surface of Mars. Possible future manned and unmanned
Lunar rover missions, e.g. Volatiles Investigating Polar Exploration Rover (VIPER), are planned for quick investigation and mapping of the Moon surface, while the Fetch
Rover on Mars sample-return mission (MSR) will deliver
a sample back to Earth. These planetary rovers are typically
equipped with a variety of science instruments, manipulation equipment and traditional imagers. In their operations,
they rely heavily on visual images and telemetry, such as
motor current or wheel rim thrust. These data are used to assess the health and safety of the vehicle and determine its activities in advance by operations teams, e.g. route planning,
hazard avoidance and targeting of onboard science instruments. Currently, such systems lack embedded instruments
that have the ability to assess the interaction between the terrain and the rover mobility system in real time.
A tactile wheel is an novel experimental concept for planetary and other exploration rovers that combines a payload
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15278

