The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Wasserstein Graph Discriminant Learning for Graph Classification
Tong Zhang1 * , Yun Wang1 * , Zhen Cui1† , Chuanwei Zhou1 ,
Baoliang Cui2 , Haikuan Huang2 , Jian Yang1
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{tong.zhang, yun.wang, zhen.cui, cwzhou}@njust.edu.cn, moqing.cbl@taobo.com, haikuan.hhk@alibaba-inc.com,
csjyang@njust.edu.cn
Abstract

streams of methods. Graph kernels (Shervashidze et al.
2011; Borgwardt and Kriegel 2005; Shervashidze et al.
2009) often have explicit expressions and are easy to train
because they usually have convex optimization solutions.
However, as these methods often take hand-crafted (shallow) features as input, their representation ability in capturing complex interactions between nodes might be limited. In
contrast, GNNs learn representation from graphs by stacking multiple neural network layers, in each of which multihop node aggregation is performed. In this way, GNNs are
powerful in capturing graph structural information, and thus
have achieved promising results in graph classification.
Although considerable success has been achieved by previous works above, however, few of them directly considered topology correspondence between graphs. Topological
characteristics play a crucial role in identifying a graph, and
well capturing topology correspondence may be of great
significance to learn discriminative graph representation.
However, topology correspondence may not be easily modeled as it requires understanding semantic structure among
nodes. Based on this consideration, Wasserstein distance
(W-distance) (Cuturi 2013) may be leveraged to measure the
topology correlation between two graphs. With an optimal
transport (OT) matrix considering all probabilistic couplings
between two probability distributions, W-distance provides
a powerful tool to compute distances between two complex
distributions. From this perspective, W-metric would be a
good selection to measure the correspondence of topology
distributions spanned by those graph nodes.
To do discriminative analysis of graphs in W-metric
space, however, we have to confront three aspects of issues:
i) The integration of W-metric into GNNs is necessary, but
difficult due to the non-Euclidean property. ii) There exists
a high complexity in computing inter-class and intra-class
scatter, as the explicit calculation on mean and covariance
of graphs are rather difficult in W-metric space. iii) The
minibatch-based processing of deep learning architectures
makes it difficult to access the global covariance of all samples within one or across different classes.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose a
deep Wasserstein Graph Discriminant Learning (WGDL) to
deal with the graph classification task. In WGDL, graph dis-

Graph topological structures are crucial to distinguish
different-class graphs. In this work, we propose a deep
Wasserstein graph discriminant learning (WGDL) framework
to learn discriminative embeddings of graphs in Wassersteinmetric (W-metric) matching space. In order to bypass the calculation of W-metric class centers in discriminant analysis, as
well as better support batch process learning, we introduce a
reference set of graphs (aka graph dictionary) to express those
representative graph samples (aka dictionary keys). On the
bridge of graph dictionary, every input graph can be projected
into the latent dictionary space through our proposed Wasserstein graph transformation (WGT). In WGT, we formulate
inter-graph distance in W-metric space by virtue of the optimal transport (OT) principle, which effectively expresses the
correlations of cross-graph structures. To make WGDL better representation ability, we dynamically update graph dictionary during training by maximizing the Wasserstein Discriminant loss, i.e. the ratio of inter-class versus intra-class
Wasserstein distance. To evaluate our WGDL method, comprehensive experiments are conducted on six graph classification datasets. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our WGDL, and state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Graph modeling has become an active topic in the machine
learning field due to its huge application potential in recent years. Generally, a graph consists of a set of nodes and
edges, where the nodes can represent any types of entities
and the edges describe their connection relationship. Due
to the flexible structure and powerful representation ability,
graphs have been widely used to characterize ubiquitous irregular data in the real world such as citation graphs and social networks. Accordingly, there exist various graph-related
pattern recognition tasks, among which graph classification
is one of the most fundamental tasks.
Numerous algorithms have been proposed for graph classification in the past decade years. Graph kernel-based algorithms and graph neural networks (GNNs) are two main* Tong Zhang and Yun Wang have equal contribution.
†

The corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10914

