The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Contour to Classification Game
Irene Lee1∗ Safinah Ali2∗ ,
1

MIT STEP Lab
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02139
ialee@mit.edu, safinah@media.mit.edu
2

Abstract

2018). The designers envisioned that having this concrete
experience acting as a node participating in the processes of
AI would help learners: a) understand how a neural network
learns over time and the limits of its understanding; b) think
through where classification and prediction can go wrong,
and c) develop ideas about how to fix the errors in classification.

The Contour to Classification game is a browser-based game
that teaches middle school students basic concepts in supervised learning. The game is an online variant of the Neural
Network game that was presented at AAAI Fall Symposium
Teaching AI in K-12 track in 2019. We share preliminary
findings from implementing the online version of the original
Neural Network game in a pilot research study and describe
the game’s evolution to the Contour to Classification game.
The new game uses a simulation of a neural network to engage students, through digital drawing and selection interactions, in the classification of images. The players act as nodes
in a multi-step process of compositing salient smaller features
to form larger features and ultimately a partial contour of an
object that is used to make a prediction. After evaluating the
prediction, information is sent back through the network in
processes mimicking back propagation and gradient descent.
Additional rounds of the game can be played to witness how
the network evolves and gets “better” at classifying images
from contours. Through this game, we aimed for students to
learn the structure, components, and functioning of a neural
network, and the processes involved in supervised learning.
The Contour to Classification game supports online student
learning by providing the image classification experience using purely visual inputs to each layer. We will conclude with a
discussion of if and how the evolving design addresses classroom needs and scaling considerations.

Background
The Contour to Classification game originates from an educational activity called the “Human Neural Network Game”
developed by Catherine Schuman, Steven Young, Thomas
Proffen, Dasha Herrmannova of Oak Ridge National Laboratory for the TechGirlz program (TechGirlz 2018 (accessed
December 17, 2020). In the Human Neural Network Game
students play the role of nodes in a 3-layer Neural Network.
The structure of the neural network is formed by students
sitting in predefined rows representing layers of the neural
network. Input nodes are provided with an image and must
write four words on individual cards that describe the image. Each of the words is distributed to each of the four
hidden layer nodes. Hidden layer nodes select two words
from their set of four to pass on to the output node. The output node creates a caption using four of the eight words it
has received from the hidden layer nodes. Subsequently the
“unveiling” takes place wherein the original image and its
caption are exposed for all to see. In this live action game,
only the feed forward process was simulated and the game
mimics the testing process in supervised learning.
In 2019, Lee and Martin extended the live action game
to introduce the processes of back propagation and gradient
descent to mimic the training process in supervised learning (Irene Lee 2019). After the unveiling of the original image and its caption, students come up with an evaluation
function to assess how well the network performed on captioning, then feedback is provided to nodes by passing circled words (if the word appeared in the original caption) or
uncircled words back to their originators. After a discussion
of the feedback and possible adjustments to the node’s word
selection behavior, the students can play additional rounds
with new images and captions to see if/how the neural network learns to get better at captioning. During a wrap-up
discussion, the facilitators reinforce that students were modeling an artificial neural network and review the analogies

Introduction
The Contour to Classification game was created to help K-12
students and teachers understand how learning is achieved
by artificial neural networks (Hecht-Nielsen 1992). The goal
was to engage learners in activities that would help build
mental models of the structures and processes in supervised
learning on neural networks. In particular, the structure and
function of input, hidden, and output nodes are represented,
and the processes of feeding forward, evaluation, back propagation and gradient descent were mimicked. This live simulation strategy is similar to others that have shown promise
for supporting learners in developing the mental models they
need to retain knowledge, and use knowledge adaptively
and flexibly (National Academies of Sciences and Medicine
∗

Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15583

