The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Sample Uncertainty for Domain Adaptive Person Re-Identification
Kecheng Zheng1 * , Cuiling Lan2† , Wenjun Zeng2 , Zhizheng Zhang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
{zkcys001,zhizheng}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {culan, wezeng}@microsoft.com, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Many unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) person reidentification (ReID) approaches combine clustering-based
pseudo-label prediction with feature fine-tuning. However,
because of domain gap, the pseudo-labels are not always reliable and there are noisy/incorrect labels. This would mislead
the feature representation learning and deteriorate the performance. In this paper, we propose to estimate and exploit the
credibility of the assigned pseudo-label of each sample to alleviate the influence of noisy labels, by suppressing the contribution of noisy samples. We build our baseline framework
using the mean teacher method together with an additional
contrastive loss. We have observed that a sample with a wrong
pseudo-label through clustering in general has a weaker consistency between the output of the mean teacher model and
the student model. Based on this finding, we propose to exploit the uncertainty (measured by consistency levels) to evaluate the reliability of the pseudo-label of a sample and incorporate the uncertainty to re-weight its contribution within
various ReID losses, including the identity (ID) classification
loss per sample, the triplet loss, and the contrastive loss. Our
uncertainty-guided optimization brings significant improvement and achieves the state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.

Figure 1: Observations on the relations between the correctness of pseudo labels and the uncertainty (which we measure
by the inconsistency level of the output features of two models, i.e., the student model and the teacher model based on
the mean teacher method (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017) for
the target domain samples (obtained from Duke→Market).
We found the uncertainty for samples with wrong/noisy
pseudo labels (red curve) is usually larger than those (green
curve) with correct/clean pseudo labels.

Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) is an important task that
matches person images across times/spaces/cameras, which
has many applications such as people tracking in smart retail, image retrieval for finding lost children. Existing approaches achieve remarkable performance when the training and testing data are from the same dataset/domain. But
they usually fail to generalize well to other datasets where
there are domain gaps (Ge, Chen, and Li 2020). To address this practical problem, unsupervised domain adaptive
(UDA) person ReID attracts much attention for both the
academic and industrial communities, where labeled source
domain and unlabeled target domain data are exploited for
training.

Typical UDA person ReID approaches (Ge, Chen, and Li
2020; Zhai et al. 2020a; Zhong et al. 2019; Zheng et al.
2020; Song et al. 2020; Dai et al. 2020) include three
steps: feature pre-training with labeled source domain data,
clustering-based pseudo-label prediction for the target domain data, and feature representation learning/fine-tuning
with the pseudo-labels. The last two steps are usually iteratively conducted to promote each other. However, the
pseudo-labels obtained/assigned through clustering usually
contain noisy (wrong) labels due to the divergence/domain
gap between the source and target data, and the imperfect
results of the clustering algorithm. Such noisy labels would
mislead the feature learning and harm the domain adaptation
performance. Thus, alleviating the negative effects of those
samples with unreliable/noisy pseudo labels is important for
the success of domain adaptation.

* This work was done when Kecheng Zheng was an intern at

MSRA.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3538

