The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning via Relation Knowledge Distillation
Songlin Dong1 # , Xiaopeng Hong2 # , Xiaoyu Tao1 , Xinyuan Chang3 , Xing Wei3 , Yihong Gong3 *
1

2

College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{dsl972731417,txy666793,cxy19960919}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{hongxiaopeng,weixing,ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the challenging few-shot classincremental learning (FSCIL) problem, which requires to
transfer knowledge from old tasks to new ones and solves
catastrophic forgetting. We propose the exemplar relation distillation incremental learning framework to balance the tasks
of old-knowledge preserving and new-knowledge adaptation.
First, we construct an exemplar relation graph to represent
the knowledge learned by the original network and update
gradually for new tasks learning. Then an exemplar relation
loss function for discovering the relation knowledge between
different classes is introduced to learn and transfer the structural information in relation graph. A large number of experiments demonstrate that relation knowledge does exist in
the exemplars and our approach outperforms other state-ofthe-art class-incremental learning methods on the CIFAR100,
miniImageNet, and CUB200 datasets.

Figure 1: Comparisons of two different knowledge transfer techniques: The individual knowledge distillation (IKD)
transfers the knowledge point to point (original output to
new output) while the relation knowledge distillation (RKD)
transfers the structural relations (e.g., adjacency) of the output.

Introduction
To date, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
achieved superior performances in a large number of computer vision and pattern recognition tasks (He et al. 2020;
Tao et al. 2020; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He
et al. 2015; Deng et al. 2009). Currently, the universal approach is to learn a model on a large amount of data, which
is usually fixed and can not change in line with the needs of
users. Practical artificial intelligence models are supposed
to adapt to the ever-changing world. For example, they can
continuously learn new tasks without forgetting tasks that
they have learned before. Thus, incremental learning (i.e.,
continuous learning, or lifelong learning) has attracted much
attention due to the ability to perform continuous model
learning in a wide range of practical applications. The scenarios of incremental learning can be briefly divided into
the class-incremental (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Tao et al. 2020a;
Chang et al. 2021) and the task-incremental (Rajasegaran
et al. 2020) ones. This paper mainly focuses on the former
one.
Most of the class-incremental learning (CIL) approaches (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Castro et al. 2018; Hou et al.

2019) learn new tasks from large scale training samples with
annotations. However, in practice, it is expensive and infeasible to continuously label a steady stream of data. As a result, it is more realistic that only very small amounts of samples with annotations are available. Therefore, in this paper,
we focus on this few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) (Tao et al. 2020b) problem which is challenging but
has great application prospects.
Knowledge distillation is a common and effective approach to transfer knowledge from an old network to a new
one in CIL (Gou et al. 2020). For example, some early
CIL approaches (Rebuffi et al. 2017; Castro et al. 2018)
distill the original model’s soft targets directly into a new
one on the output layer to preserve old knowledge. In addition, the responses of the penultimate feature layer are also
used as the knowledge to guide the training of the new task
model (Hou et al. 2019; Tao et al. 2020b). All these methods
belong to the individual knowledge distillation (IKD) approaches (Park et al. 2019), which only focus on preserving
isolated points in the feature (or output) space. Concretely,
the IKD method only constrains the differences between the

* Yihong Gong is the corresponding author. # Songlin Dong and
Xiaopeng Hong are co-first authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1255

