The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robustness Guarantees for Mode Estimation with an Application to Bandits
Aldo Pacchiano,1 Heinrich Jiang,2 Michael I. Jordan1
1

UC Berkeley
Google Research
pacchiano@berkeley.edu, heinrichj@google.com, jordan@cs.berkeley.edu
2

Abstract

We then provide a new application of mode estimation
to the problem of the multi-armed bandits (MAB) (Robbins
1985), called modal bandits. MABs have been used extensively in a wide range of practical applications and have
been extensively analyzed theoretically. The vast majority
of works presume that the value of an arm is the expected
value of a reward distribution. In this paper, we present an
alternative: where the reward is a function of the modes of
the distribution of an arm. This leads to a bandit technique
that is more robust and better uses the information from the
shape of the arm’s distribution as well as other nuances that
may be lost with the mean (see Figure 1).
Using the mean of the reward distribution can present serious limitations when the observations are biased, potentially
due to adversarial interference. We show quantitatively that
whenever this is the case, our mode-based bandit algorithms
present an alternative to mean-based ones.
Another situation where modal bandits are useful is when
the agent already has samples from the arms, but has only
one shot to select an arm to pull. Here, the agent may be
more interested in optimizing what is likely to happen rather
than the choice that is optimal in expectation. For example,
when a risk-averse agent needs to decide between a decision
that is likely to have small gains and a decision that has a
small chance of high gains but large chance of no effect and
prefers the former.
In this paper we assume each arm is a distribution over
vectors in RD with density f and a set of modes M ⊂ RD .
We model the reward of an arm as given by a ’score’ function
that takes M as input and outputs a value in [0, 1]. Although
our results can be extended to other more general definitions
and more complex modal behaviors, such as scoring functions depending on the value of the m-th most likely mode
or the distance between the smallest and the largest mode,
in this paper we focus on the case when scoring functions
depend only on the most likely mode. Details of a more general setting involving scoring functions depending on multiple modes is laid out in the Appendix1 . We proceed to define
the notion of mode and score function we will use to analyze
the modal bandit problem.

Mode estimation is a classical problem in statistics with a
wide range of applications in machine learning. Despite this,
there is little understanding in its robustness properties under possibly adversarial data contamination. In this paper, we
give precise robustness guarantees as well as privacy guarantees under simple randomization. We then introduce a theory for multi-armed bandits where the values are the modes
of the reward distributions instead of the mean. We prove regret guarantees for the problems of top arm identification, top
m-arms identification, contextual modal bandits, and infinite
continuous arms top arm recovery. We show in simulations
that our algorithms are robust to perturbation of the arms by
adversarial noise sequences, thus rendering modal bandits an
attractive choice in situations where the rewards may have
outliers or adversarial corruptions.

Introduction
Work in mode estimation has received much attention
(e.g. (Parzen 1962; Chernoff 1964; Yamato 1971; Silverman 1981; Tsybakov 1990; Vieu 1996; Dasgupta and
Kpotufe 2014)) with practical applications including clustering (Cheng 1995; Sheikh, Khan, and Kanade 2007;
Vedaldi and Soatto 2008; Jiang and Kpotufe 2017), control
(Madani and Benallegue 2007; Hofbaur and Williams 2002),
power systems (Williams, Chung, and Gupta 2001; Sarmadi
and Venkatasubramanian 2013), bioinformatics (Hedges and
Shah 2003), and computer vision (Yin et al. 2003; Tao, Jin,
and Zhang 2007; Collins 2003); however, to the best of our
knowledge, little is known about the statistical robustness of
mode estimation procedures despite the popularity of mode
estimation and the increasing need for robustness in modern data analysis (Dwork, Roth et al. 2014). Such robustness is important if mode-estimation based learning systems
need results to be less sensitive to possibly adversarial data
corruption. Moreover, data sources may be more likely to
release data to the learner if it can be guaranteed for each
source that their additional data will not change the final outcome by much– in other words robustness is also intimately
tied to another important theme of privacy (Dwork and Lei
2009).

Definition 0.1 (Mode). Suppose that f is a density over RD .
1
See https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.02932 for full paper with Appendix.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9277

