The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SeCo: Exploring Sequence Supervision for
Unsupervised Representation Learning
Ting Yao, Yiheng Zhang, Zhaofan Qiu, Yingwei Pan, Tao Mei
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{tingyao.ustc, yihengzhang.chn, zhaofanqiu, panyw.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com

Abstract

building unsupervised learning models to yield powerful and
generic representations.
The supervision in the video sequence generally originates from three types: spatial, spatiotemporal, and sequential. In between, spatial supervision is derived from the
structures in static frame, spatiotemporal supervision reflects the correlation across different frames, and sequential
supervision verifies the temporal coherence. In the literature,
unsupervised learning methods for videos often involve different proxy tasks, e.g., predicting the pixel-level displacement across consecutive frames (Liu et al. 2017; Vondrick,
Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Wang et al. 2019), or reconstructing/predicting the input/future frame through decoder
(Han, Xie et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2017; Srivastava, Mansimov, and Salakhutdinov 2015), and execute representation
learning through optimizing such tasks with the supervision.
Here, without loss of simplicity and generality, we present
one simple proxy task on each type of supervision. From
the spatial standpoint, we extend the instance discrimination task in (He et al. 2019; Wu et al. 2018; Cai et al. 2020)
to an intra-frame instance discrimination task, which distinguishes whether two frame patches are from the same video
frame, as shown in Figure 1(a). From the spatiotemporal perspective, we remould an inter-frame instance discrimination
task, which determines whether two frame patches are derived from an identical video, as depicted in Figure 1(b). For
sequential supervision, we develop a task of temporal order
validation (Figure 1(c)) and verify whether a series of frame
patches are in the correct temporal order.
To materialize the exploitation of supervision in the sequence through the three proxy tasks, we present a new
Sequence Contrastive Learning (SeCo) approach for unsupervised representation learning. Considering that contrastive learning is at the core of recent advances (He et al.
2019; Wu et al. 2018) on unsupervised learning, we build
SeCo on this recipe. The basic principle is to make positive/negative query-key pairs similar/dissimilar. Specifically,
for each video, we randomly sample three frames and take
either first frame or the last frame in time order as the “anchor” frame. In both intra-frame and inter-frame instance
discrimination tasks, we perform data augmentation on the
“anchor” frame to generate two image patches. One is taken
as query and the other patch plus the augmentations of another two frames are used as keys. Moreover, inspired by

A steady momentum of innovations and breakthroughs has
convincingly pushed the limits of unsupervised image representation learning. Compared to static 2D images, video
has one more dimension (time). The inherent supervision
existing in such sequential structure offers a fertile ground
for building unsupervised learning models. In this paper, we
compose a trilogy of exploring the basic and generic supervision in the sequence from spatial, spatiotemporal and
sequential perspectives. We materialize the supervisory signals through determining whether a pair of samples is from
one frame or from one video, and whether a triplet of samples is in the correct temporal order. We uniquely regard
the signals as the foundation in contrastive learning and derive a particular form named Sequence Contrastive Learning (SeCo). SeCo shows superior results under the linear
protocol on action recognition (Kinetics), untrimmed activity recognition (ActivityNet) and object tracking (OTB100). More remarkably, SeCo demonstrates considerable
improvements over recent unsupervised pre-training techniques, and leads the accuracy by 2.96% and 6.47% against
fully-supervised ImageNet pre-training in action recognition
task on UCF101 and HMDB51, respectively. Source code
is available at https://github.com/YihengZhang-CV/SeCoSequence-Contrastive-Learning.

Introduction
Supervised learning has made significant progress and is
still dominant in visual representation learning. Despite having high quantitative performances, the achievements rely
heavily on the requirement to have large number of expert
annotations for training deep neural networks, and the acquisition of annotations is an intellectually expensive and
time-consuming process. Moreover, the representations especially learnt on very specific tasks in a supervised manner
may suffer from generalization problem and transfer poorly
to other objectives. In contrast, unsupervised representation
learning alleviates the issues by completely exploiting the
inherent structures and correlations from the data as the supervision. This is particularly applicable to video, which is
an information-intensive media with spatiotemporal coherence and variation. Such facts motivate the explorations of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10656

