The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consensus Graph Representation Learning for Better
Grounded Image Captioning
Wenqiao Zhang1∗ , Haochen Shi1∗ Siliang Tang1† , Jun Xiao1 , Qiang Yu2 , Yueting Zhuang1
1

Zhejiang University,
Citycloud Technology
wenqiaozhang,hcshi,siliang,junx,yzhuang@zju.edu.cn, yq@citycloud.com.cn
2

Abstract

the visual and language domain. Therefore, Grounded Image Captioning (GIC) is proposed to tackle this problem by
introducing a new auxiliary task that requires the captioning model to ground object words back to the corresponding
image regions during the caption generation. The auxiliary
grounding task provides extra labels between visual and textual modals that can be used to remove biases and to reform
the correct correlations between the two modalities.
However, GIC may not be the true savior of this hallucination problem. First, grounding object words is still far from
solving the problem since the model can still hallucinate attributes of the objects and also relationships among the objects. Of course, we can introduce more grounding tasks to
alleviate these new problems, but it comes at a tremendous
cost and may induce new biases that are even harder to detect. Second, the correct correlations can hardly be fully constructed by grounding the annotation, since the image and
the annotated caption are not always consistent (?). As is
commonly known, such inconsistency happens frequently
in real life, however, we humans have the reasoning ability to summarize or to infer the consensus knowledge between currently imperfect information and existing experience from the inconsistent environment. This ability enables
us to perform better than machines in high-level reasoning
and would be the most precious capacity for modern AI.
Therefore, it is more important to enhance the reasoning capacities of models rather than just create more annotations.
Based on this insight, we propose a novel learning framework to mimic the human inference procedure, i.e., consensus graph representation learning framework (CGRL).
The CGRL can leverage structural knowledge (e.g. scene
graph, SG ) from both vision and text, and further generate grounded captions based on consensus graph reasoning
to alleviate the hallucination issue. As shown in Figure 1, the
consensus representation is inferred by aligning visual graph
to language graph. Utilizing such consensus, the model can
capture the accurate and fine-grained information among objects to predict the non-visual function words reasonably
(e.g., relationship verbs: “ride”, “play”, attribute adjective:
“red”, “ striped”), while these words are inherently challenging to predict in GIC manner. Besides, the appropriate
correlations between image and the annotated caption can
be mined in the consensus to against the semantic inconsistency across the visual-language domain. Exactly as illus-

The contemporary visual captioning models frequently hallucinate objects that are not actually in a scene, due to the
visual misclassification or over-reliance on priors that resulting in the semantic inconsistency between the visual information and the target lexical words. The most common way is
to encourage the captioning model to dynamically link generated object words or phrases to appropriate regions of the
image, i.e., the grounded image captioning (GIC). However,
GIC utilizes an auxiliary task (grounding objects) that has not
solved the key issue of object hallucination, i.e., the semantic
inconsistency. In this paper, we take a novel perspective on
the issue above: exploiting the semantic coherency between
the visual and language modalities. Specifically, we propose
the Consensus Rraph Representation Learning framework
(CGRL) for GIC that incorporates a consensus representation into the grounded captioning pipeline. The consensus is
learned by aligning the visual graph (e.g., scene graph) to the
language graph that consider both the nodes and edges in a
graph. With the aligned consensus, the captioning model can
capture both the correct linguistic characteristics and visual
relevance, and then grounding appropriate image regions further. We validate the effectiveness of our model, with a significant decline in object hallucination (-9% CHAIRi ) on the
Flickr30k Entities dataset. Besides, our CGRL also evaluated
by several automatic metrics and human evaluation, the results indicate that the proposed approach can simultaneously
improve the performance of image captioning (+2.9 Cider)
and grounding (+2.3 F1LOC ).

Introduction
More recently, image captioning models have achieved impressive or even super-human performance on many benchmark datasets (He et al. 2019; Shuster et al. 2019; Deshpande et al. 2019). However, further quantitative analyses show that they are likely to generate hallucinated captions (Zhou et al. 2019; Ma et al. 2019), such as hallucinated
objects words. Previous studies (Rohrbach et al. 2018) believed that this caption hallucination problem is caused by
biased or inappropriate visual-textual correlations learned
from the datasets, i.e., the semantic inconsistency between
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3394

