The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

High Fidelity GAN Inversion via Prior Multi-Subspace Feature Composition
Guanyue Li1 , Qianfen Jiao2 , Sheng Qian3 , Si Wu1,2,∗ and Hau-San Wong2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, P. R. China
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3
Huawei Device Company Limited, Shenzhen, P. R. China
csliguanyue007@mail.scut.edu.cn, qjiao4-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, qiansheng3@huawei.com,
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown impressive gains in image synthesis. GAN inversion was recently studied to understand and utilize the knowledge it learns,
where a real image is inverted back to a latent code and can
thus be reconstructed by the generator. Although increasing
the number of latent codes can improve inversion quality to
a certain extent, we find that important details may still be
neglected when performing feature composition over all the
intermediate feature channels. To address this issue, we propose a Prior multi-Subspace Feature Composition (PmSFC)
approach for high-fidelity inversion. Considering that the intermediate features are highly correlated with each other, we
incorporate a self-expressive layer in the generator to discover
meaningful subspaces. In this case, the features at a channel
can be expressed as a linear combination of those at other
channels in the same subspace. We perform feature composition separately in the subspaces. The semantic differences
between them benefit the inversion quality, since the inversion
process is regularized based on different aspects of semantics. In the experiments, the superior performance of PmSFC
demonstrates the effectiveness of prior subspaces in facilitating GAN inversion together with extended applications in
visual manipulation.

Figure 1: An example to illustrate the capability of the proposed approach to leverage the discovered subspaces over
GAN’s intermediate feature channels for high fidelity inversion and visual manipulation.

space. The obtained latent code is decoded into an image,
which is expected to approximate the target image to as accurate an extent as possible. As reported in (Gu, Shen, and
Zhou 2020), the expressiveness of a single latent code is
less satisfactory for the case where the target image is out
of the distribution of the GAN’s training data. To address
this issue, multiple latent codes are used, and the corresponding intermediate feature maps are combined to improve the
inversion performance. However, we find that a number of
intermediate feature channels are not necessarily important
for some aspects of semantics, and feature composition over
all the channels may thus lead to reduced emphasis on the
corresponding details.
Some recent works (Bau et al. 2018; Shen et al. 2020)
discover that the feature maps at an intermediate layer of the
generator in a GAN are highly correlated with each other, and
they work together to control certain semantics. As shown in
Figure 1, we consider that GAN inversion can benefit from
this correlation, since the inversion process can be regularized
separately based on different aspects of semantics. Toward
this end, we apply subspace clustering over GAN’s intermediate feature channels. The grouped channels compose
meaningful subspaces, which are associated with different
visual concepts. We infer latent codes in each subspace, and
the resulting separate feature composition serves to enhance
the inversion performance.
More specifically, we propose a Prior multi-Subspace feature composition (PmSFC) approach for improving GAN
inversion. To explore the degree of correlation among GAN’s
intermediate feature channels, we divide the generator of a
well-trained GAN into two subnetworks by an intermediate layer, and insert a self-expressive layer between them

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have achieved considerable success in high-fidelity
image synthesis and downstream applications, e.g., data augmentation (Wu et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020), image processing (Li et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2020), and so on. A stateof-the-art GAN-based generative model, such as BigGAN
(Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2019), PGGAN (Karras
et al. 2018) and StyleGAN (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019;
Karras et al. 2020), typically has a high capacity, and the
training procedure depends on large-scale training data. To
reduce data dependence, a few works explore how to utilize
a well-trained generic generator for various tasks (Wang et al.
2020; Shen et al. 2020).
GAN inversion is a promising way to understand and utilize the generative capability of a well-trained network. The
goal is to reverse a target image back to a status in the latent
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8366

