The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SA-BNN: State-Aware Binary Neural Network
Chunlei Liu1,2 , Peng Chen2 , Bohan Zhuang3 , Chunhua Shen2 , Baochang Zhang1 , Wenrui Ding1
1

Beihang University
The University of Adelaide
3
Monash University
liuchunlei@buaa.edu.cn, blueardour@gmail.com, bohan.zhuang@monash.edu,
chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, ding@buaa.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the gradient at the binarized value while performing the update at the full-precision value (Rastegari et al. 2016; Liu et al.
2018), which might mislead the training. Despite the chance
to be guided into the correct direction during training, the
weight update is more likely to be continuously misled and
cause a frequent weight flip, leading to less efficient training
and a sub-optimal model.
With respect with the aforementioned problem, we aim to
make the training more efficient by suppressing the fluctuation of the weight update. Specifically, we find that existing
methods (Rastegari et al. 2016; Darabi et al. 2018; Liu et al.
2018) possess the identical gradient magnitude for all quantization states {−1, 1}. According to our analysis, the frequent
weight flip in this case is more likely to occur. The intuition
here is about “Can we calibrate the magnitude of the two
states and make them distinctive such that they would have
a different chance of weight flip? Thus, it would also make
weight flip be less frequent to occur. Inspired by this, a novel
state-aware binary neural network (SA-BNN) equipped with
the carefully-designed state-aware gradient is proposed in
this paper. Specifically, we set separate learnable gradient
coefficients for different states. Thus, the unnecessary weight
update can be impeded efficiently. Moreover, we also provide
a formal analysis to further justify the claim. We conduct
comprehensive experiments and the results also validate that
our SA-BNN provides a more reliable and effective gradient calculation than other works. Our main contributions are
summarized as follows.

Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) have received significant attention due to the memory and computation efficiency recently.
However, the considerable accuracy gap between BNNs and
their full-precision counterparts hinders BNNs to be deployed
to resource-constrained platforms. One of the main reasons for
the performance gap can be attributed to the frequent weight
flip, which is caused by the misleading weight update in BNNs.
To address this issue, we propose a state-aware binary neural
network (SA-BNN) equipped with the well designed stateaware gradient. Our SA-BNN is inspired by the observation
that the frequent weight flip is more likely to occur, when
the gradient magnitude for all quantization states {−1, 1} is
identical. Accordingly, we propose to employ independent
gradient coefficients for different states when updating the
weights. Furthermore, we also analyze the effectiveness of
the state-aware gradient on suppressing the frequent weight
flip problem. Experiments on ImageNet show that the proposed SA-BNN outperforms the current state-of-the-arts (e.g.,
Bi-Real Net) by more than 3% when using a ResNet architecture. Specifically, we achieve 61.7%, 65.5% and 68.7%
Top-1 accuracy with ResNet-18, ResNet-34 and ResNet-50 on
ImageNet, respectively.

Introduction
Binary Neural Networks (BNNs) (Courbariaux et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2019) have become one of the most prevailing approaches in deep learning model compression (Choi
et al. 2018; Mishra et al. 2017; Gong et al. 2019; Cai et al.
2017) due to their computation efficiency. As demonstrated
in (Rastegari et al. 2016), BNNs can potentially achieve 32×
memory compression ratio, and up to 58× speed-up on CPU
compared with their full-precision counterparts. However, the
large accuracy drop of BNNs hampers them to be deployed
in real applications (Tang, Hua, and Wang 2017; Bulat et al.
2019; Sakr et al. 2018; Han et al. 2019).
The challenge of the accuracy drop instinctively comes
from the extremely limited binarization states {−1, 1}, which
would cause considerable propagation errors in forward and
backward procedures, and further lead to misleading weight
update (Bai, Wang, and Liberty 2018). To further illustrate
this issue, two sequential training iterations are shown in Figure 1. Specifically, with the sign(·) quantizer, BNNs compute

• We propose a state-aware binary neural network (SABNN) equipped with the state-aware gradient, which can
provide more reliable and effective gradient calculation
than prior work.
• We analyze the effectiveness of the state-aware gradient on
suppressing the frequent weight flip problem and alleviate
the ineffective update issue in BNNs optimization.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on ImageNet, showing
that our SA-BNN achieves state-of-the-art results. In particular, the proposed SA-BNN outperforms Bi-Real Net by
5.3%, 3.3% and 6.1% in Top-1 accuracy with ResNet-18,
ResNet-34 and ResNet-50, respectively.

Related Work
There have been extensive studies on network compression
and acceleration (Zhang et al. 2018a; Zhou et al. 2017, 2016;

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2091

