The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BoW Pooling: A Plug-and-Play Unit for Feature Aggregation of Point Clouds
Xiang Zhang1 * , Xiao Sun2,1 * , Zhouhui Lian1†
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China
2
Meituan
{1801210733, lianzhouhui}@pku.edu.cn, sunxiao10@meituan.com

Abstract
Point cloud provides a compact and flexible representation for
3D shapes and recently attracts more and more attention due
to the increasing demands in practical applications. The major challenge of handling such irregular data is how to achieve
the permutation invariance of points in the input. Most of existing methods extract local descriptors that encode the geometry of local structure, followed by a symmetric function to
form a global representation. The max pooling usually serves
as the symmetric function and shows slight superiority compared to the average pooling. We argue that some discrimination information is inevitably missing when applying the
max pooling across all local descriptors. In this paper, we propose the BoW pooling, a plug-and-play unit to substitute the
max pooling. Our BoW pooling analyzes the set of local descriptors statistically and generates a histogram that reflects
how the primitives in the dictionary constitute the overall geometry. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
Bow pooling is efficient to improve the performance in point
cloud classification, shape retrieval and segmentation tasks
and outperforms other existing symmetric functions.

Figure 1: Visualization of the contribution of each point
to the global representation. Results in the first row are
from the original DGCNN, while results in the second row
are from DGCNN with our BoW pooling. Redder denotes
greater contribution.

the arrangement. Different from neural networks that deal
with well-organized data, point-based models directly accept point clouds as input. The key to these approaches is
to design a way to aggregate features and eliminate the impact of the permutation of points.
According to the different implementations of such goal,
neural networks that deal with point clouds can be roughly
categorized into two classes. One idea is to design a symmetric function applied across all points on the point cloud
(Qi et al. 2017a; Wang et al. 2018; Sun, Lian, and Xiao
2019). A typical choice of the symmetric function is the average pooling or max pooling. The backbone of these networks attaches the feature of local structure to each point,
and uses a symmetric function to automatically aggregate
the features of informative points and form a global representation. Despite that the max pooling usually outperforms
the average pooling in terms of aggregating point features,
we argue that there are still two main drawbacks when directly using it. First, applying the max pooling across features of points may lead to an average contribution of each
point to the global representation. Since the global representation is obtained by selecting the biggest value across all
points for each dimension, the contribution of a point is measured by finding out how many values of the global represen-

Introduction
3D shape analysis is one of the most fundamental topics
in computer vision and computer graphics fields. With the
development of computing resources and the availability of
large-scale 3D model repositories (Wu et al. 2015; Yi et al.
2016), extensive attention have been paid in 3D shape analysis. There are several popular data formats to represent
3D shapes, including voxels, multi 2D views, point clouds
and meshes. Among them, point cloud analysis has drawn a
significantly increasing amount of interests in the past few
years both in academic research and industry, motivated by
the advancement of autonomous driving, indoor navigation,
robotics, and other wide range of applications.
Owing to the development of 3D sensors and computing resources, point cloud becomes easy to access. Despite
the fact that point cloud is a light-weight format to represent flexible 3D shapes, it is unsuitable to be directly processed by neural networks because of the irregularity of
* Denotes equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3403

