The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Pyramidal Feature Shrinking for Salient Object Detection
Mingcan Ma1 2 , Changqun Xia2∗ , Jia Li1 2∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{mingcanma, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, xiachq@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recently, we have witnessed the great progress of salient object detection (SOD), which benefits from the effectiveness
of various feature aggregation strategies. However, existing
methods usually aggregate the low-level features containing
details and the high-level features containing semantics over
a large span, which introduces noise into the aggregated features and generates inaccurate saliency maps. In this paper,
we propose a pyramidal feature shrinking network (PFSNet),
which aims to aggregate adjacent feature nodes in pairs with
layer-by-layer shrinkage, so that the aggregated features fuse
effective details and semantics and discard interference information. Specifically, a pyramidal shrinking decoder (PSD) is
proposed to aggregate adjacent features hierarchically in an
asymptotic manner. Unlike other methods that aggregate features with significantly different information, this method only focuses on adjacent feature nodes in each layer and shrinks
them to a final unique feature node. Besides, we propose
an adjacent fusion module (AFM) to perform mutual spatial
enhancement between the adjacent features to dynamically
weight the features and adaptively fuse the appropriate information. Besides, a scale-aware enrichment module (SEM)
based on the features extracted from the backbone is utilized
to obtain rich scale information and generate diverse initial
features with dilated convolutions. Extensive quantitative and
qualitative experiments demonstrate that the proposed intuitive framework outperforms 14 state-of-the-art approaches
on 5 public datasets.

Figure 1: Visual comparison of features before the last feature fusion. (a) MINet. (b) the result of MINet. From top to
bottom, (b) shows the predicted map, low-level features and
high-level features. (c) PFSNet. (d) denotes our results, and
the specific meaning is consistent with (b).

backbone. And there is a big gap between high-level features and low-level features. Therefore, the key to the SOD
algorithm lies in how to make full use of semantic and
detailed information. FPN (Lin et al. 2017) considers this
problem, and subtly combines semantic information and detailed information by gradually merging features of different levels from bottom to top. Besides, many works such as
(Zhang et al. 2018a; Zhao et al. 2020) based on the FPN have
achieved milestone results. However, there are still problems in feature fusion in FPN based networks. Considering the
merging operation of the last two features, the low-level features with rich details and noise will be combined with the
high-level features after the previous fusion processing. As
shown in Fig. 1, We visualize these two features of MINet
(Pang et al. 2020) based on FPN and find that they are completely different, and the result shows the direct combination of features with large differences will produce noise and
even cause performance degradation. We define the abovementioned feature fusion operations as leaping feature fu-

Introduction
The purpose of salient object detection (SOD) is to estimate
visually important objects and regions in an image. This is
the basic work of many visual tasks such as object tracking (Liang et al. 2016), object recognition (Rutishauser et al.
2004), semantic segmentation (Yao and Gong 2019) and so
on. Similar to many other computer vision tasks, SOD is also dominated by the CNN methods, although the results are
excellent but not perfect.
SOD algorithms based on deep-learning usually depend
on various strategies to fuse features extracted from the
∗

Correspondence should be addressed to Changqun Xia (Email: xiachq@pcl.ac.cn) and Jia Li (E-mail: jiali@buaa.edu.cn).
URL: http://cvteam.net.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2311

