The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Training and Provable Robustness: A Tale of Two Objectives
Jiameng Fan , Wenchao Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University, Boston
{jmfan, wenchao}@bu.edu

Abstract

bound of robust loss, henceforth referred to as adversarial
loss. Madry et al. (2018) propose to use projected gradient
descent (PGD) to compute the adversarial loss and train the
neural network by minimizing this loss. Networks trained
using this method can achieve state-of-art test accuracy under
strong adversaries (Carlini and Wagner 2017; Wang et al.
2018). More recently, Wong, Rice, and Kolter (2020) showed
that fast gradient sign method (FGSM) (Goodfellow, Shlens,
and Szegedy 2015) with random initialization can be used to
learn robust models faster than PGD-based adversarial training. In term of efficiency, FGSM-based adversarial training
is comparable to regular training. While adversarial training
can produce networks robust against strong attacks, minimizing the adversarial loss alone cannot guarantee that (1) is
minimized. In addition, it cannot provide rigorous guarantees
on the robustness of the trained networks.

We propose a principled framework that combines adversarial training and provable robustness verification for training
certifiably robust neural networks. We formulate the training
problem as a joint optimization problem with both empirical and provable robustness objectives and develop a novel
gradient-descent technique that can eliminate bias in stochastic multi-gradients. We perform both theoretical analysis on
the convergence of the proposed technique and experimental comparison with state-of-the-arts. Results on MNIST and
CIFAR-10 show that our method can consistently match or outperform prior approaches for provable l∞ robustness. Notably,
we achieve 6.60% verified test error on MNIST at  = 0.3,
and 66.57% on CIFAR-10 with  = 8/255.

Introduction
Vulnerability of deep neural networks to adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015) has spurred the development of training methods for
learning more robust models (Wong and Kolter 2018; Gowal
et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2020; Balunovic and Vechev 2020).
Madry et al. (2018) show that adversarial training can be
formulated as a minimax robust optimization problem as in
(1). Given a model fθ , loss function L, and training data
distribution X , the training algorithm aims to minimize the
loss whereas the adversary aims to maximize the loss within
a neighborhood S(x, ) of each input data x as follows:


0
min E(x,y)∈X 0 max L(fθ (x ), y)
(1)
θ

Provable robustness. Verification techniques (Katz et al.
2017; Dvijotham et al. 2018; Ruan, Huang, and Kwiatkowska
2018; Raghunathan, Steinhardt, and Liang 2018; Prabhakar
and Afzal 2019), on the other hand, can be used to compute a
certified upper bound of robust loss (henceforth referred to as
abstract loss). Given a neural network, a simple way to obtain
this upper bound is to propagate value bounds across the network, also known as interval bound propagation (IBP) (Mirman, Gehr, and Vechev 2018; Gowal et al. 2018). Techniques
such as CROWN (Zhang et al. 2018), DeepZ (Singh et al.
2018), MIP (Tjeng, Xiao, and Tedrake 2019) and RefineZono (Singh et al. 2019), can compute more precise bounds,
but also incur much higher computational costs. Building
upon these upper bound verification techniques, approaches
such as DIFFAI (Mirman, Gehr, and Vechev 2018) construct a
differentiable abstract loss corresponding to the upper bound
estimation and incorporate this loss function during training.
However, Gowal et al. (2018) and Zhang et al. (2020) observe
that a tighter approximation of the upper bound does not necessarily lead to a network with low robust loss. They show
that IBP-based methods can produce networks with state-ofthe-art certified robustness. More recently, COLT (Balunovic
and Vechev 2020) proposed to combine adversarial training and zonotope propagation. Zonotopes are a collection of
affine forms of the input variables and intermediate vector
outputs in the neural network. The idea is to train the network with the so-called latent adversarial examples which
are adversarial examples that lie inside these zonotopes.

x ∈S(x,)

In general, the inner maximization is intractable. Most existing techniques focus on finding an approximate solution.
There are two main approaches to approximate the inner loss
(henceforth referred to as robust loss). One direction is to
generate adversarial examples to compute a lower bound
of robust loss. The other is to compute an upper bound of
robust loss by over-approximating the model outputs. We
distinguish these two families of techniques below.
Adversarial training. To improve adversarial robustness,
a natural idea is to augment the training set with adversarial
examples (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017). Using adversarial examples to compute the training loss yields a lower
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7367

