The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stochastic Bandits with Graph Feedback in Non-Stationary Environments
Shiyin Lu,1 Yao Hu,2 Lijun Zhang1,∗
1

National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group, Beijing 100102, China
{lusy, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, yaoohu@alibaba-inc.com

While this bound is logarithmic in T , it becomes vacuous
when K is large, revealing that MAB is not suitable for applications with too many arms. Another limitation of MAB
is that the learner is assumed to observe reward of only the
chosen arm, which is too pessimistic as in some applications including recommendation systems and online advertising, side observations on rewards of other arms are available (Alon et al. 2017). To address these limitations, Mannor
and Shamir (2011) and Caron et al. (2012) introduced a variant of MAB—bandits with graph feedback.1 In this setting,
there exists an undirected graph G = (V, E), where V is the
vertex set consisting of all arms, and E is the edge set. An
edge e = (u, v) in E indicates that after playing arm u, the
learner can observe reward of not only arm u but also arm v,
and vice versa. For stochastic bandits with graph feedback,
Caron et al. (2012) proposed algorithms that enjoy regret
bounds of O(θ log T ), where θ ≤ K is the clique covering
number of the feedback graph G, and can be much smaller
than K for benign graphs.
Stochastic bandits with graph feedback were further extensively studied by a line of research (Buccapatnam, Eryilmaz, and Shroff 2014; Cohen, Hazan, and Koren 2016;
Tossou, Dimitrakakis, and Dubhashi 2017; Liu, Buccapatnam, and Shroff 2018; Liu, Zheng, and Shroff 2018; Hu,
Mehta, and Pan 2019; Lykouris, Tardos, and Wali 2019).
However, most of the existing work assumes the reward distribution of each arm is stationary over time and thus does
not apply to non-stationary rewards arising in the aforementioned real-world scenarios. For example, in recommendation systems, users’ preference changes with time (Min and
Han 2005). In online advertising, the click-through-rate of
an advertisement is also time-variant (Zeng et al. 2016). Till
now, we have very limited knowledge on stochastic bandits
with graph feedback in non-stationary environments. One
result was given by Alami (2019), who studied a rather limited setting of this problem, where the reward of each arm
follows the Bernoulli distribution and in each round with a
fixed probability, reward distributions of all arms change simultaneously. While Alami (2019) proposed a Thompson
sampling algorithm for this setting, there is no theoretical
guarantee of the proposed algorithm. In this paper, we inves-

Abstract
We study a variant of stochastic bandits where the feedback
model is specified by a graph. In this setting, after playing
an arm, one can observe rewards of not only the played arm
but also other arms that are adjacent to the played arm in the
graph. Most of the existing work assumes the reward distributions are stationary over time, which, however, is often violated in common scenarios such as recommendation systems
and online advertising. To address this limitation, we study
stochastic bandits with graph feedback in non-stationary environments and propose algorithms with graph-dependent dynamic regret bounds. When the number of reward distribution changes L √
is known in advance, one of our algorithms
achieves an Õ( αLT ) dynamic regret bound. We also develop an adaptive
√ algorithm that can adapt to unknown L and
attain an Õ( θLT ) dynamic regret. Here, α and θ are some
graph-dependent quantities and T is the time horizon.

Introduction
Stochastic bandits are a powerful learning paradigm for sequential decision-making under uncertainty and have been
applied in a variety of real-world scenarios such as online
advertising (Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013), news recommendation (Li et al. 2010), and social networks (Bnaya et al.
2013). A canonical model for studying this paradigm is the
stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB). In each round of
MAB, a learner has to choose one of K arms to play. After playing an arm, the learner observes a stochastic reward
drawn from the distribution associated with the played arm,
while rewards of other arms remain unknown. The learner’s
goal is to minimize the regret, which is the difference between the cumulative reward of arms chosen by the learner
and that of the best arm in hindsight. To accomplish this
goal, the learner needs to balance the trade-off between exploration (choosing less played arms to gain more information) and exploitation (selecting seemingly optimal arms
to accumulate more reward). Since the pioneering work of
Thompson (1933) and Robbins (1952), the stochastic MAB
has been widely studied and it is known that the minimax
regret bound is Θ(K log T ) (Lai and Robbins 1985; Auer,
Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002).
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Mannor and Shamir (2011) considered adversarial bandits,
while Caron et al. (2012) studied stochastic bandits.

8758

