The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable First-Order Methods for Robust MDPs
Julien Grand-Clément, Christian Kroer
IEOR Department, Columbia University
jg3728@columbia.edu, christian.kroer@columbia.edu

Abstract

Steimle, Kaufman, and Denton 2018; Goh et al. 2018; GrandClement et al. 2020). We focus on s-rectangular uncertainty
|A|×|S|
sets, where P = × Ps , for Ps ⊆ R+
, and solving the

Robust Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a powerful
framework for modeling sequential decision making problems with model uncertainty. This paper proposes the first
first-order framework for solving robust MDPs. Our algorithm
interleaves primal-dual first-order updates with approximate
Value Iteration updates. By carefully controlling the tradeoff
between the accuracy and cost of Value Iteration updates, we
achieve an ergodic convergence rate that is significantly better
than classical Value Iteration algorithms in terms of the number of states S and the number of actions A on ellipsoidal and
Kullback-Leibler s-rectangular uncertainty sets. In numerical
experiments on ellipsoidal uncertainty sets we show that our
algorithm is significantly more scalable than state-of-the-art
approaches. Our framework is also the first one to solve robust
MDPs with s-rectangular KL uncertainty sets.

1

s∈S

Introduction

In this paper we focus on solving robust Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with finite set of states and actions.
Markov decision process models are widely used in decisionmaking (Bertsekas 2007; Puterman 1994). In the classical
MDP setting, for each state s ∈ S, the decision maker
chooses a probability distribution xs over the set of actions
P|A|
A. The decision maker incurs a cost a=1 xsa csa for some
non-negative scalars csa and then randomly enters a new
state, according to transition kernels y = {ysa ∈ ∆(|S|)}sa
over the next state, where ∆(|S|) is the simplex of size |S|.
Given a discount factor λ, the goal of the decision-maker
is to minimize the infinite horizon discounted
 expected cost
P
∞
t
R(x, y) = E x,y
t=0 λ cst at s0 ∼ p0 .
The cost of a policy can be highly sensitive to the exact
kernel parameters y. We consider a robust approach where
the uncertainty in y is adversarially selected from an uncertainty set P centered around a nominal estimation y 0 of the
true transition kernel. Our goal is to solve the robust MDP
problem minx∈Π maxy∈P R(x, y) (Iyengar 2005; Nilim
and Ghaoui 2005; Wiesemann, Kuhn, and Rustem 2013; Goh
et al. 2018; Goyal and Grand-Clement 2018), which has
found applications in healthcare (Steimle and Denton 2017;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12086

robust MDP problem is equivalent to computing the fixed
point of the Bellman operator, thus allowing a value iteration
(VI) algorithm (Wiesemann, Kuhn, and Rustem 2013).
We focus on two specific classes of s-rectangular uncertainty sets. Kullback-Leibler (KL) uncertainty sets are constructed from density estimation and naturally appear as approximations of the confidence intervals for the maximum
likelihood estimates of y given some historical transition
data (Iyengar 2005). Ellipsoidal uncertainty sets are widely
used because of their tractability and the probabilistic guarantees of the optimal solutions of the robust problems (Ben-Tal
and Nemirovski 2000; Bertsimas, den Hertog, and Pauphilet
2019). For ellipsoidal uncertainty sets, the value iteration algorithm involves solving a convex program with a quadratic
constraint at every epoch. While this can be done in polynomial time with modern Interior Point Methods (IPMs, (Lobo
et al. 1998)), this requires inverting matrices at every step of
the IPM which can be intractable for large MDP instances.
Typically, for S = |S|, A = |A|, the complexity of VI to
return an -solution to the robust MDP problem with ellipsoidal uncertainty sets is O A3.5 S 4.5 log2 (−1 ) . This may
prove prohibitive for large instances. For KL uncertainty
sets, we are not aware of any tractable algorithm for solving
s-rectangular robust MDP with KL uncertainty sets, even
though they are well understood in Distributionally Robust
Optimization (Hu and Hong 2013).
Many problems in machine learning and game theory can
be written in the form minx∈X maxy∈Y L(x, y), where L
is a convex-concave function and X, Y are reflexive Banach
spaces, e.g. regularized finite-sum loss minimization, imaging
models, and sequential two-player zero-sum games (Chambolle and Pock 2011; Kroer et al. 2018). Even though convex
duality often allows reformulating this saddle-point problem as a single convex program, first-order methods (FOMs)
such as Chambolle & Pock’s Primal-Dual Algorithm (PDA,
(Chambolle and Pock 2011)), Mirror Descent (Nemirovski
and Yudin 1983) or Mirror Prox (Nemirovski 2004) are typically preferred for large instances. This is due to the expensive matrix calculations involved in IPMs or the simplex
algorithm. Naively, one may hope to apply FOMs directly to

