The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Flow-based Generative Models for Learning Manifold to Manifold Mappings
Xingjian Zhen1 , Rudrasis Chakraborty2 , Liu Yang1 , Vikas Singh1
1

University of Wisconsin–Madison
University of California, Berkeley
xzhen3@wisc.edu, rudrasischa@gmail.com, lyang422@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
2

Abstract
Many measurements or observations in computer vision and
machine learning manifest as non-Euclidean data. While recent proposals (like spherical CNN) have extended a number of deep neural network architectures to manifold-valued
data, and this has often provided strong improvements in performance, the literature on generative models for manifold
data is quite sparse. Partly due to this gap, there are also no
modality transfer/translation models for manifold-valued data
whereas numerous such methods based on generative models
are available for natural images. This paper addresses this
gap, motivated by a need in brain imaging – in doing so, we
expand the operating range of certain generative models (as
well as generative models for modality transfer) from natural
images to images with manifold-valued measurements. Our
main result is the design of a two-stream version of GLOW
(flow-based invertible generative models) that can synthesize
information of a field of one type of manifold-valued measurements given another. On the theoretical side, we introduce
three kinds of invertible layers for manifold-valued data, which
are not only analogous to their functionality in flow-based generative models (e.g., GLOW) but also preserve the key benefits
(determinants of the Jacobian are easy to calculate). For experiments, on a large dataset from the Human Connectome
Project (HCP), we show promising results where we can reliably and accurately reconstruct brain images of a field of
orientation distribution functions (ODF) from diffusion tensor
images (DTI), where the latter has a 5× faster acquisition time
but at the expense of worse angular resolution.

Introduction
Many measurements in computer vision and machine learning appear in a form that does not satisfy common Euclidean
geometry assumptions. Operating on data where the data
samples live in structured spaces often leads to situations
where even simple operations such as distances, angles and
inner products need to be redefined: while occasionally, Euclidean operations may suffice, the error progressively increases depending on the curvature of the space at hand
* Code and supplementary materials are available at
https://github.com/zhenxingjian/Dual_Manifold_GLOW
An introduction video of this paper is available at
https://youtu.be/0r96U0vXsCM
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11042

(Feragen, Lauze, and Hauberg 2015). One encounters such
data quite often – shapes (Chang et al. 2015), surface normal
directions (Straub et al. 2015), graphs and trees (Scarselli
et al. 2008; Kipf and Welling 2016) as well as probability
distribution functions (Srivastava, Jermyn, and Joshi 2007)
are some common examples in vision and computer graphics (Bruno, Conti, and Gregori 2005; Huang et al. 2019).
Symmetric positive definite matrices (Moakher 2005; Jayasumana et al. 2013), rotation matrices (Kendall and Cipolla
2017), samples from a sphere (Koppers and Merhof 2016),
subspaces/ Grassmannians (Huang, Wu, and Van Gool 2018;
Chakraborty, Hauberg, and Vemuri 2017), and a number of
other algebraic objects are key ingredients in the design of
efficient algorithms in computer vision and medical image
analysis as well as in the development or theoretical analysis
of various machine learning problems. While a mature literature on extending classical models such as principal components analysis (Dunteman 1989), Kalman filtering (Haykin
2004; Grewal 2011), regression (Fletcher 2013) to such a
manifold data regime is available, identifying ways in which
deep neural network (DNN) models can be adapted to leverage and utilize the geometry of such data has only become
a prominent research topic recently (Bronstein et al. 2017;
Chakraborty et al. 2018a; Kondor and Trivedi 2018; Huang,
Wu, and Van Gool 2018; Huang and Van Gool 2017). This
research direction has already provided convolutional neural
networks for various types of manifold measurements (Masci
et al. 2015a,b) as well as sequential models such as LSTM
(Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997)/GRU (Cho et al. 2014)
for manifold settings (Jain et al. 2016; Pratiher et al. 2018;
Chakraborty et al. 2018b; Zhen et al. 2019).
The results in the literature, so far, on harnessing the power
of DNNs for better analysis of manifold or structured data are
impressive, but most approaches are discriminative in nature.
In other words, the goal is to characterize the conditional
distribution P (Y |φ(X)) based on the predictor variables or
features X, here X is manifold-valued and the responses
or labels Y are Euclidean. The technical thrust is on the design of mechanisms to specify φ(·) so that it respects the
geometry of the data space. In contrast, work on the generative side is very sparse, and to our knowledge, only a
couple of methods for a few specific manifolds have been proposed thus far (Brehmer and Cranmer 2020; Rey, Menkovski,
and Portegies 2019; Miolane and Holmes 2020; Huang, Wu,

