The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforcement Learning with Trajectory Feedback
Yonathan Efroni∗1,2 , Nadav Merlis∗1 and Shie Mannor1,3
1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
2
Microsoft Research, New York
3
Nvidia Research, Israel

Abstract

it requires scoring each state-action pair with a real number.
For example, if a human is involved in providing the feedback, (a) he or she might refuse to supply with such feedback
due to the Sisyphean nature of this task, or (b) supplying with
such feedback might take too much time for the needs of the
algorithm designer.

The standard feedback model of reinforcement learning requires revealing the reward of every visited state-action pair.
However, in practice, it is often the case that such frequent
feedback is not available. In this work, we take a first step
towards relaxing this assumption and require a weaker form
of feedback, which we refer to as trajectory feedback. Instead of observing the reward obtained after every action, we
assume we only receive a score that represents the quality
of the whole trajectory observed by the agent, namely, the
sum of all rewards obtained over this trajectory. We extend
reinforcement learning algorithms to this setting, based on
least-squares estimation of the unknown reward, for both the
known and unknown transition model cases, and study the
performance of these algorithms by analyzing their regret.
For cases where the transition model is unknown, we offer a
hybrid optimistic-Thompson Sampling approach that results
in a tractable algorithm.

1

(ii) Consider a multi-stage UX interface that we want to
optimize using an RL algorithm. To do so, in the standard RL
setting, we would need a score for every visited state-action
pair. However, as we ask the users for more information on
the quality of different state-action pairs, the users’ opinions
might change due to the information they need to supply. For
example, as we ask for more information, the user might be
prone to be more negative about the quality of the interface
as the user becomes less patient to provide the requested
feedback. Thus, we would like to keep the number of queries
from the user to be minimal.
Rather than circumventing this problem by deploying
heuristics (e.g., by hand-engineering a reward signal), in this
work, we relax the feedback mechanism to a weaker and
more practical one. We then study RL algorithms in the presence of this weaker form of feedback mechanism, a setting
which we refer to as RL with trajectory feedback. In RL with
trajectory feedback, the agent does not have access to a per
state-action reward function. Instead, it receives the sum of
rewards on the performed trajectory as well as the identity
of visited state-action pairs in the trajectory. E.g., for autonomous car driving, we only require feedback on the score
of a trajectory, instead of the score of each individual stateaction pair. Indeed, this form of feedback is much weaker
than the standard RL feedback and is expected to be more
common in practical scenarios.
We start by defining our setting and specifying the interaction model of RL with trajectory feedback (Section 2).
In Section 3, we introduce a natural least-squares estimator with which the true reward function can be learned
based on the trajectory feedback. Building on the leastsquares estimator, we study algorithms that explicitly tradeoff exploration and exploitation. We start by considering the
case where the model is known while the reward function
needs to be learned. By generalizing the analysis of standard linear bandit algorithms (OFUL (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál,
and Szepesvári 2011) and Thompson-Sampling (TS) for lin-

Introduction

The field of Reinforcement Learning (RL) tackles the problem of learning how to act optimally in an unknown dynamical environment. Recently, RL witnessed remarkable empirical success (e.g., Mnih et al. 2015; Levine et al. 2016;
Silver et al. 2017). However, there are still some matters that
hinder its use in practice. One of them, we claim, is the type
of feedback an RL agent is assumed to observe. Specifically,
in the standard RL formulation, an agent acts in an unknown
environment and receives feedback on its actions in the form
of a state-action dependent reward signal. Although such an
interaction model seems undemanding at first sight, in many
interesting problems, such reward feedback cannot be realized. In practice, and specifically in non-simulated environments, it is hardly ever the case that an agent can query a
state-action reward function from every visited state-action
pair since such a query can be very costly. For example. consider the following problems:
(i) Consider the challenge of autonomous car driving.
Would we want to deploy an RL algorithm for this setting, we
would need a reward signal from every visited state-action
pair. Obtaining such data is expected to be very costly since
∗

Equal contribution, alphabetical order
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7288

