The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Knowledge Transfer via Hybrid Forward on the Teacher-Student Model
Liangchen Song, 1 Jialian Wu, 1 Ming Yang, 2 Qian Zhang, 2 Yuan Li, 3 Junsong Yuan 1
1

University at Buffalo
2
Horizon Robotics
3
Google
{lsong8,jialianw,jsyuan}@buffalo.edu, m-yang4@u.northwestern.edu, qian01.zhang@horizon.ai, liyu@google.com

Abstract
When adopting deep neural networks for a new vision task,
a common practice is to start with fine-tuning some offthe-shelf well-trained network models from the community.
Since a new task may require training a different network architecture with new domain data, taking advantage of off-theshelf models is not trivial and generally requires considerable
try-and-error and parameter tuning. In this paper, we denote a
well-trained model as a teacher network and a model for the
new task as a student network. We aim to ease the efforts of
transferring knowledge from the teacher to the student network, robust to the gaps between their network architectures,
domain data, and task definitions. Specifically, we propose a
hybrid forward scheme in training the teacher-student models, alternately updating layer weights of the student model.
The key merit of our hybrid forward scheme is on the dynamical balance between the knowledge transfer loss and task
specific loss in training. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our method on a variety of tasks, e.g, model compression,
segmentation, and detection, under a variety of knowledge
transfer settings.

Figure 1: Illustration of different settings for transferring a
well-trained teacher network to a student network, with the
model, domain, and task gaps defined in this paper. We validate the generality of the proposed hybrid forward extensively on diverse knowledge transferring settings in the experiments.

Introduction
The flourish and success of deep learning community attribute greatly to researchers who released their well-trained
neural network models for generic vision tasks, such as
object recognition (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), detection (Ren et al. 2015), and image segmentation (Chen et al.
2017). These off-the-shelf models, such as VGG (Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014) and ResNet (He et al. 2016), are often employed as the backbone networks and a wise starting point for new vision tasks. Leveraging the knowledge
encoded in a backbone model and transferring them to a
new model generally involves considerable efforts on tuning network parameters and try-and-error, due to the wide
variety of vision tasks and training data distributions. In the
paper, we borrow the terms in knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) and refer an off-the-shelf welltrained model as a teacher network and a model dedicated
for the new task as a student network. This is in the sense
that we strive to transfer the knowledge, i.e., the strong feature extraction capability, from teacher networks to student
networks for new vision tasks.

Fine-tuning a well-trained network tends to be more time
efficient and effective than training from scratch. Nevertheless, there are many issues to handle in practice. The diverse vision tasks require different network architectures, for
example, object recognition on a mobile phone requires a
lighter network than those trained for ImageNet recognition
on a server, or image segmentation requires a network to output per pixel labeling than per image classification in scene
recognition. Moreover, data in different domains generally
present different distributions or bias, e.g., synthetic streetview data generated by a simulator vs. real-world scenes collected by multiple cameras. These challenges originate from
the disparate training settings for well-trained teacher and
new student networks. We abbreviate the differences of network architectures, domain data distributions, and the task
definitions as the model gap, domain gap, and task gap between the teacher and student networks, as illustrated in Fig.
1. Last but not the least, in transferring from a well-trained
teacher network to a student, it is critical yet tricky to balance the transfer loss and the task loss, i.e., how much to
tune the backbone towards the new data and task.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2558

