The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RareBERT: Transformer Architecture for Rare Disease Patient Identification using Administrative Claims
PKS Prakash1, Srinivas Chilukuri2, Nikhil Ranade3, Shankar Viswanathan4

ZS Associates, Safina Towers-South Block, 5th Floor, Ali Asker Road, Bengaluru 560052, Karnataka, India1,3,4
ZS Associates, 1560 Sherman Ave, Evanston, IL 60201, US2
prakash.prakash@zs.com1, srinivas.chilukuri@zs.com2, nikhil.ranade@zs.com3, shankar.viswanathan@zs.com4

Abstract
A rare disease is any disease that affects a very small percentage (1 in 1,500) of population. It is estimated that there are
nearly 7,000 rare disease affecting 30 million patients in the
U. S. alone. Most of the patients suffering from rare diseases
experience multiple misdiagnoses and may never be diagnosed correctly. This is largely driven by the low prevalence
of the disease that results in a lack of awareness among
healthcare providers. There have been efforts from machine
learning researchers to develop predictive models to help diagnose patients using healthcare datasets such as electronic
health records and administrative claims. Most recently,
transformer models have been applied to predict diseases
BEHRT, G-BERT and Med-BERT. However, these have
been developed specifically for electronic health records
(EHR) and have not been designed to address rare disease
challenges such as class imbalance, partial longitudinal data
capture, and noisy labels. As a result, they deliver poor performance in predicting rare diseases compared with baselines. Besides, EHR datasets are generally confined to the
hospital systems using them and do not capture a wider sample of patients thus limiting the availability of sufficient rare
disease patients in the dataset. To address these challenges,
we introduced an extension of the BERT model tailored for
rare disease diagnosis called RareBERT which has been
trained on administrative claims datasets. RareBERT extends
Med-BERT by including context embedding and temporal
reference embedding. Moreover, we introduced a novel adaptive loss function to handle the class imbalance. In this paper,
we show our experiments on diagnosing X-Linked Hypophosphatemia (XLH), a genetic rare disease. While RareBERT performs significantly better than the baseline models
(79.9% AUPRC versus 30% AUPRC for Med-BERT), owing
to the transformer architecture, it also shows its robustness in
partial longitudinal data capture caused by poor capture of
claims with a drop in performance of only 1.35% AUPRC,
compared with 12% for Med-BERT and 33.0% for LSTM
and 67.4% for boosting trees based baseline. †

Introduction
Identifying the right patients at the right time has always
been a primary goal of the life science industry, to improve
healthcare services. Individually rare diseases are uncommon; however, there are approximately 8,000 described rare
diseases mostly with onset in childhood (Elliott et al. 2015
and Zurynski et al. 2017) affecting approximately 30 million of US population and 350 million globally worldwide
(Colbaugh and Glass 2020). Identifying these patients is a
challenging task as patients go undiagnosed or mis-diagnosed for years and move across multiple physicians (Rafi,
2016 and Zurynski Y, et al. 2017)
In the health care domain, with an increase in capture of
patients’ longitudinal history via administrative claims and
electronic health records (EHR) enables healthcare industries to understand patient progression or patient identification use cases such as onset of a condition, disease progression or treatment drop-off which in-turn helps to maximize
patient care and experience. Researchers are using machine
learning based approaches to address patient progression
and patient identification related problem. However, owing
to the richness of the data; mining this high dimension sequential data is a challenging task.
The current research focuses on rare disease patient identification using administrative claims data. The problem involves many challenges related to data and modelling which
includes: 1) Class-imbalance; 2) Unlabeled patients (negative class is not present); 3) Noisy labelled patients; 4) Diagnosis codes for rare condition are not present; and 5) Sensitivity analysis of model due to over-fitting on low positive
classes. The current paper focuses on addressing the class
imbalance and unlabeled patients challenge. Here, unlabeled

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

453

