The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scalable and Safe Multi-Agent Motion Planning with
Nonlinear Dynamics and Bounded Disturbances
Jingkai Chen1 , Jiaoyang Li2 * , Chuchu Fan1 , Brian C. Williams1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
University of Southern California
jkchen@csail.mit.edu, jiaoyanl@usc.edu, chuchu@mit.edu, williams@csail.mit.edu

piecewise linear (PWL) paths Si for each dynamical agent
Ai to follow, with the understanding that the agents cannot follow those PWL paths exactly. However, we show that
with appropriate tracking controllers, the actual trajectories
of each agent under disturbances can converge to Si with
guaranteed bounds on the spatial tracking error. More importantly, we show that such error bound can be pre-computed
for any qualified PWL path. The secrete sauce behind the
high efficiency of S2M2 is that we are able to formulate the
problem of finding PWL paths for a single agent as a Mixed
Integer-Linear Program (MILP), which can be solved efficiently using off-the-shelf MILP solvers.
To avoid inter-agent collisions, we wrap our single-agent
motion planner with the priority-based search (Ma et al.
2019) that explores the space of priority orderings using systematic search. When priorities are specified, lower-priority
agents replan their paths while treating higher-priority
agents as moving obstacles. Together with the MILP-based
path planner and guaranteed tracking controller, S2M2 can
efficiently find plans that are provably safe and robust to disturbances during execution. Moreover, by planning paths for
multiple agents on a continuous map over continuous time,
our method finds high-quality solutions with low flowtime
(i.e., makespan sum of all single-agent plans).
Consider an example of two disc-shaped vehicles making u-turns, as shown in Figure 1. Given the partially known
initial locations and bounded disturbances, we first compute
the spatial error bound of tracking a path segment, which is
a line, and then consider this error together with the agent
shape to obtain the possible swept area of the path segment. The swept area of agent A1 during its second segment (p12 , p13 ) is shown in light blue. We also consider the
minimum duration for each segment such that the agent has
enough time to adjust its position after turning, which is 3
seconds in our example. When our single-agent motion planner plans such paths for the agents, the obstacles are bloated
with respect to the spatial tracking error and the agent shape,
as shown in light red. The planner also constrains each segment to respect the minimum segment duration. As we can
see, when passing the corridor, both agents slow down and
use this 3 seconds to adjust their trajectories. After passing the corridor, agent A2 uses its full speed to approach its
goal location. When potential collisions are detected, some
agents are assigned higher priorities and thus are treated as

Abstract
We present a scalable and effective multi-agent safe motion
planner that enables a group of agents to move to their desired
locations while avoiding collisions with obstacles and other
agents, with the presence of rich obstacles, high-dimensional,
nonlinear, nonholonomic dynamics, actuation limits, and disturbances. We address this problem by finding a piecewise
linear path for each agent such that the actual trajectories following these paths are guaranteed to satisfy the reach-andavoid requirement. We show that the spatial tracking error
of the actual trajectories of the controlled agents can be precomputed for any qualified path that considers the minimum
duration of each path segment due to actuation limits. Using these bounds, we find a collision-free path for each agent
by solving Mixed Integer-Linear Programs and coordinate
agents by using the priority-based search. We demonstrate
our method by benchmarking in 2D and 3D scenarios with
ground vehicles and quadrotors, respectively, and show improvements over the solving time and the solution quality
compared to two state-of-the-art multi-agent motion planners.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent motion planning has a wide range of real-world
applications, but it is notoriously difficult. Even navigating
a single robot from an initial location to a goal location
while avoiding collisions with obstacles is terribly challenging with the presence of rich obstacles, high-dimensional
state space, nonlinear, nonholonomic dynamics, actuation
limits, and disturbances. Not to say that when such complex
robotic systems can interfere with each other in a shared environment, the scale of this problem is beyond the capability
of most existing methods.
In this paper, we present Scalable and Safe Multi-agent
Motion (S2M2) planner, a novel multi-agent motion planner that can fast and effectively generate provably safe plans
for agent models with high-dimensional nonlinear dynamics and bounded disturbances in continuous time and space.
Instead of directly planning dynamically-feasible trajectories, which are extremely computationally expensive, S2M2
exploits a separation-of-concerns approach: We first design
* Jiaoyang Li performed the research during her visit at Monash
University.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11237

