The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Nearest Neighbor Classifier Embedded Network for Active Learning
Fang Wan1 , Tianning Yuan1 , Mengying Fu1 , Xiangyang Ji2 , Qingming Huang1 Qixiang Ye1, *
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{wanfang, qmhuang, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn, {yuantianning19, fumengying19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely applied to
active learning. Despite of its effectiveness, the generalization ability of the discriminative classifier (the softmax classifier) is questionable when there is a significant distribution
bias between the labeled set and the unlabeled set. In this paper, we attempt to replace the softmax classifier in deep neural network with a nearest neighbor classifier, considering its
progressive generalization ability within the unknown subspace. Our proposed active learning approach, termed nearest Neighbor Classifier Embedded network (NCE-Net), targets at reducing the risk of over-estimating unlabeled samples
while improving the opportunity to query informative samples. NCE-Net is conceptually simple but surprisingly powerful, as justified from the perspective of the subset information, which defines a metric to quantify model generalization
ability in active learning. Experimental results show that, with
simple selection based on rejection or confusion confidence,
NCE-Net improves state-of-the-arts on image classification
and object detection tasks with significant margins.

Introduction
With the rise of deep neural networks (DNNs), image
recognition has made unprecedented progress. Nevertheless,
DNN models are typically trained on large-scale datasets
which require intensive human effort for data annotation.
Active learning, which interactively queries the data it
wants to learn from, defines an effective method to reduce
data annotation cost in practical image recognition applications (Settles 2012; Sener and Savarese 2018; Yoo and
Kweon 2019; Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019).
Conventional active learning methods can be categorized into uncertainty-based methods (Settles 2012; Settles and Craven 2008; Luo, Schwing, and Urtasun 2013;
Joshi, Porikli, and Papanikolopoulos 2009; Gal, Islam, and
Ghahramani 2017) and representative-based methods (Guo
2010; Elhamifar et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2015; Sener and
Savarese 2018). The objective is to find the most informative
unlabeled samples based on their uncertainty or diversity.
In DNN, the uncertainty/diversity is usually calculated upon
the predictions of a softmax classifier, with the assumption

Figure 1: Comparison of the softmax classifier with the nearest neighbor classifier for sample selection. m and n are unlabeled samples within the labeled sub-space. p and q are
unlabeled samples within the unlabeled space. The softmax
classifier, when falsely generalized to the unlabeled space,
tends to select sample m and p which are closer to the classification boundary but miss the informative sample q. The
nearest neighbor classifier can select m, p and q, for its
stronger generalization ability to the unknown space.

that the feature and classifier trained on the labeled set can
be always generalized to the unlabeled set.
In this study, we argue that such an assumption is problematic, particularly when there is a significant bias be-

* Correspond author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10041

