The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FC-GAGA: Fully Connected Gated Graph Architecture for Spatio-Temporal
Traffic Forecasting
Boris N. Oreshkin,1 Arezou Amini, 2 Lucy Coyle 2
Mark J. Coates 2
1 Unity Technologies, 2 McGill University

boris.oreshkin@gmail.com, arezou.amini@mail.mcgill.ca, lucy.coyle@mail.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca
Abstract

that forecast each TS in isolation. Although the inclusion
of graph modeling has proven to improve accuracy, current
models have several serious limitations. First, the complexity and therefore runtime of these models is significantly
higher. Second, some models rely on the definition of relationships between variables provided by a domain expert (e.g.
an adjacency matrix is heuristically defined based on the geographical relationships between observed variables). Finally,
existing models tend to rely on Markovian assumptions to
make modelling the interactions across variables tractable.
To address these limitations we propose a novel architecture, called FC-GAGA, that is based on a combination of a
fully-connected TS model N-BEATS (Oreshkin et al. 2020)
and a hard graph gate mechanism proposed in this paper.
To produce the forecast for a single TS (node in the graphical model), it weighs the historical observations of all other
nodes by learnable graph weights, gates them via a ReLU
and then stacks gated observations of all nodes to process
them via fully connected residual blocks (see Fig. 1). The
advantages of this architecture are threefold. First, the architecture does not rely on the knowledge of the underlying
graph focusing on learning all the required non-linear predictive relationships instead. Second, the basic layer of the
architecture is stackable and we allow every layer to learn
its own graph structure. This endows the model with the
ability to learn a very general non-Markovian information
diffusion process that can be learned effectively, which we
show empirically. Finally, FC-GAGA is a very memory and
computation efficient architecture, which we demonstrate
via profiling. Ablation studies demonstrate that when using
the efficient fully-connected residual time-series prediction
module, it is not sufficient to use standard graph attention —
the sparsification achieved by our proposed novel graph gate
is essential in achieving good predictive performance.

Forecasting of multivariate time-series is an important problem that has applications in traffic management, cellular network configuration, and quantitative finance. A special case
of the problem arises when there is a graph available that
captures the relationships between the time-series. In this paper we propose a novel learning architecture that achieves
performance competitive with or better than the best existing algorithms, without requiring knowledge of the graph.
The key element of our proposed architecture is the learnable fully connected hard graph gating mechanism that enables the use of the state-of-the-art and highly computationally efficient fully connected time-series forecasting architecture in traffic forecasting applications. Experimental results
for two public traffic network datasets illustrate the value of
our approach, and ablation studies confirm the importance of
each element of the architecture. The code is available here:
https://github.com/boreshkinai/fc-gaga.

1

Introduction

Many multivariate time-series (TS) forecasting problems naturally admit a graphical model formulation. This is especially
true when the entities whose past is observed and whose future has to be predicted affect each other through simple
causal relationships. For example, introducing pepsi products
in a store will very likely decrease future sales of coca-cola;
car traffic congestion at one point on a highway is likely to
slow down the traffic at preceding highway segments. Without graphical modeling, the model is blind to these nuances,
making entity interactions a collection of confounding factors, extremely hard for the model to explain and predict.
Equipped with a learnable model for entity properties (e.g.
entity embeddings), a model for entity interactions (e.g. graph
edge weights), and a mechanism to connect them to a TS
model (e.g. a gating mechanism), we can learn the otherwise
unknown entity interactions to improve forecasting accuracy.
Problems amenable to graphical TS modeling include forecasting demand for related products (Singh et al. 2019), electricity demand (Rolnick et al. 2019), road traffic (Shi et al.
2020) or passenger demand (Bai et al. 2019). Recent studies
have shown that models that explicitly account for the underlying relationships across multiple TS outperform models

1.1

Problem Statement

Let a graph G = (V, E) be defined as an ordered collection
of vertices, V = 1, . . . , N, and edges, E ⊂ V ×V . We are interested in the multivariate TS forecasting problem defined
on this graph. Each vertex v in the graph is assumed to generate a sequence of observations, yv = [yv,1 . . . , yv,T ] ∈ RT ,
governed by an unknown stochastic random process. The
graph connectivity encoded in E is assumed to capture unknown relations between the vertices. For example, the graph

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9233

