The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Transfer Learning for Efficient Iterative Safety Validation
Anthony Corso and Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Stanford University, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
{acorso, mykel}@stanford.edu

Abstract

vious systems to inform the validation of the next system.
We formulate iterative safety validation as a transfer learning problem by modeling each safety validation task as a
Markov decision process. The previously solved tasks are
used as the set of source tasks, and we transfer knowledge to
future tasks in the form of action value functions. We use
state-dependent attention weights to learn which previous
solutions are applicable to the current problem.
Existing safety validation algorithms use approaches from
optimization (Mathesen et al. 2019), path-planning (Zutshi
et al. 2014), reinforcement-learning (Lee et al. 2020), and
importance sampling (Huang et al. 2017), and often only address the validation of a single system. Uesato et al. (2019)
use previous versions of a system to train a failure classifier
that predicts which initial conditions of a system will lead
to failure, but their approach is not applicable to sequential
decision making problems of the type we consider. Wang,
Nair, and Althoff (2020) alternately train an agent and perform safety validation on it to improve robustness. On each
iteration, the safety validation algorithm starts with the parameters from the previous iteration to improve efficiency. In
fact, any parametric safety validation algorithm (Koren et al.
2018; Akazaki et al. 2018; Kim and Kochenderfer 2016)
could simply reuse parameters from previous tasks and then
fine-tune them for better performance. We demonstrate in
our experiments, however, that a fine-tuning approach often
fails to reach the same performance as starting from scratch.
To investigate the effectiveness of transfer learning in the
safety validation setting, we apply existing transfer learning algorithms to the problem. These include fine-tuning of
past solutions, and the attend, adapt, and transfer (A2T) algorithm (Rajendran et al. 2017). When the systems we wish
to validate have dissimilar behavior, however, we find that
existing approaches can perform poorly. We propose a modification to A2T that transforms the state and action value
spaces for each source task to increase knowledge transfer between dissimilar tasks. We evaluate the initial performance, the final performance, and the number of training steps required to reach the same performance as a notransfer algorithm. We consider four iterative safety validation tasks in gridworld and autonomous driving scenarios
and demonstrate that transfer learning has the potential to
significantly improve the performance and sample efficiency
of safety validation algorithms.

Safety validation is important during the development of
safety-critical autonomous systems but can require significant
computational effort. Existing algorithms often start from
scratch each time the system under test changes. We apply
transfer learning to improve the efficiency of reinforcement
learning based safety validation algorithms when applied to
related systems. Knowledge from previous safety validation
tasks is encoded through the action value function and transferred to future tasks with a learned set of attention weights.
Including a learned state and action value transformation for
each source task can improve performance even when systems have substantially different failure modes. We conduct
experiments on safety validation tasks in gridworld and autonomous driving scenarios. We show that transfer learning
can improve the initial and final performance of validation
algorithms and reduce the number of training steps.

Introduction
Introducing autonomy into safety-critical domains, such as
autonomous driving, aviation, and medicine, has the potential to improve both safety and efficiency. The consequences
of operational errors of these systems include loss of property or human life, so extensive safety validation and testing is required before deployment. Black-box sampling approaches have emerged as a scalable safety validation tool
for discovering failures in complex environments. Many algorithms for safety validation have been explored in the literature (Corso et al. 2020), often with the goal of finding
failures of a system with fewer samples or less computational effort. There has been little focus on the potential efficiency of validating many related systems sequentially.
Designing and certifying safety-critical systems generally
involves assessing a sequence of closely related systems.
Safety validation of complex systems often requires significant computational effort and existing approaches generally
start from scratch each time the system under test is changed.
The need to frequently perform safety validation on related
systems therefore imposes a large computational burden, but
also an opportunity to improve safety validation efficiency.
To improve the efficiency of safety validation across related systems, we use knowledge from the validation of preCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7125

