The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Bidirectional Multi-paragraph Reading Model for Zero-shot Entity Linking
Hongyin Tang1,2, * , Xingwu Sun3 , Beihong Jin1,2,† , Fuzheng Zhang3
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing China
3
Meituan-Dianping Group, China
tanghongyin14@otcaix.iscas.ac.cn
beihong@iscas.ac.cn
{sunxingwu,zhangfuzheng}@meituan.com

Abstract
Recently, a zero-shot entity linking task is introduced to challenge the generalization ability of entity linking models. In
this task, mentions must be linked to unseen entities and only
the textual information is available. In order to make full use
of the documents, previous work has proposed a BERT-based
model which can only take fixed length of text as input. However, the key information for entity linking may exist in nearly
everywhere of the documents thus the proposed model cannot capture them all. To leverage more textual information
and enhance text understanding capability, we propose a bidirectional multi-paragraph reading model for the zero-shot entity linking task. Firstly, the model treats the mention context
as a query and matches it with multiple paragraphs of the
entity description documents. Then, the mention-aware entity representation obtained from the first step is used as a
query to match multiple paragraphs in the document containing the mention through an entity-mention attention mechanism. In particular, a new pre-training strategy is employed
to strengthen the representative ability. Experimental results
show that our bidirectional model can capture long-range
context dependencies and outperform the baseline model by
3-4% in terms of accuracy.

Introduction

Figure 1: Left: (a) Evidence exists in other paragraphs of entity document. Right: (b) Evidence exists in other paragraphs
of mention document. Underlined texts are mentions. Green
italic texts are the evidences for linking.

Entity Linking (EL) is a task of resolving ambiguous mentions to their referent entities in a knowledge base (KB).
EL is a fundamental task in the area of information extraction (IE) and can benefit other NLP applications such as
question answering (Chang 2016), text summarization (Amplayo, Lim, and Hwang 2018), etc.
Most previous work focuses on linking mentions to general KBs (e.g. Wikipedia). They usually train models under a setting where the entities occurring in the test set are
partially or fully available for training. Moreover, they typically utilize not only textual information but also powerful resources like frequency statistics and meta-data (Ganea

and Hofmann 2017; Roth et al. 2014) existing in the KBs.
Compared to general domains, entity linking in specialized
domains such as movies or fictions, needs to be addressed
with a strong demand. However, this type of linking can be
much more challenging in such domains since labeled data
are not easily obtained and the resources in such KBs are not
as abundant as the general ones. Therefore, models with the
capability of generalizing to new domains need to be developed.
To evaluate the domain generalization of entity linking
systems, Lajanugen et al.(Logeswaran et al. 2019) presented
a zero-shot entity linking task which has two key properties:

* The work was done when the first author was an intern at

Meituan Group.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13889

