The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spherical Image Generation from a Single Image by Considering Scene Symmetry
Takayuki Hara1 , Yusuke Mukuta1, 2 , Tatsuya Harada1, 2
1

The University of Tokyo
2
RIKEN
{hara, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

−180° −90°

Abstract
Spherical images taken in all directions (360◦ ×180◦ ) allow
the full surroundings of a subject to be represented, providing an immersive experience to viewers. Generating a spherical image from a single normal-ﬁeld-of-view (NFOV) image is convenient and expands the usage scenarios considerably without relying on a speciﬁc panoramic camera or images taken from multiple directions; however, achieving such
images remains a challenging and unresolved problem. The
primary challenge is controlling the high degree of freedom
involved in generating a wide area that includes all directions
of the desired spherical image. We focus on scene symmetry,
which is a basic property of the global structure of spherical images, such as rotational symmetry, plane symmetry, and
asymmetry. We propose a method for generating a spherical
image from a single NFOV image and controlling the degree
of freedom of the generated regions using the scene symmetry. To estimate and control the scene symmetry using both a
circular shift and ﬂip of the latent image features, we incorporate the intensity of the symmetry as a latent variable into conditional variational autoencoders. Our experiments show that
the proposed method can generate various plausible spherical
images controlled from symmetric to asymmetric, and can reduce the reconstruction errors of the generated images based
on the estimated symmetry.

0° +90°+180°

0°

All round
90° rotational
+90°
rotational − 90°
symmetry
symmetry −180° +180°

Plane symmetry
to 0° plane

Plane symmetry
to 90° plane

180° rotational
symmetry

Asymmetry

Figure 1: Symmetry types of spherical images in SUN360
dataset (Xiao et al. 2012). Images are represented through a
equirectangular projection (see Figure 2), where the arrows
in the circles correspond to the viewpoint transitions that do
not signiﬁcantly change the appearance.

be created using a single conceptual photograph, which can
reduce production time and costs dramatically. In addition,
generating peripheral views of images taken can allow viewers to enjoy content with a feeling of immersion (Kimura
and Rekimoto 2018). Finally, estimating an illumination environment map will allow rendering an object with realistic relighting for use in augmented reality (Gardner et al.
2017; Song and Funkhouser 2019). In these applications, it
is better to reconstruct the actual scene as it is, however it
is worthwhile if we can obtain an image that is perceptually
plausible to humans, even if it is different from the actual
scene.
However, because an NFOV image captures only a small
portion of the whole view 1 , two main challenges exist while
generating a spherical image from a single NFOV image:
generating an image corresponding to the spherical structure, and controlling the high degree of freedom involved in
generating a wide area, which includes all directions of a
plausible spherical image.
Generating a spherical image from a single image is related to the task of image completion, which predicts an entire image from a partial one. However, conventional image-

Introduction
Spherical images capturing all possible directions (horizontal 360◦ × vertical 180◦ ) are used in various domains such
as surveillance systems, construction industry, tourism, autonomous cars, and entertainment. They can capture environments around the main subject and represent the entire
space. Furthermore, when viewed through a head-mounted
display, spherical images allow one to enjoy a scene in a
more immersive manner. However, capturing spherical images is not an easy task, as doing so requires a speciﬁc
panoramic camera or speciﬁc software that stitches together
images taken from multiple directions. Therefore, it would
be more convenient to generate a spherical image from a
single normal-ﬁeld-of-view (NFOV) image which is a perspective projection image taken by a normal camera. Furthermore, it will considerably expand the usage scenarios.
For example, the background of virtual reality content can
c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
We assume a FOV of about 120 degrees even on the wideangle side in reference to commercial cameras.

1513

