The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Prior-Dependent Correction Enhanced Reinforcement Learning for
Natural Language Generation
Wei Cheng1 , Ziyan Luo2 , Qiyue Yin 3∗
1

Technology and Data Center, JD.com , Beijing, China
2
University of California, San Diego
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
weicheng5993@foxmail.com, discat@foxmail.com, qyyin@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract

differentiable. This loss inconsistency issue hampers the algorithms to optimize the sequence as a whole. The teacherforcing technique trains the model to predict the next word
given the previous ground truth words as input, but at the
test stage, the model utilizes the previously generated words
instead of the ground-truth as the input to generate the following sentence. It results that the model has never been exposed to its own predictions. It is well known as the exposure
bias issue. Besides, the MLE-based approaches treat all incorrect outputs equally during training (Li et al. 2019).
To address the loss inconsistency and exposure bias
issues, reinforcement learning (RL) methods have been
adopted to train NLG models to avoid these two issues. For example, policy gradient and actor-critic methods (Bahdanau et al. 2017; Rennie et al. 2017; Ranzato
et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2020a; Wu et al. 2018) are applied to this task. Unlike MLE, which maximizes the loglikelihood, RL-based methods optimize the reward function.
The reward function can either be differentiable and nondifferentiable, thus the non-differentiable sequence-level
metrics like BLEU can be properly optimized. RL-based
methods also solve the exposure bias issue as the training
sentences are generated by the agent rather than using the
ground-truth as the instruction.
However, these RL-based training methods can not solve
the issue that all incorrect outputs are treated equally well,
which we call it deviation ignorance in our RL-based
method. It means that, the models may fail to understand
how much the prediction distribution deviates from a prior
distribution related to the ground-truth at token-level. Since
in RL training method for NLG, the objective aims to maximize the reward, such as BLEU and ROUGE, by estimating gradient. However, this reward assigns unfair scores
to different incorrect model outputs, which means that all
incorrect token-level outputs are treated equally in a sequence during training. In some cases, a huge deviation between the predicted token and the ground-truth token can
directly cause semantically incorrect results. For instance,
the ground-truth sentence is “the boy is eating an apple”. It
is clearly better for the prediction sentence to be “the kid
is eating an apple” or “the boy is having an apple” rather
than “the cat is eating an apple” or “the dog is eating an apple”. But the metrics, such as BLEU and ROUGE assign the

Natural language generation (NLG) is an important task with
various applications like neural machine translation (NMT)
and image captioning. Since deep-learning-based methods
have issues of exposure bias and loss inconsistency, reinforcement learning (RL) is widely adopted in NLG tasks recently.
But most RL-based methods ignore the deviation ignorance
issue, which means the model fails to understand the extent of
token-level deviation well. It leads to semantic incorrectness
and hampers the agent to perform well. To address the issue,
we propose a technique called adaptive prior-dependent correction (APDC) to enhance RL. It leverages the distribution
generated by computing the distances between the ground
truth and all other words to correct the agent’s stochastic policy. Additionally, some techniques on RL are explored to coordinate RL with APDC, which requires a reward estimation
at every time step. We find that the RL-based NLG tasks are
a special case in RL, where the state transition is deterministic and the afterstate value equals the Q-value at every time
step. To utilize such prior knowledge, we estimate the advantage function with the difference of the Q-values which can
be estimated by Monte Carlo rollouts. Experiments show that,
on three tasks of NLG (NMT, image captioning, abstractive
text summarization), our method consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art RL-based approaches on different frequentlyused metrics.

Introduction
Natural language generation (NLG) is a promising task in
natural language processing that aims to generate a piece
of new text. It has a wide range of applications, including
neural machine translation (NMT), image captioning, text
summarization and so on.
Since NLG is a sequence prediction task, it usually
adopts maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) with teacherforcing technique (Cho et al. 2014; Williams and Zipser
1989). MLE training maximizes the log-likelihood of each
word conditioned on its previous context, but the model is
evaluated using a sequence-level metric like BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002), ROUGE (Lin 2004) and CIDEr (Vedantam, Lawrence Zitnick, and Parikh 2015) which are non∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12701

