The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proportionally Representative Participatory Budgeting
with Ordinal Preferences
Haris Aziz and Barton E. Lee
UNSW Sydney and Data61 CSIRO
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au, barton.e.lee@gmail.com

Abstract

years, some PB applications have shifted to requiring linear
order inputs. For example, in the New South Wales state of
Australia, participants are asked to provide a partial strict
ranking over projects.1 The PB model we consider encompasses both approval ballots and linear order inputs.
In most of the PB settings considered, the participants are
assumed to have the same weight. However, in many scenarios, symmetry may be violated. For example, in liquid
democracy or proxy voting settings, a voter could be voting
on behalf of several voters so may have much more voting
weight. Similarly, asymmetric weights may naturally arise if
PB is used in settings where voters have contributed different amounts to a collective budget or voters are affected by
the PB outcome to different extents. Therefore, we consider
PB where voters may have asymmetric weights.
While there is much discussion on fairness and representation issues in PB, there is a critical need to formalize reasonable axioms to capture these goals. We present
two new axioms that relate to the proportional representation axiom, proportionality for solid coalitions (PSC), advocated by Dummett for multi-winner elections (Dummett
1984). PSC has been referred to as “a sine qua non for a
fair election rule”(Woodall 1994) and the essential feature
of a voting rule that makes it a system of proportional representation (Tideman 1995). We use the key ideas underlying PSC to design new axioms for PB settings. Our axioms
provide yardsticks against which existing and new rules and
algorithms can be measured. We also provide several justifications for our new axioms.

Participatory budgeting (PB) is a democratic paradigm
whereby voters decide on a set of projects to fund with a limited budget. We consider PB in a setting where voters report
ordinal preferences over projects and have (possibly) asymmetric weights. We propose proportional representation axioms and clarify how they fit into other preference aggregation settings, such as multi-winner voting and approvalbased multi-winner voting. As a result of our study, we also
discover a new solution concept for approval-based multiwinner voting, which we call Inclusion PSC (IPSC). IPSC
is stronger than proportional justified representation (PJR),
incomparable to extended justified representation (EJR), and
yet compatible with EJR. The well-studied Proportional Approval Voting (PAV) rule produces a committee that satisfies
both EJR and IPSC; however, both these axioms can also be
satisfied by an algorithm that runs in polynomial-time.

1

Introduction

Participatory budgeting (PB) provides a grassroots and
democratic approach to selecting a set of public projects to
fund within a given budget (Aziz and Shah 2020). It has been
deployed in several cities all over the globe (Shah 2007). In
contrast to standard political elections, PB requires consideration of the (heterogeneous) costs of projects and must respect a budget constraint. When examining PB settings formally, standard voting axioms and methods that ignore budget constraints and differences in each project’s cost need to
be reconsidered. In particular, it has been discussed in policy
circles that the success of PB partly depends on how well it
provides representation to minorities (Bhatnaga et al. 2003).
We take an axiomatic approach to the issue of proportional
representation in PB.
In this paper, we consider PB with weak ordinal preferences. Ordinal preferences provide a simple and natural input format whereby participants rank candidate projects and
are allowed to express indifference. A special class of ordinal preferences are dichotomous preferences (sometimes
referred to as approval ballots); this input format is used
in most real-world applications of PB. However, in recent

Contributions We formalize the setting of PB with weak
ordinal preferences. Previously, only restricted versions of
the setting, such as PB with approval ballots, have been axiomatically studied (Aziz, Lee, and Talmon 2018). We then
propose two new axioms Inclusive PSC (IPSC) and Comparative PSC (CPSC) that are meaningful proportional representation and fairness axioms for PB with ordinal preferences. In contrast to previous fairness axioms for PB with
approval ballots (see, e.g., Aziz, Lee, and Talmon 2018),
both IPSC and CPSC imply exhaustiveness (i.e., no addi-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5110

https://mycommunityproject.service.nsw.gov.au

