The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Exploiting Hitting Sets for Model Reconciliation
Stylianos Loukas Vasileiou,1 Alessandro Previti, 2 William Yeoh 1
1

Washington University in St. Louis
2
Ericsson Research
{v.stylianos, wyeoh}@wustl.edu, alessandro.previti@ericsson.com

easily explainable plans1 (i.e., plans that are easily understood and accepted by a human user) (Zhang et al. 2017),
most work has focused on the explanation generation problem (i.e., the problem of identifying explanations of plans
found by planning agents that when presented to users,
will allow them to understand and accept the proposed
plan) (Kambhampati 1990; Langley 2016). Within this context, there is a popular theme that has recently emerged
called model reconciliation (Chakraborti et al. 2017). Researchers in this area have looked at how an agent can explain its decisions to a human user who might have a different understanding of the same planning problem. These
explanations bring the human’s model closer to the agent’s
model by transferring the minimum number of updates from
the agent’s model to the human’s model. However, a common thread across most of these works is that they, not surprisingly, employ mostly automated planning approaches.
In this paper, we approach the model reconciliation problem from a different perspective – one based on knowledge
representation and reasoning (KR). We propose a novel general logic-based framework for model reconciliation, where
given a knowledge base KBa (of an agent) that entails a
formula ϕ and a knowledge base KBh (of a human user)
that does not entail ϕ, the goal is to identify a subset of
KBa such that when it used to update KBh , then KBh
entails ϕ. More specifically, we present a novel algorithm
that exploits the hitting set duality of minimal correction sets
(MCSes) and minimal unsatisfiable sets (MUSes) for computing minimum explanations with respect to two knowledge bases. MUSes and MCSes have also been studied by
Reiter (1987) under the name of conflicts and diagnoses,
respectively. de Kleer, Mackworth, and Reiter (1992) have
related MUSes (conflicts) and MCSes (diagnoses) to prime
implicates and prime implicants. Further, we implement the
proposed algorithm in propositional logic and evaluate its
performance against the current state-of-the-art (Chakraborti
et al. 2017) on classical planning problems as well as present
results on some general instances from recent SAT competitions. Although presented in the context of propositional
logic, the algorithm can be applied to any type of constraint
system for which the satisfiability of subsets can be decided.
Our empirical results demonstrate that our approach signif-

Abstract
In human-aware planning, a planning agent may need to provide an explanation to a human user on why its plan is optimal. A popular approach to do this is called model reconciliation, where the agent tries to reconcile the differences in its
model and the human’s model such that the plan is also optimal in the human’s model. In this paper, we present a logicbased framework for model reconciliation that extends beyond the realm of planning. More specifically, given a knowledge base KB1 entailing a formula ϕ and a second knowledge base KB2 not entailing it, model reconciliation seeks
an explanation, in the form of a cardinality-minimal subset of
KB1 , whose integration into KB2 makes the entailment possible. Our approach, based on ideas originating in the context
of analysis of inconsistencies, exploits the existing hitting set
duality between minimal correction sets (MCSes) and minimal unsatisfiable sets (MUSes) in order to identify an appropriate explanation. However, differently from those works targeting inconsistent formulas, which assume a single knowledge base, MCSes and MUSes are computed over two distinct
knowledge bases. We conclude our paper with an empirical
evaluation of the newly introduced approach on planning instances, where we show how it outperforms an existing stateof-the-art solver, and generic non-planning instances from recent SAT competitions, for which no other solver exists.

Introduction
With increasing proliferation and integration of AI systems
in our daily life, there is a surge of interest in explainable
AI, which includes the development of AI systems whose
actions can be easily understood by humans. Driven by
this goal, machine learning (ML) researchers have begun
to classify commonly used ML algorithms according to different dimensions of explainability (Guidotti et al. 2018);
improved the explainability of existing ML algorithms (Alvarez Melis and Jaakkola 2018; Petkovic et al. 2018); as
well as proposed new ML algorithms that trade off accuracy
for increasing explainability (Dong et al. 2017; Gilpin et al.
2018).
In contrast, researchers in the automated planning community have mostly taken a complementary approach. While
there is some work on adapting planning algorithms to find
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

6514

Also called explicable plans in the planning literature.

