The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Metric Learning with Self-Supervised Ranking
Zheren Fu1 * , Yan Li2 * , Zhendong Mao1† , Quan Wang3 , Yongdong Zhang1
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Research Institute, University of Science and Technology of China, Beijing, China
fzr@mail.ustc.edu.cn, liyan@kuaishou.com, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, quanwang1012@gmail.com

Positive samples

Anchor

Abstract

1

Deep metric learning aims to learn a deep embedding space,
where similar objects are pushed towards together and different objects are repelled against. Existing approaches typically use inter-class characteristics, e.g., class-level information or instance-level similarity, to obtain semantic relevance of data points and get a large margin between different classes in the embedding space. However, the intra-class
characteristics, e.g., local manifold structure or relative relationship within the same class, are usually overlooked in
the learning process. Hence the data structure cannot be fully
exploited and the output embeddings have limitation in retrieval. More importantly, retrieval results lack in a good ranking. This paper presents a novel self-supervised ranking auxiliary framework, which captures intra-class characteristics as
well as inter-class characteristics for better metric learning.
Our method defines specific transform functions to simulates
the local structure change of intra-class in the initial image
domain, and formulates a self-supervised learning procedure
to fully exploit this property and preserve it in the embedding
space. Extensive experiments on three standard benchmarks
show that our method significantly improves and outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on the performances of both retrieval and ranking by 2%-4%.

2

3

4

(a) Intra-class variance
Positive
boundary
𝑑! 1
𝑑"

Negative
samples

Ranking preserving

4

𝑑! = 𝑑" = 𝑑# = 𝑑$

(b) Previous method

1
2

2

𝑑#
𝑑$ 3

3
Embedding
Space

4

𝑑! < 𝑑" < 𝑑# < 𝑑$

(c) Our method

Figure 1: Illustration of the limitation of previous works.
Best retrieval result ranking should be 1, 2, 3, 4, but previous method may return a random order like 2, 4, 1, 3 since
they overlook the relationship of different positive samples.
(a) Inherent intra-class variances from the same category. (b)
Previous methods only maximize the inter-class variance but
cannot preserve the intra-class properties. (c) Our method
captures intra-class variance by keeping their ranking information to achieve better retrieval result.

Introduction
Deep Metric learning aims to learn effective distance or similarity measures between arbitrary objects with the success
of deep learning. It’s a crucial topic in computer vision and
has been applied to a variety of tasks, including face verification (Liu et al. 2017), person re-identification (Xiao et al.
2017), and fine-grained image retrieval (Qian et al. 2019).
The paradigm of deep metric learning aims to project data
onto an embedding space, where the embeddings of visualsemantically similar samples (e.g., images of the same class)
are close together, while dissimilar ones (e.g., images from
different classes) are far apart from each other. Most of the
deep metric learning approaches focus on designing objective functions which can be defined in terms of pairwise similarities between an anchor (regarded as a query in retrieval)
and corresponding positive/negative samples (Sohn 2016;

Ge 2018). Their performances heavily rely on sampling
strategies (Wu et al. 2017; Suh et al. 2019), pairs weighting (Wang et al. 2019a,b), and examples generation (Zhao
et al. 2018; Zheng et al. 2019) to mine informative samples.
Recent works improve the model through using boost-like
policies, including attentions (Kim et al. 2018), features separation (Sanakoyeu et al. 2019), and self-supervised strategies (Roth et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2020). These ensemble approaches are built on standard objective functions to
distinguish negative samples. Generally, existing methods
concentrate on learning class-discriminative embeddings by
maximizing inter-class variance.
However, these deep metric learning approaches completely dismiss intra-class variance in the embedding space,
i.e., relative distance between positive samples and the anchor or local manifold structure. They regard all positive
samples equally since the lack of annotations and try their
best to discriminate positive and negative samples, while

* Equal contribution, this work was done during Zheren Fu’s
internship at Kuaishou. † Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1370

