The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Graph Spectral Evolution Networks for Graph Topological Evolution
Negar Etemadyrad 1 , Qingzhe Li 1, * , Liang Zhao 1,2,†
1

George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, 22033
2
Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30307
netemady@gmu.edu, qli10@gmu.edu, liang.zhao@emory.edu

Abstract

distribution while graph evolution can be modeled as a mapping to a target graph topology given a source graph topology.
Graph evolution based on deep graph learning is a very challenging problem and is still in its nascent stage because of the
extremely high dimensionality of the data. An ideal model
should be able to capture both the local and global characteristics of source graph and be able to determine the existence
or weight of potential edges for each pair of nodes. Models
that are both expressive and efficient are in urgent demand.
The domain which has investigated graph evolution for a
long time is graph signal processing, where well-defined
mathematical framework and various techniques such as
graph wavelets and kernels that abstract the graph process
in frequency domain have been hypothesized and verified in
many applications. For example, Kunegis et al. have demonstrated that triangle-closing kernels fit very well to the evolution of graph spectrum during the “befriending process” in
some social networks ((Leskovec et al. 2008)). Most recently,
neuroscience researchers found that the functional connectivity shares the same graph Fourier basis with structural
connectivity in several special situations.
Although graph signal processing allows powerful and concise models to characterize many graph evolution processes,
it requires to first determine the potentially suitable type of
graph kernel and then fit the parameters of it. However, this
raises up serious challenges: First, it is difficult to discover or
select suitable kernel types for various applications. Graph
kernels are proposed based on the analyses and abstraction
of the prior knowledge on various graph phenomena. But
until now, quite a lot of phenomena have not yet been analyzed or interpreted by humans. For example, it is unclear
whether and how the spectrum of resting-state functional connectivity transforms into task-specific functional connectivity
in human brain (Hermundstad et al. 2013). Moreover, for
many sophisticated phenomena, the graph process typically
involves the combination and composition of multiple graph
processes corresponding to multiple kernels. For example,
the evolution of a social networks might involve not only the
triangle closing process (i.e., two friends of a person tend to
be friends) by triangle-closing kernels, but also the behavior
diffusion process which can be characterized by diffusion
kernels. Also, the involvement of different kernel process
might be simultaneous or sequential, and hence prohibitively
difficult to manually determine or combinatorially optimize.

Characterizing the underlying mechanism of graph topological evolution from a source graph to a target graph has attracted fast increasing attention in the deep graph learning
domain. However, it is very challenging to build expressive
and efficient models that can handle global and local evolution
patterns between source and target graphs. On the other hand,
graph topological evolution has been investigated in the graph
signal processing domain historically, but it involves intensive labors to manually determine suitable prescribed spectral
models and prohibitive difficulty to fit their potential combinations and compositions. To address these challenges, this
paper proposes the deep Graph Spectral Evolution Network
(GSEN) for modeling the graph topology evolution problem
by the composition of newly-developed generalized graph kernels. GSEN can effectively fit a wide range of existing graph
kernels and their combinations and compositions with the theoretical guarantee and experimental verification. GSEN has
outstanding efficiency in terms of time complexity (O(n)) and
parameter complexity (O(1)), where n is the number of nodes
of the graph. Extensive experiments on multiple synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate outstanding performance.

Introduction
Understanding the mechanism of graph generation and evolution has significant importance in many applications (Guo
and Zhao 2020; Guo et al. 2020; You et al. 2018), such as
brain simulation, mobility network simulation, and social
network modeling and intervention (Zhao 2020). Beyond
the traditional methods from network science domain, graph
generation and evolution have been attracting fast increase
attention by deep graph generative models due to their great
potential of learning the underlying known generation and
evolution mechanism in an end-to-end fashion. Existing deep
generative models for graphs are typically unconditional and
generate graphs from random noise. But in many cases, we
need a “conditional setting”, by generating a target graph
given a source graph. Based on deep graph generative models, the graph generation problem is considered as decoding
a graph based on latent variables following some underlying
* Equally contributing as first author
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7358

