The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Domain Adaptation for Face Anti-Spoofing
Jingjing Wang, Jingyi Zhang, Ying Bian, Youyi Cai,
Chunmao Wang, Shiliang Pu ∗
Hikvision Research Institute
{wangjingjing9,zhangjingyi,bianying,caiyouyi,wangchunmao,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Although current face anti-spoofing methods achieve promising results under intra-dataset testing, they suffer from poor
generalization to unseen attacks. Most existing works adopt
domain adaptation (DA) or domain generalization (DG) techniques to address this problem. However, the target domain is
often unknown during training which limits the utilization of
DA methods. DG methods can conquer this by learning domain invariant features without seeing any target data. However, they fail in utilizing the information of target data. In
this paper, we propose a self-domain adaptation framework to
leverage the unlabeled test domain data at inference. Specifically, a domain adaptor is designed to adapt the model for
test domain. In order to learn a better adaptor, a meta-learning
based adaptor learning algorithm is proposed using the data
of multiple source domains at the training step. At test time,
the adaptor is updated using only the test domain data according to the proposed unsupervised adaptor loss to further improve the performance. Extensive experiments on four public
datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

DG Methods

DA Methods

Our Method

Source Domains

Source Domains

Source Domains

Oulu

CASIA

MSU-MFSD

Target Domain
No
Acess

Oulu

CASIA

MSU-MFSD

Idiap

Target data:

MSU-MFSD

Learn Model
Adapt Model

Learn Model

Learn Model

CASIA

Target Domain

Target Domain

Source data:

Oulu

Idiap

Classifier:

Figure 1: Framework comparison among our proposed
method and those of DG and DA methods. The DG methods train the model without target domain data, which lose
useful information in the target domain. The DA methods
need the target domain data to learn the model which is not
realistic for face anti-spoofing applications. Our self-domain
adaptation method can leverage the target domain information at inference to adapt the model itself for better prediction results on the target domain.

Introduction
In recent years, face recognition (FR) systems have been
widely applied in our daily lives, such as smartphones
unlock, access control and pay-with-face. However, easyaccessible human face images and various types of presentation attacks (e.g. photo, video replay, or 3D facial mask)
make the FR systems vulnerable to spoofing attacks. Therefore, face anti-spoofing has become a crucial part to guarantee the security of these systems and drawn increasing attention in the face recognition community.
Various face anti-spoofing methods have been proposed,
and can be categorized into texture-based methods and
temporal-based methods. Texture-based methods utilize various appearance cues, such as color (Boulkenafet, Komulainen, and Hadid 2017), distortion cues (Wen, Han, and Jain
2015)), or deep features (Yang, Lei, and Li 2014) to differentiate real and fake faces. While, temporal-based methods
leverage various temporal cues, such as facial motions (Kollreider et al. 2007; Shao, Lan, and Yuen 2017, 2018) or rPPG
(Liu et al. 2016; Liu, Lan, and Yuen 2018; Liu, Jourabloo,

and Liu 2018). Although these methods achieve promising
results in intra-dataset experiments, the performance dramatically degrades in cross-dataset experiments where training and testing data are from different datasets.
The main reason of the performance drop of previous
methods is that the feature distribution between the source
and the target domain data is disparate. To make the algorithm generalize well to unseen scenarios, recent face antispoofing methods mainly adopt domain adaptation (DA) or
domain generalization (DG) techniques to reduce the impact of domain shift. DA based approaches (Li et al. 2018b;
Wang et al. 2019) adopt DA techniques to minimize the distribution discrepancy between the source and the target domain by leveraging the labeled source domain data and unlabeled target domain data. However, in real scenarios, it is
often the case that collecting adequate target domain data is
difficult and even no information about the target domain is
available during training.
To overcome this limitation of DA based methods, DG

∗

Shiliang Pu is the Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2746

