The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distant Transfer Learning via Deep Random Walk
Qiao Xiao1 and Yu Zhang1,2, *
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
xiaoq3@mail.sustech.edu.cn, yu.zhang.ust@gmail.com

Abstract
Transfer learning, which is to improve the learning performance in the target domain by leveraging useful knowledge
from the source domain, often requires that those two domains
are very close, which limits its application scope. Recently,
distant transfer learning has been studied to transfer knowledge between two distant or even totally unrelated domains via
unlabeled auxiliary domains that act as a bridge in the spirit of
human transitive inference that two completely unrelated concepts can be connected through gradual knowledge transfer.
In this paper, we study distant transfer learning by proposing
a DeEp Random Walk basEd distaNt Transfer (DERWENT)
method. Different from existing distant transfer learning models that implicitly identify the path of knowledge transfer
between the source and target instances through auxiliary instances, the proposed DERWENT model can explicitly learn
such paths via the deep random walk technique. Specifically,
based on sequences identified by the random walk technique
on a data graph where source and target data have no direct
connection, the proposed DERWENT model enforces adjacent
data points in a sequence to be similar, makes the ending data
point be represented by other data points in the same sequence,
and considers weighted classification losses of source data.
Empirical studies on several benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed DERWENT algorithm yields the state-ofthe-art performance.

Introduction
Transfer learning (Yang et al. 2020) aims to effectively enhance the performance of the target domain by learning useful
knowledge from the source domain and it has a wide range of
applications (Zhang et al. 2019; Uribe 2010; Pan et al. 2011),
especially when the target domain has limited or no label information. Using a large number of labeled data in the source
domain to improve the performance in the target domain with
limited or even no labeled training data via transfer learning
models can greatly reduce the cost of labeling in the target
domain.
A major assumption of traditional transfer learning is that
the source and target domains should be close or similar to
each other. When there is a large discrepancy between the
target domain and the source domain, traditional transfer
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10422

learning methods likely fail to work and even lead to the
‘negative transfer’ phenomenon (Pan and Yang 2010; Yang
et al. 2020). Instead, distant transfer learning (Tan et al. 2015,
2017) is proposed to handle this situation. Inspired by the
transitive learning ability of human that two unrelated concepts can be connected via some intermediate concepts as
a bridge, distant transfer learning uses data in auxiliary domains as such bridge to connect two distant domains, which
makes the knowledge transfer between two distant domains
possible. Distant transfer learning broadens the application
scope of transfer learning and makes the learning system
close towards human intelligence.
As pioneered in distant transfer learning, Tan et al. (2015)
require that auxiliary domains include both characteristics of
the source and target domains in a form of the co-occurrence
data and propose a matrix-factorization-based model to
achieve one-step transitive learning through the auxiliary
domain. By relaxing such requirement on the data form in
the auxiliary domain, the Distant Domain Transfer Learning
(DDTL) method (Tan et al. 2017) utilizes the idea of selfpaced learning (Kumar, Packer, and Koller 2010) to select
both useful source and auxiliary data based on the reconstruction error for improving the performance of the target
domain which has limited labeled data. However, those two
studies cannot explicitly identify the transfer paths between
the source and target domains via auxiliary domains.
In this paper, we follow the setting of (Tan et al. 2017) to
study distant transfer learning with an objective to identify
transfer paths between two distant domains, which is what
previous studies cannot achieve. An advantage of identifying
the transfer paths is to improve the interpretability of the
model by visualizing the transfer process. To achieve that, we
adopt deep random walk to generate transfer paths between
those two domains. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, we
construct a graph on all the data from all the domains with
edge weights measuring the similarities of pairs of data based
on the hidden feature representation learned from a neural
network. Note that there are no edges between source and
target data in the graph as directly transferring is not so feasible. Then based on the constructed graph, we can generate
sequences to connect source and target data through auxiliary data. For each sequence, the proposed DeEp Random
Walk basEd distaNt Transfer (DERWENT) model enforces
adjacent data points in this sequence to be similar and makes

