The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Curse or Redemption? How Data Heterogeneity Affects
the Robustness of Federated Learning
Syed Zawad, 1 Ahsan Ali, 1 Pin-Yu Chen, 2 Ali Anwar, 2 Yi Zhou, 2 Nathalie Baracaldo, 2
Yuan Tian, 3 Feng Yan 1
1

University of Nevada, Reno
2
IBM Research
3
University of Virginia
szawad@nevada.unr.edu, aali@nevada.unr.edu, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, ali.anwar2@ibm.com, yi.zhou@ibm.com,
baracald@ibm.com, yt2e@virginia.edu
Abstract

of the model (such as Byzantine attacks) and backdoor attacks aiming at creating targeted misclassifications without
affecting the overall performance on the main tasks (Chen
et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2019; Bagdasaryan et al. 2018).
Defending against such attacks usually requires complete
control of the training process or monitoring the training
data (Steinhardt, Koh, and Liang 2017), which is challenging in FL due to the privacy requirements. In this paper,
we choose the popular and sophisticated backdoor attacks
as an example for our study. Although some work exists to
defend against backdoor attacks, including activation clustering (Chen et al. 2018) and k-means clustering (Shen,
Tople, and Saxena 2016), these approaches require access
to the training data making them inapplicable for FL settings. Some attack strategies tailored for FL have also been
studied including sybil attacks (Fung, Yoon, and Beschastnikh 2018), model replacement (Bagdasaryan et al. 2018),
GANs based attacks (Zhang et al. 2019), and distributed attacks (Xie et al. 2019). However, a comprehensive study on
the effectiveness of backdoor attacks under a variety of data
distribution among parties remains at unexplored.
The training data in FL is generated by clients and thus
heterogeneous inherently (Bonawitz et al. 2019; Chai et al.
2020; Zhao et al. 2018; Sattler et al. 2019). As the training
is conducted locally at each client, the data cannot be balanced nor monitored like in conventional data-centralized
or distributed ML. Such uncontrollable and severe data heterogeneity is one of the key challenges of FL as it is rarely
seen in conventional ML. Despite its uniqueness and importance, data heterogeneity has been largely overlooked
through the lens of robustness to backdoor attacks. Existing
FL backdoor attacks either assume IID training data distribution among clients or only conduct a simplified study on
non-IID data (Bagdasaryan et al. 2018; Bhagoji et al. 2019;
Xie et al. 2019). None of them provides a comprehensive
study nor understanding on how data heterogeneity impacts
the backdoor attacks and defenses.
In this paper, we focus on quantifying and understanding
the implications brought by data heterogeneity in FL backdoor attacks through extensive empirical experiments and
comprehensive analysis.
We define Heterogeneity Index to quantify the extent

Data heterogeneity has been identified as one of the key features in federated learning but often overlooked in the lens
of robustness to adversarial attacks. This paper focuses on
characterizing and understanding its impact on backdooring
attacks in federated learning through comprehensive experiments using synthetic and the LEAF benchmarks. The initial
impression driven by our experimental results suggests that
data heterogeneity is the dominant factor in the effectiveness
of attacks and it may be a redemption for defending against
backdooring as it makes the attack less efficient, more challenging to design effective attack strategies, and the attack
result also becomes less predictable. However, with further
investigations, we found data heterogeneity is more of a curse
than a redemption as the attack effectiveness can be significantly boosted by simply adjusting the client-side backdooring timing. More importantly, data heterogeneity may result
in overfitting at the local training of benign clients, which
can be utilized by attackers to disguise themselves and fool
skewed-feature based defenses. In addition, effective attack
strategies can be made by adjusting attack data distribution.
Finally, we discuss the potential directions of defending the
curses brought by data heterogeneity. The results and lessons
learned from our extensive experiments and analysis offer
new insights for designing robust federated learning methods
and systems.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is widely successful in training machine learning (ML) models collaboratively across clients
without sharing private data (McMahan et al. 2016; Zhao
et al. 2018; Bonawitz et al. 2019). In FL, models are trained
locally at clients to preserve data privacy and the trained
model weights are sent to a central server for aggregation
to update the global model. During the aggregation, privacy
mechanisms such as differential privacy (Abadi et al. 2016)
and secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al. 2017) are often employed to strengthen the privacy. There are two types of poisoning attacks: performance degradation attacks where the
goal of the adversary is to reduce the accuracy/F1 scores
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10807

