The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalising without Forgetting for Lifelong Person Re-Identification
Guile Wu, Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
guile.wu@qmul.ac.uk, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

also on the need for learning from scratch over combined
old and new data many times. This is both wasteful and nonscalable. In essence, a Re-ID model needs to continuously
incorporate piecemeal new information while preserving old
knowledge without assembling old data again in a lifelong
learning process. We call this lifelong person Re-ID.
Intuitively, lifelong person Re-ID is related to incremental learning (Li and Hoiem 2018; Zhao et al. 2020) (also
known as lifelong learning (Hou et al. 2018)), which aims
to incrementally increase a model’s capability by a flow of
data rather than training a model with a fixed dataset all at
once. However, in traditional incremental learning, all test
classes are usually seen during training and/or share a common class space as the training data, so the main challenge is
leveraging new and old information to optimise a model for
a common set of known (seen) classes. In contrast, lifelong
person Re-ID has significantly different and harder challenges: (1) Lifelong Re-ID is inherently a zero-shot learning problem (w/o semantic information) where training and
test classes (person identities) are non-overlapping, so test
classes are unseen in training; (2) Sequential data streams
are from different domains with entirely different and new
classes (person IDs), which increases the difficulty in balancing information from new and old domains; (3) Class imbalance is more challenging in lifelong Re-ID as compared
to a shared common class space in conventional incremental
learning, as each Re-ID dataset contains different numbers
of person identities (non-overlapping) with different numbers of samples. Image classification datasets usually have
balanced class sampling distributions, e.g. 100 classes in
CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009) all having 600
samples per class.
In this work, we propose a novel Generalising without
Forgetting method (GwFReID) for lifelong person Re-ID.
In GwFReID, we continuously optimise a Re-ID model to
extract more generalisable feature representations for Re-ID
at different domains without catastrophic forgetting. To implement this generalising without forgetting principle, our
learning paradigm resembles the spirit of the human vision
perceptual process. In the human vision system, we normally store in memory a few exemplars of classes observed
so far. When we encounter new classes (unseen before), we
improve our understanding of these new classes by leveraging both new and old information. In the same princi-

Existing person re-identification (Re-ID) methods mostly
prepare all training data in advance, while real-world Re-ID
data are inherently captured over time or from different locations, which requires a model to be incrementally generalised from sequential learning of piecemeal new data without forgetting what is already learned. In this work, we call
this lifelong person Re-ID, characterised by solving a problem of unseen class identification subject to continuous new
domain generalisation and adaptation with class imbalanced
learning. We formulate a new Generalising without Forgetting method (GwFReID) for lifelong Re-ID and design a
comprehensive learning objective that accounts for classification coherence, distribution coherence and representation
coherence in a unified framework. This design helps to simultaneously learn new information, distil old knowledge and
solve class imbalance, which enables GwFReID to incrementally improve model generalisation without catastrophic forgetting of what is already learned. Extensive experiments on
eight Re-ID benchmarks, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet show the
superiority of GwFReID over the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims at matching people
across non-overlapping camera views. The development of
deep learning and the availability of increasingly large-scale
Re-ID datasets have significantly advanced person Re-ID in
the past decade (Cheng et al. 2020; Song et al. 2019; Wu,
Zhu, and Gong 2020). Existing Re-ID methods (Xiao et al.
2016; Yu, Wu, and Zheng 2017; Song et al. 2019) mostly
assume that all training data can be prepared in advance
for model learning. However, real-world Re-ID data (person images) are inherently captured over time or from different locations/domains, which requires a Re-ID model to be
incrementally optimised from sequential learning of piecemeal new data. Potential solutions for solving this problem
include fine-tuning a pre-trained model with sequentially inputted new data or assembling all the data (old and new) into
a large data pool for joint-training from scratch. Although
these solutions are easy to implement, the former leads to
forgetting most previously learned knowledge, whilst the
latter imposes a huge burden not only on data storage, but
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2889

