The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Augmented Partial Mutual Learning with Frame Masking for Video Captioning
Ke Lin 1,2 , Zhuoxin Gan 2 , Liwei Wang 1
1

Peking University, China
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B), China
{ke17.lin, zhuoxin1.gan}@samsung.com, wanglw@pku.edu.cn,
2

Abstract

with different architectures or identity models with different initializations and integrates them into a powerful model
at inference stage. Nevertheless, this method is incapable
of improving the performance of each single model in the
ensemble group because of its overlooking of mutual interaction during training and its resource exhausting property at
inferencing phase also limits its practical application.
In this paper, we propose to use mutual learning (Zhang
et al. 2018) to jointly train multiple decoders and make them
guide each other during training, thus their independent caption generation performance get improved significantly. Mutual learning is a technique to transfer knowledge among
a group of peer models, deriving from Knowledge Distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) which trains a teacher
model and a student model simultaneously to improve the
student model by the guidance of the bigger teacher model.
But unlike Knowledge Distillation, mutual learning does not
restrict the size or the type of models and makes all the training models as the mutual teachers to guide each other via
minimizing a mimicry loss which measures the prediction
discrepancy among peer-models with respect to the same
inputs. This mimicry loss can be regarded as a kind of regularization which improves the generalization ability of the
model.
Since video captioning is a complicated multimodal task, original mimicry loss is not adequate to regularize this complex
multimodal interaction. To further improve the capability of
this mimicry regularization, we propose a novel Augmented
Partial Mutual Learning (APML) in which instead of feeding
the same video data to the peer-models as the input, multiple
peer-decoders calculates the mimicry loss with different augmented video data via Auto-Augment (Cubuk et al. 2018).
Besides, we add an extra intrinsic loss which calculates the
KL divergence between the outputs respect to normal input
and augmented input for each decoder. In our method, each
peer-model is just a part of the whole captioning model and
shares the left part (e.g. Embedding module), which forms
another regularization over the shared modules, analogous
to sharing backbone in multi-task learning. Note that our
method using multiple decoders is different from the ensemble method. Because, instead of seeking to derive an more
powerful integrated ensemble from a group of single models,
we explore the improving of each single model with the help
of other peer models in the group. Therefore, with our train-

Recent video captioning work improves greatly due to the
invention of various elaborate model architectures. If multiple captioning models are combined into a unified framework
not only by simple more ensemble, and each model can benefit from each other, the final captioning might be boosted
further. Jointly training of multiple model have not been explored in previous works. In this paper, we propose a novel
Augmented Partial Mutual Learning (APML) training method
where multiple decoders are trained jointly with mimicry losses between different decoders and different input variations.
Another problem of training captioning model is the ”one-tomany” mapping problem which means that one identical video
input is mapped to multiple caption annotations. To address
this problem, we propose an annotation-wise frame masking
approach to convert the ”one-to-many” mapping to ”one-toone” mapping. The experiments performed on MSR-VTT and
MSVD datasets demonstrate our proposed algorithm achieves
the state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
Video captioning refers to the task that generating a description of a given video automatically and it combines computer
vision and natural language processing (NLP) in a unified
framework (Venugopalan et al. 2015). It can be widely used
in video retrieval, video recommendation, disabled supporting and scene understanding. Following Venugopalan et al.
(Venugopalan et al. 2015), recent video captioning works
are almost based on encoder-decoder framework in which
a 2D or 3D CNN with other transformation modules are regarded as the encoder and a sequential module (e.g. GRU)
serves as the decoder. The improvement of their caption
generation performance mainly comes from more elaborate
visual features(Aafaq et al. 2019; Zhang and Peng 2019).
Despite the great evolution on their encoders, the decoders of them are still either RNN (LSTM/GRU) based or the
Transformer based(Vaswani et al. 2017). However, designing a new general sequence-modeling network is not trivial.
Therefore, the motivation of taking advantage of these existed
sequence-modeling networks simultaneously to enhance the
decoding robustness is natural. One way to address this issue is ensemble, which independently trains multiple models
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2047

