The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Who You Would Like to Share With? A Study of Share Recommendation in Social
E-commerce
Houye Ji1 , Junxiong Zhu2 , Xiao Wang1 , Chuan Shi1* , Bai Wang1 ,
Xiaoye Tan2 , Yanghua Li2 , Shaojian He2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
{jhy1993,xiaowang,shichuan,wangbai}@bupt.edu.cn,
{xike.zjx,yichen.lyh}@taobao.com,{xiaoye.txy,shaojian.he}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

new business paradigm which improves user stickiness and
activeness and monetizes the user influence. For example,
Facebook and Instagram integrate e-commerce into social
media, while Amazon and Taobao leverage social interactions to improve e-commerce.
With the development of social e-commerce, a new recommendation paradigm, share recommendation, has sprung
up recently. In particular, share recommendation aims to
predict whether a user will share an item with his friend.
Such recommendation demand is ubiquitous in social ecommerce. Share recommendation has been a unique recommendation paradigm in social e-commerce, due to the
following characteristics. Firstly, share recommendation
seamlessly integrates the benefits of social relations and
item recommendation. Most users coexist in purchase network and social network, so a user well knows his purchasing items, as well as his friends. Seamlessly integrating
them, share recommendation not only enhances the stickiness and activeness of users but also monetizes the user influence (e.g., the attention economy and Internet celebrity
economy). Secondly, share recommendation provides a reliable recommendation. Since the user knows both the recommended item and his friends, the share action of the user is
trustworthy for his friends, which increases the recommendation reliability and thus facilitates purchase action.
The share recommendation is significantly different from
traditional recommendations, such as item recommendation
(Wang et al. 2019a) and friend recommendation (Wang et al.
2014). As shown in Figure 1, we can find that item recommendation aims to recommend an item to a user (i.e., essentially maximize the probability P (i2 |u2 )) and friend recommendation aims to recommend a friend to a user (i.e.,
maximize the probability P (u4 |u2 )). Note that social recommendation (Ma et al. 2008) is naturally item recommendation. Significantly different from the above binary recommendations, the goal of share recommendation is to predict
the ternary interactions among hU ser, Item, F riendi, i.e.,
whether a user will share an item with his friend, maximizing the probability P (u3 |u2 , i3 ).
Deliberately considering the characteristics of share recommendation, we need to address the following challenges
for modeling share recommendation.
• Rich Heterogeneous Information. Share recommenda-

The prosperous development of social e-commerce has
spawned diverse recommendation demands, and accompanied a new recommendation paradigm, share recommendation. Significantly different from traditional binary recommendations (e.g., item recommendation and friend recommendation), share recommendation models ternary interactions among hU ser, Item, F riendi, which aims to recommend a most likely friend to a user who would like to share a
specific item, progressively becoming an indispensable service in social e-commerce. Seamlessly integrating the social relations and purchase behaviours, share recommendation improves user stickiness and monetizes the user influence, meanwhile encountering three unique challenges: rich
heterogeneous information, complex ternary interaction, and
asymmetric share action. In this paper, we first study the share
recommendation problem and propose a heterogeneous graph
neural network based share recommendation model, called
HGSRec. Specifically, HGSRec delicately designs a tripartite
heterogeneous GNNs to describe the multifold characteristics
of users and items, and then dynamically fuses them via capturing potential ternary dependency with a dual co-attention
mechanism, followed by a transitive triplet representation to
depict the asymmetry of share action and predict whether
share action happens. Offline experiments demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed HGSRec with significant improvements (11.7%-14.5%) over the state-of-the-arts, and online A/B testing on Taobao platform further demonstrates the
high industrial practicability and stability of HGSRec.

Introduction
In the era of information explosion, the recommender system has become the most effective way to help users to discover what they are interested in enormous data. As two
basic Internet applications, e-commerce and social network
both provide the recommender service and therefore generate corresponding item recommendation and friend recommendation, respectively. Recently, with the thriving of
online applications, there is a surge of social e-commerce
(Gefen and Straub 2004), which integrates social network
and e-commerce for better e-commerce service. Benefitting
from rich social interactions, social e-commerce provides a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

232

