The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Amodal Segmentation Based on Visible Region Segmentation and Shape Prior
Yuting Xiao,1, 2 Yanyu Xu,4 Ziming Zhong,1, 2 Weixin Luo,1, 2 Jiawei Li,3 Shenghua Gao 1, 2
1

ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Alibaba Group
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
{xiaoyt, zhongzm, luowx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, xu yanyu@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, mingong.ljw@alibaba-inc.com
2

Abstract

all of them learn the mapping relationship from the feature
corresponding to the whole view to the amodal mask. This
processing brings explicitly ambiguity that the same image
appearances of occlusion may require different predictions.
Motivated by the behavior of human leveraging only visible regions and memorizing the category-specific shape
prior for amodal segmentation, we propose a solution that
estimates the visible region of the target object and leverages the visible region and shape prior for amodal segmentation. Without the shape prior of an object, the amodal mask
inferred by human might be in an arbitrary shape. Similarly,
the estimated amodal mask might also suffer from the lack of
shape prior, resulting in the arbitrary edges. Thus, our model
leads to more robust results. As shown in Fig. 1, although the
target (green vegetable) is occluded by different objects, our
method could perceive the almost same occluded regions,
like human ignoring the different occlusion contexts such as
banana, apples, or cabbage. However, the existing baseline
estimates the different occluded regions.
In particular, our proposed method consists of a coarse
mask segmentation module, a visible mask segmentation
module, and an amodal mask segmentation module. In the
coarse mask segmentation module, we utilize the backbone
of Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017) with an amodal mask head
and a visible mask head to predict the coarse amodal and
visible mask respectively. In the visible mask segmentation
module, we propose to leverage the amodal mask to refine
the visible mask and a reclassification regularizer to alleviate
the misleading effect of occlusion in classification. Specifically, we use the coarse amodal mask as the attention multiplying with the feature of region-of-interest for more accurate visible mask estimation. The coarse amodal mask alleviates the effect of the background and contains more information than the coarse visible mask, which provides a cue for
the visible mask. Further, for the reclassification regularizer,
we propose to apply the feature of the visible region instead
of the whole view to for classification, which alleviates the
influence of the occlusion and background. In the amodal
mask segmentation module, we propose to use the feature of
the visible region and the shape prior to refine the amodal
mask. Unlike the diversity of the visible mask, the amodal
mask has the inherent category-specific shape prior. To encode the shape prior, we design an auto-encoder for amodal
mask encoding, and a codebook is used as the memory ob-

Almost all existing amodal segmentation methods make
the inferences of occluded regions by using features corresponding to the whole image. This is against the human’s
amodal perception, where human uses the visible part and
the shape prior knowledge of the target to infer the occluded
region. To mimic the behavior of the human and solve
the ambiguity in the learning, we propose a framework, it
firstly estimates a coarse visible mask and a coarse amodal
mask. Then based on the coarse prediction, our model infers
the amodal mask by concentrating on the visible region
and utilizing the shape prior in the memory. In this way,
features corresponding to background and occlusion can be
suppressed for amodal mask estimation. Consequently, the
amodal mask would not be affected by the occlusion when
given the same visible regions. The leverage of shape prior
makes the amodal mask estimation more robust and reasonable. Our proposed model is evaluated on three datasets.
Experiments show that our proposed model outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods. The visualization of shape
prior indicates that the category-specific feature in the
codebook has certain interpretability. The code is available
at
https://github.com/YutingXiao/Amodal-SegmentationBased-on-Visible-Region-Segmentation-and-Shape-Prior.

Introduction
Amodal segmentation aims to infer the amodal mask, including both the visible region and the possible invisible region of the target object. Different from semantic segmentation or traditional instance segmentation, amodal segmentation is designed to exploit the amodal perception capability
(Zhu et al. 2017), where human could infer and perceive the
whole semantic concept of the target object mainly according to the partially visible region of the target object.
Simulating the amodal perception is quite challenging
Lots of efforts have been done for the amodal segmentation, which could be roughly divided into two groups. Methods in the first group directly estimate both the visible and
the amodal regions from the images (Qi et al. 2019; Follmann et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2017), while methods in the
second group use inferred depth order information to help
the amodal mask prediction (Zhang et al. 2019). However,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2995

