The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generate Your Counterfactuals: Towards Controlled
Counterfactual Generation for Text
Nishtha Madaan, Inkit Padhi, Naveen Panwar, Diptikalyan Saha
1
IBM Research AI
{nishthamadaan, naveen.panwar, diptsaha}@in.ibm.com, inkpad@ibm.com

Abstract

diversity will ensure high coverage of the input space defined by the goal. In this paper, we aim to generate such
counterfactual text samples which are also effective in finding test-failures (i.e. label flips for NLP classifiers).
Recent years have seen a tremendous increase in the work
on fairness testing (Ma, Wang, and Liu 2020; Holstein et al.
2019) which are capable of generating a large number of
test-cases that capture the model’s ability to misclassify or
remove unwanted bias around specific protected attributes
(Huang et al. 2019), (Garg et al. 2019). This is not only limited to fairness but the community has seen great interest
in building robust models susceptible to adversarial changes
(Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014; Michel et al. 2019;
Ebrahimi et al. 2017; Zhao, Dua, and Singh 2017). These
models are capable of generating sentences that can change
the label of the classifier. These works are very limited to a
specific domain. While the change of label is likely, the generations are not plausible and are ungrammatical (Li, Monroe, and Jurafsky 2016) or require manual human intervention in many cases (Jia and Liang 2017).
A recent work by Ribeiro et al. 2020 employs a tool
Checklist which is one of the attempts to come up with
generalized test-cases. For generation, Checklist uses a set
of pre-defined templates, lexicons, general-purpose perturbations, and context-aware suggestions. A major limitation with these template-based approaches or rule-based approaches is that these can not generate meaningful diverse
counterfactual samples. Our goal is to be able to generate
these counterfactual samples for a given text in a more generalized manner with high generation quality and diversity.
Generative models like GPT-2 (Radford et al. 2019) are
good at generating plausible and diverse text. We can leverage these capabilities to generate counterfactual text (Pearl
et al. 2000). However, directly adopting Transformers architecture (Vaswani et al. 2017) to generate perturbations
for a goal-oriented task is difficult without adding additional attributes and fine-tuning with attribute-specific data
(Keskar et al. 2019). Similar to (Dathathri et al. 2020), we
perform controlled text generation to achieve the above objectives. There are two key technical challenges in adopting this approach. First, transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017)
are good at generating feasible and plausible but inferencing on GPT-2 is hard. Second, prior approaches to control
GPT-2 text generation do not support a custom model to

Machine Learning has seen tremendous growth recently,
which has led to a larger adoption of ML systems for educational assessments, credit risk, healthcare, employment,
criminal justice, to name a few. Trustworthiness of ML and
NLP systems is a crucial aspect and requires guarantee that
the decisions they make are fair and robust. Aligned with
this, we propose a framework GYC, to generate a set of counterfactual text samples, which are crucial for testing these
ML systems. Our main contributions include a) We introduce
GYC, a framework to generate counterfactual samples such
that the generation is plausible, diverse, goal-oriented and effective, b) We generate counterfactual samples, that can direct
the generation towards a corresponding condition such as
named-entity tag, semantic role label, or sentiment. Our experimental results on various domains, show that GYC generates counterfactual text samples exhibiting the above four
properties. GYC generates counterfactuals that can act as test
cases to evaluate a model and any text debiasing algorithm.

Introduction
Owing to the advancement of deep learning in recent years,
AI systems are now deployed for varied tasks and domains
like educational assessments, credit risk, healthcare, employment, criminal justice. With the deployment of NLP
systems in these domains, the need to ascertain trustworthiness and reliability becomes crucial to ensure the decisions
that they make are fair and robust. To this end, counterfactual
text (Pearl et al. 2000) provides an alternate dataset which
acts as test-cases to evaluate the properties such as fairness
and robustness of these systems. These texts along with its
correct labels may also be used to augment the training set
to mitigate such properties (Garg et al. 2019).
The four properties that are important for counterfactual
text are plausibility, diversity, goal-orientedness, and effectiveness. Plausibility ensures that the generated test cases are
realistic and can occur in the input and thus can be further
used for retraining. Goal-orientedness can ensure that the
generated counterfactual text samples are deviating from the
original sample on a particular aspect like NER, SRL, synonyms or fairness attributes as controlled by the user. The
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13516

