The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Contextual Bandits via Bootstrapping
Qiao Tang, Hong Xie, Yunni Xia, Jia Lee, Qingsheng Zhu
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Software Theory and Technology, Chongqing University
felicity 0719@163.com, xiehong2018@cqu.edu.cn, xiayunni@hotmail.com, {lijia,qszhu}@cqu.edu.cn

where θ∗ ∈ Rd and Wa is random variable with normal
distribution N (0, σa2 ). In each round t ∈ N+ , the decision
maker selects an arm at ∈ At ⊆ A and receives the reward,
which is a sample from Rat . The objective is to design an
arm selection algorithm to attain as large as possible the
cumulative reward in T ∈ N+ rounds.

Abstract
Upper confidence bound (UCB) based contextual bandit algorithms require one to know the tail property of the reward
distribution. Unfortunately, such tail property is usually unknown or difficult to specify in real-world applications. Using
a tail property heavier than the ground truth leads to a slow
learning speed of the contextual bandit algorithm, while using
a lighter one may cause the algorithm to diverge. To address
this fundamental problem, we develop an estimator (evaluated from historical rewards) for the contextual bandit UCB
based on the multiplier bootstrapping technique. We first establish sufficient conditions under which our estimator converges
asymptotically to the ground truth of contextual bandit UCB.
We further derive a second order correction for our estimator
so as to obtain its confidence level with a finite number of
rounds. To demonstrate the versatility of the estimator, we
apply it to design a BootLinUCB algorithm for the contextual
bandit. We prove that the BootLinUCB has a sub-linear regret upper bound and also conduct extensive experiments to
validate its superior performance.

For the bandit feedback illustrated in Example 1, contextual bandit algorithms need to balance the exploitation vs.
exploration trade-off. One popular class of contextual bandit
algorithms use the upper confidence bound (UCB) approach
to balance this trade-off (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári
2011; Auer 2002; Chu et al. 2011; Lattimore and Szepesvári
2020). The following example illustrates one of the UCB
approaches for Example 1.
Example 2. Consider the setting of Example 1. In round t,
selects the arm at ∈ arg maxa∈At Ut (a), where Ut (a) is the
UCB associated with arm a and it is defined as
Ut (a) , xTa θbt + φt (xa , σ, Ht−1 ),

Introduction
Contextual bandit is a popular online learning framework
and has been applied to solve many real-world problems, i.e.,
it has been applied to recommender systems to recommend
products to interactive users (Li et al. 2010; Wang, Wu, and
Wang 2016; Zhang et al. 2019), applied to optimize information retrieval algorithms (Hofmann et al. 2011; Gampa
and Fujita 2019; Glowacka et al. 2019), as well as applied
to networking applications such as selecting edge servers in
mobile edge computing systems (Ouyang et al. 2019). Also,
numerous variants of contextual bandit were developed (Filippi et al. 2010; Wang, Wu, and Wang 2016; Krishnamurthy,
Wu, and Syrgkanis 2018; Zhang et al. 2019). To illustrate,
consider the following example of a simplified contextual
bandit:
Example 1. Consider a finite number of arms indexed by
a ∈ A , {1, . . . , A}, where A ∈ N+ . Arm a is associated
with a feature vector xa ∈ Rd , where d ∈ N+ . The reward
model for arm a is
Ra = xTa θ∗ + Wa ,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12182

where σ = (σ1 , . . . , σA ), Ht denotes the historical arms and
rewards up to round t, θbt denote an estimator of θ∗ evaluated
from Ht−1 , and the penalty term satisfies φt (xa , σ, Ht−1 ) >
0.
Example 2 summarizes the structure of LinUCB algorithms for contextual bandit (Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and
Szepesvári 2011; Chu et al. 2011). The penalty term encourages exploration and a larger value induces more exploration. The penalty term φt (xa , σ, Ht−1 ) is non-decreasing
in σa , ∀a ∈ A, capturing that when the reward is subjected
to a larger variation, the estimated θbt becomes less accurate,
thus, the algorithm needs to do more explorations. Unfortunately, one does not possess the knowledge of σa , ∀a ∈ A,
in practice. Using a standard deviation larger than σa for
Algorithm in Example 2 leads to over exploration, i.e., slow
learning speed, while the reverse may cause the algorithm
to diverge. In summary, Example 2 highlights a reward distribution tail property mis-match problem (e.g., σa characterizes the tail property of the reward distribution), which is
inherent in many UCB based contextual bandit algorithms beyond LinUCB, e.g., LinRel (Auer 2002), SupLinUCB (Chu
et al. 2011), action elimination algorithms (Lattimore and
Szepesvári 2020).

