The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Plug-and-Play Domain Adaptation for Cross-Subject
EEG-based Emotion Recognition
Li-Ming Zhao,1 Xu Yan, 3 Bao-Liang Lu 1 2

subject 1-4
happy
neutral
sad

Abstract

algorithm 1
algorithm 2
algorithm 3

Bad

Performance

Human emotion decoding in affective brain-computer interfaces suffers a major setback due to the inter-subject variability of electroencephalography (EEG) signals. Existing approaches usually require amassing extensive EEG data of
each new subject, which is prohibitively time-consuming
along with poor user experience. To tackle this issue, we divide EEG representations into private components specific to
each subject and shared emotional components that are universal to all subjects. According to this representation partition, we propose a plug-and-play domain adaptation method
for dealing with the inter-subject variability. In the training
phase, subject-invariant emotional representations and private
components of source subjects are separately captured by a
shared encoder and private encoders. Furthermore, we build
one emotion classifier on the shared partition and subjects’
individual classifiers on the combination of these two partitions. In the calibration phase, the model only requires few
unlabeled EEG data from incoming target subjects to model
their private components. Therefore, besides the shared emotion classifier, we have another pipeline to use the knowledge
of source subjects through the similarity of private components. In the test phase, we integrate predictions of the shared
emotion classifier with those of individual classifiers ensemble after modulation by similarity weights. Experimental results on the SEED dataset show that our model greatly shortens the calibration time within a minute while maintaining
the recognition accuracy, all of which make emotion decoding more generalizable and practicable.

Poor User Experience Excellent

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 200240
2
Center for Brain-Machine Interface and Neuromodulation,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 200020
3
Department of Linguistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 98195
{lm zhao, bllu}@sjtu.edu.cn, xyan3@uw.edu
Good

1

∗

Calibration time

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Illustration of the domain-shift challenges and
the dilemma of constructing practical EEG-based affective
models. (a) Individual differences of EEG signals of four
subjects with three classes of emotions. (b) A rough display
of the trade-off dilemma between algorithm performance
and user experience.

Zhu, and Lu 2019). However, EEG data is highly subjectdependent due to the structural and functional variability between subjects (Samek, Meinecke, and Müller 2013), like
mental states, electrode impedance, head shapes, etc. Figure
1(a) illustrates the inter-subject variability of emotional EEG
data, which brings great challenges of constructing practical
EEG-based affective models. This shortage definitely hinders developments and applications of affective computing
on a large scale.
The obstacle mentioned above has motivated many researchers to develop practical emotion recognition algorithms. The conventional method to deal with this problem
is to collect a large amount of data from the new subject,
label them, and use them to customize the classifier parameters before the test stage. Unfortunately, this demand
is time-consuming and causes poor user experience, which
makes the model less practical. Another route is using transfer learning methods (Pan and Yang 2009) to deal with the
individual differences. The transfer learning can be roughly
divided into domain adaptation (DA) and domain generalization (DG) according to whether the data of the target domain is used in the model training phase. For the practical
application of emotion recognition, DA is inefficient due to
the use of all target data, and DG may suffer from its generalization ability as it does not rely on any information from

Introduction
The emerging affective computing aims at detecting, recognizing, processing, and responding to people’s affected
states. It has broad prospects in many fields of applications
in daily life, ranging from specific scenarios such as medical
treatment, intelligent education, and entertainment to general affect-sensitive systems like brain-computer interfaces
(BCIs), among which emotion recognition is the primary
step and the milestone (Brunner et al. 2015). Recently, EEGbased emotion recognition has greatly attracted researchers’
interest for its information sufficiency (Alarcao and Fonseca 2017) and stable neural patterns over time (Zheng,
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

863

