The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private Link Prediction with Protected Connections
Abir De, Soumen Chakrabarti
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
{abir, soumen}@cse.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

2019), at least in a probabilistic sense, because they take advantage of rampant triad completion: when node u links to
v, very often there exists a node w such that edges (u, w)
and (w, v) already exist. Therefore, recommending v to u
allows u to learn about the edge (w, v), which may result in
breach of privacy of v and w. Motivated by these observations, a recent line of work (Machanavajjhala, Korolova, and
Sarma 2011; Xu et al. 2018) proposes privacy preserving LP
methods. While they introduce sufficient noise to ensure a
specified level of privacy, they do not directly optimize for
the LP ranking utility. Consequently, they show poor predictive performance.

Link prediction (LP) algorithms propose to each node a
ranked list of nodes that are currently non-neighbors, as the
most likely candidates for future linkage. Owing to increasing concerns about privacy, users (nodes) may prefer to keep
some of their connections protected or private. Motivated by
this observation, our goal is to design a differentially private LP algorithm, which trades off between privacy of the
protected node-pairs and the link prediction accuracy. More
specifically, we first propose a form of differential privacy
on graphs, which models the privacy loss only of those nodepairs which are marked as protected. Next, we develop D P L P,
a learning to rank algorithm, which applies a monotone transform to base scores from a non-private LP system, and then
adds noise. D P L P is trained with a privacy induced ranking
loss, which optimizes the ranking utility for a given maximum
allowed level of privacy leakage of the protected node-pairs.
Under a recently-introduced latent node embedding model,
we present a formal trade-off between privacy and LP utility. Extensive experiments with several real-life graphs and
several LP heuristics show that D P L P can trade off between
privacy and predictive performance more effectively than several alternatives.

1

1.1

Present Work

In this work, we design a learning to rank algorithm which
aims to optimize the LP utility under a given amount of privacy leakage of the node-pairs (edges or non-edges) which
are marked as protected. Specifically, we make the following
contributions.
Modeling differential privacy of protected node pairs.
Differential privacy (DP) (Dwork and Roth 2014) is concerned with privacy loss of a single entry in a database
upon (noisy) datum disclosure. As emphasized by Dwork
and Roth (2014, Section 2.3.3), the meaning of single entry
varies across applications, especially in graph databases. DP
algorithms over graphs predominantly consider two notions
of granularity, e.g., node and edge DP, where one entry is
represented by a node and an edge respectively. While node
DP provides a stronger privacy guarantee than edge DP, it
is often stronger than what is needed for applications. As a
result, it can result in unacceptably low utility (Song et al.
2018; Dwork and Roth 2014). To address this challenge, we
adopt a variant of differential privacy, called protected-pair
differential privacy, which accounts for the loss of privacy
of only those node-pairs (edges or non edges), which are
marked as private. Such a privacy model is well suited for
LP in social networks, where users may hide only some
sensitive contacts and leave the remaining relations public (Dwork and Roth 2014). It is much stronger than edge
DP, but weaker than node DP. However, it serves the purpose in the context of our current problem.
Maximizing LP accuracy subject to privacy constraints.
Having defined an appropriate granularity of privacy, we develop D P L P, a perturbation wrapper around a base LP algo-

Introduction

Link prediction (LP) (Liben-Nowell and Kleinberg 2007; Lü
and Zhou 2011) is the task of predicting future edges that are
likely to emerge between nodes in a social network, given
historical views of it. Predicting new research collaborators,
new Facebook friends and new LinkedIn connections are examples of LP tasks. LP algorithms usually presents to each
node u a ranking of the most promising non-neighbors v of u
at the time of prediction.
Owing to the growing concerns about privacy (Tucker
2014; Machanavajjhala, Korolova, and Sarma 2011; Waniek
et al. 2019), social media users often prefer to mark their
sensitive contacts, e.g., dating partners, prospective employers, doctors, etc. as ‘protected’ from other users and the Internet at large. However, the social media hosting platform
itself continues to enjoy full access to the network, and may
exploit them for link prediction. In fact, many popular LP
algorithms often leak neighbor information (Waniek et al.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

63

