The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Revealing Hidden Preconditions and Effects of Compound HTN Planning Tasks
— A Complexity Analysis
Conny Olz,1 Susanne Biundo,1 Pascal Bercher2
1

Ulm University, Germany
The Australian National University, Australia
conny.olz@uni-ulm.de, susanne.biundo@uni-ulm.de, pascal.bercher@anu.edu.au
2

Abstract

eventually a completely primitive plan is achieved featuring all necessary preconditions and effects. So, while – due
to the eventual introduction of primitive tasks – compound
tasks do have an impact on states, it is not directly visible or
even specified in the model explicitly (Goldman 2009).
In contrast, a vast range of hierarchical planning formalisms do feature and exploit preconditions and effects
of compound tasks (Bercher et al. 2016), e.g., the hybrid
planning formalisms by Kambhampati, Mali, and Srivastava
(1998) and Biundo and Schattenberg (2001). For example
they are used to insert compound tasks and reason about executability in plan space-based hierarchical planning such
as PANDA (Biundo and Schattenberg 2001; Schattenberg
2009), FAPE (Dvor̆ák et al. 2014; Bit-Monnot, Smith, and
Do 2016) or UMCP (Tsuneto, Hendler, and Nau 1998); or
to generate solution plans that still contain compound tasks
(Clement, Durfee, and Barrett 2007; Marthi, Russell, and
Wolfe 2008; de Silva, Sardina, and Padgham 2009). Another
prominent example is the established HTN formalism by
Erol, Hendler, and Nau (1996). It features a rich set of constraints that can be expressed, such as the (immediately) before constraint, which enables one to define preconditions of
compound tasks, even preconditions which are not required
by actions of its primitive refinements. Similarly, it also allows to use (immediately) after constraints constraining the
search to choose an refinement after which the specified state
properties hold (even if the chosen refinement itself did not
have them as effect, if some held already prior its execution).
In most of these works, the compound tasks’ preconditions and effects are provided by the domain modeler, so it
is up to him or her to ensure completeness and correctness of
this information. Thus, the benefit of automated inference of
this information is twofold: it reduces modelling effort and
prevents modelling errors. Moreover, it provides information that could be exploited for search, e.g., for the Upward
and Downward properties (Yang 1990) (which are essential
for generating abstract solutions), or heuristics.
There is a huge range of state-based heuristics for classical (i.e., non-hierarchical) planning, which all center around
properties of states. In HTN planning, however, it is unclear which impact a compound task’s hierarchy has on
states when not knowing its pre- and postconditions. Our
paper bridges the gap between both, so it can serve as a basis to compute such state properties. We are optimistic that

In Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning, compound
tasks need to be refined into executable (primitive) action
sequences. In contrast to their primitive counterparts, compound tasks do not show preconditions or effects. Thus, their
implications on the states in which they are applied are not
explicitly known: they are “hidden” in and depending on the
decomposition structure. We formalize several kinds of preconditions and effects that can be inferred for compound tasks
in totally ordered HTN domains. As relevant special case we
introduce a problem relaxation which admits reasoning about
preconditions and effects in polynomial time. We provide
procedures for doing so, thereby extending previous work,
which could only deal with acyclic models. We prove our
procedures to be correct and complete for any totally ordered
input domain. The results are embedded into an encompassing complexity analysis of the inference of preconditions and
effects of compound tasks, an investigation that has not been
made so far.

Introduction
Hierarchical Task Network (HTN) planning is a hierarchical
approach to planning, where compound tasks are step-wise
refined into more primitive tasks, until an executable plan
of action is obtained (Erol, Hendler, and Nau 1996; Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004). When modeling such planning
problems, often a planning language is used in which compound tasks do neither show preconditions nor effects like
their primitive action counterparts. This is for example the
case in HDDL (Höller et al. 2020a), a standard description
language for HTN planning problems, which was also used
to describe the benchmark set of the International Planning
Competition 2020 (Behnke et al. 2019)1 on HTN planning.
This is also in line with one of the standard formalizations
of HTN planning (Geier and Bercher 2011; Alford, Bercher,
and Aha 2015) that HDDL bases upon, which is also used,
among others, for many of the more recent theoretical investigations (Bercher, Alford, and Höller 2019). Instead of describing state transitions, the decomposition of a compound
task introduces other primitive and/or compound tasks until
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
See ipc2020.hierarchical-task.net.

11903

