The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Addressing Domain Gap via Content Invariant Representation
for Semantic Segmentation
Li Gao, 1 Lefei Zhang, 1 * Qian Zhang 2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of Computer Science and Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network
Communication Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. 2 Horizon Robotics, Inc., Beijing, China.
gaoli1218@whu.edu.cn, zhanglefei@whu.edu.cn, qian01.zhang@horizon.ai
Abstract
The problem of unsupervised domain adaptation in semantic segmentation is a major challenge for numerous computer vision tasks because acquiring pixel-level labels is timeconsuming with expensive human labor. A large gap exists
among data distributions in different domains, which will
cause severe performance loss when a model trained with
synthetic data is generalized to real data. Hence, we propose
a novel domain adaptation approach, called Content Invariant Representation Network, to narrow the domain gap between the source (S) and target (T ) domains. The previous
works developed a network to directly transfer the knowledge from the S to T . On the contrary, the proposed method
aims to progressively reduce the gap between S and T on
the basis of a Content Invariant Representation (CIR). CIR is
an intermediate domain (I) sharing invariant content with S
and having similar data distribution to T . Then, an Ancillary
Classifier Module (ACM) is designed to focus on pixel-level
details and generate attention-aware results. ACM adaptively
assigns different weights to pixels according to their domain
offsets, thereby reducing local domain gaps. The global domain gap between CIR and T is also narrowed by enforcing
local alignments. Last, we perform self-supervised training
in the pseudo-labeled target domain to further fit the distribution of the real data. Comprehensive experiments on two
domain adaptation tasks, that is, GTAV → Cityscapes and
SYNTHIA → Cityscapes, clearly demonstrate the superiority of our method compared with state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1: Connection of CIR with source and target domains. S and T denote source and target domain, respectively. The image from S has the same content with its corresponding CIR image. The blue, red, and yellow dots represent the distribution of T , S, and CIR, respectively. CIR
has a similar distribution to T .

are indispensable for training. In the case that the number
of labeled real images is not enough, utilizing synthetically
generated data is one promising approach that addresses the
above issues (Richter et al. 2016; Ros et al. 2016). Nevertheless, models trained with the synthetic images perform
unsatisfactorily when applied to a realistic domain because
of the existence of cross-domain discrepancy (Shimodaira
2000).
To solve the aforementioned problems, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) approaches (Saenko et al. 2010)
are proposed to reduce distribution offsets between source
and target domains. Numerous domain adaptation methods
(Hoffman et al. 2016; Sankaranarayanan, Balaji, and Jain
2018; Song et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2019) are designed to
learn the domain-invariant features of the source and target
domains. Thus, when we have no access to the target domain labels, the model learned from the source domain can
be applied to the target domain.
Some prior works (Lee et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2017; Zou
et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; Murez et al.
2018) tend to directly adapt the information of the source domain to the target domain. The distance between these two
feature spaces is often very far, and many categories have

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the rapid development
of deep learning, which made a vital effect on many computer vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation. Semantic
segmentation aims to assign each pixel of a photograph to
a semantic class label to distinguish different things on the
image. That is, semantic segmentation can be understood as
a pixel-level classification task.
For computer-generated images, obtaining their semantic
labels is very simple, but acquiring the labels of real pictures
requires expensive human labor (Luo et al. 2018). Moreover, in some scenarios, such as autonomous cars and industry robots, huge amount of real images with accurate labels
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7528

