The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Addressing Action Oscillations through Learning Policy Inertia
Chen Chen1∗ , Hongyao Tang2,1∗ , Jianye Hao1,2† , Wulong Liu1 , Zhaopeng Meng2
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
chenchen9@huawei.com, bluecontra@tju.edu.cn, {haojianye,liuwulong}@huawei.com, mengzp@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

However, one important problematic phenomenon of
DRL agent is action oscillation, which means that a welltrained agent selects different actions within consecutive
steps during online execution though the states only differ
slightly, which leads to shaky behaviors and jerky trajectories. Albeit the agent can achieve good task-specific rewards in simulation, the action oscillation may strongly affect the user experience in many practical interactive applications and exacerbate the wear and tear of a real physical
agent. More crucially, the induced abnormal behavior can
cause potential security menace in such as autonomous driving scenarios, where safety is the very first requirement. In a
nutshell, action oscillation inhibits the deployment of DRL
agents in many real-world domains.
Action oscillation can be widely observed for both deterministic policies and stochastic policies. For deterministic
policies like Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015), the
underlying causes may come from the complexity of deep
function approximation with high-dimensional inputs and
stochastic noises due to partial observation and random sampling. This issue can be more inevitable for stochastic policies. For example, an entropy regularizer is often adopted
in policy-based approaches; moreover, maximum entropy
approaches, e.g., Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al.
2018b), take policy entropy as part of optimization objective. Such approaches encourage diverse behaviors of policy
for better exploration and generalization, thus aggravate the
oscillation in actions in turn. Figure 1 shows two exemplary
scenarios in which ‘unnatural’ and unnecessary oscillations
in actions are often observed for learned policies. It deserves
to note that the action oscillation issue we study in this paper is different from the inefficient shaky or unstructured exploration behaviors studied in previous works (Sutton and
Barto 2018; Haarnoja et al. 2018b; Korenkevych et al. 2019;
Haarnoja et al. 2018a; Kendall et al. 2019). On the contrary
to exploration, we care about how to address action oscillation during online execution (i.e., exploitation).
As previously explained, action oscillation is often neglected since mainstream evaluations of DRL algorithms
are based on expected returns, which might be sufficient
for games yet ignores some realistic factors in practical
applications. We are aware that the idea of action repetition (Durugkar et al. 2016; Lakshminarayanan, Sharma, and
Ravindran 2016; Sharma, Lakshminarayanan, and Ravin-

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithms have been
demonstrated to be effective in a wide range of challenging
decision making and control tasks. However, these methods
typically suffer from severe action oscillations in particular in
discrete action setting, which means that agents select different actions within consecutive steps even though states only
slightly differ. This issue is often neglected since the policy
is usually evaluated by its cumulative rewards only. Action
oscillation strongly affects the user experience and can even
cause serious potential security menace especially in realworld domains with the main concern of safety, such as autonomous driving. To this end, we introduce Policy Inertia
Controller (PIC) which serves as a generic plug-in framework
to off-the-shelf DRL algorithms, to enables adaptive trade-off
between the optimality and smoothness of the learned policy
in a formal way. We propose Nested Policy Iteration as a general training algorithm for PIC-augmented policy which ensures monotonically non-decreasing updates under some mild
conditions. Further, we derive a practical DRL algorithm,
namely Nested Soft Actor-Critic. Experiments on a collection
of autonomous driving tasks and several Atari games suggest
that our approach demonstrates substantial oscillation reduction in comparison to a range of commonly adopted baselines
with almost no performance degradation.

Introduction
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been widely considered to be a promising way to learn optimal policies
in a wide range of practical decision making and control
domains, such as Game Playing (Mnih et al. 2015; Silver
et al. 2016), Robotics Manipulation (Hafner et al. 2020; Lillicrap et al. 2015; Smith et al. 2019), Medicine Discovery
(Popova et al. 2019; Schreck, Coley, and Bishop 2019; You
et al. 2018) and so on. One of the most appealing characteristics of DRL is that optimal policies can be learned in
a model-free fashion, even in complex environments with
high-dimensional state and action space and stochastic transition dynamics.
∗
Equal contributions. This work is done when Hongyao Tang is
an intern at Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.
†
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7020

