The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Confidence-aware Non-repetitive Multimodal Transformers for TextCaps
Zhaokai Wang1 , Renda Bao2 , Qi Wu3 , Si Liu1 *
1

Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
3
University of Adelaide, Australia
{wzk1015, liusi}@buaa.edu.cn, renda.brd@alibaba-inc.com, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
When describing an image, reading text in the visual scene
is crucial to understand the key information. Recent work explores the TextCaps task, i.e. image captioning with reading
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) tokens, which requires
models to read text and cover them in generated captions. Existing approaches fail to generate accurate descriptions because of their (1) poor reading ability; (2) inability to choose
the crucial words among all extracted OCR tokens; (3) repetition of words in predicted captions. To this end, we propose a Confidence-aware Non-repetitive Multimodal Transformers (CNMT) to tackle the above challenges. Our CNMT
consists of a reading, a reasoning and a generation modules,
in which Reading Module employs better OCR systems to enhance text reading ability and a confidence embedding to select the most noteworthy tokens. To address the issue of word
redundancy in captions, our Generation Module includes a
repetition mask to avoid predicting repeated word in captions.
Our model outperforms state-of-the-art models on TextCaps
dataset, improving from 81.0 to 93.0 in CIDEr. Our source
code is publicly available 1 .

Figure 1: Our model extracts text in image with better OCR
systems and records their recognition confidence as confidence embedding, which represents semantic importance of
OCR tokens. After reasoning with objects and text features,
it predicts caption tokens with a repetition mask to avoid redundancy.

model M4C-Captioner (Sidorov et al. 2020), adapted to
the TextCaps task from M4C (Hu et al. 2020), fuses visual modality and text modality by embedding them into a
common semantic space and predicts captions with multiword answer decoder based on features extracted from multimodal transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017).
While M4C-Captioner manages to reason over text in images, it is originally designed for TextVQA (Singh et al.
2019), and thus fails to fit into Image Captioning task.
It mainly has three problems. Firstly, its OCR system
Rosetta (Borisyuk, Gordo, and Sivakumar 2018) is not robust enough, making it suffer from bad recognition results.
As words in captions come from either pre-defined vocabulary (common words) or OCR tokens, even a tiny error in
recognizing uncommon words can lead to missing key information of the image.
Secondly, compared with answers in TextVQA where
all OCR tokens can be queried in questions, captions in
TextCaps should only focus on the most important OCR tokens in the image. In Figure 1, the key OCR tokens should
be nokia and ushahidi, while others like location, description are dispensable. In fact, having these words in captions
makes them verbose and even has negative effects. However,
M4C-Captioner simply feeds all the OCR tokens into transformers without paying attention to their semantic significance, so irrelevant OCR tokens can appear in captions.

Introduction
Image Captioning has emerged as a prominent area at the
intersection of vision and language. However, current Image
Captioning datasets (Chen et al. 2015; Young et al. 2014)
and models (Anderson et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019) pay
few attention to reading text in the image, which is crucial to
scene understanding and its application, such as helping visually impaired people understand the surroundings. For example, in Figure 1, Ushahidi on the screen tells the user the
website he is browsing. To address this drawback, Sidorov
et al. has introduced TextCaps (Sidorov et al. 2020) dataset,
which requires including text in predicted captions.
In order to generate captions based on text from images,
the model needs to (1) recognize text in the image with
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) methods; (2) capture
the relationship between OCR tokens and visual scenes;
(3) predict caption tokens from fixed vocabulary and OCR
tokens based on previous features. Current state-of-the-art
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/wzk1015/CNMT

2835

