The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization Through
Learning Explicit Subspaces for Action and Context
Ziyi Liu1 , Le Wang1∗ , Wei Tang2 , Junsong Yuan3 , Nanning Zheng1 , Gang Hua4
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi‘an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago
3
The State University of New York at Buffalo
4
Wormpex AI Research
liuziyi@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {lewang, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,
tangw@uic.edu, jsyuan@buffalo.edu, ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract

WS-TAL learns to localize action instances with only video-level categorical labels provided during training.
However, the mismatch between this video-level classification supervision and the temporal localization task makes it
difficult to distinguish the actual action instances from their
frequently co-occurring contextual background (termed context). For example, the action baseball pitch commonly cooccurs with the context baseball field both temporally and
spatially. We term this challenge action-context confusion.
Most existing methods train a video-level classifier and
apply it snippet by snippet to achieve temporal action localization, as shown in Figure 1. Unfortunately, this pipeline
can only exclude the irrelevant background but not the relevant context from the localization results. While the former
is class-agnostic, the latter is action-specific: the context of
an action seldom co-occurs with other actions. Therefore,
irrelevant background is useless to classification, but context can provide important classification cues. For example,
recognizing the baseball field will prevent the video from
being misclassified as diving. Therefore, features trained on
video-level categorical labels will look for contextual cues,
and the entire learned feature space will represent action and
context jointly. Consequently, snippets with only context are
frequently mistaken as part of the action instance.
The goal of this paper is to address the challenge of
action-context confusion in WS-TAL. Our idea is to learn
a feature space which can be explicitly split into two (feature) subspaces, i.e., the action subspace and the context subspace, as shown in Figure 1. After representing action visual
elements in a feature subspace separated from context visual elements, the target action instances can be localized
considering only action elements represented in the action
subspace. Therefore, the distraction from the context is alleviated, in spite of its temporal and spatial co-occurrence
with action.
However, learning explicit action and context subspaces
with insufficient supervision is nontrivial. The key challenge is how to collect snippets with action/only context/only irrelevant background (i.e., red dots/black dots/circles
in Figure 1). We take advantage of the two-stream video
representation, i.e., spatial (RGB) and temporal (optical
flow) streams for snippets grouping. Specifically, we con-

Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization (WS-TAL)
methods learn to localize temporal starts and ends of action
instances in a video under only video-level supervision. Existing WS-TAL methods rely on deep features learned for action recognition. However, due to the mismatch between classification and localization, these features cannot distinguish
the frequently co-occurring contextual background, i.e., the
context, and the actual action instances. We term this challenge action-context confusion, and it will adversely affect
the action localization accuracy. To address this challenge,
we introduce a framework that learns two feature subspaces
respectively for actions and their context. By explicitly accounting for action visual elements, the action instances can
be localized more precisely without the distraction from the
context. To facilitate the learning of these two feature subspaces with only video-level categorical labels, we leverage
the predictions from both spatial and temporal streams for snippets grouping. In addition, an unsupervised learning task
is introduced to make the proposed module focus on mining
temporal information. The proposed approach outperforms
state-of-the-art WS-TAL methods on three benchmarks, i.e.,
THUMOS14, ActivityNet v1.2 and v1.3 datasets.

1

Introduction

Temporal action localization (TAL) means to localize temporal starts and ends of action instances in an untrimmed
video. It is a fundamental task in video understanding and
has numerous applications such as intelligent surveillance,
video retrieval and video summarization (Dan, Verbeek,
and Schmid 2013; Asadiaghbolaghi et al. 2017; Kang and
Wildes 2016). Since untrimmed videos can contain irrelevant content and multiple action instances, training fully supervised TAL methods (Chao et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2018,
2019; Liu et al. 2019a; Xu et al. 2020a) requires temporal
boundary annotations of action instances. However, obtaining such annotations is time-consuming, which drives the
research of weakly-supervised temporal action localization
(WS-TAL) methods.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2242

