The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

We Can Explain Your Research in Layman’s Terms:
Towards Automating Science Journalism at Scale
Rumen Dangovski,1, * Michelle Shen,1 Dawson Byrd,1 Li Jing,1 Desislava Tsvetkova,2
Preslav Nakov,3 Marin Soljačić1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Sofia University, 3 Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, * rumenrd@mit.edu

Abstract

Generated: it ’s no secret that women are as good
as men . but when it comes to job satisfaction ,
a new study shows that this gender equality can affect
one ’s own job and make the impression that women
experience higher levels of gender equity among women .

We propose to study Automating Science Journalism (ASJ),
the process of producing a layman’s terms summary of a research article, as a new benchmark for long neural abstractive summarization and story generation. Automating science
journalism is a challenging task as it requires paraphrasing
complex scientific concepts to be grasped by the general
public. Thus, we create a specialized dataset that contains
scientific papers and their Science Daily press releases. We
demonstrate numerous sequence to sequence (seq2seq) applications using Science Daily with the aim of facilitating
further research on language generation, which requires extreme paraphrasing and coping with long research articles.
We further improve the quality of the press releases using
co-training with scientific abstracts of sources or partitioned
press releases. Finally, we apply evaluation measures beyond
ROUGE, and we demonstrate improved performance over
strong baselines, which we further confirm by quantitative
and qualitative evaluation.

Target: male workers appear to support women becoming
ceos even more than female workers do , finds new
research on the proverbial glass ceiling and job
satisfaction in six formerly socialist countries .
Source snippets: . . . moreover , recent data show that ,
in spite of significant barriers , more women reach the
upper managerial ranks in the workplace . . . does gender
equality in workplace promotion opportunities have
consequences for job satisfaction ? we address this
question by examining the link between job satisfaction
and perceived prospects for women to become top
manager at the firm .

Table 1: Summary from our dataset (short Science Daily)
using our model (SciBertSumAbs). We see the need for extreme paraphrasing and coherent generation.

Introduction
Recent years have been characterized by rapid growth of
published scientific research. Coping with this quantity is
increasingly challenging, which has led to the emergence
of a number of initiatives, including software applications
that try to summarize and to organize research articles. For
example, Scholarcy helps researchers and students by summarizing relevant portions of academic papers. Likewise,
Mendeley establishes meaningful links between research papers. Furthermore, there are emerging tools, such as Litmaps
that place scientific research in a broader perspective, thus
making it accessible to layman readers.
Traditionally, this was the task of science journalism, led
by media outlets such as Science Daily, Scientific American,
and Popular Science, which establish some of the few direct
connections between scientific research and the general public. As demonstrated in Table 1, this is a tremendously difficult task: it requires writing factual summaries, while also
paraphrasing complex scientific concepts using a language
that is accessible to the general public.
We argue that the abundance of science journalism articles enables a variety of learning approaches, most no-

tably neural text summarization (Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015). The latter has undergone strong evolution recently (Lin and Ng 2019): from extractive (Nallapati, Zhai,
and Zhou 2017) through abstractive (Nallapati et al. 2016)
to hybrid (See, Liu, and Manning 2017) models; from maximum likelihood to reinforcement learning objectives (Celikyilmaz et al. 2018; Chen and Bansal 2018); from small to
large datasets (Grusky, Naaman, and Artzi 2018), which are
also abstractive (Sharma, Li, and Wang 2019); from short
to orders of magnitude longer sources and targets (Liu et al.
2018); from models trained from scratch to using pre-trained
representations (Edunov, Baevski, and Auli 2019; Liu and
Lapata 2019).
From a modelling perspective, these advances are yet
to be challenged with an abstractive summarization task
(i) from long source research articles into long targets, and
(ii) using extreme paraphrasing. Here, we argue that automating science journalism is a natural testbed for this.
The task is defined as follows: Given a scientific article,
produce a layman summary of that article.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12728

