The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Expected Eligibility Traces
Hado van Hasselt1 , Sephora Madjiheurem2 , Matteo Hessel1
David Silver1 , André Barreto1 , Diana Borsa1
2

1
DeepMind
University College London, UK

MDP

Abstract
The question of how to determine which states and actions
are responsible for a certain outcome is known as the credit
assignment problem and remains a central research question
in reinforcement learning and artificial intelligence. Eligibility traces enable efficient credit assignment to the recent sequence of states and actions experienced by the agent, but not
to counterfactual sequences that could also have led to the
current state. In this work, we introduce expected eligibility
traces. Expected traces allow, with a single update, to update
states and actions that could have preceded the current state,
even if they did not do so on this occasion. We discuss when
expected traces provide benefits over classic (instantaneous)
traces in temporal-difference learning, and show that sometimes substantial improvements can be attained. We provide
a way to smoothly interpolate between instantaneous and expected traces by a mechanism similar to bootstrapping, which
ensures that the resulting algorithm is a strict generalisation
of TD(λ). Finally, we discuss possible extensions and connections to related ideas, such as successor features.

True value

TD(0)

TD(λ)

ET(λ)

Figure 1: A comparison of TD(0), TD(λ), and the new
expected-trace algorithm ET(λ) (with λ = 0.9). The MDP
is illustrated on the left. Each episode, the agent moves randomly down and right from the top left to the bottom right,
where any action terminates the episode. Reward on termination are +1 with probability 0.2, and zero otherwise—all
other rewards are zero. We plot the value estimates after the
first positive reward, which occurred in episode 5. We see
a) TD(0) only updated the last state, b) TD(λ) updated the
trajectory in this episode, and c) ET(λ) additionally updated
trajectories from earlier (unrewarding) episodes.

Traces provide temporal credit assignment, but do not assign credit counterfactually to states or actions that could
have led to the current state, but did not do so this time.
Credit will eventually trickle backwards over the course of
multiple visits, but this can take many iterations. As an example, suppose we collect a key to open a door, which leads
to an unexpected reward. Using standard one-step TD learning, we would update the state in which the door opened.
Using eligibility traces, we would also update the preceding
trajectory, including the acquisition of the key. But we would
not update other sequences that could have led to the reward,
such as collecting a spare key or finding a different entrance.
The problem of credit assignment to counterfactual states
may be addressed by learning a model, and using the model
to propagate credit (cf. Sutton 1990; Moore and Atkeson
1993; Chelu, Precup, and van Hasselt 2020); however, it
has often proven challenging to construct and use models
effectively in complex environments (cf. van Hasselt, Hessel,
and Aslanides 2019).
We introduce a new approach to counterfactual credit assignment, based on the concept of expected eligibility traces.
We present a family of algorithms, which we call ET(λ), that
use expected traces to update their predictions. We analyse
the nature of these expected traces, and illustrate their benefits empirically in several settings—see Figure 1 for a first

Motivation and Summary
Appropriate credit assignment has long been a major research
topic in artificial intelligence (Minsky 1963). To make effective decisions and understand the world, we need to accurately associate events, like rewards or penalties, to relevant
earlier decisions or situations. This is important both for learning accurate predictions, and for making good decisions.
Temporal credit assignment can be achieved with repeated
temporal-difference (TD) updates (Sutton 1988). One-step
TD updates propagate information slowly: when a surprising value is observed, the state immediately preceding it is
updated, but no earlier states or decisions are updated. Multistep updates (Sutton 1988; Sutton and Barto 2018) propagate
information faster over longer temporal spans, speeding up
credit assignment and learning. Multi-step updates can be
implemented online using eligibility traces (Sutton 1988),
without incurring significant additional computational expense, even if the time spans are long; these algorithms have
computation that is independent of the temporal span of the
predictions (van Hasselt and Sutton 2015).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9997

