The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Informer: Beyond Efficient Transformer for Long Sequence
Time-Series Forecasting
Haoyi Zhou, 1 Shanghang Zhang, 2 Jieqi Peng, 1 Shuai Zhang, 1 Jianxin Li, 1
Hui Xiong, 3 Wancai Zhang 4
1

Ground truth
Prediction

Many real-world applications require the prediction of long
sequence time-series, such as electricity consumption planning. Long sequence time-series forecasting (LSTF) demands
a high prediction capacity of the model, which is the ability
to capture precise long-range dependency coupling between
output and input efficiently. Recent studies have shown the
potential of Transformer to increase the prediction capacity.
However, there are several severe issues with Transformer
that prevent it from being directly applicable to LSTF, including quadratic time complexity, high memory usage, and inherent limitation of the encoder-decoder architecture. To address these issues, we design an efficient transformer-based
model for LSTF, named Informer, with three distinctive characteristics: (i) a ProbSparse self-attention mechanism, which
achieves O(L log L) in time complexity and memory usage,
and has comparable performance on sequences’ dependency
alignment. (ii) the self-attention distilling highlights dominating attention by halving cascading layer input, and efficiently
handles extreme long input sequences. (iii) the generative
style decoder, while conceptually simple, predicts the long
time-series sequences at one forward operation rather than
a step-by-step way, which drastically improves the inference
speed of long-sequence predictions. Extensive experiments
on four large-scale datasets demonstrate that Informer significantly outperforms existing methods and provides a new
solution to the LSTF problem.

Short
Long

0d

6

MSE score

Abstract

MSE score
Inference speed

4
2
12 48 96

2d

4d

6d

8d

Time

(a) Sequence Forecasting.

192

480

The predictions/sec
(in log scale)

SCSE and BDBC, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
UC Berkeley, California, US
3
Rutgers University, New Jersey, US
4
Beijing Guowang Fuda Science & Technology Development Company
{zhouhy, pengjq, zhangs, lijx}@act.buaa.edu.cn, shz@eecs.berkeley.edu, {xionghui,zhangwancaibuaa}@gmail.com
10

0

10

−1

The predict sequence length

(b) Run LSTM on sequences.

Figure 1: (a) LSTF can cover an extended period than
the short sequence predictions, making vital distinction in
policy-planning and investment-protecting. (b) The prediction capacity of existing methods limits LSTF’s performance. E.g., starting from length=48, MSE rises unacceptably high, and the inference speed drops rapidly.
et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2017; Wen et al. 2017). The increasingly long sequences strain the models’ prediction capacity
to the point where this trend is holding the research on LSTF.
As an empirical example, Fig.(1) shows the forecasting results on a real dataset, where the LSTM network predicts the
hourly temperature of an electrical transformer station from
the short-term period (12 points, 0.5 days) to the long-term
period (480 points, 20 days). The overall performance gap
is substantial when the prediction length is greater than 48
points (the solid star in Fig.(1b)), where the MSE rises to
unsatisfactory performance, the inference speed gets sharp
drop, and the LSTM model starts to fail.
The major challenge for LSTF is to enhance the prediction capacity to meet the increasingly long sequence demand, which requires (a) extraordinary long-range alignment ability and (b) efficient operations on long sequence inputs and outputs. Recently, Transformer models have shown
superior performance in capturing long-range dependency
than RNN models. The self-attention mechanism can reduce the maximum length of network signals traveling paths
into the theoretical shortest O(1) and avoid the recurrent
structure, whereby Transformer shows great potential for
the LSTF problem. Nevertheless, the self-attention mechanism violates requirement (b) due to its L-quadratic computation and memory consumption on L-length inputs/outputs.
Some large-scale Transformer models pour resources and

Introduction
Time-series forecasting is a critical ingredient across many
domains, such as sensor network monitoring (Papadimitriou
and Yu 2006), energy and smart grid management, economics and finance (Zhu and Shasha 2002), and disease
propagation analysis (Matsubara et al. 2014). In these scenarios, we can leverage a substantial amount of time-series
data on past behavior to make a forecast in the long run,
namely long sequence time-series forecasting (LSTF). However, existing methods are mostly designed under short-term
problem setting, like predicting 48 points or less (Hochreiter
and Schmidhuber 1997; Li et al. 2018; Yu et al. 2017; Liu
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11106

