The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ada-Segment: Automated Multi-loss Adaptation for Panoptic Segmentation
∗

Gengwei Zhang1 , Yiming Gao1 , Hang Xu2 , Hao Zhang3 , Zhenguo Li2 , Xiaodan Liang1
1

Sun Yat-Sen University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zgwdavid@gmail.com, gaoym9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, xdliang328@gmail.com
2

Abstract

Automated Multi-Loss Adaptation
controller

controller

Panoptic segmentation that unifies instance segmentation and
semantic segmentation has recently attracted increasing attention. While most existing methods focus on designing
novel architectures, we steer toward a different perspective:
performing automated multi-loss adaptation (named AdaSegment) on the fly to flexibly adjust multiple training losses
over the course of training using a controller trained to capture the learning dynamics. This offers a few advantages: it
bypasses manual tuning of the sensitive loss combination, a
decisive factor for panoptic segmentation; it allows to explicitly model the learning dynamics, and reconcile the learning of multiple objectives (up to ten in our experiments);
with an end-to-end architecture, it generalizes to different
datasets without the need of re-tuning hyperparameters or readjusting the training process laboriously. Our Ada-Segment
brings 2.7% panoptic quality (PQ) improvement on COCO
val split from the vanilla baseline, achieving the state-of-theart 48.5% PQ on COCO test-dev split and 32.9% PQ on
ADE20K dataset. The extensive ablation studies reveal the
ever-changing dynamics throughout the training process, necessitating the incorporation of an automated and adaptive
learning strategy as presented in this paper.

controller
weights

weights

losses

losses

Network

Network

weights

losses

Network
Panoptic Model Training

Figure 1: Our Ada-Segment aims at automatically adjusting
the weights of multiple objectives in panoptic segmentation
during training for achieving the balanced learning dynamics, in contrast to existing works that rely on carefully handtuned weights after tediously re-training multiple times. It
adjusts the training loss every training epochs on the fly via
a weight controller within a single training procedure. AdaSegment can achieve remarkably better results than results
without loss tuning and also perform significant better than
other hyperparameter tuning methods.

Various network modules or fusing strategies (Kirillov
et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lazarow et al.
2020) have been proposed to deal with the consistency of
learning or predictions from instance segmentation and semantic segmentation branches. As reported in many literatures (Kirillov et al. 2019; Xiong et al. 2019), the performance of a panoptic segmentation architecture exhibits extreme sensitivity and variability
with respect to the multi-objective loss weights. Therefore, previous works relied on exhaustive hyper-parameter
search over such weights. For example, Panoptic FPN (Kirillov et al. 2019) uses a grid search to find better loss weights
on two datasets; UPSNet (Xiong et al. 2019) carefully investigates the weighting scheme of loss functions. In our experiments, different loss weights may yield 2% performance
difference (measured in PQ). It is thus hard to disentangle
the advantages of an improved method from a better hyperparameter setting.
Moreover, previous works only apply static loss weights
throughout the training, skipping chances for the appropriate adaptation to the dynamically-varying convergence be-

Introduction
Capitalized on advances from traditional semantic segmentation and instance segmentation, the vision community recently steps forward to resolve a more challenging task,
panoptic segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2018), which targets at
simultaneously segmenting both foreground instance things
(e.g., person, car and dog) and background semantic stuff
(e.g., sky, river and sea), achieving a more unified understanding of images. Hence, panoptic segmentation is usually formulated as a multi-objective problem for jointly optimizing for semantic and instance segmentation. To solve
this problem, many existing methods (Kirillov et al. 2019;
Xiong et al. 2019; Porzi et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019) have
designed multi-branched network architectures, while each
branch mapping to an instance or semantic segmentation objective and resulted in many (up to ten in our experiments)
individual losses that need to be reconciled during training.
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3333

