The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

C2F-FWN: Coarse-to-Fine Flow Warping Network for
Spatial-Temporal Consistent Motion Transfer
Dongxu Wei1 , Xiaowei Xu2 , Haibin Shen1 , Kejie Huang1∗
1
2

Department of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences
{tracywei, shen hb, huangkejie}@zju.edu.cn
xiao.wei.xu@foxmail.com

Abstract

of frames from this person collected as the training data to
fit the model for his/her appearance. To generate videos for
another person, they have to perform a new round of data
collection and model training, which requires massive human resources and computation costs. The recent emergence
of general-purpose methods (Wang et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2019b; Wei et al. 2020) manages to solve this by providing
additional appearance inputs (e.g., exemplary images that
describe the desired appearances) for GANs. Thus they can
generate videos for new persons by altering the input exemplary images. However, most of these methods directly utilize GANs to generate values for all the pixels from scratch
without preserving their spatial consistency with pixels in
the exemplary images, which results in the loss of appearance details such as decorative patterns and colors of clothes.
Besides, they either don’t consider temporal consistency or
only focus on implicit temporal consistency among frame
images when synthesizing videos, which causes low temporal coherence in their video results. Moreover, most of them
don’t support HVMT with fully editable appearances, lacking flexibility and efficiency for real applications.

Human video motion transfer (HVMT) aims to synthesize
videos that one person imitates other persons’ actions. Although existing GAN-based HVMT methods have achieved
great success, they either fail to preserve appearance details due to the loss of spatial consistency between synthesized and exemplary images, or generate incoherent video results due to the lack of temporal consistency among video
frames. In this paper, we propose Coarse-to-Fine Flow Warping Network (C2F-FWN) for spatial-temporal consistent
HVMT. Particularly, C2F-FWN utilizes coarse-to-fine flow
warping and Layout-Constrained Deformable Convolution
(LC-DConv) to improve spatial consistency, and employs
Flow Temporal Consistency (FTC) Loss to enhance temporal consistency. In addition, provided with multi-source appearance inputs, C2F-FWN can support appearance attribute
editing with great flexibility and efficiency. Besides public datasets, we also collected a large-scale HVMT dataset
named SoloDance for evaluation. Extensive experiments conducted on our SoloDance dataset and the iPER dataset
show that our approach outperforms state-of-art HVMT
methods in terms of both spatial and temporal consistency.
Source code and the SoloDance dataset are available at
https://github.com/wswdx/C2F-FWN.

In this paper, to address these limitations, we propose
Coarse-to-Fine Flow Warping Network (C2F-FWN) to ensure both spatial and temporal consistency for HVMT. For
spatial consistency, our C2F-FWN synthesizes motion transfer videos through warping based on coarse-to-fine transformation flows rather than direct generation based on
GANs. Thus we can precisely model geometric deformations caused by motions to preserve spatial correlations between synthesized and exemplary image pixels. Moreover,
Layout-Constrained Deformable Convolution (LC-DConv)
is utilized to extract deformable features for C2F-FWN, further improving the spatial consistency. For temporal consistency, we propose Flow Temporal Consistency (FTC) Loss
with optical flows as the constraints to enforce explicit temporal consistency among transformation flows instead of
frame images, radically ensuring the video coherence.

Introduction
Human Video Motion Transfer (HVMT) refers to the task
of synthesizing videos that one person imitates motions of
other persons, which has attractive potential applications in
movies, interactive games, virtual shopping, etc. With the
development of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al. 2014) and GAN-based image-to-image
translation techniques (Wang et al. 2018b,a; Park et al.
2019), HVMT works have achieved great success.
In general, existing HVMT methods have two main
streams: personalized HVMT and general-purpose HVMT.
Personalized methods (Chan et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019a) focus on learning the mapping from motion inputs (e.g., body
poses or semantic layouts that describe the desired motions)
to video frames for a specific person, with a large number

In our experiments, we evaluate our method on both
iPER dataset (Liu et al. 2019b) and a large-scale SoloDance
dataset collected by ourselves. Both quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that videos generated by our method
have significantly better spatial and temporal consistency

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2852

