The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deductive Learning for Weakly-Supervised 3D Human Pose Estimation via
Uncalibrated Cameras
Xipeng Chen1 , Pengxu Wei1* , Liang Lin1, 2
1

Sun Yat-Sen University
DarkMatter AI Research
chenxp37@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn, linliang@ieee.org
2

Abstract

Karagoz, and Akbas 2019; Rhodin et al. 2018; Rhodin, Salzmann, and Fua 2018; Chen et al. 2019a), which inherit the
benefits of rich annotation and diversity of 2D pose datasets.
They usually utilize annotated 2D pose images by lifting
2D poses to the 3D space together with geometric consistency constraints and train models without 3D pose labels
for 3D human pose estimation. (Chen et al. 2019a) proposes
a method to learn from single-view self-supervision, but requires a very large amount of diverse 2D human poses. (Kocabas, Karagoz, and Akbas 2019; Rhodin et al. 2018; Rhodin,
Salzmann, and Fua 2018) propose a multi-view consistency
from images which are taken for the same person from different viewpoints. Nevertheless, these methods have to obtain
well-defined rigid transformation from annotations (Rhodin,
Salzmann, and Fua 2018) or predictions from off-the-shelf
methods (Kocabas, Karagoz, and Akbas 2019; Rhodin et al.
2018). Meanwhile, they employ the view synthesis strategy
to produce 3D poses which supervise the training of 3D pose
detectors. This casts the weakly-supervised learning problem
of 3D pose estimation with only 2D annotation into a conventional fully-supervised learning task with synchronized
information from multi-view images (Chen et al. 2019a). Essentially, fully supervised models are trained inductively in
a data-driven manner, which greatly depends on abundant
observations or samples with labels. Nevertheless, following
the same spirit, with weak supervision or without annotation,
the training of models suffers from a large knowledge of
uncertainty or controversial ambiguity, which would cause
ill-conditioned learning or inferior estimation.

Without prohibitive and laborious 3D annotations, weaklysupervised 3D human pose methods mainly employ the model
regularization with geometric projection consistency or geometry estimation from multi-view images. Nevertheless, those approaches explicitly need known parameters of calibrated cameras, exhibiting a limited model generalization in various realistic scenarios. To mitigate this issue, in this paper, we propose
a Deductive Weakly-Supervised Learning (DWSL) for 3D
human pose machine. Our DWSL firstly learns latent representations on depth and camera pose for 3D pose reconstruction.
Since weak supervision usually causes ill-conditioned learning or inferior estimation, our DWSL introduces deductive
reasoning to make an inference for human pose from a view to
another and develops a reconstruction loss to demonstrate what
the model learns and infers is reliable. This learning by deduction strategy employs the view-transform demonstration and
structural rules derived from depth, geometry and angle constraints, which improves the reliability of the model training
with weak supervision. On three 3D human pose benchmarks,
we conduct extensive experiments to evaluate our proposed
method, which achieves superior performance in comparison
with state-of-the-art weak-supervised methods. Particularly,
our model shows an appealing potential for learning from 2D
data captured in dynamic outdoor scenes, which demonstrates
promising robustness and generalization in realistic scenarios.
Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/XipengChen/DWSL-3D-pose.

Introduction
3D human pose estimation is a fundamental problem in computer vision for many applications, such as human-robot interaction, virtual reality, and action recognition, etc. However, it
is greatly bottlenecked by the availability of abundant 3D annotated data, since 3D images are usually subject to specific
conditions with constrained laboratory environments and thus
have limited pose variations and simple backgrounds, and
particularly, accurate 3D annotation demands prohibitively
expensive cost. Accordingly, they cause the poor generalization of 3D pose models to the cases in the wild.
Without any 3D pose annotation, many researchers resort
to Weakly-Supervised Learning (WSL) methods (Kocabas,

To mitigate this problem, we propose Deductive WeaklySupervised Learning (DWSL) for 3D human pose estimation. Rather than following the spirit of data-driven inductive
learning in most existing methods, the proposed paradigm of
learning by deduction utilizes deduction with view-transform
demonstration and structural rules to infer the plausible 2D
pose from another view and develop a reconstruction loss
for training. This is regarded as a self-demonstration with
deductive reasoning from one view to another view, namely,
deduction with view-transform demonstration, and the derived reconstruction loss provides a checkpoint for the current
weakly-supervised learning. At the same time, we also introduce structural rules to further promote the learning by
deduction, which would ease the model training and reduce
the searching space of parameters. We conduct experiments

*Pengxu Wei is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1089

