The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Unified Pretraining Framework for Passage Ranking and Expansion
Ming Yan, Chenliang Li, Bin Bi, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang
Alibaba Group
{ym119608, lcl193798, b.bi, hebian.ww, songfang.hsf}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Pretrained language models have recently advanced a wide
range of natural language processing tasks. Nowadays, the
application of pretrained language models to IR tasks has also
achieved impressive results. Typical methods either directly
apply a pretrained model to improve the re-ranking stage, or
use it to conduct passage expansion and term weighting for
first-stage retrieval. We observe that the passage ranking and
passage expansion tasks share certain inherent relations, and
can benefit from each other. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a general pretraining framework to enhance both tasks
with Unified Encoder-Decoder networks (UED). The overall
ranking framework consists of two parts in a cascade manner:
(1) passage expansion with a pretraining-based query generation method; (2) re-ranking of passage candidates from a
traditional retrieval method with a pretrained transformer encoder. Both the two parts are based on the same pretrained
UED model, where we jointly train the passage ranking and
query generation tasks for further improving the full ranking
pipeline. An extensive set of experiments have been conducted
on two large-scale passage retrieval datasets to demonstrate
the state-of-the-art results of the proposed framework in both
the first-stage retrieval and the final re-ranking. In addition, we
successfully deploy the framework to our online production
system, which can stably serve industrial applications with a
request volume of up to 100 QPS in less than 300ms.

Figure 1: Comparison of the unified pretraining framework
with the previous prevalent framework for full ranking.
Callan 2019a) for enhancing first-stage retrieval. The association between the retrieval stage and the re-ranking stage is
not fully exploited, where different pretrained models usually
work separately. With the same goal of relevance matching,
we hypothesize that different stages in a full ranking pipeline
are related, and can benefit from each other. Therefore, in
this paper, we propose a unified pretraining framework for
enhancing the full ranking pipeline with both stages, where
task relationships can be better exploited. A brief illustration
of the proposed framework is shown in Figure 1.
Based on the unified pretrained encoder-decoder networks
(UED), we enhance the overall framework from two aspects:
(1) to tackle the vocabulary mismatch problem in the first
stage retrieval, we leverage passage expansion technique as
in (Nogueira et al. 2019b) to improve the term-based retriever
with a pretraining-based query generation model, and (2)
we exploit the language understanding ability of pretrained
model for enhancing the neural re-ranker, and jointly train
both the ranking and generation tasks to better capture the
task relationships. In literature, passage expansion (Tao et al.
2006; Efron, Organisciak, and Fenlon 2012) proves to be
helpful for improving ranking performance. Take Figure 2
as an example, the predicted query “the characteristics of
dyslexia” of the passage can help the model better understand
the main point of the passage, which can in turn help rerank the passage in terms of the actual query “What are
characteristics of dyslexia?”. The passage ranking task of
knowing the relevant passage to a given query and query

Introduction
Pretrained language models have advanced the state-of-theart in a variety of NLP tasks ranging from text classification,
language inference to question answering (Wang et al. 2018;
Rajpurkar et al. 2016). The same trend is witnessed in the IR
community, where several recent works have been proposed
to apply these models to IR tasks and achieve promising
results such as document retrieval (Yilmaz et al. 2019; MacAvaney et al. 2019) and passage ranking (Nogueira and Cho
2019; Dai and Callan 2019b).
Nowadays, in ad-hoc retrieval, the prevalent approach either directly deploys the pretrained models like BERT as
re-rankers over an initial list of candidate passages retrieved
from a traditional retrieval method (Nogueira and Cho 2019),
or uses the deep pretrained models to conduct passage expansion (Nogueira et al. 2019b) and term weighting (Dai and
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4555

