The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Treatment Effect Estimation with Disentangled Latent Factors
Weijia Zhang* , Lin Liu, Jiuyong Li
University of South Australia
weijia.zhang.xh@gmail.com,{lin.liu,jiuyong.li}@unia.edu.au

Abstract

From a theoretical perspective, practitioners are tempted
to include as many variables as possible to ensure the satisfaction of the unconfoundedness assumption. This is because confounders can be difficult to measure in the realworld and practitioners need to include noisy proxy variables to ensure unconfoundedness. For example, the socioeconomic status of patients confounds treatment and prognosis, but cannot be included in the electronic medical
records due to privacy concerns. It is often the case that such
unmeasured confounders can be inferred from noisy proxy
variables which are easier to measure. For instance, the zip
codes and job types of patients can be used as proxies to
infer their socio-economic statuses (Sauer et al. 2013).
From a practical perspective, the inflated number of variables included for confounding adjustment reduces the efficiency of treatment effect estimation. Moreover, it has
been previously shown that including unnecessary covariates is suboptimal when the treatment effect is estimated
non-parametrically (Hahn 1998; Abadie and Imbens 2006;
Häggström 2017). In a high dimensional scenario, eventually many included variables will not be confounders and
should be excluded from the set of adjustment variables.
Most existing treatment estimation algorithms treat the
given variables “as is”, and leave the task of choosing confounding variables to the user. It is clear that the users are
left with a dilemma: on the one hand including more variables than necessary produces inefficient and inaccurate estimators; on the other hand restricting the number of adjustment variables may exclude confounders themselves or
proxy variables of the confounders and thus increases the
bias of the estimated treatment effects. With only a handful
of variables, the problem can be avoided by consulting domain experts. However, a data-driven approach is required
in the big data era to deal with the dilemma.
In this work, we propose a data-driven approach for simultaneously inferencing latent factors from proxy variables
and disentangling the latent factors into three disjoint sets as
illustrated in Figure 1: the instrumental factors zt which only
affect the treatment but not the outcome, the risk factors zy
which only affect the outcome but not the treatment, and the
confounding factors zc that affect both the treatment and the
outcome. Since our method builds upon the recent advancement of the research on variational autoencoder (Kingma
and Welling 2014), we name our method Treatment Effect

Much research has been devoted to the problem of estimating treatment effects from observational data; however, most
methods assume that the observed variables only contain confounders, i.e., variables that affect both the treatment and the
outcome. Unfortunately, this assumption is frequently violated in real-world applications, since some variables only affect the treatment but not the outcome, and vice versa. Moreover, in many cases only the proxy variables of the underlying
confounding factors can be observed. In this work, we first
show the importance of differentiating confounding factors
from instrumental and risk factors for both average and conditional average treatment effect estimation, and then we propose a variational inference approach to simultaneously infer latent factors from the observed variables, disentangle the
factors into three disjoint sets corresponding to the instrumental, confounding, and risk factors, and use the disentangled
factors for treatment effect estimation. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on a
wide range of synthetic, benchmark, and real-world datasets.

Introduction
Estimating the effect of a treatment on an outcome is a fundamental problem faced by many researchers and has a wide
range of applications across diverse disciplines. In social
economy, policy makers need to determine whether a job
training program will improve the employment perspective
of the workers (Athey and Imbens 2016). In online advertisement, companies need to predict whether an advertisement campaign could persuade a potential buyer into buying
the product (Rzepakowski and Jaroszewicz 2011).
To estimate treatment effect from observational data, the
treatment assignment mechanism needs to be independent
of the possible outcomes when conditioned on the observed
variables, i.e., the unconfoundedness assumption (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) needs to be satisfied. With this assumption, treatment effects can be estimated from observational data by adjusting on the confounding variables which
affects both the treatment assignment and the outcome. The
treatment effect estimation may be biased if not all the confounders are considered in the estimation (Pearl 2009).
* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10923

