The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online 3D Bin Packing with Constrained Deep Reinforcement Learning
Hang Zhao1 , Qijin She1 , Chenyang Zhu1 , Yin Yang2 , Kai Xu1 *
1

National University of Defense Technology
2
Clemson University

RGB image

Abstract
We solve a challenging yet practically useful variant of 3D
Bin Packing Problem (3D-BPP). In our problem, the agent
has limited information about the items to be packed into
a single bin, and an item must be packed immediately after
its arrival without buffering or readjusting. The item’s placement also subjects to the constraints of order dependence
and physical stability. We formulate this online 3D-BPP as
a constrained Markov decision process (CMDP). To solve
the problem, we propose an effective and easy-to-implement
constrained deep reinforcement learning (DRL) method under the actor-critic framework. In particular, we introduce a
prediction-and-projection scheme: The agent first predicts a
feasibility mask for the placement actions as an auxiliary task
and then uses the mask to modulate the action probabilities
output by the actor during training. Such supervision and projection facilitate the agent to learn feasible policies very efficiently. Our method can be easily extended to handle lookahead items, multi-bin packing, and item re-orienting. We have
conducted extensive evaluation showing that the learned policy significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods. A
preliminary user study even suggests that our method might
attain a human-level performance.

Depth image

Figure 1: Online 3D-BPP, where the agent observes only a
limited numbers of lookahead items (shaded in green), is
widely useful in logistics, manufacture, warehousing etc.

many real-world challenges could be much more efficiently
handled if we have a good solution to it. A good example is large-scale parcel packaging in modern logistics systems (Figure. 1), where parcels are mostly in regular cuboid
shapes, and we would like to collectively pack them into
rectangular bins of the standard dimension. Maximizing the
storage use of bins effectively reduces the cost of inventorying, wrapping, transportation, and warehousing. While being strongly NP-hard, 1D-BPP has been extensively studied. With the state-of-the-art computing hardware, big 1DBPP instances (with about 1, 000 items) can be exactly
solved within tens of minutes (Delorme, Iori, and Martello
2016) using e.g., integer linear programming (ILP) (Schrijver 1998), and good approximations can be obtained within
milliseconds. On the other hand 3D-BPP, due to the extra complexity imposed, is relatively less explored. Solving a 3D-BPP of moderate size exactly (either using ILP or
branch-and-bound) is much more involved, and we still have
to resort to heuristic algorithms (Crainic, Perboli, and Tadei
2008; Karabulut and İnceoğlu 2004).
Most existing 3D-BPP literature assumes that the information of all items is known while does not take physical
stability into consideration, and the packing strategies allow backtracking i.e., one can always repack an item from
the bin in order to improve the current solution (Martello,
Pisinger, and Vigo 2000). In practice however, we do not
know the information of all items. For instance see Figure 1,
where a robot works beside a bin, and a conveyor forwards
parcels sequentially. The robot may only have the vision
of several upcoming items (similar to Tetris), and an item
must be packed within a given time period after its arrival.

Introduction
As a classic NP-hard problem, the bin packing problem (1DBPP) seeks for an assignment of a collection of items with
various weights to bins. The optimal assignment houses all
the items with the fewest bins such that the total weight of
items in a bin is below the bin’s capacity c (Korte and Vygen
2012). In its 3D version i.e., 3D-BPP (Martello, Pisinger,
and Vigo 2000), an item i has a 3D “weight” corresponding
to its length, li , width wi , and height hi . Similarly, c is also
in 3D including L ≥ li , W ≥ wi , and H ≥ hi . It is assumed
that li , wi , hi , L, W, H ∈ Z + are positive integers. Given
the set of items I, we would like to pack all the items into
as few bins as possible. Clearly, 1D-BPP is a special case of
its three dimensional counter part – as long as we constrain
hi = H and wi = W for all i ∈ I, a 3D-BPP instance can
be relaxed to a 1D-BPP. Therefore, 3D-BPP is also highly
NP-hard (Man Jr, Garey, and Johnson 1996).
Regardless of its difficulty, the bin packing problem turns
out to be one of the most needed academic problems as
* Hang Zhao and Qijin She are co-first authors. Kai Xu is the
corresponding author (kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

741

