The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Argument Mining Driven Analysis of Peer-Reviews
Michael Fromm,1 Evgeniy Faerman,1 Max Berrendorf,1 Siddharth Bhargava,2 Ruoxia Qi,2
Yao Zhang,2 Lukas Dennert,2 Sophia Selle,2 Yang Mao2 and Thomas Seidl1
1

Database Systems and Data Mining, LMU Munich, Germany
2
LMU Munich, Germany
{fromm, faerman, berrendorf}@dbs.ifi.lmu.de

Abstract

such as encyclopedic articles (Aharoni et al. 2014), student
essays (Stab and Gurevych 2014b), web discourse (Habernal and Gurevych 2016) or political speeches (Haddadan,
Cabrio, and Villata 2019). AM techniques build the backbone of an IBM AI system Project Debater, which has
the ambitious goal to debate humans on complex topics.
This work aims to further extend the application of AM to
the novel domain of scientific peer reviews. Peer reviewing is a cornerstone of today’s academic editorial decisionmaking process in nearly all scientific disciplines. The peerreviewers, who are usually not part of the editorial team, are
experts in the corresponding research field and their task is
the critical evaluation of the work proposed for publication.
We argue that peer-reviewing can also be seen as an argumentation process, where the reviewers make up their minds
about the examined publications and try to convince the editorial team by providing arguments in favor of or against acceptance. While the evaluation or review usually comprises
different parts, such as a summary of the work or additional
background information about the topic, the reviewers’ pro
and contra arguments are often the most relevant for making
the final decision. Consequently, we envision that the automatic identification of argumentative content can improve
and simplify different peer-review process phases. One possible use-case is to provide editors or meta-reviewers, coresponsible for the final decision, with an overview of arguments from all reviews and let them focus on the most relevant ones. For instance, after reading only the highlighted
arguments in Figure 1, it is possible to get a good idea about
the paper’s strong and weak points. Another possible usecase is to support the reviewers by providing information
about (missing) argumentation. For example, the author of
the review in Figure 1 provides a detailed description of the
empirical evaluation, but it is not completely clear from the
text whether the reviewer is satisfied with the proposed evaluation criteria.

Peer reviewing is a central process in modern research and
essential for ensuring high quality and reliability of published work. At the same time, it is a time-consuming process
and increasing interest in emerging fields often results in a
high review workload, especially for senior researchers in this
area. How to cope with this problem is an open question and
it is vividly discussed across all major conferences. In this
work, we propose an Argument Mining based approach for
the assistance of editors, meta-reviewers, and reviewers. We
demonstrate that the decision process in the field of scientific
publications is driven by arguments and automatic argument
identification is helpful in various use-cases. One of our findings is that arguments used in the peer-review process differ
from arguments in other domains making the transfer of pretrained models difficult. Therefore, we provide the community with a new peer-review dataset from different computer
science conferences with annotated arguments. In our extensive empirical evaluation, we show that Argument Mining can
be used to efficiently extract the most relevant parts from reviews, which are paramount for the publication decision. The
process remains interpretable since the extracted arguments
can be highlighted in a review without detaching them from
their context.

Introduction
Argumentation is a process of bringing together and organizing reasons to convince a reasonable critic to accept or
refuse a certain standpoint (Van Eemeren, Grootendorst, and
van Eemeren 2004). It is an essential part of each rational
decision-making process and after the decision is made, argumentation is important for its explanation and justification
(Amgoud and Prade 2009). An important step in the argumentation process is the identification of arguments. Generally speaking, there is a difference between argumentative
and informative content: Argumentative content expresses
evidence or reasoning used to either oppose or support a
given point. Informative parts often contain background information and describe how entities appear and act in the
world.
In the last years, Argument Mining (AM) approaches have
been applied in many fields and for different types of texts,

In this paper, we propose the application of AM to the domain of peer-reviewing. To this end, we collect a new dataset
containing peer-reviews from different computer science
conferences. We define a suitable AM annotation schema
and annotate the dataset. We investigate the applicability
of state-of-the-art AM techniques in an extensive empirical evaluation. Among others, we study the transferability
of models trained on data from different domains to our task

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4758

