The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Topology-Aware Correlations Between Relations for Inductive Link Prediction
in Knowledge Graphs
Jiajun Chen, Huarui He, Feng Wu, Jie Wang∗
University of Science and Technology of China
{jiajun98, huaruihe}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {fengwu, jiewangx}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

entities in knowledge graphs, where entities during training
and inference stages can be different. Despite the importance of inductive link prediction in real-world applications,
many existing works focus on transductive link prediction
and cannot manage previously unseen entities (Sadeghian
et al. 2019). Inductive link prediction is challenging as we
need to determine which relation it is between two unseen
entities during training, that is, we need to generalize what
is learned from training entities to unseen entities.
Existing models of inductive reasoning mainly focus on
predicting missing links by learning logical rules in knowledge graphs. Rule learning based methods (Yang, Yang, and
Cohen 2017; Sadeghian et al. 2019) explicitly mine logical rules based on observed co-occurrence patterns of relations, which are inherently inductive as the learned rules
are entity-independent and can naturally generalize to new
entities. More recently, GraIL (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton
2020) implicitly learns logical rules with reasoning over subgraph structures in an entity-independent manner. However,
many existing inductive reasoning approaches do not take
into account neighboring relational triples when predicting
the missing links.
To take advantage of the neighboring relational
triples, we exploit semantic correlations between relations, which are commonly seen in knowledge graphs.
For example, for the relations in Freebase (Bollacker
et al. 2008), “/people/person/nationality” and “/people/ethnicity/languages spoken” have a strong correlation
as a person’s spoken languages are correlated to the person’s nationality, while “/people/person/nationality” and
“/film/film/country” have a weak correlation. Moreover,
the topological patterns between any two relations—the
way how they are connected in knowledge graphs—can
be different, which influence the correlation patterns. For
example, for the relation pair “father of” and “has gender”
in Figure 1, they are connected by e1 in a tail-to-tail manner
and connected by e2 in a head-to-tail manner, which are
different topological patterns.
In this paper, we propose a novel inductive reasoning approach, namely TACT, which can effectively exploit
Topology-Aware CorrelaTions between relations in knowledge graphs. Specifically, TACT models the semantic correlations in two aspects: correlation patterns and correlation coefficients. We categorize all relation pairs into several

Inductive link prediction—where entities during training
and inference stages can be different—has been shown
to be promising for completing continuously evolving
knowledge graphs. Existing models of inductive reasoning
mainly focus on predicting missing links by learning logical rules. However, many existing approaches do not take
into account semantic correlations between relations, which
are commonly seen in real-world knowledge graphs. To
address this challenge, we propose a novel inductive reasoning approach, namely TACT, which can effectively exploit Topology-Aware CorrelaTions between relations in
an entity-independent manner. TACT is inspired by the observation that the semantic correlation between two relations is highly correlated to their topological structure in
knowledge graphs. Specifically, we categorize all relation
pairs into several topological patterns, and then propose a
Relational Correlation Network (RCN) to learn the importance of the different patterns for inductive link prediction.
Experiments demonstrate that TACT can effectively model
semantic correlations between relations, and significantly
outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods on benchmark
datasets for the inductive link prediction task.

Introduction
Knowledge graphs store quantities of structured human
knowledge in the form of factual triples, which have
been widely used in many fields, such as natural language processing (Zhang et al. 2019), recommendation
systems (Wang et al. 2018), and question answering
(Huang et al. 2019).
For real-world knowledge graphs, new entities keep
emerging continuously, such as new users and products in ecommerce knowledge graphs and new molecules in biomedical knowledge graphs (Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020).
Moreover, they usually face the incompleteness problem,
i.e., some links are missing. To address this challenge, researchers have paid increasing attention to the inductive link
prediction task (Tran et al. 2016; Hamaguchi et al. 2017;
Wang et al. 2019; Teru, Denis, and Hamilton 2020). Inductive link prediction aims at predicting missing links between
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6271

