The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spatiotemporal Graph Neural Network based Mask Reconstruction for
Video Object Segmentation
Daizong Liu1 , Shuangjie Xu2 , Xiao-Yang Liu3 , Zichuan Xu4 , Wei Wei1 , Pan Zhou1*
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
DEEPROUTE.AI
3
Columbia University
4
Dalian University of Technology
{dzliu, weiw, panzhou}@hust.edu.cn, shuangjiexu@deeproute.ai, xl2427@columbia.edu, z.xu@dlut.edu.cn
Challenge video ‘carousel’

Abstract

Current Mask

Current Frame

This paper addresses the task of segmenting class-agnostic
objects in semi-supervised setting. Although previous detection based methods achieve relatively good performance,
these approaches extract the best proposal by a greedy strategy, which may lose the local patch details outside the chosen
candidate. In this paper, we propose a novel spatiotemporal
graph neural network (STG-Net) to reconstruct more accurate
masks for video object segmentation, which captures the local contexts by utilizing all proposals. In the spatial graph, we
treat object proposals of a frame as nodes and represent their
correlations with an edge weight strategy for mask context
aggregation. To capture temporal information from previous
frames, we use a memory network to refine the mask of current frame by retrieving historic masks in a temporal graph.
The joint use of both local patch details and temporal relationships allow us to better address the challenges such as object occlusion and missing. Without online learning and finetuning, our STG-Net achieves state-of-the-art performance on
four large benchmarks (DAVIS, YouTube-VOS, SegTrackv2, and YouTube-Objects), demonstrating the effectiveness
of the proposed approach.

occlusion

Greedy Search

Historic Frame

Historic Mask

Current Frame

Generating Proposals

Current Mask

Graph of Proposals

Mask Result

Figure 1: Different from previous detection based methods
that generally utilize a greedy strategy to choose the best
proposal for segmentation, our spatiotemporal graph considers all proposals of each frame in the spatial domain and utilizes historic masks for refinement in the temporal domain,
which provides better mask details.
with a few adjacent neighboring frames (Luiten, Voigtlaender, and Leibe 2018). Although they are effective in object
missing and occlusion scenarios, these approaches rely on
a greedy search scheme that extracts the best proposal in a
frame, as shown in the upper part of Figure 1, resulting in a
strong dependence not only on the proposal quality, but also
on a reliable Re-ID network (Li et al. 2017) for proposal selection. Since the local patch details may be contained in all
proposals scattered across the frame, instead of choosing the
best proposal by a greedy search scheme, we argue that one
should leverage the rich contexts of all proposals to reconstruct a more accurate mask.
Recently, graph neural network (GNN) (Scarselli et al.
2008; Gilmer et al. 2017; Cheng et al. 2020b,a; Liu et al.
2020) is recognized as a promising approach in sequential
information processing. It takes advantage of aggregating
the information with node-wise correlation establishment.
Previous GNN based methods (Wang et al. 2019b; Haller,
Florea, and Leordeanu 2019; Bao, Wu, and Liu 2018) in the
VOS task either represent image frames as nodes to explore
their temporal correlations, or represent pixels as nodes that
may lose instance-level relations. They may also fail to recover the spatial mask details in local contexts. To better
capture the local patch details for more accurate mask reconstruction, different from them, we take masks of all detection

Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) in semi-supervised setting aims to segment the class-agnostic objects or instances
from the background according to the annotation in the first
frame, which has been widely applied to video editing, automatic driving, etc. Tremendous progress (Johnander et al.
2019; Caelles et al. 2017; Wug Oh et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2019a) has been made with deep learning methods in recent years, most of which directly embed the whole frame
image or propagate the previous mask into current frame.
However, it is still challenging due to the background noise,
object missing, or severe occlusion in real world scenarios.
To address such challenges, detection based schemes (Li
et al. 2017; Luiten, Voigtlaender, and Leibe 2018) are proposed, which restore missing objects or re-establish objects
with bounding box proposals. These proposals of target objects are either generated individually in each frame by detectors like Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017), or further merged
*Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2100

