The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SALNet: Semi-Supervised Few-Shot Text Classification
with Attention-based Lexicon Construction
Ju-Hyoung Lee1 , Sang-Ki Ko2 , Yo-Sub Han1
1
Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Kangwon National University, Kangwon, Republic of Korea
juhyounglee@yonsei.ac.kr, sangkiko@kangwon.ac.kr, emmous@yonsei.ac.kr
2

Abstract

and Mitchell 1998; Li and Liu 2003; Zhu, Ghahramani, and
Lafferty 2003; Rosenberg, Hebert, and Schneiderman 2005;
Wang and Zhang 2007; Yaslan and Cataltepe 2010; Jo and
Cinarel 2019) use only high confidence predictions of classifiers or utilize the agreement among the different classifiers,
for pseudo-labeling. These methods can lead to accumulated
classification errors along the training process. Therefore, it
remains challenging to train classifiers for text classification
under semi-supervision, because it still requires hundreds
of thousands of labeled training data to achieve satisfactory
performance.
We combine the deep learning classifier with the lexicon
and tackle the labeled-data sparsity problem. With respect to
the attention mechanism, important words often have high
attention weights for text classification (Cho et al. 2014;
Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015; Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015; Xu et al. 2015).
We visualize the attention layer and empirically confirm that
the attention mechanism indeed assigns higher weights to
words that can represent the class of input data. We also
observe that even though the performance of the initially
trained classifier is poor, the classifier assigns higher weights
to the important words of the data predicted with high confidence. For instance, the following is a visualization example of the attention mechanism on one of the IMDB review
dataset. We collect these high weight words from the attention mechanism and make a set of words (called lexicon) for
our semi-supervised classification.

We propose a semi-supervised bootstrap learning framework
for few-shot text classification. From a small number of the
initial data, our framework obtains a larger set of reliable
training data by using the attention weights from an LSTMbased trained classifier. We first train an LSTM-based text
classifier from a given labeled dataset using the attention
mechanism. Then, we collect a set of words for each class
called a lexicon, which is supposed to be a representative
set of words for each class based on the attention weights
calculated for the classification task. We bootstrap the classifier using the new data that are labeled by the combination of the classifier and the constructed lexicons to improve
the prediction accuracy. As a result, our approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods including semisupervised learning algorithms and pretraining algorithms for
few-shot text classification task on four publicly available
benchmark datasets. Moreover, we empirically confirm that
the constructed lexicons are reliable enough and substantially
improve the performance of the original classifier.

Introduction
Recently, text classifiers using deep learning show great success in various NLP tasks due to lots of labeled training data.
However, one critical limit is that these effective classifiers
are hard to make when there is not enough labeled data. Often it is difficult and expensive to obtain a reasonable number of labeled data since it requires many well-trained human annotators. On the other hand, a traditional approach
for text classification is to use a domain lexicon for classification since we can correctly decide a class using the
lexicon and the size of the training data is irrelevant. The
efforts to address the data sparsity problem are to make lexicons of each domain and use it for text classification (Lu and
Tsou 2010; Lei et al. 2011; Hailong, Wenyan, and Bo 2014;
Bandhakavi et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018). On the other hand,
it is not easy to automatically make a high-quality lexicon
for a new domain (and. Binbin Chen and Bernstein 2016;
Feng et al. 2018). Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is an approach to use both a small number of labeled data and a large
number of unlabeled data in training. The traditional SSL
methods based on neural network (Yarowsky 1995; Blum

This movie is stupid. There’s no getting around it. But so is dumb and
dumber. Mind you, dumb and dumber is significantly more funny than this.
However, I for one love seeing stupid movies (tail sting) and laughing with a
group of good friends over how bad it is. Call me callous, but see this
movie, and you’ll find that the only way you can laugh at it is if you laugh
at it instead of with it.

Figure 1: Visualization of the attention mechanism using a
LSTM-based classifier trained with few labeled data. Darker
colors indicate higher attention weights.
We propose a semi-supervised few-shot text classification
with attention-baed lexicon construction when there is only
a small number of labeled data. Our approach is closely related to neural bootstrapping methods. The bootstrapping
methods for SSL use only predictions of neural-based classi-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13189

