The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Federated Multi-Armed Bandits
Chengshuai Shi, Cong Shen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
{cs7ync, cong}@virginia.edu

• Communication efficiency. The communication cost
scales with the number of clients, which becomes one of
the primary bottlenecks of the FL system (McMahan et al.
2017). It is critical to minimize the communication cost
while maintaining the learning accuracy.
• Privacy. FL protects the local data privacy by only sharing model updates instead of the raw data.

Abstract
Federated multi-armed bandits (FMAB) is a new bandit
paradigm that parallels the federated learning (FL) framework in supervised learning. It is inspired by practical applications in cognitive radio and recommender systems, and
enjoys features that are analogous to FL. This paper proposes
a general framework of FMAB and then studies two specific federated bandit models. We first study the approximate
model where the heterogeneous local models are random realizations of the global model from an unknown distribution.
This model introduces a new uncertainty of client sampling,
as the global model may not be reliably learned even if the
finite local models are perfectly known. Furthermore, this uncertainty cannot be quantified a priori without knowledge of
the suboptimality gap. We solve the approximate model by
proposing Federated Double UCB (Fed2-UCB), which constructs a novel “double UCB” principle accounting for uncertainties from both arm and client sampling. We show that
gradually admitting new clients is critical in achieving an
order-optimal regret while explicitly considering the communication cost. The exact model, where the global bandit model
is the exact average of heterogeneous local models, is then
studied as a special case. We show that, somewhat surprisingly, the order-optimal regret can be achieved independent
of the number of clients with a careful choice of the update
periodicity. Experiments using both synthetic and real-world
datasets corroborate the theoretical analysis and provide interesting insight into the proposed algorithms.

1

While the state of the art FL largely focuses on the supervised learning setting, we propose to extend the core principles of FL to the multi-armed bandits (MAB) problem. This
is motivated by real-world applications, such as:
• Cognitive radio. A base station wants to select one channel from a given set of channels that is most likely to be
“empty” in its coverage area. It is well-known that different geographic locations have different channel availabilities, and the (ground-truth) global channel availability is the
average over the entire coverage area (see Section 2.1 for a
detailed discussion). The base station, however, is fixed at
one location and cannot learn the global channel availability
by itself. A common solution is to utilize randomly placed
devices (e.g., mobile phones) in the coverage area to sample the channels and then aggregate at the base station. Each
device is at a different location and thus samples a non-IID
local channel availability. In addition, the bandit problem is
approximate because there are only finite devices while the
global model is integrated over the entire coverage area.
• Recommender system. The central server wants to recommend the most popular item to new customers to maximize the expected reward. The server does not initially have
the global item popularity but can learn via interacting with
customers, leading to a bandit problem (Li et al. 2010). In reality, however, the server may not learn the popularity model
directly from user behavior data due to privacy concerns or
regulation requirement (e.g., private user data in some regions may not be shared outside). Instead, the user data are
stored strictly on the client device or local server (and never
leave) for better privacy preservation. The local view of item
popularity is often biased and not representative of the overall distribution, while the global server can only access some
aggregate information instead of individual data, resulting in
a federated learning problem in the bandit setting.
In both applications, which are illustrated in Figs. 1 and
2, we see that the general FL characteristics still apply, and

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017) is a new
distributed machine learning (ML) paradigm that addresses
new challenges in modern machine learning (ML). In particular, FL handles distributed ML with the following characteristics:
• Non-IID local datasets. FL caters to the growing trend
that massive amount of the real-world data are generated directly at the edge devices. The local datasets are likely drawn
from non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID)
distributions, and do not represent the global distribution.
• Massively distributed. The number of participating
clients can be significant, e.g., on the order of millions
(Bonawitz et al. 2019).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9603

