The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cutting to the Core of Pseudo-Boolean Optimization:
Combining Core-Guided Search with Cutting Planes Reasoning
Jo Devriendt,1,2,3 Stephan Gocht,1,2 Emir Demirović,4 Jakob Nordström,2,1 Peter J. Stuckey5
1

Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
3
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
4
TU Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
5
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
jo.devriendt@cs.lth.se, stephan.gocht@cs.lth.se, e.demirovic@tudelft.nl, jn@di.ku.dk, peter.stuckey@monash.edu
2

Abstract

declared to be soft, but with associated penalties for violating them, and where the goal is to minimize the total
penalty of violated constraints. The core-guided approach
introduced by (Fu and Malik 2006) optimistically assumes
that this penalty is zero, and then tries to solve the resulting SAT problem under this assumption as described in (Eén
and Sörensson 2003). If this attempt fails, the solver returns
a core explaining why the assumption was too good to be
true, and such cores are repeatedly used to update the estimate of the optimal solution and make new attempts with
revised assumptions. Such techniques play a crucial role for
the performance of modern MaxSAT solvers (Morgado et al.
2013), and have also been adapted to other paradigms such
as answer set programming (ASP) (Andres et al. 2012) and
constraint programming (Gange et al. 2020).
A technical barrier for efficient implementations of coreguided search, however, is that the process of using cores
to strengthen bounds requires dealing with cardinality constraints. Such constraints are cumbersome to encode in the
low-level language of propositional logic, and the resolution method on which CDCL SAT solvers are based (Beame,
Kautz, and Sabharwal 2004) has severe limitations when it
comes to cardinality reasoning (Haken 1985), affecting even
core-guided approaches that use clauses to explain propagations by the cardinality constraints (Manquinho, MarquesSilva, and Planes 2009; Alviano, Dodaro, and Ricca 2015).

Core-guided techniques have revolutionized Boolean satisfiability approaches to optimization problems (MaxSAT), but
the process at the heart of these methods, strengthening
bounds on solutions by repeatedly adding cardinality constraints, remains a bottleneck. Cardinality constraints require
significant work to be re-encoded to SAT, and SAT solvers
are notoriously weak at cardinality reasoning. In this work,
we lift core-guided search to pseudo-Boolean (PB) solvers,
which deal with more general PB optimization problems
and operate natively with cardinality constraints. The cutting planes method used in such solvers allows us to derive
stronger cardinality constraints, which yield better updates
to solution bounds, and the increased efficiency of objective
function reformulation also makes it feasible to switch repeatedly between lower-bounding and upper-bounding search.
A thorough evaluation on applied and crafted benchmarks
shows that our core-guided PB solver significantly improves
on the state of the art in pseudo-Boolean optimization.

Introduction
The Boolean satisfiability (SAT) problem plays a fascinating dual role in computer science. Although it is an
archetypal hard problem—proven NP-complete in (Cook
1971; Levin 1973) and widely believed to be exponentially hard in theory—at the same time it serves as the
modelling language for the conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) SAT solvers (Bayardo Jr. and Schrag 1997;
Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999; Moskewicz et al. 2001)
that have emerged over the last two decades as highly
practical tools for solving large-scale real-world problems
in a wide range of application areas (Biere et al. 2021).
This success has also led to exports of the conflict-driven
paradigm beyond SAT solving to, e.g., SAT-based optimization (MaxSAT) (Fu and Malik 2006), pseudo-Boolean
(PB) optimization (Chai and Kuehlmann 2005; Sheini and
Sakallah 2006), constraint programming (CP) (Ohrimenko,
Stuckey, and Codish 2009; Stuckey 2010), and mixed integer
programming (MIP) (Achterberg 2007).
Our starting point in this work is the MaxSAT problem,
which differs from SAT in that some of the constraints are

Our Contribution The simple but crucial observation underlying our work is that the MaxSAT problem of minimizing a weighted sum of penalties subject to constraints expressed in conjunctive normal form (CNF) is just a special
case of PB optimization (also known as 0-1 integer linear
programming). An intriguing fact in this context is that there
are PB solvers that borrow the conflict-driven paradigm from
SAT but perform their reasoning using the cutting planes
method (Cook, Coullard, and Turán 1987). Cardinality constraints are no problem for such solvers, since they operate
with even more general PB constraints, and it is known that
cutting planes applied to cardinality constraints is exponentially more powerful than resolution.
In view of this, it might seem like an attractive, and
even obvious, proposition to combine PB reasoning with

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3750

