The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distributional Reinforcement Learning via Moment Matching
Thanh Nguyen-Tang, Sunil Gupta, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ), Deakin University, Australia
{thanhnt, sunil.gupta, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract

Dabney et al. 2018b,a; Yang et al. 2019), they all share the
same characteristic that they explicitly learn a set of statistics
of predefined functional forms to approximate a return distribution. Using predefined statistics can limit the learning
due to the statistic constraints it imposes and the difficulty
to maintain such predefined statistics. In this paper, we propose to address these limitations by instead learning a set of
unrestricted statistics, i.e., deterministic (pseudo-)samples,
of a return distribution that can be evolved into any functional form. We observe that the deterministic samples can
be deterministically learned to simulate a return distribution
by utilizing an idea from statistical hypothesis testing known
as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD). This novel perspective requires a careful design of algorithm and a further understanding of distributional RL associated with MMD.
Leveraging this perspective, we are able to provide a
novel algorithm to eschew the predefined statistic limitations
in distributional RL and give theoretical understanding of
distributional RL within this perspective. Our approach is
also conceptually amenable for natural extension along the
lines of recent modelling improvements to distributional RL
brought by Implicit Quantile Networks (IQN) (Dabney et al.
2018a), and Fully parameterized Quantile Function (FQF)
(Yang et al. 2019). Specifically, our key contributions are

We consider the problem of learning a set of probability distributions from the empirical Bellman dynamics in distributional reinforcement learning (RL), a class of state-of-the-art
methods that estimate the distribution, as opposed to only the
expectation, of the total return. We formulate a method that
learns a finite set of statistics from each return distribution via
neural networks, as in the distributional RL literature. Existing distributional RL methods however constrain the learned
statistics to predefined functional forms of the return distribution which is both restrictive in representation and difficult in
maintaining the predefined statistics. Instead, we learn unrestricted statistics, i.e., deterministic (pseudo-)samples, of the
return distribution by leveraging a technique from hypothesis testing known as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD),
which leads to a simpler objective amenable to backpropagation. Our method can be interpreted as implicitly matching all
orders of moments between a return distribution and its Bellman target. We establish sufficient conditions for the contraction of the distributional Bellman operator and provide finitesample analysis for the deterministic samples in distribution
approximation. Experiments on the suite of Atari games show
that our method outperforms the distributional RL baselines
and sets a new record in the Atari games for non-distributed
agents.

1. We provide a novel approach to distributional RL using
deterministic samples via MMD that addresses the limitations in the existing distributional RL;
2. We provide theoretical understanding of distributional RL
within our framework, specifically the contraction property of the distributional Bellman operator and the nonasymptotic convergence of the approximate distribution
from deterministic samples;
3. We demonstrate the practical effectiveness of our framework in both tabular RL and large-scale experiments
where our method outperforms the standard distributional
RL methods and even establishes a new record in the Atari
games for non-distributed agents.

Introduction
A fundamental aspect in reinforcement learning (RL) is the
value of an action in a state which is formulated as the
expected value of the return, i.e., the expected value of
the discounted sum of rewards when the agent follows a
policy starting in that state and executes that action (Sutton, Barto et al. 1998). Learning this expected action-value
via Bellman’s equation (Bellman 1957) is central to valuebased RL such as temporal-difference (TD) learning (Sutton 1988), SARSA (Rummery and Niranjan 1994), and Qlearning (Watkins and Dayan 1992). Recently, however, approaches known as distributional RL that aim at learning the
distribution of the return have shown to be highly effective in
practice (Morimura et al. 2010b,a; Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017; Dabney et al. 2018b,a; Yang et al. 2019).
Despite many algorithmic variants with impressive practical performance (Bellemare, Dabney, and Munos 2017;

Outline. After carefully reviewing relevant background and
related works, and discussing their limitations, we present
our novel algorithmic approach to address these issues followed by theoretical analysis. We then present the experiments to confirm the effectiveness of our approach empirically and conclude our work.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9144

