The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computing Plan-Length Bounds Using Lengths of Longest Paths
Mohammad Abdulaziz and Dominik Berger
Techniche Universität München, Germany

Abstract

length of the longest path that does not traverse any state
more than once. Both, d and rd , are upper bounds on the
shortest plan’s length, i.e. they are completeness thresholds
for SAT-based planning. Also, d is a lower bound on rd that
can be exponentially smaller.
Computing d or rd for succinctly represented transition
systems, such as factored systems, is hindered by the worstcase complexity of all existing methods, which is exponential or doubly-exponential in the size of the given system,
respectively. This complexity can be alleviated by compositionally computing upper bounds on d or rd instead of
exactly computing them. Compositional bounding methods
compute an upper bound on a factored transition system’s
diameter by composing together values of topological properties of state spaces of abstract subsystems (Baumgartner, Kuehlmann, and Abraham 2002; Rintanen and Gretton
2013; Abdulaziz, Gretton, and Norrish 2015, 2017; Abdulaziz 2019), and they are currently the only practically viable method to compute bounds on plan lengths or the state
space diameter. Compositional approaches provide useful
bounds on plan length or the diameter using potentially exponentially smaller computational effort compared to directly computing d or rd , since explicit representations of
only abstract subsystems have to be constructed.
In this work we study the computation of rd for state
spaces of classical planning problems, which are factored
transition systems. The longest simple path and its length
are fundamental graph properties. Thus, computing rd for
state spaces of planning problems is inherently interesting,
as it might reveal interesting properties of different planning
problems. However, our goal is to devise better compositional methods to compute upper bounds on plan lengths to
aid SAT-based planning. This raises an interesting question:
why should we focus on computing rd instead of d? This
question is reasonable since, as stated earlier, d can be computed in exponentially less time than rd , and rd is an upper
bound on d that can be exponentially larger. The reason is
simple: it has been shown that d cannot be bounded by diameters of projections (Abdulaziz 2017, Chapter 3, Theorem
1). Since projections are cornerstone abstractions for compositional bounding, a method to compute d cannot be leveraged for compositional bounding. On the other hand, previous authors showed that, theoretically, recurrence diameters of projections can be composed to bound the concrete

We devise a method to exactly compute the length of the
longest simple path in factored state spaces, like state spaces
encountered in classical planning. Although the complexity
of this problem is NEXP-hard, we show that our method
can be used to compute practically useful upper-bounds on
lengths of plans. We show that the computed upper-bounds
are significantly (in many cases, orders of magnitude) better
than bounds produced by previous bounding techniques and
that they can be used to improve the SAT-based planning.

Introduction
Many techniques for solving problems defined on transition systems, like SAT-based planning (Kautz and Selman
1992) and bounded model checking (Biere et al. 1999), benefit from knowledge of upper bounds on the lengths of solution transition sequences, aka completeness thresholds. If N
is such a bound, and if a solution exists, then that solution
need not comprise more than N transitions.
In AI planning, upper bounds on plan lengths have two
main uses related to SAT-based planning. Firstly, like for
bounded model-checking, an upper bound on plan lengths
can be used as a completeness threshold, i.e. to prove a planning problem has no solution. Secondly, it can be used to
improve the ability of a SAT-based planner to find a solution. Typically, a SAT-based planner queries a SAT solver to
search for plans of increasing lengths, aka horizons, going
through many unsatisfiable formulae until the given horizon
is longer than the shortest possible plan. If a horizon longer
than the shortest plan were initially provided, the planner
can avoid many of the costly unsatisfiable queries (Gerevini,
Saetti, and Vallati 2015). Using plan length upper bounds as
horizons in this way was shown to increase the coverage of
SAT-based planners (Rintanen and Gretton 2013; Abdulaziz,
Gretton, and Norrish 2017; Abdulaziz 2019).
Biere et al. identified the diameter (d) and the recurrence diameter (rd ), which are topological properties of the
state space, as completeness thresholds for bounded modelchecking of safety and liveness properties, respectively. d is
the longest shortest path between any two states. rd is the
length of the longest simple path in the state space, i.e. the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11709

