The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hyperbolic Variational Graph Neural Network for Modeling Dynamic Graphs
Li Sun1 , Zhongbao Zhang1∗ , Jiawei Zhang2 , Feiyang Wang1 , Hao Peng3 ,
Sen Su1* and Philip S. Yu4
1

State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
IFM Lab, Department of Computer Science, Florida State University, FL, USA
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, China
4
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA
{l.sun, zhongbaozb, fywang}@bupt.edu.cn; jiawei@ifmlab.org; penghao@act.buaa.edu.cn; psyu@uic.edu
Abstract

of the Euclidean space only grows polynomially w.r.t. radius, while this size grows exponentially in hyperbolic space
(Krioukov et al. 2010). Hyperbolic space provides a more
promising alternative. Actually, recent results (Papadopoulos et al. 2012; Liu, Nickel, and Kiela 2019) show that hyperbolic space is well-suited for modeling graphs.
2) Modeling Dynamics. Most of existing models (Li et al.
2020; Tu et al. 2018; Wang, Cui, and Zhu 2016) consider
the graphs to be static. Actually, graphs are usually dynamic
and constantly evolving over time. Dynamic graphs have
been typically observed in social networks, transportation
networks and financial transaction networks (Zhou et al.
2018b). Ignoring the inherent dynamics of graphs usually
leads to questionable inference. Such models may mistakenly utilize future information for predicting past interactions as the evolving constraints are disregarded.
3) Modeling Uncertainty. Most of existing models (Liu et al.
2020; Grover and Leskovec 2016) map nodes to deterministic vectors. However, the formation and evolution of graphs
are full of uncertainties, especially for low-degree nodes
which deliver less information and bear more uncertainties
(Zhu et al. 2018). Actually, uncertainty is an inherent characteristic of graphs. The deterministic representation cannot
model uncertainty. Alternatively, stochastic representation
provides a promising approach to model such characteristic. It naturally captures the uncertainty to represent nodes
as normal distributions, i.e., the mean and variance.
To address the aforementioned limitations, we propose to
learn dynamic graph representation in hyperbolic space, for
the first time, which aims to learn stochastic node representations modeling graph dynamics and its uncertainty.
To this end, we present a novel Hyperbolic Variational
Graph Neural Network, referred to as HVGNN. In HVGNN,
to address the first limitation, instead of the Euclidean space,
we utilize hyperbolic space as the representation space. To
address the second limitation, we introduce a novel Temporal GNN (TGNN) to model the dynamics. In particular,
TGNN performs a time-aware attention based on a theoretically grounded time encoding approach, which distinguishes nodes in time domain. To address the third limitation, we devise a hyperbolic graph variational autoencoder
built upon TGNN to jointly model the uncertainty and dy-

Learning representations for graphs plays a critical role in a
wide spectrum of downstream applications. In this paper, we
summarize the limitations of the prior works in three folds:
representation space, modeling dynamics and modeling uncertainty. To bridge this gap, we propose to learn dynamic
graph representation in hyperbolic space, for the first time,
which aims to infer stochastic node representations. Working
with hyperbolic space, we present a novel Hyperbolic Variational Graph Neural Network, referred to as HVGNN. In
particular, to model the dynamics, we introduce a Temporal
GNN (TGNN) based on a theoretically grounded time encoding approach. To model the uncertainty, we devise a hyperbolic graph variational autoencoder built upon the proposed
TGNN to generate stochastic node representations of hyperbolic normal distributions. Furthermore, we introduce a reparameterisable sampling algorithm for the hyperbolic normal
distribution to enable the gradient-based learning of HVGNN.
Extensive experiments show that HVGNN outperforms stateof-the-art baselines on real-world datasets.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge of representation learning on graphs (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang
et al. 2015; Xhonneux, Qu, and Tang 2020). Its basic idea
is to map each node to a vector in a low-dimensional representation space. By learning graph representations, classical
machine learning algorithms can be applied to solve various
graph analysis tasks, such as link prediction and node classification (Kipf and Welling 2016a).
In this paper, we summarize the limitations of the prior
graph representation learning works in three folds:
1) Representation Space. Most of existing studies (Kipf and
Welling 2016b; Xu et al. 2020) model graphs in the Euclidean space. Euclidean models tend to have distortions
when representing real-world graphs with latent hierarchies
(Chami et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2013). In particular, for
such graphs, the number of nodes surrounding to a center
node grows exponentially w.r.t. radius. However, the size
∗

Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4375

