The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Empowering Conversational AI is a Trip to Mars:
Progress and Future of Open Domain Human-Computer Dialogues
Rui Yan 1,2 and Wei Wu 3
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
3
Microsoft Corporation
ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn, wuwei@microsoft.com

Abstract

dialogue systems and products as the key driving force towards new profits. Apple Inc. launched Siri, the personal
virtual assistant for every individual user. Google released
several relevant products, from Google Assistant, to Google
Home, and now Douplex. Amazon holds Alexa Prize Challenge every year to encourage cutting-edge research into
daily dialogues. There are many more companies, big names
or startups, working towards conversational AI.
Take Microsoft as an example. The chatbot dialogue system named Microsoft XiaoIce was first released to Chinese
users in 2014, and then was launched in Japan (Rinna),
U.S. (Zo), India (Ruuh), and Indonesia (Rinna). The products now have attracted more than 800 million users all over
the world, and the technologies behind have powered a great
number of business applications such as various third party
official accounts and IoT (Internet-of-Things) devices. Until 2018, users from the 5 countries have finished more than
30 billion conversations with XiaoIce; and on average, each
conversation lasts up to 23 turns. The promising user data
indicate impressive popularity of the dialogue system based
product in the real-world scenarios.
The need from industry stimulates research in academia.
Major conferences and journals are now explicitly calling
out for research articles of conversational studies. We conducted preliminary statistics about the number of accepted
papers published at conversational AI related conferences
within recent 5 years. The target venues for our investigation
include ACL, EMNLP, NAACL, AAAI, IJCAI, NeurIPS,
SIGIR, ICML, and others. We use a simple filter to identify
the number of research papers about conversational studies,
using the query keywords as “conversation” or “dialogue”
or “response”. The result is visualized in Figure 1.
It is obvious that the absolute (total) number of accepted
papers about conversational studies and dialogue systems
steadily keeps going up, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). The
phenomenon may indicate that dialogue research becomes
more and more popular, especially in the Natural Language
Processing (NLP) community. Considering the recent AI
boost which results in expansion in almost all research areas,
we rule out such a factor by counting the ratio of accepted
papers about dialogue systems against all accepted papers.
We have similar observations in Figure 1(b). The ratio of
dialogue papers is also growing up in recent years, especially
in major NLP conferences (ACL, NAACL, and EMNLP).

Dialogue systems powered by conversational artificial intelligence (AI) have never been so popular. Interacting with computer through languages reveals a more natural interface to
give orders and acquire information—just like human communication. Due to promising potential as virtual assistants
and/or social bots, major NLP, AI and even Search & Mining communities are explicitly calling-out for contributions
of conversational studies.
Learning towards real conversational intelligence is a trip to
Mars; perhaps we are yet on Earth. We have achieved substantial progress from recent research outputs. Still we have major
obstacles to overcome. In this paper, we present an overview
of progress and look forward to future trends so as to shed
light on possible directions towards success.

Overview of Conversational Studies
“Twenty minutes of small talk with a computer isn’t just a
moonshot. It’s a trip to Mars.”

Starting from 1960s, research for conversational artificial
intelligence (Conversational AI) has never been so popular
as in recent years. Dialogue systems have great potential and
commercial value (e.g., personal assistants, agent systems,
and social bots), as real world applications.
There are two mainstream types of dialogue systems.
Task-oriented dialogue systems are designed for helping
people complete specific tasks such as question-answering
(Ferrucci et al. 2013), bus information inquiry (Raux et al.
2005), etc. Non-task-oriented dialogue systems, a.k.a., chitchat dialogue systems, aim to engage users in open domain
human-machine conversation for entertainment and/or emotional companionship, namely social bot or chatbot. In this
paper, we mainly focus on the second type of dialogue system but we will make a comparison in details.
Dialogue systems are expected to take over as the main
marketing and communication channel across numerous
major industries. The large-scaled messaging capabilities
powered by the automatic intelligent conversational agents
are predicted to bring revolutions in business operation
and managements. Therefore, companies, capitals, and even
government officials, regard research and development in
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15078

