The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TSQA: Tabular Scenario Based Question Answering
Xiao Li, Yawei Sun, Gong Cheng
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
{xiaoli.nju, ywsun}@smail.nju.edu.cn, gcheng@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

named GeoTSQA. It contains 1k real questions contextualized by tabular scenarios in the geography domain, collected from China’s high-school exams. Compared with existing datasets for table-based question answering like WikiTableQuestions (Pasupat and Liang 2015), GeoTSQA requires fundamentally different reading and reasoning skills,
and poses new research challenges.
For instance, Figure 1 shows a question in GeoTSQA. To
answer it, tabular data needs to be synthesized via a complex
operation: identifying a monotonic increase in ELP over
the interval 2000–2003. Focusing on this particular interval
rather than many other intervals is implicitly suggested in
the question: after year 2000. Moreover, the passage in the
scenario helps to link ELP with educational level, and the
retrieved domain knowledge bridges the gap between educational level and rural labor which is the correct answer.
To conclude, TSQA methods need to properly manipulate
tabular data, and comprehend fused textual information.

Scenario-based question answering (SQA) has attracted an
increasing research interest. Compared with the well-studied
machine reading comprehension (MRC), SQA is a more challenging task: a scenario may contain not only a textual passage to read but also structured data like tables, i.e., tabular scenario based question answering (TSQA). AI applications of TSQA such as answering multiple-choice questions
in high-school exams require synthesizing data in multiple
cells and combining tables with texts and domain knowledge
to infer answers. To support the study of this task, we construct GeoTSQA. This dataset contains 1k real questions contextualized by tabular scenarios in the geography domain. To
solve the task, we extend state-of-the-art MRC methods with
TTGen, a novel table-to-text generator. It generates sentences
from variously synthesized tabular data and feeds the downstream MRC method with the most useful sentences. Its sentence ranking model fuses the information in the scenario,
question, and domain knowledge. Our approach outperforms
a variety of strong baseline methods on GeoTSQA.

1

Our Approach. To meet the challenges, considering that
text reading has been extensively studied in MRC research,
we propose to extend state-of-the-art MRC methods with a
novel table-to-text generator named TTGen to specifically
handle tabular data. The basic idea is straightforward: feeding a MRC model with sentences generated from tables using templates that encapsulate many and various predefined
operations for manipulating tabular data. However, the potentially large number (e.g., hundreds) of generated sentences may easily exceed the capacity of typical MRC models, and produce much noise information influencing the accuracy of reading comprehension. To address this problem,
TTGen incorporates a sentence ranking model that fuses the
information in the scenario, question, and domain knowledge to effectively select sentences that are most useful for
answering the question. It outperforms a variety of strong
baseline methods in extensive experiments on GeoTSQA.
We summarize our contributions in the paper as follows.

Introduction

Scenario-based question answering (SQA) is to answer
questions contextualized by scenarios (Lally et al. 2017).
Compared with the well-studied task of machine reading
comprehension (MRC) which requires reading a passage to
extract or infer an answer (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Lai et al.
2017), a SQA task requires reading a scenario which commonly contains both a textual passage and a set of structured
data. One such prominent AI application of SQA is answering multiple-choice questions in high-school geography exams (Ding et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2019). Those questions
are contextualized by scenarios containing tables and diagrams, where the rich information cannot be captured by
current MRC methods but have to be manually interpreted
using natural language. Thus, one natural research question
arises: can we solve SQA in a fully automated manner?
Task and Challenges. Specifically, we focus on questions
contextualized by a scenario consisting of a textual passage and a set of tables. We refer to this branch of SQA as
TSQA, short for Tabular Scenario based Question Answering. To support the study of this task, we construct a dataset

• We construct and publish GeoTSQA, the first dataset dedicated to TSQA. It requires reading and reasoning with
tables, texts, and domain knowledge at high school level.
• We extend MRC methods with TTGen to solve TSQA.
TTGen performs question and knowledge aware ranking
of sentences generated from synthesized tabular data.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13297

