The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Discovering Fully Oriented Causal Networks
Osman Mian, Alexander Marx and Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{osman.mian, alexander.marx, jv}@cispa.de

factorizations of joint distribution P (X, Y ), the algorithmic
Markov condition takes the complexities of these distributions into account: in this case, the simplest factorization of
P (X, Y ) is K(P (X)) + K(P (Y |X)) as only this factorization upholds the true independence between the marginal and
conditional distribution—any competing factorization will be
more complex because of inherent redundancy between the
terms. As Kolmogorov complexity can capture any physical
process (Li and Vitányi 2009) the AMC is a very general
model for causality. However, Kolmogorov complexity is not
computable, and hence we need a practical score to instantiate it. Here we do so through the Minimum Description
Length principle (Grünwald 2007), which provides a statistically well-founded approach to approximate Kolmogorov
complexity from above.

Abstract
We study the problem of inferring causal graphs from observational data. We are particularly interested in discovering
graphs where all edges are oriented, as opposed to the partially
directed graph that the state-of-the-art discover. To this end
we base our approach on the algorithmic Markov condition.
Unlike the statistical Markov condition, it uniquely identifies
the true causal network as the one that provides the simplest—
as measured in Kolmogorov complexity—factorization of the
joint distribution. Although Kolmogorov complexity is not
computable, we can approximate it from above via the Minimum Description Length principle, which allows us to define a
consistent and computable score based on non-parametric multivariate regression. To efficiently discover causal networks in
practice, we introduce the G LOBE algorithm, which greedily
adds, removes, and orients edges such that it minimizes the
overall cost. Through an extensive set of experiments we show
G LOBE performs very well in practice, beating the state-ofthe-art by a margin.

We develop an MDL-based score for directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs), where we model the dependencies between
variables through non-parametric multivariate regression.
Simply put, the lower the regression error of the discovered model, the lower its cost, while more parameters mean
higher complexity. We show this score is consistent: given
sufficiently many samples from the joint distribution, we can
uniquely identify the true causal graph if the causal relations
are nearly deterministic. To efficiently discover causal networks directly from data we introduce the G LOBE algorithm,
which much like the well-known GES (Chickering 2002)
algorithm greedily adds and removes edges to optimize the
score. Unlike GES, however, G LOBE traverses the space of
DAGs rather than Markov equivalence classes—orienting
edges during its search based on the AMC—and hence is
guaranteed to result in a fully directed network.

Introduction
Discovering causal dependencies from observational data
is one of the most fundamental problems in science (Pearl
2009). We consider the problem of recovering the causal
network over a set of continuous-valued random variables X
based on an iid sample from their joint distribution. The stateof-the-art does so by first recovering an undirected causal
skeleton—which identifies the variables that have a direct
causal relation—and then uses conditional independence tests
to orient as many edges as possible. By the nature of these
tests this can only be done up to Markov equivalence classes,
which means that these methods in practice return networks
where only few edges are oriented. In contrast, we develop
an approach that discovers fully directed causal graphs.
We base our approach on the algorithmic Markov condition
(AMC), a recent postulate that states that the factorization
of the joint distribution according to true causal network coincides with the one that achieves the lowest Kolmogorov
complexity (Janzing and Schölkopf 2010). As an example,
consider the case where X causes Y . Whereas the traditional statistical Markov condition cannot differentiate between P (X)P (Y |X) and P (Y )P (X|Y ) as both are valid

Through extensive empirical evaluation we show that
G LOBE performs well in practice and outperforms the stateof-the-art conditional independence and score based causal
discovery algorithms. On synthetic data we confirm G LOBE
does not discover spurious edges between independent variables, and overall achieves the best scores on both the structural hamming distance and the structural intervention distance. Last, but not least, on real-world data we show that
G LOBE even works well when it is unlikely that our modelling assumptions are met.
For reproducibility we provide detailed pseudo-code in
technical appendix, and make all code and data available.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8975

