The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private k-Means via Exponential Mechanism and Max Cover
Huy L. Nguyễn∗ , Anamay Chaturvedi∗ , Eric Z Xu∗
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University
440 Huntington Ave
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
{hu.nguyen, chaturvedi.a, xu.er}@northeastern.edu

1982), which has a tight sub-optimal multiplicative guarantee
of O(log k), works well in practice. This behaviour can be
understood by showing (Aggarwal, Deshpande, and Kannan
2009) that Lloyd’s finds a solution with O(1) multiplicative
error with constant probability, or that for a general class of
datasets satisfying a certain separability condition (Ostrovsky
et al. 2012) the multiplicative error again has a strong O(1)
bound.
In contrast, when the algorithm is required to be (p , δp )differentially private, no pure multiplicative approximation
is attainable and additive error is necessary. This principle is
formalised for the closely related discrete k-medians1 problem in theorem 4.4 of Gupta et al. (2010) which shows that
there is a family of instances whose optimal clustering cost
is 0 but any differentially private algorithm must incur an
Ω(∆2 k(log n/k)/p ) expected cost. In practice, for many
datasets it is seen that although the non-private clustering
cost naturally decreases as the number of centers k increases,
the costs incurred by differentially private algorithms quickly
plateau (as in the experiments of Balcan et al. (2017)), suggesting that they have reached their limit in the additive error.
Given this fundamental barrier, a major question is:
Question: Is it possible to obtain a finite approximation
with additive error nearly linear in k?

Abstract
We introduce a new (p , δp )-differentially private algorithm
for the k-means clustering problem. Given a dataset in Euclidean space, the k-means clustering problem requires one
to find k points in that space such that the sum of squares
of Euclidean distances between each data point and its closest respective point among the k returned is minimised. Although there exist privacy-preserving methods with good
theoretical guarantees to solve this problem, in practice it
is seen that it is the additive error which dictates the practical performance of these methods. By reducing the problem to a sequence of instances of maximum coverage on
a grid, we are able to derive a new method that achieves
lower additive error than previous works. For input datasets
with cardinality n and diameter ∆,
p our algorithm has an
O(∆2 (k log2 n log(1/δp )/p + k d log(1/δp )/p )) additive error whilst maintaining constant multiplicative error. We
conclude with some experiments and find an improvement
over previously implemented work for this problem.

Introduction
Clustering is a well-studied problem in theoretical computer
science. A relatively general variant of this problem is when
given a dataset D of size n to find k centers that minimize the
sum of distances of each point to its closest center. When the
ambient space is Euclidean and the distance is the square of
the Euclidean metric this is known as the k-means problem.
When algorithms handle sensitive information, an important requirement that they might be expected to fulfill is that
of being differentially private (Dwork et al. 2016). Differential privacy provides a framework for capturing the loss in
privacy that occurs when sensitive data is processed. In this
work we are interested in the centralized model of differential
privacy, where the algorithm whose privacy loss we want to
bound is executed by a trusted curator with access to many
agents’ private information and who must reveal their answer
publicly.
In the theoretical study of the k-means problem, reducing
the worst-case multiplicative approximation factor has been
the focus of a major line of work (Kanungo et al. 2004; Ahmadian et al. 2020). However, even Lloyd’s algorithm (Lloyd

Contributions
We introduce a differentially private k-means clustering algorithm for the global model of differential privacy. The
additive error is nearly linear in k in contrast to a polynomial
overhead in previous works, and the multiplicative error is
constant, which is competitive with all previous works. The
algorithm also exhibits an improvement experimentally over
earlier work on synthetic and real-world datasets (Balcan et al.
2017). For a specific setting of parameters with constants applicable for experiments, we have the following bound. More
general bounds can be found in subsequent sections.
Theorem 1. There is an (p , δp ) differentially private algorithm for the k-means problem that achieves a 
utilk∆2 log2 n log 1/δp
ity bound of O(1)fD (OPTD ) + O
+
p
1

The discrete k-medians problem is formulated similarly except
the distance function is a metric, and the centers come from a public
finite set and not the whole ambient space.

∗

Equal contribution, names in no particular order.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
9101

