The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Joint Demosaicking and Denoising in the Wild:
The Case of Training Under Ground Truth Uncertainty
Jierun Chen, Song Wen, S.-H. Gary Chan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
{jcheneh, swenaa, gchan}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Image demosaicking and denoising are the two key fundamental steps in digital camera pipelines, aiming to reconstruct clean color images from noisy luminance readings. In
this paper, we propose and study Wild-JDD, a novel learning framework for joint demosaicking and denoising in the
wild. In contrast to previous works which generally assume
the ground truth of training data is a perfect reflection of the
reality, we consider here the more common imperfect case
of ground truth uncertainty in the wild. We first illustrate its
manifestation as various kinds of artifacts including zipper
effect, color moire and residual noise. Then we formulate a
two-stage data degradation process to capture such ground
truth uncertainty, where a conjugate prior distribution is imposed upon a base distribution. After that, we derive an evidence lower bound (ELBO) loss to train a neural network
that approximates the parameters of the conjugate prior distribution conditioned on the degraded input. Finally, to further enhance the performance for out-of-distribution input,
we design a simple but effective fine-tuning strategy by taking the input as a weakly informative prior. Taking into account ground truth uncertainty, Wild-JDD enjoys good interpretability during optimization. Extensive experiments validate that it outperforms state-of-the-art schemes on joint demosaicking and denoising tasks on both synthetic and realistic raw datasets.

(a) Zipper effect.

(b) Color moire.

(c) Residual noise.

Figure 1: Imperfect ground truth examples (electronic zoomin recommended): (a) A ground truth image from CBSD
dataset (Arbeláez et al. 2011) suffering from zipper effect,
an artificial jagged pattern around edges; (b) Color moire in
an image from ImageNet dataset (Russakovsky et al. 2015).
Such artifact appears as false coloring due to interpolation
error; (c) Noticeable residual noise in the collected “clean”
image from Renoir dataset (Anaya and Barbu 2018).

most crucial steps. Demosaicking aims to undo the mosaicking operation A by interpolating the missing two-thirds of
each pixel’s color channels, while denoising removes the inevitable noise n from the measurement x. Due to their modular property, substantial traditional literature takes them as
independent tasks and executes them in a sequential manner.
This yields potentially suboptimal performance, and inspires
several works on jointly addressing the DM&DN tasks (Liu
et al. 2020; Kokkinos and Lefkimmiatis 2019; Tan et al.
2017a).
Among the joint DM&DN works, data-driven approaches
(Liu et al. 2020; Tan et al. 2018; Kokkinos and Lefkimmiatis 2018) have been shown more effective than applying
handcrafted priors and filters. These approaches usually require a collection of paired data, which are the mosaicked
noisy images x and the demosaicked clean “ground truth”
counterparts y. However, it is often costly and tedious to
collect a large amount of high quality real-life data. Furthermore, the collected y is not perfect without artifacts or noise.
We illustrate this in Figure 1. For demosaicking, many approaches (Syu, Chen, and Chuang 2018; Tan et al. 2017b)
take the output from a camera pipeline as y, possibly introducing artifacts like zipper effect or color moire in regions with rich textures and sharp edges. For denoising, the

Introduction
Modern digital cameras use a single sensor overlaid with a
color filter array (CFA) to capture an image. This means that
only one color channel’s value is recorded for each pixel
location. Let N be the number of pixels in an image, the raw
data acquisition process can be simply modeled as
x = Az + n,
(1)
where x ∈ RN is a noisy raw data vector of luminance readings, A ∈ RN ×3N is a mosaicking operation, z ∈ R3N
is an unknown clean image with three color channels, and
n ∈ RN is a noise vector.
Before the final “cooked” image is ready for the users,
the raw data undergoes a series of processing steps, known
as the image processing pipeline. Among those, demosaicking and denoising (DM&DN) are two of the very early and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1018

