The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Sit: Synthesizing Human-Chair Interactions via Hierarchical Control
Yu-Wei Chao,1∗ Jimei Yang,2 Weifeng Chen,3 Jia Deng4
1

NVIDIA
Adobe Research
3
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
4
Princeton University
ychao@nvidia.com, jimyang@adobe.com, wfchen@umich.edu, jiadeng@cs.princeton.edu
2

Abstract
Recent progress on physics-based character animation has
shown impressive breakthroughs on human motion synthesis, through imitating motion capture data via deep reinforcement learning. However, results have mostly been demonstrated on imitating a single distinct motion pattern, and do
not generalize to interactive tasks that require flexible motion patterns due to varying human-object spatial configurations. To bridge this gap, we focus on one class of interactive tasks—sitting onto a chair. We propose a hierarchical reinforcement learning framework which relies on a
collection of subtask controllers trained to imitate simple,
reusable mocap motions, and a meta controller trained to execute the subtasks properly to complete the main task. We experimentally demonstrate the strength of our approach over
different non-hierarchical and hierarchical baselines. We also
show that our approach can be applied to motion prediction
given an image input. A supplementary video can be found
at https://youtu.be/3CeN0OGz2cA.

Figure 1: Synthesizing the motion of sitting. Top left: Input
image and 3D chair detection. Top right: Physics simulated
environment for learning human-chair interactions. Bottom:
Two examples of synthesized motions.

Introduction
The capability of synthesizing realistic human-scene interactions is an important basis for simulating human living
space, where robots can be trained to collaborate with humans, e.g. avoiding collisions or expediting the completion
of assistive tasks.
Motion capture (mocap) data, by offering high quality
recordings of articulated human pose, has provided a crucial resource for human motion synthesis. With large mocap
datasets and deep learning algorithms, kinematics-based approaches have recently made rapid progress on motion synthesis and prediction (Fragkiadaki et al. 2015; Jain et al.
2016; Holden, Saito, and Komura 2016; Ghosh et al. 2017;
Bütepage et al. 2017; Martinez et al. 2017; Holden, Komura,
and Saito 2017; Zhou et al. 2018; Li et al. 2018; Gui et al.
2018a,b; Yan et al. 2018). However, the lack of physical
interpretability in the synthesized motion has been a major limitation of these approaches. Such problem becomes
impermissible when it comes to motions that involve substantial human-object or human-human interactions. Without modeling the physics, the sythensized interactions are

often physically unrealistic, e.g. body parts penetrating obstacles or not reacting to collision. This generally limits the
use of these approaches to either non-interactive motions,
or a carefully set up virtual scene with high fidelity to the
captured one.
The graphics community has recently witnessed impressive progress on physics-based character animation (Peng
et al. 2017, 2018a,b). These approaches, through imitating
mocap examples via deep reinforcement learning, can synthesize realistic motions in physics simulated environments.
Consequently, they can adapt to different physical contexts and thus attain a better generalization performance for
interaction-based motions, e.g. walking on uneven terrain
or stunt performance under obstacle disturbance. Nonetheless, these approaches still suffer from a drawback—a single
model is trained for performing a single task with a distinct
motion pattern (often time from a single mocap clip). As a
result, they might not generalize to higher-level interactive
tasks that require flexible motion patterns. Take the example
of a person sitting down on a chair. A person can start in
any location and orientation relative to the chair (Fig. 1). A

∗

Work mostly done at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5887

