The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Energy-Based Model
with Variational Auto-Encoder as Amortized Sampler
Jianwen Xie, Zilong Zheng, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{jianwen.kenny, zlzheng.cs, pingli98}@gmail.com
Abstract

translation (Xie et al. 2021b). Other applications can be seen
in natural language processing (Bakhtin et al. 2021), biology (Ingraham et al. 2018; Du et al. 2019), and inverse optimal control (Xu et al. 2019).
Energy-based generative models directly define an unnormalized probability density that is an exponential of the
negative energy function, where the energy function maps
the input variable to an energy scalar. Training an energybased model (EBM) from observed data corresponds to finding an energy function, where observed data are assigned
lower energies than unobserved ones. Synthesizing new data
from the energy-based probability density can be achieved
by a gradient-based Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
method, which is an implicit and iterative generation process, to find low energy regions of the learned energy landscape; we refer readers to two excellent textbooks (Liu 2008;
Barbu and Zhu 2020) and numerous references therein.
Energy-based generative models, therefore, unify the generation and learning processes in a single model.
A persisting challenge in training an EBM of highdimensional data via maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE) is the calculation of the normalizing constant or
the partition function, which requires a computationally intractable integral. Therefore, an MCMC sampling procedure, such as the Langevin dynamics or Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (Neal 2011), from the EBMs is typically used to approximate the gradient of the partition function during the
model training. However, the MCMC is computationally expensive or even impractical, especially if the target distribution has multiple modes separated by highly low probability
regions. In such a case, traversing modes becomes very difficult and unlikely because different MCMC chains easily get
trapped by different local modes.
To tackle the above challenge, with the inspiration of the
idea of amortized generation in Kim and Bengio (2016); Xie
et al. (2018b), we propose to train a directed latent variable
model as an approximate sampler that generates samples
by deterministic transformation of independent and identically distributed random samples drawn from Gaussian distribution. Such an ancestral sampler can efficiently provide
a good initial point of the iterative MCMC sampling of the
EBM to avoid a long computation time to generate convergent samples. We call this process of first running an
ancestral sampling by a latent variable model and then re-

Due to the intractable partition function, training energybased models (EBMs) by maximum likelihood requires
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling to approximate the gradient of the Kullback-Leibler divergence between
data and model distributions. However, it is non-trivial to
sample from an EBM because of the difficulty of mixing between modes. In this paper, we propose to learn a variational
auto-encoder (VAE) to initialize the finite-step MCMC, such
as Langevin dynamics that is derived from the energy function, for efficient amortized sampling of the EBM. With these
amortized MCMC samples, the EBM can be trained by maximum likelihood, which follows an “analysis by synthesis”
scheme; while the VAE learns from these MCMC samples
via variational Bayes. We call this joint training algorithm
the variational MCMC teaching, in which the VAE chases the
EBM toward data distribution. We interpret the learning algorithm as a dynamic alternating projection in the context
of information geometry. Our proposed models can generate
samples comparable to GANs and EBMs. Additionally, we
demonstrate that our model can learn effective probabilistic
distribution toward supervised conditional learning tasks.

1

Introduction

Generative modeling of high-dimensional data is a very
challenging and fundamental problem in both computer vision and machine learning communities. Energy-based generative model (Zhu, Wu, and Mumford 1998; LeCun et al.
2006) with the energy function parameterized by a deep neural network was first proposed by Xie et al. (2016), and has
been drawing attention in the recent literature (Xie, Zhu,
and Wu 2017; Gao et al. 2018; Xie et al. 2018c; Xie, Zhu,
and Wu 2019; Du and Mordatch 2019; Nijkamp et al. 2019;
Grathwohl et al. 2019), not only for its empirically powerful ability to learn highly complex probability distribution,
but also for its theoretically fascinating aspects of representing high-dimensional data. Successful applications with
energy-based generative frameworks have been witnessed in
the field of computer vision, for example, video synthesis
(Xie, Zhu, and Wu 2017, 2019), 3D volumetric shape synthesis (Xie et al. 2018c, 2020), unordered point cloud synthesis (Xie et al. 2021a), supervised image-to-image translation (Xie et al. 2019), and unpaired cross-domain visual
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10441

