The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

From Label Smoothing to Label Relaxation
Julian Lienen, Eyke Hüllermeier
Heinz Nixdorf Institute and Department of Computer Science
Paderborn University
33098 Paderborn, Germany
{julian.lienen,eyke}@upb.de

Abstract

observed. Again, class probabilities constitute an important
example: Even if probabilistic predictions are sought, the
data will normally not provide such probabilities as training
information. Instead, it typically consists of examples with a
single class label attached. In such cases, the formalization
of the learning problem also involves the modeling of the
training data.
This aspect, the modeling of data, is at the core of this
paper. Compared to the model class and learning algorithm,
it has received rather little attention in the literature so far,
and is mostly done in an implicit way. For example, when
training a model by optimizing losses such as log-loss or
Brier score, an observed class label is implicitly treated as a
degenerate (one-point) distribution, which assigns the entire
probability mass to that label. Unsurprisingly, feeding the
learner with extreme distributions of that kind aggravates the
problems of overfitting and over-confidence.
So-called label smoothing (Szegedy et al. 2016) has recently been proposed to address these issues. The idea is to
remove a certain amount of probability mass from the observed class and spread it across the other classes, thereby
making the distribution less extreme. While probability mass
can be spread in any way, the authors suggest a uniform distribution over all classes. This modification of the data encourages the model to be less confident about the predictions, which effectively narrows the gap between the logits of the observed class and the others. This method has
proved successful in various applications, such as classification of image data using deep convolutional neural networks
(Szegedy et al. 2016; Müller, Kornblith, and Hinton 2019).
Although label smoothing undoubtedly provokes a regularization effect (Lukasik et al. 2020), it can be questioned
from a data modeling point of view. In particular, since the
smoothed probability distribution is still unlikely to match
the true underlying conditional class probability, it is likely
to introduce a bias that may harm the generalization performance (Li, Dasarathy, and Berisha 2020). Indeed, while label smoothing helps to calibrate the degree of confidence of
a model, and improves compared to the use of the conventional cross-entropy loss with one-point probabilities, explicit calibration methods such as temperature scaling (Guo
et al. 2017) turn out to calibrate models even better (Müller,
Kornblith, and Hinton 2019).
In this paper, we propose label relaxation as an alternative

Regularization of (deep) learning models can be realized at
the model, loss, or data level. As a technique somewhere
in-between loss and data, label smoothing turns deterministic class labels into probability distributions, for example by
uniformly distributing a certain part of the probability mass
over all classes. A predictive model is then trained on these
distributions as targets, using cross-entropy as loss function.
While this method has shown improved performance compared to non-smoothed cross-entropy, we argue that the use
of a smoothed though still precise probability distribution as
a target can be questioned from a theoretical perspective. As
an alternative, we propose a generalized technique called label relaxation, in which the target is a set of probabilities represented in terms of an upper probability distribution. This
leads to a genuine relaxation of the target instead of a distortion, thereby reducing the risk of incorporating an undesirable bias in the learning process. Methodically, label relaxation leads to the minimization of a novel type of loss function, for which we propose a suitable closed-form expression
for model optimization. The effectiveness of the approach is
demonstrated in an empirical study on image data.

Introduction
In standard settings of supervised learning, the result of a
learning process is essentially determined by the interplay of
the model class, the learning algorithm resp. the loss function this algorithm seeks to minimize in order to identify
the presumably optimal model, and the training data. Of
utmost practical importance, especially for flexible models
such as neural networks, is a regularization of the learner, so
as to prevent it from overfitting the training data. In the case
where models are non-deterministic and produce probabilistic predictions, for example class probabilities in the case
of classification, overfitting also manifests itself in overly
confident predictors with a tendency to assign probabilities
close to the extremes of 0 or 1.
While the role of the model class and the loss function
in helping to regularize the learner is quite obvious, this is
arguably less true for the training data. The role of the data
becomes especially important when supervision is only indirect in the sense that the target of the predictor is not directly
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8583

