The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Delving into Variance Transmission and Normalization: Shift of Average Gradient
Makes the Network Collapse
Yuxiang Liu1 , Jidong Ge1 , Chuanyi Li1 and Jie Gui 2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University
yxliu@smail.nju.edu.cn, {gjd, lcy}@nju.edu.cn, guijie@seu.edu.cn

Abstract

We have witnessed the growth of deep learning in computer vision. With the maturity of theories for convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al. 1989; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), several research directions,
such as image classification (Simonyan and Zisserman 2015;
He et al. 2016a; Szegedy et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017a) and
object detection (Redmon et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2015; Liu
et al. 2016), can be explored in depth.
Batch Normalization (BN) (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), benefiting from its ability to accelerate training speed and reduce the impact of complex initialization and variance transmission (Glorot and Bengio 2010; He et al. 2015), has been
widely used in most of the state-of-the-art networks. With
the help of normalization, the setting of learning rate (LR) is
no longer scrupulous. Generally, the network (without BN)
will collapse rapidly if a large LR is set for training. Intuitively, this is attributed to a large update caused by inappropriate LR. By contrast, the appearance of BN alleviates this phenomenon. Moreover, BN accelerates the convergence only by modifying the mean and variance of the
output layer, which is puzzling.

Despite normalization’s pervasiveness, the real reason for
why they are useful still needs to be studied. However, BN
is not omnipotent. It tends to use large batch size and will
crash by inaccurate batch statistics estimation when we use a
miniature batch size. In (Santurkar et al. 2018; Bjorck et al.
2018), BN was thought to make the optimization landscape
significantly smoother. Many variants (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2016; Wu and
He 2018; Luo et al. 2019) of BN are proposed. Nonetheless,
they may not replace BN entirely because of time cost, performance, and other factors. Inspired by those methods of
conducting normalization on outputs, weight normalization
(WN) (Salimans and Kingma 2016) and other variants (Qiao
et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2017b, 2018) that conduct normalization on filters’ weights are proposed. Those methods
which normalize the filters usually cooperate with BN to
speed up convergence. Many of them may not work if the
scale of the output is out of control. Although BN and other
methods are effective, changing the outputs may block the
variance transmission and lose some information. To better
understand why normalizing the outputs is beneficial, we intend to analyze BN from the perspective of variance transmission. We attempt to find a method, which is equivalent
to BN and simultaneously robust to mini-batch size. In this
way, we may find out why BN works to some extent.
In this paper, we study the variance transmission to find
out why BN can speed up convergence and keep the network
stable when we use a large LR. We point out that the shift
of the average gradient, which is reduced by BN and WN
inadvertently, will hinder network training. Therefore, we
present Parametric Weights Standardization (PWS) as an alternative to BN and WN. PWS solves the shift of the average
gradient by normalizing outputs. It needs less computation
and is robust to mini-batch size. Moreover, PWS does not
directly control the output variance. PWS acts the same as
normal conv operation. We have carried out object detection
task in VOC and COCO (Lin et al. 2014) datasets, and image
classification task in CIFAR10 and ImageNet (Russakovsky
et al. 2015). All models are trained from scratch (Shen et al.
2017; Zhu et al. 2019) to exploit the power of normalization.
We refocus on variance transmission to find the discrepancy
among normalization operations. Our contributions are:

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Theoretically, we reveal how the shift of the average gradient makes a significant impact on variance transmission.

Normalization operations are essential for state-of-the-art
neural networks and enable us to train a network from scratch
with a large learning rate (LR). We attempt to explain the
real effect of Batch Normalization (BN) from the perspective of variance transmission by investigating the relationship between BN and Weights Normalization (WN). In this
work, we demonstrate that the problem of the shift of the
average gradient will amplify the variance of every convolutional (conv) layer. We propose Parametric Weights Standardization (PWS), a fast and robust to mini-batch size module used for conv filters, to solve the shift of the average
gradient. PWS can provide the speed-up of BN. Besides,
it has less computation and does not change the output of
a conv layer. PWS enables the network to converge fast
without normalizing the outputs. This result enhances the
persuasiveness of the shift of the average gradient and explains why BN works from the perspective of variance transmission. The code and appendix will be made available on
https://github.com/lyxzzz/PWSConv.

Introduction

2216

