The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforcement Learning with a Disentangled Universal
Value Function for Item Recommendation
Kai Wang, 1 Zhene Zou, 1 Qilin Deng, 1 Jianrong Tao, 1 Runze Wu, 1 *
Changjie Fan, 1 Liang Chen, 2 Peng Cui 3
1
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Tsinghua University, China
{wangkai02,zouzhene,dengqilin,hztaojianrong,wurunze1,fanchangjie}@corp.netease.com,
chenliang6@mail.sysu.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

exploit extremely sparse user-item feedback through limited
user-agent interactions; (ii) the best strategy is to maximize
users’ overall long-term satisfaction without sacrificing the
recommendations’ short-term utility.
While RL has shown considerable success in
games (Mnih et al. 2013; Colas et al. 2018) and robotics (Lillicrap et al. 2015; Andrychowicz et al. 2017), large-scale
deployment of RL in real-world applications has proven
challenging (Dulac-Arnold, Mankowitz, and Hester 2019).
Compared to other machine learning methods, deep reinforcement learning has a reputation for being data-hungry
and is subject to instability in its learning process (Henderson et al. 2018). In this paper, we first summarize three key
challenges when applying RL to RS:

In recent years, there are great interests as well as challenges
in applying reinforcement learning (RL) to recommendation
systems (RS). In this paper, we summarize three key practical challenges of large-scale RL-based recommender systems: massive state and action spaces, high-variance environment, and the unspecific reward setting in recommendation.
All these problems remain largely unexplored in the existing
literature and make the application of RL challenging.
We develop a model-based reinforcement learning framework, called GoalRec. Inspired by the ideas of world model
(model-based), value function estimation (model-free), and
goal-based RL, a novel disentangled universal value function designed for item recommendation is proposed. It can
generalize to various goals that the recommender may have,
and disentangle the stochastic environmental dynamics and
high-variance reward signals accordingly. As a part of the
value function, free from the sparse and high-variance reward
signals, a high-capacity reward-independent world model is
trained to simulate complex environmental dynamics under a
certain goal. Based on the predicted environmental dynamics, the disentangled universal value function is related to
the user’s future trajectory instead of a monolithic state and
a scalar reward. We demonstrate the superiority of GoalRec
over previous approaches in terms of the above three practical
challenges in a series of simulations and a real application.

• Massive state and action spaces. In an industrial setting, the dimension of user features (state space) is extremely large, and the item is usually represented by highdimensional item features (action space). However, most
model-free RL methods as well as RL-based RS methods (Shi et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2018) in the literature learn
from reward signals directly and often only use small neural networks with few parameters. As discussed in Ha and
Schmidhuber (2018), the famous “credit assignment problem” and low-quality reward signals are the two main bottlenecks that make it hard for RL algorithms to learn millions of weights of a large model.

Introduction
With the recent tremendous development of reinforcement
learning (RL), there has been increasing interest in adopting
RL for recommendations (Shani, Heckerman, and Brafman
2005; Hu et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2019b). The RL-based recommender systems treat the recommendation process as a
sequential interaction between the user (environment) and
the recommendation agent (RL agent). And a part of user
feedback (e.g., user purchase) is regarded as reward signals.
The RL-based recommender systems can achieve two key
advantages: (i) the recommendation agent can explore and

• High-variance environment. Different from static gym
environments, real-world recommendation environments
are commonly high-variance and uncertain. On the one
hand, the feedback reward of users is usually sparse (e.g.,
0.2% conversion rate) and unbalanced (e.g., a wide range
of deal price). On the other hand, the random page jumps
of users make the calculation of expected rewards difficult. These difficulties lead to a high-variance and biased estimation of the expected reward, which probably
misleads the reinforcement learning towards poor performance.

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Unspecific reward setting in recommendation. Unlike
reward-given environments, there is no specific reward
setting given in real applications. Actually, it is unclear
4427

