The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Double Oracle Algorithm for Computing Equilibria in Continuous Games
Lukáš Adam, Rostislav Horčı́k, Tomáš Kasl, Tomáš Kroupa
Artificial Intelligence Center, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{adamluk3, xhorcik, kasltoma, tomas.kroupa}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract

anteed only for infinite games whose utility functions satisfy
additional conditions such as continuity (Glicksberg 1952;
Fan 1952). On top of that, some well-understood classes
of infinite games have only optimal strategies with uncountable supports; see (Roberson 2006) for an in-depth discussion of infinite Colonel Blotto games.
Computational procedures for finding (approximate)
equilibria of infinite games exist for rather special kinds
of utility functions. Two-person zero-sum polynomial
games are solvable by semidefinite programming (Parrilo
2006; Laraki and Lasserre 2012). Games with piecewiselinear utility functions and their equilibria were analyzed
in (Kroupa and Majer 2014). Approximate equilibria of separable games can be computed under particular assumptions
(Stein, Ozdaglar, and Parrilo 2008). For some games the best
response can be approximated by neural nets (Kamra et al.
2018, 2019). One of the important iterative procedures for finite games, Brown-Robinson learning process known as fictitious play (Brown 1951; Robinson 1951), has been recently
applied to infinite games (Ganzfried 2020). However, the
dynamics of best response strategies generated by fictitious
play was analyzed only in special cases; cf. (Hofbauer and
Sorin 2006; Perkins and Leslie 2014). To the best of our
knowledge, not much is known about the convergence of fictitious play for general zero-sum continuous games as defined below.
This paper deals with continuous games, which we define
as two-person zero-sum games with continuous utility functions over compact strategy sets. Finding equilibria in such
games is a much harder problem than solving finite games.
Computational techniques exist only for special utility functions mentioned above (polynomial, convex/concave, separable, etc.) In this paper we propose an iterative algorithm that can be applied to all continuous games. Namely
we extend the double oracle algorithm (McMahan, Gordon,
and Blum 2003) to such games. This algorithm is an iterative strategy generation technique based on (i) the solution
of subgames by LP solvers and (ii) the expansion of subgames’ strategy sets using the best response strategies obtained thus far. Our main result, Theorem 1, is the convergence of this algorithm for any continuous game. We point
out that this is a non-trivial generalization of Theorem 1
from (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003). The crucial issues to be overcome are the following.

Many efficient algorithms have been designed to recover
Nash equilibria of various classes of finite games. Special
classes of continuous games with infinite strategy spaces,
such as polynomial games, can be solved by semidefinite programming. In general, however, continuous games are not directly amenable to computational procedures. In this contribution, we develop an iterative strategy generation technique
for finding a Nash equilibrium in a whole class of continuous two-person zero-sum games with compact strategy sets.
The procedure, which is called the double oracle algorithm,
has been successfully applied to large finite games in the past.
We prove the convergence of the double oracle algorithm
to a Nash equilibrium. Moreover, the algorithm is guaranteed
to recover an approximate equilibrium in finitely-many steps.
Our numerical experiments show that it outperforms fictitious
play on several examples of games appearing in the literature.
In particular, we provide a detailed analysis of experiments
with a version of the continuous Colonel Blotto game.

Introduction
Action spaces of games appearing in AI applications are
often prohibitively large. Consequently, one has to strive
for efficiently computable approximations of equilibria, possibly with provable bounds on convergence rates (Gilpin,
Peña, and Sandholm 2012). A number of algorithms applied in AI like regret matching (Hart and Mas-Colell 2000),
the double oracle algorithm (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum
2003) or the policy-space response oracle (Lanctot et al.
2017; Muller et al. 2019) overcome the problem with the cardinality by selecting ‘good’ strategies iteratively. The recent
advances in algorithmic game theory have led to the development of algorithms for approximately solving extremely
large finite games, such as variants of poker (Moravčı́k et al.
2017; Brown and Sandholm 2019) or multidimensional resource allocation problems (Behnezhad et al. 2017).
Completely new problems arise from considering games
with infinite strategy spaces, in which the strategies are vectors of real numbers corresponding to physical parameters
(Archibald and Shoham 2009) or to the setting of classifiers
(Yasodharan and Loiseau 2019). The first theoretical obstacle is that the existence of mixed strategy equilibria is guarCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5070

