The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Beating Attackers At Their Own Games:
Adversarial Example Detection Using Adversarial Gradient Directions
Yuhang Wu, Sunpreet S. Arora, Yanhong Wu, and Hao Yang
Visa Research
{yuhawu, sunarora, yanwu, haoyang}@visa.com

Abstract
Adversarial examples are input examples that are specifically
crafted to deceive machine learning classifiers. State-of-theart adversarial example detection methods characterize an input example as adversarial either by quantifying the magnitude of feature variations under multiple perturbations or by
measuring its distance from estimated benign example distribution. Instead of using such metrics, the proposed method
is based on the observation that the directions of adversarial gradients when crafting (new) adversarial examples play
a key role in characterizing the adversarial space. Compared
to detection methods that use multiple perturbations, the proposed method is efficient as it only applies a single random
perturbation on the input example. Experiments conducted on
two different databases, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, show that
the proposed detection method achieves, respectively, 97.9%
and 98.6% AUC-ROC (on average) on five different adversarial attacks, and outperforms multiple state-of-the-art detection methods. Results demonstrate the effectiveness of using
adversarial gradient directions for adversarial example detection.

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the proposed approach in
the 2D embedding space (L) of adversarial example x0 , and
(R) of benign example x. Assume that an attacker crafts an
adversarial example x0 from a benign example x of class
A, and aims to deceive a deep network into misclassifying x0 in class B. Given an input example xq , the proposed
method perturbs xq using a random perturbation µ to obtain
xp , and retrieves xq ’s nearest neighbor prototype xn from
a reference database, which shares the same predicted class
with xq . Following this, adversarial gradients of xq , xp , and
xn (denoted as vki ) corresponding to their top K predicted
classes (here K=2) are calculated. Pairwise angular similarity between {vkq , vkp }, {vkq , vkn }, and {vkp , vkn } is computed
(k = {1, 2}) and used to determine if xq is adversarial. Note
that adversarial gradient directions in (R) are comparatively
consistent and have larger angular similarities than (L).

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are being widely used in classification systems because of their exceptional performance
on a wide range of practical problems from fraud detection to biometrics. However, recent research in adversarial
machine learning has highlighted a major security concern
with use of the DNNs in practical applications. Researchers
have shown that an adversary can add human-imperceptible
malicious perturbations to input examples to cause incorrect
predictions (Szegedy et al. 2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017).
Such input examples are termed adversarial examples.
State-of-the-art adversarial example detection methods
primarily exploit the following two observed properties of
adversarial examples: (i) adversarial examples are comparatively more sensitive to perturbations in the input space than
benign examples, and (ii) the distance of an adversarial example to the data distribution of benign examples is anomalous.
The methods presented in (Wang et al. 2018; Xu, Evans,
and Qi 2018; Tian, Yang, and Cai 2018) are based on observation (i). These methods transform an input example

using geometrical transformations (e.g., rotation, translation) and/or filtering operations (e.g.median filtering). The
changes in prediction probabilities of the classifier before
and after transformation are aggregated and compared to determine if the input example is adversarial. Despite promising results, one limitation of these methods is the use of
multiple random transformations which, in turn, increases
the computational complexity. The proposed method, on the
other hand, applies a single random perturbation to an input
example to determine if the example is adversarial by using
adversarial gradient directions.
Instead of relying on observation (i), the method described in (Feinman et al. 2017) is based on observation (ii)
and uses kernel density estimation to identify low probability adversarial sub-spaces. The method reported in (Ma et al.
2018) characterizes the space-filling capability of the region
surrounding an adversarial example using local intrinsic di-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2969

