The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Memory-Gated Recurrent Networks
Yaquan Zhang,3

Nanbo Peng,1

Qi Wu,2 *

Min Dai,4

Jing Zhang,2

Hu Wang1

1

JD Digits
City University of Hong Kong
3
National University of Singapore, Department of Mathematics and Risk Management Institute
4
National University of Singapore, Department of Mathematics, Risk Management Institute, and Chong-Qing & Suzhou
Research Institutes
{pengnanbo, wanghu5}@jd.com, qiwu55@cityu.edu.hk, jingzha28-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, {rmizhya, mindai}@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract

perhaps the most popular. They introduce intermediary variables, which are referred to as gates, to regulate memory
and information flow. More recently, some advanced algorithms were proposed. State-of-the-art results were obtained
by WEASEL+MUSE (Schäfer and Leser 2017), MLSTMFCN (Karim et al. 2019), channel-wise LSTM (Harutyunyan
et al. 2019), and TapNet (Zhang et al. 2020), just to name a
few.
As alternatives to machine learning algorithms, one may
also analyze multivariate time series with traditional time
series models. An example is the multivariate ARMAGARCH model (Ling and McAleer 2003), in which one
models the evolution of each variable with an ARMA process and models the covariance of variables by a GARCH
process. The drawback of this approach is that it makes strict
assumptions on data structures such as innovation distributions and linearity of dependence. The assumptions are often
not flexible enough to deal with real-world data sets.
Despite their drawbacks, the traditional time series models have an important implication: the dynamics of multivariate time series can be separately described by the individual dynamic of each variable (the ARMA processes)
and the dynamic of variable interactions (the GRACH process). The seemingly trivial implication motivates us to propose Memory-Gated Recurrent Network (mGRN)1 , which
modifies the existing RNN architectures to match the multivariate time series’s internal structure. Specifically, we split
variables into a few groups. For each variable group, we
set up a marginal-memory component regulating only the
group-specific memory and information. Afterward, candidate memories of marginal components are combined and
regulated in the joint-memory component to learn interactions among variable groups. In this way, we establish the
correspondence between memory and information within
each variable group. Such an explicit correspondence is
missing in the existing RNN architectures.
To demonstrate the superiority of mGRN, we extensively
test the model with simulated and real-world data sets. In the
simulation study, the multivariate time series data are generated from the heavy-tailed model proposed in Yan, Wu,
and Zhang (2019). We design a task such that a good pre-

The essence of multivariate sequential learning is all about
how to extract dependencies in data. These data sets, such
as hourly medical records in intensive care units and multifrequency phonetic time series, often time exhibit not only
strong serial dependencies in the individual components (the
“marginal” memory) but also non-negligible memories in
the cross-sectional dependencies (the “joint” memory). Because of the multivariate complexity in the evolution of the
joint distribution that underlies the data generating process,
we take a data-driven approach and construct a novel recurrent network architecture, termed Memory-Gated Recurrent
Networks (mGRN), with gates explicitly regulating two distinct types of memories: the marginal memory and the joint
memory. Through a combination of comprehensive simulation studies and empirical experiments on a range of public
datasets, we show that our proposed mGRN architecture consistently outperforms state-of-the-art architectures targeting
multivariate time series.

1

Introduction

A multivariate time series consists of values of several timedependent variables. The data structure commonly appears
in fields such as economics and engineering. By studying
multivariate time series, one can make forecasts based on
past observations or determine which category the time series belongs. Despite its importance, multivariate time series
analysis is a daunting task due to the complexity of the data
structure. The values of each variable may not only depend
on the past self but also interact with other variables.
Machine learning algorithms are commonly adopted in
the analysis of multivariate time series. Early attempts can
be traced back to Chakraborty et al. (1992), in which feedforward neural networks are studied. Later on, a specialized architecture known as recurrent neural networks (RNN)
was proposed. They are specially designed to handle sequential inputs. Among the variants of RNN, long shortterm memory (LSTM) units (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997) and gated recurrent units (GRU) (Cho et al. 2014) are
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

10956

https://github.com/yaquanzhang/mGRN

