The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Collaborative Group Learning
Shaoxiong Feng,1 Hongshen Chen,2 Xuancheng Ren,3 Zhuoye Ding,2 Kan Li,1 Xu Sun3,4
1

School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
JD.com
3
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University
{shaoxiongfeng, likan}@bit.edu.cn, {renxc, xusun}@pku.edu.cn
ac@chenhongshen.com, dingzhuoye@jd.com
Abstract

learning, explore less costly and unified models to eliminate
the necessity of pre-training a large teacher model (Zhang
et al. 2018; Anil et al. 2018), where a group of students simultaneously discovers knowledge from the ground-truth labels and distills group-level knowledge (multi-view feature
representation) from each other.
Collaborative learning shares the benefits of finding a
more robust local minimum than a single model learning while accelerating the model learning efficiency compared with conventional KD. In terms of the implementation of student networks in collaborative learning, DML
(Zhang et al. 2018) uses a pool of network-based students,
where each student is an individual network and they asynchronously collaborate, whereas CL-ILR (Song and Chai
2018) proposed branch-based collaborative learning that all
the student networks share the bottom layers while dividing into branches in the upper layers. Benefiting from representation sharing (an extreme form of hint training (Romero
et al. 2015)), CL-ILR not only is more compact and efficient but also shows better generalization performance. As
observed in (Zhang et al. 2018; Song and Chai 2018; Lan,
Zhu, and Gong 2018; Chen et al. 2020), the model performance continually improves along with the increasing number of students.
However, the students in collaborative learning tend to homogenize, damage the generalization ability, and degrade to
the original individual network. Although the students are
randomly initialized, they learn from the same entire training
set and are prone to converging to similar feature representations (Li et al. 2016; Morcos, Raghu, and Bengio 2018).
Moreover, each student distills knowledge from all other students, which further aggravates the homogenization problem
due to ignoring the diversity of students’ group-level knowledge (Schwenker 2013; Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Chen
et al. 2020). Another insurmountable obstacle for collaborative learning is that the computational cost boosts greatly
as well when more students join in collaborative learning.
To overcome these challenges, in this paper, we propose
a collaborative group learning framework that improves and
maintains the diversity of feature representation to conduct
an effective regularization. Intuitively, under the spirit of
knowledge distillation by learning as collaborative groups,
we divide the whole course into multiple segments and
assign students into several non-isolated sub-groups. Each

Collaborative learning has successfully applied knowledge
transfer to guide a pool of small student networks towards
robust local minima. However, previous approaches typically
struggle with drastically aggravated student homogenization
when the number of students rises. In this paper, we propose Collaborative Group Learning, an efficient framework
that aims to diversify the feature representation and conduct
an effective regularization. Intuitively, similar to the human
group study mechanism, we induce students to learn and exchange different parts of course knowledge as collaborative
groups. First, each student is established by randomly routing on a modular neural network, which facilitates flexible
knowledge communication between students due to random
levels of representation sharing and branching. Second, to resist the student homogenization, students first compose diverse feature sets by exploiting the inductive bias from subsets of training data, and then aggregate and distill different complementary knowledge by imitating a random subgroup of students at each time step. Overall, the above mechanisms are beneficial for maximizing the student population
to further improve the model generalization without sacrificing computational efficiency. Empirical evaluations on both
image and text tasks indicate that our method significantly
outperforms various state-of-the-art collaborative approaches
whilst enhancing computational efficiency.

Introduction
Deep neural network has achieved impressive performance
in various fields. Combining multiple individual networks,
an ensemble model gains better predictive performance than
a single network. One important reason is that an ensemble model usually aggregates a robust local minimum rather
than a sharp local minimum that a single model may be
stuck in. To alleviate the prohibitive computational cost of
those high-capacity ensemble networks, Knowledge Distillation (KD) method is therefore proposed to achieve more
compact yet accurate models by transferring knowledge (Ba
and Caruana 2014; Romero et al. 2015; Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015; Han, Mao, and Dally 2016). KD comprises
two pipelined learning stages, a pre-training stage and a
knowledge transfer stage. Recently, attempts on group-based
online knowledge distillation, also known as collaborative
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7431

