The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Device Fabrication Knowledge Extraction from Materials Science Literature
Neelanshi Wadhwa, Sarath S, Sapan Shah, Sreedhar Reddy,
Pritwish Mitra, Deepak Jain, Beena Rai
TCS Innovation Labs, Tata Consultancy Services,
TRDDC, Pune, India 411013
{neelanshi.w, sarath.s8, sapan.hs, sreedhar.reddy, pritwish.mitra, deepak.jain3, beena.rai}@tcs.com

Abstract

experimental validation in order to prove their correctness.
Moreover, it is not often known a priori that a promising material screened via the above procedure when incorporated
with other materials during the device fabrication process,
shall result in expected device performance. Devices like
solar cells, batteries etc. often comprise of more than one
material, are subjected to various operations under very specific conditions, before finally being characterized for desired performance (Chen et al. 2019; Kaur et al. 2019). A
large amount of such device fabrication knowledge is available in the form of publications, company reports, patents
and so on (Jena, Kulkarni, and Miyasaka 2019). However, as
this knowledge is present in textual form, it is usually fragmented and there is no consolidated structured view which
can be queried or analysed. A knowledge graph for device
fabrication along with suitable query and analysis tools can
greatly reduce time and efforts by providing good starting
points for fabrication design space exploration and guiding
the design process.
In this work, we present a system for automatically extracting device fabrication knowledge from materials science literature. We first present a comprehensive ontology to
represent the device fabrication knowledge. It provides constructs to represent the sequence of operations, their parameter set points, materials used, device transformation, and
so on. The extracted knowledge is represented using knowledge graphs conforming to this ontology. The system first
employs a relevance classifier to identify the set of paragraphs that contain device fabrication knowledge. It then
employs state of the art models for entity and relation extraction to identify domain entities i.e. instances of domain
concepts such as operation, material, method, etc. and relations between them. These algorithms extensively leverage
prior domain knowledge in the form of pre-trained word embedding models and dictionaries. Finally, the system applies
an unsupervised algorithm to identify the sequence of operations that make up a device fabrication procedure. The extracted entities, relations and procedures are then combined
to create the knowledge graph. We used our system to extract solar cell fabrication knowledge from materials science
literature and achieved good performance.
The major contributions of this work are: (1) A comprehensive ontology to represent device fabrication knowledge;
(2) A system for automatically extracting knowledge graphs

Devices like solar cells, batteries etc. often comprise of a host
of material types including organic, inorganic and hybrid materials. The fabrication procedures for these devices involve
screening or designing the right set of materials and then subjecting them to a sequence of operations under very specific
conditions. The performance characteristics of a device critically depend on the materials used in its fabrication, the specific operations carried out, their operating conditions and the
specific sequence in which they are carried out. The space
of potential materials, operations and operating conditions is
vast, and selecting the right combination thereof to achieve
the desired characteristics is a knowledge intensive activity.
A large amount of such device fabrication knowledge is available in the form of publications, patents, company reports
and so on. In this paper, we present a system that systematically extracts this knowledge from materials science literature. The extracted knowledge is represented as knowledge
graphs conforming to an ontology that can be queried to make
informed decisions in device fabrication procedures. The system first identifies the set of relevant paragraphs that contain
fabrication knowledge. It then employs state of the art entity
and relation extraction models to identify instances of operations, methods, materials, etc. and relations between them.
The system then applies an unsupervised algorithm to identify sequences of operations representing fabrication procedures. We applied our system on solar cell fabrication knowledge extraction and achieved good performance. We believe
our results provide much needed impetus for further work in
this area.

1

Introduction

Technologies like solar cells, lithium-ion batteries, light
emitting diodes etc. have benefited enormously as a result
of fundamental research in materials science. Traditional approaches for screening and design of these materials include
combination of tedious experimental and theoretical characterization. Lately, in-silico techniques like computational
material science and machine learning based property prediction models are being leveraged to help guide the materials design process (Jain et al. 2019b,a). Although these techniques have shown great promise in reducing time and effort
for materials design/screening, they still require excessive
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15416

