The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Combining Reinforcement Learning and
Constraint Programming for Combinatorial Optimization
Quentin Cappart,1, 2 Thierry Moisan,2 Louis-Martin Rousseau1 ,
Isabeau Prémont-Schwarz2 , Andre A. Cire3
1

Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Canada
2
Element AI, Montreal, Canada
3
University of Toronto Scarborough, Toronto, Canada
{quentin.cappart, louis-martin.rousseau}@polymtl.ca
thierry.moisan@elementai.com
isabeau@cryptolab.net
andre.cire@utoronto.ca
Abstract
Such algorithms will eventually find the optimal solution, but
they may be prohibitive for solving large instances because
Combinatorial optimization has found applications in numerof the exponential increase of the execution time. That being
ous fields, from aerospace to transportation planning and ecosaid, well-designed exact algorithms can nevertheless be used
nomics. The goal is to find an optimal solution among a finite
to obtain sub-optimal solutions by interrupting the search beset of possibilities. The well-known challenge one faces with
fore its termination. This flexibility makes exact methods
combinatorial optimization is the state-space explosion probappealing and practical, and as such they constitute the core
lem: the number of possibilities grows exponentially with the
of modern optimization solvers as CPLEX (Cplex 2009),
problem size, which makes solving intractable for large problems. In the last years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has
Gurobi (Optimization 2014), or Gecode (Schulte, Lagerkvist,
shown its promise for designing good heuristics dedicated to
and Tack 2006). It is the case of constraint programming (CP)
solve NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems. However,
(Rossi, Van Beek, and Walsh 2006), which has the additional
current approaches have an important shortcoming: they only
asset to be a generic tool that can be used to solve a large
provide an approximate solution with no systematic ways to
variety of COPs, whereas mixed integer programming (MIP)
improve it or to prove optimality. In another context, constraint
(Bénichou et al. 1971) solvers only deal with linear probprogramming (CP) is a generic tool to solve combinatorial
lems and limited non-linear cases. A critical design choice in
optimization problems. Based on a complete search procedure,
CP is the branching strategy, i.e., directing how the search
it will always find the optimal solution if we allow an execuspace must be explored. Naturally, well-designed heuristics
tion time large enough. A critical design choice, that makes
are more likely to discover promising solutions, whereas bad
CP non-trivial to use in practice, is the branching decision,
directing how the search space is explored. In this work, we
heuristics may bring the search into a fruitless subpart of
propose a general and hybrid approach, based on DRL and CP,
the solution space. In general, the choice of an appropriate
for solving combinatorial optimization problems. The core of
branching strategy is non-trivial and their design is a hot
our approach is based on a dynamic programming formulation,
topic in the CP community (Palmieri, Régin, and Schaus
that acts as a bridge between both techniques. We experimen2016; Fages and Prud’Homme 2017; Laborie 2018).
tally show that our solver is efficient to solve three challenging
On the other hand, heuristic algorithms (Aarts and Lenstra
problems: the traveling salesman problem with time windows,
the 4-moments portfolio optimization problem, and the 0-1
2003; Gendreau and Potvin 2005) are incomplete methods
knapsack problem. Results obtained show that the framework
that can compute solutions efficiently, but are not able to
introduced outperforms the stand-alone RL and CP solutions,
prove the optimality of a solution. They also often require
while being competitive with industrial solvers.
substantial problem-specific knowledge for building them. In
the last years, deep reinforcement learning (DRL) (Sutton,
Barto
et al. 1998; Arulkumaran et al. 2017) has shown its
Introduction
promise to obtain high-quality approximate solutions to some
The design of efficient algorithms for solving NP-hard probNP-hard COPs (Bello et al. 2016; Khalil et al. 2017; Deudon
lems, such as combinatorial optimization problems (COPs),
et al. 2018; Kool, Van Hoof, and Welling 2018). Once a model
has long been an active field of research (Wolsey and
has been trained, the execution time is typically negligible
Nemhauser 1999). Broadly speaking, there exist two main
in practice. The good results obtained suggest that DRL is a
families of approaches for solving COPs, each of them having
promising new tool for finding efficiently good approximate
pros and cons. On the one hand, exact algorithms are based
solutions to NP-hard problems, provided that (1) we know
on a complete and clever enumeration of the solutions space
the distribution of problem instances and (2) that we have
(Lawler and Wood 1966; Rossi, Van Beek, and Walsh 2006).
enough instances sampled from this distribution for training
the model. Nonetheless, current methods have shortcomings.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Firstly, they are mainly dedicated to solve a specific problem,
3677

