The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differentially Private Clustering via Maximum Coverage
Matthew Jones, Huy L. Nguyen, Thy D Nguyen
Northeastern University
{jones.m, hu.nguyen, nguyen.thy2}@northeastern.edu

Abstract

Arya et al. 2004; Charikar et al. 2002; Jain and Vazirani
2001; Jain et al. 2003; Byrka et al. 2017). The state of the
art is a 2.675 +  approximation by Byrka et al. (2017).
For the differentialy private k-medians problem, Gupta et al.
(2010) proposed a polynomial time (p , 0)-differentially private algorithm with cost at most 6OPT + O(k 2 log2 n/p ).
Kaplan and Stemmer (2018) states a variant of the algorithm
for (p , δp )-differential privacy with cost

This paper studies the problem of clustering in metric spaces
while preserving the privacy of individual data. Specifically,
we examine differentially private variants of the k-medians
and Euclidean k-means problems. We present polynomial algorithms with constant multiplicative error and lower additive
error than the previous state-of-the-art for each problem. Additionally, our algorithms use a clustering algorithm without
differential privacy as a black-box. This allows practitioners
to control the trade-off between runtime and approximation
factor by choosing a suitable clustering algorithm to use.

1

q


∆k 1.5
n
O OPT +
log n · log(1/δp )
log
p
β
where β is the failure probability and ∆
=
max(u,v)∈V 2 d(u, v) is the diameter of the metric space. We
denote by OPT the optimal objective cost of the non-private
clustering problem in question, and n and k denote the
number of points available for choice as cluster centers and
the number of clusters respectively.
In contrast with the non-private setting, any result for differentially private clustering requires additive error in addition to a multiplicative factor on the optimal clustering
cost. In particular for the k-medians problem, Theorem 4.5
in Gupta et al. (2010) shows that any private algorithm needs
at least Ω(∆·k ln(n/k)/p ) additive error. In fact, their proof
shows there exists a family of k-medians instances such that
the optimal objective cost is 0 but every p -differentially private algorithm must incur a cost Ω(∆ · k ln(n/k)/p ). This
lower bound can be extended almost as is to (p , δp )-DP with
δp = 1/poly(n). From a practical point of view, the additive
error is the main driver dictating the performance of algorithms as can be seen from the experimental results in Balcan
et al. (2017). In Section 7 of Balcan et al. (2017) the experiments show that increasing the number of centers reduces
the clustering cost for the non-private k-means algorithm
significantly, whereas the clustering cost stays relatively stable for the private counterpart. This behavior is observed in
both synthetic and real datasets and both for their algorithm
and SuLQ k-means. These results show strong evidence that
the additive error is both a limiting factor objectively and an
important key to improving private clustering algorithms.
Motivated by the insights from Gupta et al. (2010)
and Balcan et al. (2017), our main contributation is a new
(p , δp )-differentially private k-medians algorithm whose
time is polynomial and which has a constant multiplicative

Introduction

Clustering is an important routine in many machine learning
tasks, such as image segmentation (Yang et al. 2017; Patel,
Van Nguyen, and Vidal 2013), collaborative filtering (McSherry and Mironov 2009; Schafer et al. 2007), and time
series analysis (Mueen and Keogh 2012). Thus, improving
the performance of private clustering has a great potential for
directly improving other private machine learning tasks. Ideally, we are looking to achieve differential privacy, a privacy
definition with strong theoretical support which requires that
the algorithm be insensitive to small changes in the dataset
(Dwork, Roth et al. 2014). As practical evidence of the significance of differentially private clustering, differential privacy has been accepted by several large tech corporations
such as Google, Apple, and Microsoft (Álvarez Marañón
2020) and used in several clustering applications including
clustering network data (Ni et al. 2018), clustering for facial
recognition (Chamikara et al. 2020), and developing intelligent electrical service through user data clustering (Xiong
et al. 2018). Hence, the motivation to study clustering in the
differential privacy framework has sources in both strong
technical and practical reasons. We begin with closely related works and our results, first in k-medians and then in
k-means.
The k-medians problem has been studied extensively in
the literature. Previous work in Kariv and Hakimi (1979)
proved that k-medians is NP-hard. There is a long line of
works on approximation algorithms for k-medians without
differential privacy (Chrobak, Kenyon, and Young 2006;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11555

