The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient Deep Image Denoising via Class Specific Convolution
Lu Xu1 * † , Jiawei Zhang2 * ‡ , Xuanye Cheng2 , Feng Zhang2 , Xing Wei3 , Jimmy Ren2, 4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research
3
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lxu7@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, zhjw1988@gmail.com, xuanyech@gmail.com,
gleefeng@foxmail.com, weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, jimmy.sj.ren@gmail.com
Abstract

dense net (Tai et al. 2017; Jia et al. 2019) and U-net (Mao,
Shen, and Yang 2016) are applied. As a result, they are still
computationally expensive. In order to make the network
more efficient, (Gu et al. 2019) use a multi-scale structure
and the low-resolution intermediate features can save the
time cost as well as the memory. In super-resolution, (Ahn,
Kang, and Sohn 2018) replace the convolution by group convolution followed with pointwise one to accelerate the inference time similar to MobileNet (Howard et al. 2017).
Nowadays, knowledge distilling (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2014), parameter pruning (Han et al. 2015) and network quantization (Jacob et al. 2018) are widely used to
compress the network. However, these techniques are commonly used in high-level vision tasks and only a few works,
e.g. (Hui, Wang, and Gao 2018), have discussed applying
them to low-level vision.
Even though using a small network to denoise in any scenarios is difficult, it is still possible to remove noises from
only a specific type of pattern or texture. Such a divide and
conquer scheme has already been applied in low-level vision
tasks. RAISR (Romano, Isidoro, and Milanfar 2016) and
BLADE (Getreuer et al. 2018) classify the image patches
into different buckets according to the local gradient statistics. Then only one specific convolution layer is learned for
every bucket to efficiently solve low-level vision tasks. Kernel prediction network (KPN) is proposed to remove noises
from brust images (Mildenhall et al. 2018) or single-frame
image (Bako et al. 2017; Vogels et al. 2018). Unlike RAISR
and BLADE that classify patches, they use deep neural networks to predict spatially variant kernels which not only
align the frames but also remove noises according to the
specific information around every noisy pixel. (Wang et al.
2018) propose spatial feature transform (SFT) for superresolution. They use the semantic information to decide the
spatial feature transforms to generate realistic textures.
However, shortcomings still exist in RAISR, BLADE and
KPN. RAISR and BLADE are equivalent to a single layer
network which is too shallow to remove severe noises. In
addition, the local gradient characteristics estimated from
eigenanalysis are not very accurate under noises. Although
KPN estimates spatially variant kernels by a network that
is trained from the training set, it confronts the same issue
that the spatially variant convolution is directly applied to
images which is too shallow to remove severe noises from

Deep neural networks have been widely used in image denoising during the past few years. Even though they achieve
great success on this problem, they are computationally inefficient which makes them inappropriate to be implemented
in mobile devices. In this paper, we propose an efficient deep
neural network for image denoising based on pixel-wise classification. Despite using a computationally efficient network
cannot effectively remove the noises from any content, it is
still capable to denoise from a specific type of pattern or texture. The proposed method follows such a divide and conquer scheme. We first use an efficient U-net to pixel-wisely
classify pixels in the noisy image based on the local gradient
statistics. Then we replace part of the convolution layers in
existing denoising networks by the proposed Class Specific
Convolution layers (CSConv) which use different weights
for different classes of pixels. Quantitative and qualitative
evaluations on public datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method can reduce the computational costs without sacrificing the performance compared to state-of-the-art algorithms.

Introduction
Image denoising aims to recover a clean image X given a
noisy observation Y which is one of the most fundamental
problems in low-level vision. Plenty of algorithms (Buades,
Coll, and Morel 2005; Elad and Aharon 2006; Dabov et al.
2007; Zoran and Weiss 2011; Dong et al. 2012; Gu et al.
2014) have been proposed to solve this problem in the last
decade. Even though they are effective to remove noises,
their computational costs are high because of the complex
optimization process as well as block matching procedure
which make them inappropriate to be deployed in mobile
devices.
Recently, deep neural networks have been widely used in
image denoising (Mao, Shen, and Yang 2016; Zhang et al.
2017; Tai et al. 2017; Jia et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Brooks et al. 2019; Zamir et al.
2020). To achieve state-of-the-art performance, very deep
network structures with residual net (Zhang et al. 2017),
* Equal contribution
†

This work was done when Lu Xu was an intern at SenseTime.
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
‡

3039

