The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalized Adversarially Learned Inference
Yatin Dandi,1 Homanga Bharadhwaj, 2 Abhishek Kumar, 3 Piyush Rai 1
1

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
3
Google Brain
yatind@iitk.ac.in, homanga@cs.toronto.edu, abhishk@google.com, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in
2

Abstract

On the other hand, GAN based adversarial learning techniques do not perform inference and directly learn a generative model to construct high-quality data, which are usually
much more realistic than those generated by VAEs. However, due to the absence of an efficient inference mechanism
it is not possible to learn rich unsupervised feature representations from data.
To address the above issues, recent approaches, in particular, Adversarially Learned Inference (ALI) and Bidirectional GAN (BiGAN) (Dumoulin et al. 2017; Donahue,
Krähenbühl, and Darrell 2017) have attempted to integrate
an inference mechanism within the GAN framework by
training a discriminator to discriminate not only in the data
space (x vs G(z)), but discriminate joint samples of data and
encodings ((x, E(x))) from joint samples of the generations
and latent variables ((G(z), z)). Here, E(·) denotes the encoder and G(·) denotes the generator. We argue that generalizing such adversarial joint distribution matching to multiple
distributions and arbitrary number of random variables can
unlock a much larger potential for representation learning
and generative modeling that has not yet been explored by
previous approaches (Dumoulin et al. 2017; Li et al. 2017a;
Donahue, Krähenbühl, and Darrell 2017). Unlike other generative models such as VAEs, as we show, GANs can be generalized to match more than two joint distributions of tuples
of an arbitrary number of random variables. We demonstrate
that this allows integration of self-supervised learning and
learned or prior knowledge about the properties of desired
solutions.
Unlike previous approaches relying on pixel-level reconstruction objectives (Kingma and Welling 2013; Li et al.
2017a; Ulyanov, Vedaldi, and Lempitsky 2018) which are
known to be one of the causes of blurriness (Li et al.
2017a; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017), we propose an approach for incorporating multiple layers of reconstructive
feedback within the adversarial joint distribution matching
framework. Our approach allows incorporation of such taskspecific self-supervised feedback and knowledge of equivariance of reconstructions to dataset-dependent transformations within the framework of adversarial joint distribution matching, without requiring careful tuning of weighing terms for different objectives. In particular, we consider a discriminator that classifies joint samples of an arbitrary number of random variables into an arbitrary num-

Allowing effective inference of latent vectors while training
GANs can greatly increase their applicability in various
downstream tasks. Recent approaches, such as ALI and
BiGAN frameworks, develop methods of inference of
latent variables in GANs by adversarially training an
image generator along with an encoder to match two joint
distributions of image and latent vector pairs. We generalize
these approaches to incorporate multiple layers of feedback
on reconstructions, self-supervision, and other forms of
supervision based on prior or learned knowledge about
the desired solutions. We achieve this by modifying the
discriminator’s objective to correctly identify more than
two joint distributions of tuples of an arbitrary number
of random variables consisting of images, latent vectors,
and other variables generated through auxiliary tasks, such
as reconstruction and inpainting or as outputs of suitable
pre-trained models. We design a non-saturating maximization objective for the generator-encoder pair and prove
that the resulting adversarial game corresponds to a global
optimum that simultaneously matches all the distributions.
Within our proposed framework, we introduce a novel
set of techniques for providing self-supervised feedback
to the model based on properties, such as patch-level
correspondence and cycle consistency of reconstructions.
Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate the
efficacy, scalability, and flexibility of the proposed approach
for a variety of tasks. The appendix of the paper can be
found at the following link: https://drive.google.com/file/
d/1i99e682CqYWMEDXlnqkqrctGLVA9viiz/view?usp=
sharing

Introduction
Recent advances in deep generative models have enabled
modeling of complex high-dimensional datasets. In particular, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2017) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling 2013) are broad classes of current state-of-theart deep generative approaches, providing complementary
benefits. VAE based approaches aim to learn an explicit
inference function through an encoder neural network that
maps from the data distribution to a latent space distribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7185

