The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Event Stereo Leveraged by Event-to-Image Translation
Soikat Hasan Ahmed* , Hae Woong Jang* , S M Nadim Uddin, Yong Ju Jung†
College of Information Technology Convergence, Gachon University, Seongnam, South Korea
{soikat, leaping, nadim}@gc.gachon.ac.kr, yjung@gachon.ac.kr

Abstract

motion blur, and capability to handle different lighting conditions (Gallego et al. 2019). However, most of the current
deep learning-based stereo models are not capable of taking full advantage of the temporally asynchronous and spatially sparse nature of the event data provided by event cameras. The main reasons behind this are difficulties in handling asynchronous event data and lack of spatial structure
information.
Early pioneering studies have reported that event cameras
can be used for depth estimation (Zhou et al. 2018; Tulyakov
et al. 2019; Zhu, Chen, and Daniilidis 2018; Xie, Chen, and
Orchard 2017; Dikov et al. 2017; Schraml and Belbachir
2010; Schraml, Schön, and Milosevic 2007). Prior studies introduced event data representations using hand-crafted
methods (Sironi et al. 2018; Zhu et al. 2018b, 2019) to produce a dense event feature map from the sparse event data.
(Kogler et al. 2014; Xie, Chen, and Orchard 2017) employed
Belief Propagation on a Markov Random Field. (Xie, Zhang,
and Wang 2018) used a traditional semi-global matching approach (Hirschmuller 2007). (Dikov et al. 2017; Piatkowska,
Belbachir, and Gelautz 2013; Firouzi and Conradt 2016) extended the cooperative stereo algorithm using iterative nonlinear operations to extract disparities. (Zhou et al. 2018;
Zhu, Chen, and Daniilidis 2018) explicitly used camera motion information to improve depth estimation. (Zou et al.
2017) produced disparity at every location based on interpolation while (Tulyakov et al. 2019; Gehrig et al. 2019; Chen
et al. 2020) focused on learning-based event representations
instead of hand-crafted or rule-based event accumulation for
deep learning-based stereo matching.
Nevertheless, though the existing representations encode
the asynchronous event stream to a dense event feature,
they do not contain any spatial intensity information of the
scenes. To our best knowledge, despite the fact that the spatial structural information in intensity images is particularly
important for stereo matching, all of the existing deep eventbased stereo algorithms have used only event features directly extracted from the input event data without explicitly
reconstructing spatial image features.
In this study, we propose a novel end-to-end deep event
stereo architecture to generate spatial image features from
input event data and use them as a guidance for the accurate
stereo event matching. Inspired by the recent studies (Kalia,
Navab, and Salcudean 2019; Rebecq et al. 2019; Scheerlinck

Depth estimation in real-world applications requires precise
responses to fast motion and challenging lighting conditions.
Event cameras use bio-inspired event-driven sensors that provide instantaneous and asynchronous information of pixellevel log intensity changes, which makes them suitable for
depth estimation in such challenging conditions. However,
as the event cameras primarily provide asynchronous and
spatially sparse event data, it is hard to provide accurate
dense disparity maps in stereo event camera setups - especially in estimating disparities on local structures or edges. In
this study, we develop a deep event stereo network that reconstructs spatial image features from embedded event data
and leverages the event features using the reconstructed image features to compute dense disparity maps. To this end,
we propose a novel image reconstruction sub-network with
a cross-semantic attention mechanism. A feature aggregation sub-network is also developed for accurate disparity estimation, which modulates the event features with the reconstructed image features by a stacked dilated spatially-adaptive
denormalization mechanism. Experimental results reveal that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by significant margins both in quantitative and qualitative measures.

Introduction
Stereo matching or finding corresponding pixels from two
viewpoints for depth estimation has been regarded as one
of the core problems in computer vision. Most of the recent
deep learning-based stereo matching frameworks depend on
passive frame-based cameras that provide intensity images
at a fixed rate (e.g. 10ms latency). The traditional framebased cameras are prone to motion blur and sudden intensity
changes in high-speed scenarios. Thus, new camera sensors
such as event-based cameras are emerging as alternatives to
traditional frame-based cameras in stereo camera setups.
Event cameras use bio-inspired data-driven sensors that
provide asynchronous and instantaneous per-pixel intensity
change information and inherits several advantageous characteristics over traditional cameras, such as low latency (
0.001ms), high dynamic range, high temporal resolution, no
* Contributed equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

882

