The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Neuro-Symbolic Knowledge Graph Construction
for Zero-Shot Commonsense Question Answering
Antoine Bosselut,1,2 Ronan Le Bras,2 Yejin Choi3,2
1

Stanford University
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
antoineb@cs.stanford.edu, {ronanlb,yejinc}@allenai.org
2

Abstract

Kai knew that things were getting
out of control and managed to
keep his temper in check

Understanding narratives requires reasoning about implicit
world knowledge related to the causes, effects, and states of
situations described in text. At the core of this challenge is
how to access contextually relevant knowledge on demand
and reason over it.
In this paper, we present initial studies toward zero-shot commonsense question answering by formulating the task as inference over dynamically generated commonsense knowledge
graphs. In contrast to previous studies for knowledge integration that rely on retrieval of existing knowledge from static
knowledge graphs, our study requires commonsense knowledge integration where contextually relevant knowledge is
often not present in existing knowledge bases. Therefore, we
present a novel approach that generates contextually-relevant
symbolic knowledge structures on demand using generative
neural commonsense knowledge models.
Empirical results on two datasets demonstrate the efficacy of
our neuro-symbolic approach for dynamically constructing
knowledge graphs for reasoning. Our approach achieves significant performance boosts over pretrained language models and
vanilla knowledge models, all while providing interpretable
reasoning paths for its predictions.

Link to static KG

Generate dynamic
graph with COMET

bad
links

X keeps ___
under control

no
linking

X keeps X's
___ in check
X keeps X’s
temper

X sweats

context-free
knowledge

X wants to
show strength
X avoids a fight

Kai wants to
avoid trouble
Kai intends
to be calm

Kai stays
calm

Kai is viewed
as cautious

contextual knowledge

Figure 1: Previous approaches for accessing knowledge link
situational contexts to static knowledge graphs. Our work
generates knowledge dynamically from neural knowledge
models.

Introduction
Understanding narratives requires reasoning about all the implicit, but trivially inferable, details of a situation based only
on what is explicitly stated in text. A statement as simple
as “they went to the club” instantly invokes a bank of commonsense expectations: they had to get dressed, they were
going dancing, they likely had drinks, and so forth. These
reasoning capabilities are missing in most existing neural
language understanding models that learn task-specific representations without acquiring rich background knowledge
about the social and physical world.
In response, recent work has investigated augmenting deep
learning models with retrieval mechanisms over large-scale
commonsense knowledge graphs (Mihaylov and Frank 2018;
Bauer, Wang, and Bansal 2018; Paul and Frank 2019). However, these approaches assume an entity linking step between
the written text and knowledge graph. By canonicalizing entities, they discard key context surrounding the input, and

often retrieve semantically irrelevant knowledge (e.g., a club
being a blunt weapon is irrelevant to the earlier situation).
In this paper, we propose to generate new knowledge that is
contextually relevant instead of retrieving existing knowledge
as is. Bosselut et al. (2019) recently introduced Commonsense
Transformers (COMET), a new framework for training neural representations of knowledge graphs. This new class of
neural knowledge model provides a powerful representational
tool for connecting commonsense knowledge to downstream
task models. Because COMET represents knowledge graphs
neurally, it can generate commonsense inferences for any entity that can be encoded by the neural model (i.e., described
with language). With no need to canonicalize context entities
to link to a static knowledge graph, the knowledge model can
be queried directly with complex compositional structures,
and even full narrative contexts. This flexibility has led them
to be used out-of-the-box in a variety of settings requiring

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4923

