The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GIF Thumbnails: Attract More Clicks to Your Videos
Yi Xu1 * , Fan Bai1 , Yingxuan Shi2 , Qiuyu Chen3 , Longwen Gao2 , Kai Tian1
Shuigeng Zhou1† , Huyang Sun2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, and School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
2
Bilibili, China
3
Department of Computer Science, UNC Charlotte
{yxu17,fbai19,ktian14,sgzhou}@fudan.edu.cn; {shiyingxuan,gaolongwen,sunhuyang}@bilibili.com; qchen12@uncc.edu
Abstract

be clicked and further viewed with high probability depends
on its thumbnail and title. Videos with eye-catching thumbnails will definitely attract more viewers. Therefore, how to
create attractive image thumbnails to boost Click-ThroughRate (CTR) becomes a major concern of video publishers and
streaming sites (Song et al. 2016; Yuan, Ma, and Zhu 2019;
Zhao et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2019).
Fig. 1 shows two different kinds of thumbnails of a video:
1) a static image (left) and 2) an animated GIF consisting of
three shots (right). Obviously, the right one is more attractive
because the GIF provides more vivid snapshots of the video
and consequently will stimulate users’ stronger interest in
clicking and viewing. However, manually creating thumbnails (especially GIF thumbnails) is time-consuming and
quality-unguaranteed. Thus, it is desirable to automatically
generate thumbnails in the form of animated GIFs.
Nowadays, some popular video streaming sites, such as
YouTube, begin to trim a short segment from a video as
the thumbnail to make it more attractive. However, only one
trimmed segment may lead to misunderstanding or even clickbaits for limited video gist information, while too many shots
in a GIF thumbnail will dampen viewers’ interest and patience. For example, with only the 2nd shot in Fig. 1 as the
thumbnail may make viewers mistake bullying as having fun,
but more than 3 shots will cost viewers too much patience
to browse the thumbnail. On the other hand, user interaction
information (e.g. time-sync comments and real-time view
counts) is helpful for locating interesting shots and generating GIF thumbnails. Nevertheless, for newly-uploaded or
rarely-viewed videos, there is little user interaction information available.
With the observation above in mind, we propose a novel
problem: automatically generating GIF thumbnails for videos
from computer vision perspective. Considering that most
stories can be summarized in a three-part structure (“startdevelop-end”), we define a GIF thumbnail as three shots from
the target video in this paper. Therefore, our task is to select
three shots from the target video and rearrange them, not
necessarily in the original chronological order. From visual
perspective, a GIF is short, and sometimes contains unique
spatio-temporal visual patterns to thread multiple shots with
video gist content or of interestingness.
To support this study, we first build a benchmark dataset for
GIF thumbnail generation, which consists of 1070 videos of

With the rapid increase of mobile devices and online media, more and more people prefer posting/viewing videos online. Generally, these videos are presented on video streaming
sites with image thumbnails and text titles. While facing huge
amounts of videos, a viewer clicks through a certain video with
high probability because of its eye-catching thumbnail. However, current video thumbnails are created manually, which is
time-consuming and quality-unguaranteed. And static image
thumbnails contain very limited information of the corresponding videos, which prevents users from successfully clicking
what they really want to view.
In this paper, we address a novel problem, namely GIF thumbnail generation, which aims to automatically generate GIF
thumbnails for videos and consequently boost their ClickThrough-Rate (CTR). Here, a GIF thumbnail is an animated
GIF file consisting of multiple segments from the video, containing more information of the target video than a static
image thumbnail. To support this study, we build the first
GIF thumbnails benchmark dataset that consists of 1070
videos covering a total duration of 69.1 hours, and 5394 corresponding manually-annotated GIFs. To solve this problem,
we propose a learning-based automatic GIF thumbnail generation model, which is called Generative Variational DualEncoder (GEVADEN). As not relying on any user interaction information (e.g. time-sync comments and real-time view
counts), this model is applicable to newly-uploaded/rarelyviewed videos. Experiments on our built dataset show that
GEVADEN significantly outperforms several baselines, including video-summarization and highlight-detection based
ones. Furthermore, we develop a pilot application of the proposed model on an online video platform with 9814 videos
covering 1231 hours, which shows that our model achieves a
37.5% CTR improvement over traditional image thumbnails.
This further validates the effectiveness of the proposed model
and the promising application prospect of GIF thumbnails.

Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a phenomenal surge in video
sharing. According to statistics, hundreds hours of videos
are uploaded to Youtube per minute (Jamil et al. 2018). With
such huge amounts of videos, whether a certain video will
* This author did most work during his internship at Bilibili.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3074

