The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PC-RGNN: Point Cloud Completion and Graph Neural Network for
3D Object Detection
Yanan Zhang1, 2, 3 , Di Huang1, 2, 3 * , Yunhong Wang1, 3
1

Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
{zhangyanan, dhuang, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract

LiDAR-based 3D object detection is an important task for autonomous driving and current approaches suffer from sparse
and partial point clouds of distant and occluded objects. In
this paper, we propose a novel two-stage approach, namely
PC-RGNN, dealing with such challenges by two specific solutions. On the one hand, we introduce a point cloud completion module to recover high-quality proposals of dense points
and entire views with original structures preserved. On the
other hand, a graph neural network module is designed, which
comprehensively captures relations among points through a
local-global attention mechanism as well as multi-scale graph
based context aggregation, substantially strengthening encoded features. Extensive experiments on the KITTI benchmark show that the proposed approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-art baselines by remarkable margins, highlighting its effectiveness.

PointRCNN

Ours

PointRCNN

Ours

Figure 1: Illustration of the two major challenges in LiDARbased 3D object detection (best viewed with zoom-in). The
left case shows a sparse point cloud for a car far away, while
the right case shows the extremely incomplete point clouds
for occluded cars. The red and green boxes indicate the predicted results and ground-truths respectively.

Introduction
3D object detection in point clouds is eagerly in demand
in autonomous driving, and LiDAR laser scanners are the
most common instruments to collect such data. Compared to
2D images, LiDAR point clouds convey real 3D geometric
structures and spatial locations of objects and are less sensitive to illumination variations, which enables more reliable
detection results.
In recent years, several approaches have been proposed
for 3D object detection and they follow either the one-stage
framework or the two-stage one as in the 2D domain, where
how to learn effective shape features is an essential issue.
For instance, MV3D (Chen et al. 2017) and AVOD (Ku et al.
2018) transform point clouds to bird’s eye view or front view
as initial representation and apply 2D convolutions for feature map computation; VoxelNet (Zhou and Tuzel 2018) and
SECOND (Yan, Mao, and Li 2018) voxelize the 3D space
into regular cells and employ 3D convolutions to extract
features; F-Pointnet (Qi et al. 2018) and PointRCNN (Shi,
Wang, and Li 2019) take raw point clouds as input and encode features by PointNets (Qi et al. 2017a,b).
Those approaches indeed show great potentials and have
consistently improved the performance of major bench-

marks. Unfortunately, they tend to fail in the presence of
low-quality input point clouds, i.e. sparse and partial data
due to distant and occluded objects, which often occur in
the real world. As illustrated in Fig. 1, PointRCNN, the state
of the art representative, misses many objects marked with
the red ellipse and arrows for long-distance and severe occlusions. Such a limitation derives from two main aspects:
(1) point cloud representation in current 3D object detectors
does not work well on large variations in sampling density
and sampling integrity and (2) the PointNet-like networks
adopted as the backbones in the leading 3D object detectors
are not so powerful which make insufficient use of given
point clouds.
Motivated by the analysis above, this paper proposes a
novel two-stage approach, named PC-RGNN, to 3D object detection from LiDAR based point clouds. Specifically,
the 3D proposal generation (3D PG) module first suggests
bounding box candidates in a bottom-up manner via segmenting the whole scene into foreground and background.
Since objects are usually sparsely and partially sampled, a
point cloud completion (PC) module is then introduced to
recover high-quality proposals with dense points and entire
views. Further, we model each refined proposal as a graph
and design a graph neural network module, called AMSGNN, to capture its shape characteristics. AMS-GNN ag-

* Corresponding author: Di Huang.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3430

