The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

STELAR: Spatio-temporal Tensor Factorization with Latent Epidemiological
Regularization
Nikos Kargas1,2,* , Cheng Qian2,* , Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos3 , Cao Xiao2 ,
Lucas M. Glass2,4 , Jimeng Sun5
1

Dept. of ECE, University of Minnesota, 2 Analytics Center of Excellence, IQVIA, 3 Dept. of ECE, University of Virginia,
4
Dept. of Statistics, Temple University 5 Dept. of CS, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract

which are determined via curve fitting. These types of
models do not require much training data, but they are
quite restrictive and cannot leverage rich information.

Accurate prediction of the transmission of epidemic diseases
such as COVID-19 is crucial for implementing effective mitigation measures. In this work, we develop a tensor method
to predict the evolution of epidemic trends for many regions
simultaneously. We construct a 3-way spatio-temporal tensor (location, attribute, time) of case counts and propose a
nonnegative tensor factorization with latent epidemiological
model regularization named STELAR. Unlike standard tensor factorization methods which cannot predict slabs ahead,
STELAR enables long-term prediction by incorporating latent temporal regularization through a system of discretetime difference equations of a widely adopted epidemiological model. We use latent instead of location/attribute-level
epidemiological dynamics to capture common epidemic profile sub-types and improve collaborative learning and prediction. We conduct experiments using both county- and statelevel COVID-19 data and show that our model can identify
interesting latent patterns of the epidemic. Finally, we evaluate the predictive ability of our method and show superior
performance compared to the baselines, achieving up to 21%
lower root mean square error and 25% lower mean absolute
error for county-level prediction.

• Machine learning models such as deep learning, model
the epidemiological trends as a set of regression problems (Yang et al. 2020; Toda 2020; He, Peng, and Sun
2020; Chimmula and Zhang 2020; Tomar and Gupta
2020). These models are able to learn the trajectory of the
outbreak only from data and can perform very well especially in short-term prediction. However, they usually
require a large amount of training data.
This paper extends Canonical Polyadic Decomposition
(CPD) (Harshman 1970) via epidemiological model (e.g.,
SIR and SEIR) regularization, which integrates spatiotemporal real-world case data and exploits the correlation
between different regions for long-term epidemic prediction.
CPD is a powerful tensor model with successful applications in many fields (Papalexakis, Faloutsos, and Sidiropoulos 2016; Sidiropoulos et al. 2017). Compared to traditional
epidemiological models which cannot incorporate fine-grain
observations or any kind of side information, tensors offer a
natural way of representing multidimensional time evolving
data and incorporate additional information (Acar, Dunlavy,
and Kolda 2009; Araujo, Ribeiro, and Faloutsos 2017). CPD
can capture the inherent correlations between the different
modes and thanks to its uniqueness properties it can extract
interpretable latent components rendering it an appealing solution for modeling and analyzing epidemic dynamics. Additionally, it can parsimoniously represent multidimensional
data and can therefore learn from limited data. These two
important properties differentiate CPD from neural networks
and deep learning models which typically require a lot of
training data and are often treated as black box models.
In this work, we propose a Spatio-temporal Tensor factorization with EpidemioLogicAl Regularization (STELAR).
STELAR combines a nonnegative CPD model with a system
of discrete-time difference equations to capture the epidemic
transmission patterns. Unlike standard tensor factorization
methods which cannot predict slabs ahead, STELAR can simultaneously forecast the evolution of the epidemic for a list
of regions, and it can also perform long-term prediction.
In the experiments, we build a spatio-temporal tensor,
location × attribute × time of case counts based on large

Introduction
Pandemic diseases such as the novel coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pose a serious threat to global public health,
economy, and daily life. Accurate epidemiological measurement, modeling, and tracking are needed to inform public health officials, government executives, policy makers,
emergency responders, and the public at large. Two types of
epidemiological modeling methods are popular today:
• Mechanistic models define a set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) which capture the epidemic transmission patterns and predict the longterm trajectory of the outbreak. These models include
the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model (Kermack and McKendrick 1927), the Susceptible-ExposedInfected-Recovered (SEIR) (Cooke and Van Den Driessche 1996) and their variants e.g, SIS, SIRS, and delayed
SIR. These models have a small number of parameters
* equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4830

