The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual Adversarial Graph Neural Networks for Multi-label Cross-modal Retrieval
Shengsheng Qian,1,2 Dizhan Xue,2 Huaiwen Zhang,1,2 Quan Fang,1,2 Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1

National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{shengsheng.qian, huaiwen.zhang, qfang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, xuedizhan17@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval has become an active study field with
the expanding scale of multimodal data. To date, most existing methods transform multimodal data into a common representation space where semantic similarities between items
can be directly measured across different modalities. However, these methods typically suffer from following limitations: 1) They usually attempt to bridge the modality gap by
designing losses in the common representation space which
may not be sufficient to eliminate potential heterogeneity
of different modalities in the common space. 2) They typically treat labels as independent individuals and ignore label relationships which are important for constructing semantic links between multimodal data. In this work, we
propose a novel Dual Adversarial Graph Neural Networks
(DAGNN) composed of the dual generative adversarial networks and the multi-hop graph neural networks, which learn
modality-invariant and discriminative common representations for cross-modal retrieval. Firstly, we construct the dual
generative adversarial networks to project multimodal data
into a common representation space. Secondly, we leverage
the multi-hop graph neural networks, in which a layer aggregation mechanism is proposed to exploit multi-hop propagation information, to capture the label correlation dependency
and learn inter-dependent classifiers. Comprehensive experiments conducted on two cross-modal retrieval benchmark
datasets, NUS-WIDE and MIRFlickr, indicate the superiority of DAGNN.

Figure 1: The left picture illustrates the co-occurrence of
“Snow” and “Sky” in the NUS-WIDE dataset. The right
picture demonstrates the co-occurrence of “Animals” and
“Plant” in MIRFlickr dataset.
representation space. Traditional methods (Hotelling 1936;
Yao, Mei, and Ngo 2015) typically take linear projections
as basic models, which often maximize the cross-modal
pairwise item correlation or classification accuracy to learn
the common representation. Recently, deep neural networks
(DNN) are emerging tools to automatically learn feature representations, which have been increasingly utilized in the
cross-modal retrieval task (Ngiam et al. 2011; Peng and Qi
2019; Andrew et al. 2013). The DNN-based cross-modal retrieval has become an active study field to exploit nonlinear relationships and achieved great performance improvements. Most existing methods, such as DSCMR (Zhen et al.
2019) and ACMR (Wang et al. 2017), mainly consider how
to transform the original representation to the common representation and design handcraft loss functions based on the
common representation. However, there may exist modalityspecific features in the common representation in the transform process, which may not be fully eliminated by the existing methods and lead to the performance decline. Therefore, we have to face the Challenge 1: How to bridge the
modality gap so that modality-specific information can be
eliminated well and semantic information can be fully preserved in the common representation space?
Another drawback of existing supervised methods is that
labels are treated as independent individuals and the label
correlations in multimodal data are ignored. For example,
cross-modal datasets such as MIRFlickr (Huiskes, Thomee,
and Lew 2008) and NUS-WIDE (Chua et al. 2009), often
contain multiple labels for each sample, where the semantic
dependencies among multiple labels are important for crossmodal retrieval and representation learning. As illustrated

Introduction
Cross-modal retrieval has raised widespread interests with
the objective to perform retrieval across different modalities
(Wang et al. 2017; Zhen et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020). Traditionally, modeling semantically similarity links mainly focuses on single-modality scenarios, while the cross-modal
retrieval requires that semantically similar items in one
modality (e.g., text) can be retrieved with a query item from
another modality (e.g., image).
Since instances of different modality typically have inconsistent feature distributions and representations, the modality gap caused by the heterogeneous nature of data needs to
be bridged. To bridge the gap among different multimodal
data, the general solution is to map them into a common
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2440

