The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TaLNet: Voice Reconstruction from Tongue and Lip Articulation with Transfer
Learning from Text-to-Speech Synthesis
Jing-Xuan Zhang1,2 , Korin Richmond2 , Zhen-Hua Ling1 , Li-Rong Dai1
1

National Engineering Laboratory for Speech and Language Information Processing,
University of Science and Technology of China, P. R. China,
2
The Center for Speech Technology Research, University of Edinburgh, UK
nosisi@mail.ustc.edu.cn, korin@cstr.ed.ac.uk, {zhling, lrdai}@ustc.edu.cn
Abstract

surgery, or as an aid for assisting communication in either
high-noise or silent environments.
A reasonable amount of prior work has looked at voice
reconstruction over the years, from either tongue or lip data,
or both data streams combined. One early study adopted
contour points extracted from ultrasound tongue imaging as
inputs to a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) for acoustic feature prediction (Denby and Stone 2004). Eigentongues have
also been proposed for feature extraction from tongue images (Hueber et al. 2007a). Naturally, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been used for tongue-to-speech conversion
and F0 estimation (Csapó et al. 2017; Tóth et al. 2018; Grósz
et al. 2018; Kimura, Kono, and Rekimoto 2019). Other work
has focused on speech recovery from lip videos, for example: convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (Ephrat and
Peleg 2017; Akbari et al. 2018; Kumar et al. 2019) and a
dual CNN model (Ephrat, Halperin, and Peleg 2017) have
been proposed for speech reconstruction. Prajwal et al. proposed a model for accurately learning a lip-to-speech mapping for an individual speaker using about 20 hours of that
speaker’s video (Prajwal et al. 2020). Some studies, meanwhile, have leveraged both tongue and lip data together. For
example, (Hueber et al. 2011; Hueber and Bailly 2016) built
and compared Gaussian mixture models (GMMs) and hidden Markov models (HMMs) for the articulatory-to-acoustic
conversion task.
Previous studies like these have achieved impressive results, but have also had several limitations. First,
the articulatory-to-acoustic conversion models have been
trained only with data speciﬁcally designed and recorded
with specialist articulography equipment for the task. This
has strongly limited the amount of data available for training, certainly in comparison with standard audio-only TTS
corpora which are much easier to collect. To address this,
we argue that since both TTS and articulatory-to-acoustic
conversion have in common the same objective of generating natural speech, we should seek to transfer learning
from a TTS task to our model for articulatory-to-acoustic
conversion. Second, the majority of work has focused exclusively either on tongue or lip inputs, rather than utilizing both features in tandem. Third, because articulatory-toacoustic conversion remains challenging, many studies have
focused only on narrow and constrained-vocabulary tasks,
or indeed speaker-dependent models trained with data from

This paper presents TaLNet, a model for voice reconstruction with ultrasound tongue and optical lip videos as inputs.
TaLNet is based on an encoder-decoder architecture. Separate encoders are dedicated to processing the tongue and
lip data streams respectively. The decoder predicts acoustic
features conditioned on encoder outputs and speaker codes.
To mitigate for having only relatively small amounts of dual
articulatory-acoustic data available for training, and since our
task here shares with text-to-speech (TTS) the common goal
of speech generation, we propose a novel transfer learning
strategy to exploit the much larger amounts of acoustic-only
data available to train TTS models. For this, a Tacotron 2
TTS model is ﬁrst trained, and then the parameters of its decoder are transferred to the TaLNet decoder. We have evaluated our approach on an unconstrained multi-speaker voice
recovery task. Our results show the effectiveness of both the
proposed model and the transfer learning strategy. Speech
reconstructed using our proposed method signiﬁcantly outperformed all baselines (DNN, BLSTM and without transfer learning) in terms of both naturalness and intelligibility.
When using an ASR model decoding the recovery speech,
the WER of our proposed method shows a relative reduction
of over 30% compared to baselines.

Introduction
Human speech production involves over 100 muscles (Anumanchipalli, Chartier, and Chang 2019). The tongue and lips
play a crucial role to control the shape of vocal tract, so modifying its resonant properties in order to convey the different
phonemes uttered. It is therefore natural to ask whether, and
to what extent, speech can be reconstructed by computer
model from observed tongue and lip articulations alone.
In this paper, we study the issue of continuous and openvocabulary speech generation using both ultrasound tongue
and optical lip video. This task falls under the umbrella of
articulatory-to-acoustic conversion, and may also be referred
to as a silent speech interface (SSI) (Denby et al. 2010). Not
only does work in this area improve our understanding of
speech production mechanisms, but it also promises wideranging practical applications, such as restoring speech communication for patients who have undergone laryngectomy
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
14402

