The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learned BI-Resolution Image Coding Using Generalized Octave Convolutions
Mohammad Akbari1 , Jie Liang1 , Jingning Han2 , Chengjie Tu3
1

Simon Fraser University, Canada
2
Google Inc., Mountain View
3
Tencent Technologies
akbari@sfu.ca, jiel@sfu.ca, jingning@google.com, chengjietu@tencent.com

Abstract

model was extended in (Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici 2018;
Lee, Cho, and Beack 2018) where a Gaussian mixture model
(GMM) with both mean and scale parameters conditioned on
the hyperprior was utilized. In these methods, the hyperpriors
were combined with autoregressive priors generated using
context models, which outperformed BPG in terms of both
PSNR and MS-SSIM. Another context-adaptive approach
was introduced by (Zhou et al. 2019) in which multi-scale
masked convolutional networks were utilized for their autoregressive model combined with hyperpriors.
The state of the art in learned image compression has been
achieved by context-adaptive entropy methods in which hyperprior and autoregressive models are combined (Minnen,
Ballé, and Toderici 2018). These approaches are jointly optimized to effectively capture the spatial dependencies and
probabilistic structures of the latent representations, which
lead to a compression model with superior rate-distortion
(R-D) performance. However, similar to natural images, the
latents are usually represented by feature maps of the same
spatial resolution, which result in some spatial redundancies.
These maps can be factorized into high and low resolution
components with effective inter-resolution communication
(Chen et al. 2019), which result in less spatial redundancies
and consequently better R-D performance.
In this paper, a learned bi-resolution image coding and
entropy model is introduced in which octave convolutions
(Chen et al. 2019) are employed to factorize the latent representations into high resolution (HR) and low resolution
(LR) components. As LR is represented by a lower spatial
resolution, the corresponding spatial redundancy is reduced
and the compression performance is improved, similar to
wavelet transforms (Antonini et al. 1992). In addition, due
to the effective communication between HR and LR components in octave convolutions, the reconstruction performance
is also improved. In the original octave convolution (Chen
et al. 2019), fixed interpolation methods are used for downand up-sampling operations, which do not retain the spatial
information. So, it can negatively affect the image compression performance. In order to preserve the spatial structure
of the latents in our image coding framework, we develop
novel generalized octave convolution and octave transposedconvolution architectures with internal activation layers.
Experiment results show that the proposed scheme outperforms all existing learning-based methods and standard

Learned image compression has recently shown the potential to outperform the standard codecs. State-of-the-art ratedistortion (R-D) performance has been achieved by contextadaptive entropy coding approaches in which hyperprior and
autoregressive models are jointly utilized to effectively capture
the spatial dependencies in the latent representations. However, the latents are feature maps of the same spatial resolution in previous works, which contain some redundancies
that affect the R-D performance. In this paper, we propose a
learned bi-resolution image coding approach that is based on
the recently developed octave convolutions to factorize the
latents into high and low resolution components. Therefore,
the spatial redundancy is reduced, which improves the R-D
performance. Novel generalized octave convolution and octave
transposed-convolution architectures with internal activation
layers are also proposed to preserve more spatial structure of
the information. Experimental results show that the proposed
scheme outperforms all existing learned methods as well as
standard codecs such as the next-generation video coding standard VVC (4:2:0) in both PSNR and MS-SSIM. We also show
that the proposed generalized octave convolution can improve
the performance of other auto-encoder-based schemes such as
semantic segmentation and image denoising.

Introduction
Deep learning-based image compression has shown the potential to outperform standard codecs such as JPEG2000 and
H.265/HEVC-based BPG (Bellard 2017). These approaches
automatically discover and exploit the features of the data;
thereby achieve better compression performance compared
to traditional methods. Various learning-based image compression frameworks have been proposed in the last few years
(Toderici et al. 2015; Ballé, Laparra, and Simoncelli 2016;
Rippel and Bourdev 2017; Theis et al. 2017; Agustsson et al.
2017; Johnston et al. 2017; Minnen, Ballé, and Toderici 2018;
Lee, Cho, and Beack 2018; Akbari, Liang, and Han 2019;
Akbari et al. 2020; Li et al. 2019, 2020).
In (Ballé et al. 2018), a conditional Gaussian scale mixture
(GSM)-based entropy model was introduced where the scale
parameters were conditioned on a hyperprior learned using a
hyper auto-encoder. The compressed hyper latents were transmitted and added to the bit stream as side information. This
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6592

