The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Unsupervised Sampling Approach for Image-Sentence Matching Using
Document-Level Structural Information
Zejun Li,1 Zhongyu Wei,1,4 * Zhihao Fan,1 Haijun Shan,2 Xuanjing Huang3
1

School of Data Science, Fudan University, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, China
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
4
Research Institute of Intelligent and Complex Systems, Fudan University, China
{20210980139, zywei, 18210980005}@fudan.edu.cn, workingshan@163.com, xjhuang@fudan.edu.cn
(a)

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the problem of unsupervised
image-sentence matching. Existing research explores to utilize document-level structural information to sample positive
and negative instances for model training. Although the approach achieves positive results, it introduces a sampling bias
and fails to distinguish instances with high semantic similarity. To alleviate the bias, we propose a new sampling strategy to select additional intra-document image-sentence pairs
as positive or negative samples. Furthermore, to recognize
the complex pattern in intra-document samples, we propose
a Transformer based model to capture fine-grained features
and implicitly construct a graph for each document, where
concepts in a document are introduced to bridge the representation learning of images and sentences in the context of
a document. Experimental results show the effectiveness of
our approach to alleviate the bias and learn well-aligned multimodal representations.

(b)

images

(c)

images

images

sentences

(d)

Doc 1

Doc 2

sentences

sentences
Doc 1

images

Doc 2

sentences

Figure 1: Illustration of different settings for image-sentence
matching: (a) multimodal semantic spaces, (b) supervised
alignment, (c) unsupervised cross-document objective in
(Hessel, Lee, and Mimno 2019), (d) our intra-document objective. Red links denote matched positive pairs, blue links
denote negative pairs; solid links represent annotated labels, dashed lines represent pseudo labels detected by unsupervised methods; dashed circles denote image-sets and
sentence-sets in documents.

Introduction
Image-text matching is one of the fundamental problems
in the field of vision and language (Nam, Ha, and Kim
2017; Huang et al. 2018), and the main target is learning to
align the semantic spaces of two modalities (Figure 1(a)).
Previous works on image-text matching is mainly supervised (Lee et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020),
requiring large amounts of annotated image-sentence pairs
(Figure 1(b)). Considering labeled pairs of images and sentences are expensive to obtain, progress in developing unsupervised methods is therefore exciting and promising. Although some attempts are made to align image regions and
segments of sentences (Karpathy, Joulin, and Fei-Fei 2014;
Karpathy and Fei-Fei 2015; Rohrbach et al. 2016; Datta
et al. 2019), they still rely on matched image-sentence pairs
for distant supervision.
The main challenge in unsupervised image-sentence
matching is the lack of such information to distinguish positive and negative samples for model training. (Hessel, Lee,
and Mimno 2019) explores to utilize the document-level

structural information. In specific, image-sentence pairs in
a document (intra-document) are selected as positive samples, and negative samples are drawn from cross-document
image-sentence pairs (Figure 1(c)). During training, the
model is learning to maximize the distance between the
sampled positive and negative pairs. Although this unsupervised sampling strategy is shown to be effective for learning
aligned representations for images and sentences to some
extent, the sampling bias between the training environment
and real environment can not be ignored.
Figure 2(a) shows an example. The positive and negative sample pairs for training are much easier to be distinguished (book vs horses), while an image and a sentence
in a negative sample from the testing environment can be
highly correlated in terms of semantics. We further present
the evidence for bias resulted in this sampling strategy in
Figure 2(b). For each sentence in the VIST-DII dataset (Hes-

* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13324

