The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Preference Elicitation as Average-Case Sorting
Dominik Peters and Ariel D. Procaccia
Harvard University
{dpeters, arielpro}@seas.harvard.edu

elicitation schemes, which rely on knowledge of D to achieve
lower query complexity.

Abstract
Many decision making systems require users to indicate their
preferences via a ranking. It is common to elicit such rankings
through pairwise comparison queries. By using sorting algorithms, this can be achieved by asking at most O(m log m)
adaptive comparison queries. However, in many cases we have
some advance (probabilistic) information about the user’s
preferences, for instance if we have a learnt model of the
user’s preferences or if we expect the user’s preferences to
be correlated with those of previous users. For these cases,
we design elicitation algorithms that ask fewer questions in
expectation, by building on results for average-case sorting.
If the user’s preferences are drawn from a Mallows φ model,
O(m) queries are enough; for a mixture of k Mallows models,
log k + O(m) queries are enough; for Plackett–Luce models,
the answer varies with the alternative weights. Our results
match information-theoretic lower bounds. We also provide
empirical evidence for the benefits of our approach.

1

A better UI for eliciting rankings Social choice practitioners have implemented a number of web tools that allow
users to set up polls that are run using the best voting methods taken from the literature. To use these tools, each user
needs to input a ranking of the alternatives. Typically, the
user interfaces of these tools allow this either by presenting
a random ranking and letting the user to correct it via Drag
and Drop (e.g., RoboVote, Pnyx, or OPRA) or by presenting a list of alternatives and asking the user to click on
them in order of preference, thereby building the ranking
(e.g., Whale). A version of the latter method is also used
in Australian elections for the House of Representatives,
where voters number candidates (1, 2, 3, . . . ) in order of
preference on a paper ballot. All these methods require significant effort, something like Θ(m2 ) mental operations,
because the list of alternatives needs to be scanned repeatedly. But we know that we can do it using any of the
common sorting algorithms in O(m log m) queries!
In larger elections, we could obtain a prior via polls or early
votes. Using informed elicitation schemes, this should, on
average, lead to a reduction in the number of queries.

Introduction

A sizable body of literature deals with the problem of eliciting a decision maker’s preferences, represented as a ranking over a set of m alternatives, via pairwise comparison
queries (“which of these is better: x or y?”). In its most basic
form, this is just the standard sorting problem, which requires
Θ(m log m) queries in the worst case.
Our point of departure is that we assume access to some
probabilistic information about the ranking. Suppose we
know (or suspect) that the ranking is drawn from some distribution D over all m! possible rankings. We can then use
this prior to guide our queries, potentially resulting in an
average-case number of queries that is significantly lower
than the worst-case bound. Specifically, we ask:

Virtual democracy In some situations, a collection of decision makers need to repeatedly make similar decisions.
Running a vote on each occasion may be tedious. Instead,
the emerging paradigm of virtual democracy proposes
that for each decision maker, we train a machine learning model of their preferences (for example by learning
personalized weights of various attributes). When a new
decision needs to be made, we use these models to predict each voter’s preference ranking, and then use a voting
rule to make a decision. Variants of this scheme have been
proposed for ethical decision making in self-driving cars
(Noothigattu et al. 2018) and for prioritization decision
in kidney exchange (Freedman et al. 2020). It has been
deployed in practice at a Pittsburgh charity that transports
food donations to nonprofits (Lee et al. 2019).
While decision makers may be happy to outsource preference determination to the model most of the time, there
may be instances of increased importance to a voter, when
they may wish to vote themselves or check the quality of
the model output. An informed elicitation scheme can help

Given a “typical” distribution D over rankings, what is
the expected number of pairwise comparisons queries
needed to identify a ranking drawn from D?
From this viewpoint, preference elicitation becomes
closely intertwined with average-case sorting, and we will
indeed show that the connection is technically fruitful. But
first, let us motivate the research question by describing two
domains in which it is potentially possible to apply informed
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5647

