The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Writing Polishment with Simile: Task, Dataset and A Neural Approach
Jiayi Zhang, Zhi Cui, Xiaoqiang Xia, Yalong Guo,
Yanran Li, Chen Wei and Jianwei Cui
Xiaomi AI Lab, Beijing, China
{zhangjiayi3, cuizhi, liyanran, weichen, cuijianwei}@xiaomi.com

Writing Polishment with Simile
Looking at his bloodthirsty eyes, everyone felt
Before
horrible and couldn’t help but step back.
Looking at his bloodthirsty eyes, everyone felt
horrible as if they were being stared at by a
After
serpent, and couldn’t help but step back.
Other Figurative Language Generation
Task
Status
Text
Before A metaphorical pair of (Enjoy, Devour)
Metaphor
After
She devoured his novels.
NonTried to leave town and my phone died,
ironic
what a failure.
Nice to leave town and my phone died,
Irony
Ironic
definition of success.

Abstract
A simile is a figure of speech that directly makes a comparison, showing similarities between two different things, e.g.
“Reading papers can be dull sometimes, like watching grass
grow”. Human writers often interpolate appropriate similes
into proper locations of the plain text to vivify their writings.
However, none of existing work has explored neural simile interpolation, including both locating and generation. In this paper, we propose a new task of Writing Polishment with Simile (WPS) to investigate whether machines are able to polish
texts with similes as we human do. Accordingly, we design
a two-staged Locate&Gen model based on transformer architecture. Our model firstly locates where the simile interpolation should happen, and then generates a location-specific
simile. We also release a large-scale Chinese Simile (CS)
dataset containing 5 million similes with context. The experimental results demonstrate the feasibility of WPS task and
shed light on the future research directions towards better automatic text polishment.

Table 1: Example of WPS and other related tasks.

especially unique for similes, since most polishing objectives clearly requires text rephrasing, e.g., grammar error
correction for fluency polishment, text editing for irony style
transfer, etc. Distinctly, interpolating similes is like putting
proper ingredients to an unflavored dish, instead of totally
re-cooking a new one based on a different recipe. Despite the
importance of simile, only a few work has explored simile
recognition (Liu et al. 2018; Zeng et al. 2020). To the best of
our knowledge1 , none of existing work has ever investigated
simile generation given a plain text, which is indispensable
for amplifying writing with similes.
Although sequence-to-sequence models work well for
story generation (Liu et al. 2020), irony generation (Zhu, Yu,
and Wan 2019), or metaphor and personification generation
(Liu et al. 2019), it is non-trivial for these models to generate proper and creative simile for a given text. In particular,
writing polishment with similes is a unique task because it
requires to together address the challenges listed below:

Introduction
Figurative language, or a figure of speech (修辞), is phrasing
that goes beyond the literal meaning of words to get a message or point across. Writers and poets use figurative language to build imagery and elicit aesthetic experiences (Citron and Zervos 2018). In computational linguistics, figurative language processing (FLP) has long been an interesting
research topic, including both detection (Li and Sporleder
2010; Klebanov et al. 2020) and generation tasks (Mishra,
Tater, and Sankaranarayanan 2019; Yu and Wan 2019; Liu
et al. 2019).
There exist a handful of figurative types that help make
concepts become vivid and graspable, including but not limited to simile (明喻), metaphor (隐喻), irony, etc. Among
them, similes play a vital role for human writings to be attractive. Different from metaphors’ using implicit comparisons, a simile is a description that uses “like” or “as” to
make a clear comparison between two separate concepts.
As shown in Table 1, human writers add coherent similes
into proper locations of the original text to vivify plain writings. Such an interpolation-based text polishing process is

• Locating is critical for simile interpolation. A simile inserted at a wrong place will impact language fluency and
result in weird reading experience.
• To polish writing appropriately, the generated simile must
be coherent to the context and diverse in the semantics
1

We encourage readers to also refer to a contemporary work by
Chakrabarty, Muresan, and Peng (2020), which shares a different
point of view of simile generation.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14383

