The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Attack Real-World Models for Person Re-identification
via Virtual-Guided Meta-Learning
Fengxiang Yang1 , Zhun Zhong2 , Hong Liu3 , Zheng Wang3 ,
Zhiming Luo5∗ , Shaozi Li1∗ , Nicu Sebe2,4 , Shin’ichi Satoh3
1

Artificial Intelligence Department, Xiamen University, China
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
National Institute of Informatics, Japan
4
Huawei Research, Ireland
5
Post Doctoral Mobile Station of Information and Communication Engineering, Xiamen University, China
{zhiming.luo, szlig}@xmu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Target #2

Recent advances in person re-identification (re-ID) have led
to impressive retrieval accuracy. However, existing re-ID
models are challenged by the adversarial examples crafted
by adding quasi-imperceptible perturbations. Moreover, reID systems face the domain shift issue that training and
testing domains are not consistent. In this study, we argue
that learning powerful attackers with high universality that
works well on unseen domains is an important step in promoting the robustness of re-ID systems. Therefore, we introduce a novel universal attack algorithm called “MetaAttack” for person re-ID. MetaAttack can mislead re-ID models on unseen domains by a universal adversarial perturbation. Specifically, to capture common patterns across different domains, we propose a meta-learning scheme to seek
the universal perturbation via the gradient interaction between meta-train and meta-test formed by two datasets. We
also take advantage of a virtual dataset (PersonX), instead
of real ones, to conduct meta-test. This scheme not only enables us to learn with more comprehensive variation factors
but also mitigates the negative effects caused by biased factors of real datasets. Experiments on three large-scale re-ID
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in attacking re-ID models on unseen domains. Our final visualization results reveal some new properties of existing re-ID
systems, which can guide us in designing a more robust reID model. Code and supplemental material are available at
https://github.com/FlyingRoastDuck/MetaAttack AAAI21.

Target #1

𝛿0+),

PersonX

𝛿.'*)/,-

𝛿*+,Source

𝛿'(')

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of attacking in re-ID. Adversarial perturbation sets of real source, real target, and virtual
(PersonX) datasets are visualized in different colors. Each
perturbation set crushes the re-ID model on its corresponding dataset. The common region represents perturbations
that can attack models on all datasets. This common region
is hard to reach when directly training with only one dataset,
e.g., optimizing with real source (δinit →δreal ) or PersonX
(δinit →δvirtual ). Our MetaAttack leverages the interacted
gradients from real source and PersonX to guide the initialized perturbation to the common region (δinit →δmeta ).

makes the design of robust re-ID systems that are insensitive to adversarial examples become an urgent issue to be
resolved.
“Our strength grows out of our weakness.”
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Inspired by this quote, in this work, we argue that learning
powerful attackers helps verifying and improving the robustness of re-ID models, especially ones with high universality.
Then, our goal is designing such an attacker, which will help
reveal and understand the weaknesses of re-ID systems.
Most current studies in adversarial attack mainly focus on image classification (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and
Frossard 2016; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al. 2017; Goodfellow,
Shlens, and Szegedy 2015), while few (Tolias, Radenovic,

Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) (Sun et al. 2018; Wang et al.
2018) aims to match pedestrians across non-overlapping
cameras. Recent advances in person re-ID have witnessed
great progress with the developments of deep models (Ye
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020b). However, the robustness of
deep re-ID models is challenged by the adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2020a). By disturbing images with quasi-imperceptible noises, re-ID models
will suffer from catastrophic performance degradation. This
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3128

