The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Unified Multi-Task Learning Framework for
Joint Extraction of Entities and Relations
Tianyang Zhao1 , Zhao Yan2 , Yunbo Cao2 , Zhoujun Li1 *
1

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Tencent Cloud Xiaowei, Beijing, China
{tyzhao,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn, {zhaoyan,yunbocao}@tencent.com

Abstract
Joint extraction of entities and relations has achieved great
success in recent year by task decomposition and multi-task
learning. Previous works effectively perform the task through
different extraction order, such as relation-last, relation-first
and relation-middle manner. However, these methods still
suffer from the template-dependency, non-entity detection
and non-predefined relation prediction problem. To overcome
these challenges, in this paper, we propose a unified multitask learning framework, which decomposes the task into
three interacted sub-tasks. Specifically, we first introduce the
type-attentional method for subject extraction to provide prior
type information explicitly. Then, the subject-aware relation
prediction is presented to select useful relations based on the
combination of global and local semantics. Third, we propose a question generation based QA method for object extraction to obtain diverse queries automatically. Notably, our
method detects subjects or objects without relying on NER
models and thus it is capable of dealing with the non-entity
scenario. Finally, three sub-tasks are integrated into a unified model through parameter sharing. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed framework outperforms all the
baseline methods on four benchmark datasets, and further
achieves excellent performance for non-predefined relations.

Sentence:

Entities:

So far U.S. soldiers have
discovered nearly $600 million
hidden around Baghdad.

soldiers (PER)
U.S. (GPE)
Baghdad (GPE)

Golden Relation Triplets:
(soldiers, ORG-AFF, U.S.)
(soldiers, PHYS, Baghdad)

Sub-Task 1: Type-attentional Subject Extraction
• person; So far U.S. soldiers have discovered nearly $600
million hidden around Baghdad
• geopolitical entity; So far U.S. soldiers have discovered
nearly $600 million hidden around Baghdad
• organization; So far U.S. soldiers have discovered nearly
$600 million hidden around Baghdad
• ……

soldiers
U.S.
Baghdad
None
……

Sub-Task 2: Subject-aware Relation Prediction
• Relation Subset: {ORG-AFF, PHYS}
Sub-Task 3: QA-based Object Extraction
Seed Question: Find geopolitical entities that soldiers is employed ?
Auto Generated Question:
• What country soldiers is actually employed ?
• Which geopolitical entities employ soldiers ?
• Where is soldiers in ?
Answer: U.S.

Figure 1: The extraction process based on the proposed
multi-task learning framework
task into several fundamental procedures or solve the problem through multi-task learning framework. According to
the extraction order of the triple elements, these models
fall into three categories: relation-last, relation-first and
relation-middle. The relation-last method can be formed
as (e1 , e2 ) → r, which indentifies all entities in the sentence first using named entity recognition (NER) techniques,
then conducts relation classification for any two entities
(Katiyar and Cardie 2017; Eberts and Ulges 2019; Sun
et al. 2019). However, the method requires to enumerate
all pairs of entities, resulting in a heavy computational burden. And the redundant pairs cause negative influences on
the relation classifier. The relation-first method is formed
as r → (e1 , e2 ). In this manner, the relation is generated
initially by the Seq2Seq framework, and then subjects and
objects are selected respectively based on the copy mechanism (Zeng et al. 2018; Zeng, Zhang, and Liu 2020).
By predicting relations first, this kind of approaches filter
out irrelevant relationships, which mitigate negative effects
caused by useless relations and greatly avoid the data imbalance issue. Therefore, they have an overall higher computation efficiency. More recently, the relation-middle method,
denoted as e1 → r → e2 , has shown promising per-

Introduction
Entity-relation extraction aims to recognize entity spans
from a sentence and detect the relations of entity pairs. Generally, it is formed as extracting an entity-relation triplet
(e1 , r, e2 ), which denotes that the relation r holds between
the subject e1 and the object e2 , i.e., (Jack, Live-In, New
York). It has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
Early works mainly focus on pipelined methods, which
divide the task into two independent sub-tasks, named entity recognition (NER) and relation extraction (RE) (Miwa
et al. 2009; Chan and Roth 2011; Lin et al. 2016). However, the pipelined approaches neglect the inherent correlations between NER and RE tasks, which leads to the error
propagation problem.
To leverage the interactions between NER and RE tasks,
some recent works propose to extract entities and relations jointly. The joint methods tend to decompose the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14524

