The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scene Graph Embeddings Using Relative Similarity Supervision
Paridhi Maheshwari1 * , Ritwick Chaudhry2 * † , Vishwa Vinay1
1

Adobe Research
Carnegie Mellon University
parimahe@adobe.com, rchaudhr@andrew.cmu.edu, vinay@adobe.com
2

Abstract

that incorporate semantic information from the text modality
into image representations. While natural language enables
rich and detailed descriptions of visual content, it is unstructured and requires explicit grounding into images (Krishnamurthy and Kollar 2013; Lin et al. 2014a). This has led to the
recent development of image representations using graphbased formulations that capture detailed scene semantics in
a structured format.
Scene graphs (Johnson et al. 2015) have emerged as one
such popular and powerful representation of the underlying content of images. This construct encapsulates the constituent objects and their relationships, and also encodes object attributes and spatial information. Their success can be
ascribed to the numerous downstream applications that they
facilitate, including visual question answering (Teney, Liu,
and van Den Hengel 2017; Norcliffe-Brown, Vafeias, and
Parisot 2018), scene classification (Schroeder, Tripathi, and
Tang 2019), image manipulation (Dhamo et al. 2020) and
visual relationship detection (Lu et al. 2016).
In the context of image retrieval, there has been work on
grounding scene graphs into images to obtain the likelihood
of the scene graph-image pair (Johnson et al. 2015; Schuster et al. 2015). Alternately, we propose to utilize distributed
representations derived from scene graphs of images alongside standard measures of similarity such as cosine similarity or inner product. Embeddings derived from the scene
graphs capture the information present in the scene and this
allows us to combine the advantages of structured representations like graphs and continuous intermediate representations. Further, we demonstrate in Figure 1 that similarity
search over these embeddings captures the overall context
of the scene, offering an alternative to visual similarity provided by traditional image embeddings.
We leverage Graph Convolutional Networks to map an
image’s scene graph into an embedding. In the existing literature, the training of such models is set up in one of
the following paradigms: (1) Self-supervised, where scene
graphs are jointly embedded with corresponding supplementary information (like visual features or text) about the image (Wang, Li, and Lazebnik 2016; Belilovsky et al. 2017),
and (2) Task-dependent, where learning of the scene graph
representation is driven by supervision from specific downstream applications (Teney, Liu, and van Den Hengel 2017;
Schroeder, Tripathi, and Tang 2019). In contrast, we con-

Scene graphs are a powerful structured representation of the
underlying content of images, and embeddings derived from
them have been shown to be useful in multiple downstream
tasks. In this work, we employ a graph convolutional network to exploit structure in scene graphs and produce image embeddings useful for semantic image retrieval. Different from classification-centric supervision traditionally available for learning image representations, we address the task
of learning from relative similarity labels in a ranking context.
Rooted within the contrastive learning paradigm, we propose
a novel loss function that operates on pairs of similar and dissimilar images and imposes relative ordering between them
in embedding space. We demonstrate that this Ranking loss,
coupled with an intuitive triple sampling strategy, leads to robust representations that outperform well-known contrastive
losses on the retrieval task. In addition, we provide qualitative
evidence of how retrieved results that utilize structured scene
information capture the global context of the scene, different
from visual similarity search.

Introduction
In recent times, the advancement of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has led to significant improvements in
image classification (He et al. 2016; Krizhevsky, Sutskever,
and Hinton 2012). Their intermediate image representations
have also proven to be powerful visual descriptors in a variety of other tasks. One such application is content-based
image retrieval, where a given image is used to query a
database and retrieve other similar images. Models trained
for image classification capture visually discriminative features and the retrieved images are, therefore, visually similar
to the query image. On the other hand, semantic image retrieval enables the search of visual situations where multiple
objects interact in different ways such as ‘man talking on the
phone while sipping coffee’. This requires an understanding
of the semantics of the scene as well as bridging the semantic
gap (Smeulders et al. 2000; Hare et al. 2006) between visual
features and high-level concepts. To address this, numerous visual-semantic embedding models have been proposed
* These authors contributed equally
†

Work done while at Adobe Research
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2328

