The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Enhanced Top-K Recommendation in Poincaré Ball
Chen Ma * 1 , Liheng Ma * 1 , Yingxue Zhang 2 , Haolun Wu * 1 , Xue Liu 1 and Mark Coates 1
1

McGill University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab Montreal
chen.ma2@mail.mcgill.ca, liheng.ma@mail.mcgill.ca, yingxue.zhang@huawei.com,
haolun.wu@mail.mcgill.ca, xueliu@cs.mcgill.ca, mark.coates@mcgill.ca
2

Abstract

the KG that carry the high-order connectivity information
and feed these paths into the predictive model. To handle the
large number of paths between two nodes, researchers have
either applied path selection algorithms to select prominent
paths or defined meta-path patterns to constrain the paths.
By contrast, regularization-based methods devise additional
loss terms that capture the KG structure and use these to regularize the recommender model learning.
Although many effective models have been proposed, we
argue that there are still several avenues for enhancing performance. First, previous works learn the KG representations in the Euclidean space. As has been observed in other
application domains, this may not effectively capture the hierarchical structure that is known to exist within KGs (Sala
et al. 2018). Second, methods like CKE (Zhang et al. 2016),
CFKG (Ai et al. 2018), and RippleNet (Wang et al. 2018)
do not distinguish between neighboring entities, adjusting
according to their relative importance and informativeness,
when learning the representation of each entity. This may
lead to undesirable blurring of information from relations in
the KG and an incomplete understanding of an entity. Third,
all the regularization-based methods adopt a fixed hyperparameter. We argue that the regularization degree should
be adaptive, taking on different values for different entities according to the relevance and value of the information from the knowledge graph. Furthermore, different training phases may need different magnitudes of regularization
power values, so the hyper-parameter values should evolve
during training.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, we propose a
knowledge-enhanced recommendation model in the hyperbolic space, namely Hyper-Know, to tackle the top-K recommendation task. In particular, we map the entity and relation embeddings of the KG as well as user and item embeddings to the Poincaré ball model. This allows us to capture
the hierarchical structure in the KG. We incorporate an attention model in the hyperbolic space, and use the Einstein
midpoint for aggregation, in order to form a representation
of the neighborhood of each item in the knowledge graph.
We then use a regularization term to encourage the representation of an item to remain close to the representation
of its neighborhood (in the hyperbolic space). This transfers
the relational and structural information from the knowledge
graph to the recommendation model. To adaptively control

Personalized recommender systems are increasingly
important as more content and services become available and users struggle to identify what might interest
them. Thanks to the ability for providing rich information, knowledge graphs (KGs) are being incorporated
to enhance the recommendation performance and interpretability. To effectively make use of the knowledge
graph, we propose a recommendation model in the hyperbolic space, which facilitates the learning of the hierarchical structure of knowledge graphs. Furthermore, a
hyperbolic attention network is employed to determine
the relative importances of neighboring entities of a certain item. In addition, we propose an adaptive and finegrained regularization mechanism to adaptively regularize items and their neighboring representations. Via a
comparison using three real-world datasets with stateof-the-art methods, we show that the proposed model
outperforms the best existing models by 2-16% in terms
of NDCG@K on Top-K recommendation.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of Internet services and mobile devices, personalized recommender systems play an increasingly important role in modern society. They can reduce
information overload and help satisfy diverse service demands. Such systems bring significant benefits to at least
two parties. They can: (i) help users easily discover products
from millions of candidates, and (ii) create opportunities for
product providers to increase revenue.
To provide a more accurate and interpretable recommendation service, knowledge graphs (KGs) are being incorporated into recommender systems. A KG is a heterogeneous
graph, where nodes function as entities and edges represent
relations between the entities. This is an effective data structure to model relational data, e.g., two movies directed by
the same director. Several recent works have integrated KGs
into the recommendation model, and the approaches can be
divided into two branches: path-based (Hu et al. 2018; Wang
et al. 2018) and regularization-based (Zhang et al. 2016;
Wang et al. 2019c). Path-based methods extract paths from
* Work done as interns at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab in Montreal.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4285

