The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization via Tree-Structured Additive Models
Eric Han,1 Ishank Arora,2 Jonathan Scarlett1,3
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
3
Department of Mathematics & Institute of Data Science, National University of Singapore
eric han@nus.edu.sg, ishank.arora.cse14@iitbhu.ac.in, scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

A key difficulty associated with high-dimensional BO is
the curse of dimensionality (Spruyt 2014), namely, exponentially many observations are needed to find the global optimum in the absence of structural assumptions. Accordingly,
two significant opposing challenges include the incorporation of suitable structural assumptions, and computationally
efficient acquisition function optimization.

Bayesian Optimization (BO) has shown significant success
in tackling expensive low-dimensional black-box optimization problems. Many optimization problems of interest are
high-dimensional, and scaling BO to such settings remains
an important challenge. In this paper, we consider generalized additive models in which low-dimensional functions with
overlapping subsets of variables are composed to model a
high-dimensional target function. Our goal is to lower the
computational resources required and facilitate faster model
learning by reducing the model complexity while retaining
the sample-efficiency of existing methods. Specifically, we
constrain the underlying dependency graphs to tree structures
in order to facilitate both the structure learning and optimization of the acquisition function. For the former, we propose
a hybrid graph learning algorithm based on Gibbs sampling
and mutation. In addition, we propose a novel zooming-based
algorithm that permits generalized additive models to be employed more efficiently in the case of continuous domains. We
demonstrate and discuss the efficacy of our approach via a
range of experiments on synthetic functions and real-world
datasets.

1

1.1

Related Work

In the literature, there are at least two approaches to highdimensional BO with differing assumptions:
• Under low effective dimensionality, only few dimensions
significantly affect f . (Chen, Castro, and Krause 2012)
performed joint variable selection and optimization using GP-UCB. (Djolonga, Krause, and Cevher 2013) applied low-rank matrix recovery techniques to learn the
underlying effective subspace, and (Zhang, Li, and Su
2019) proposed a related approach based on sliced inverse regression. (Wang et al. 2013) proposed REMBO,
tackling the problem through random embedding. More
recently, (Kirschner et al. 2019) proposed LineBO, decomposing the problem into a sequence of one-dimensional
sub-problems. The use of non-linear low-dimensional embeddings has also recently been proposed (Lu et al. 2018;
Moriconi, Kumar, and Deisenroth 2019).
• Under additive structure, small subsets of variables interact with each other. Specifically, additive models assume
that f can be decomposed into sums of lower-dimensional
functions. (Kandasamy, Schneider, and Póczos 2015) assumed that the variables constructing a particular lowerdimensional function are not present in the other decomposed functions (i.e., the variables of each function are
pairwise disjoint), which we refer to as Graph No-Overlap.
(Rolland et al. 2018) generalized the additive model to
allow for an arbitrary dependency graph, removing the
restriction of pairwise disjointness, which we refer to
as Graph Overlap. Also considering overlapping groups,
(Hoang et al. 2018) assumed that f can be decomposed
into several sparse factor functions, allowing for distributed
acquisition function approximation. (Li et al. 2016) generalized to a projected-additive assumption; the model
proposed by (Kandasamy, Schneider, and Póczos 2015)
is a special case when there is no projection. Ensemble
BO (Wang et al. 2018) seeks to not only exploit addi-

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a widespread method for sequential global optimization (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams
2012), and is suited to scenarios in which the target function f is unknown and expensive to evaluate. BO was traditionally used in model selection (Močkus 1975) and hyperparameter tuning (Snoek, Larochelle, and Adams 2012;
Swersky, Snoek, and Adams 2013). Recently, BO has also
found success in black-box adversarial attack (Ru et al. 2020),
robotics (Jaquier et al. 2020), finance (Gonzalvez et al. 2019),
pharmaceutical product development (Sano et al. 2019), natural language processing (Yogatama, Kong, and Smith 2015),
and more. Two critical ingredients of BO include a model
that captures prior beliefs about the objective function, and
an acquisition function that can be optimized efficiently.
BO has been most successful in low dimensions (i.e. 10
or less) (Wang et al. 2013; Nayebi, Munteanu, and Poloczek
2019), whereas many applications require optimization in
higher-dimensional spaces; this remains a critical problem in
BO (Wang 2016; Rolland et al. 2018; Frazier 2018).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7630

