The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Differential Spectral Normalization (DSN) for PDE Discovery
Chi Chiu So, Tsz On Li, Chufang Wu, Siu Pang Yung
The University of Hong Kong
kelccso@connect.hku.hk, toli2@cs.hku.hk, wucf@connect.hku.hk, spyung@hku.hk

Given measurements of u (x1 , . . . , xS ) over certain temporal and spatial domains, {u (t, x1 , . . . , xS ) : t ∈
{0, ∆t, 2∆t, . . . , T } ⊂ R, (x1 , . . . , xS ) ∈ Ω ⊂ RS }, the
objective of PDE discovery problem is to uncover equation
(1) governing the observed system. Equation (1) expresses a
generic form of PDE with S spatial dimensions and 1 temporal dimension of order K.

∂u
∂u ∂u
∂u
= f x1 , x2 , . . . , xS , u,
,
,...,
,
∂t
∂x1 ∂x2
∂xS
 (1)
∂2u
∂2u
∂K u
∂2u ∂2u
,
,..., 2 ,
,..., K
∂x21 ∂x22
∂xS ∂x1 ∂x2
∂xS

Abstract
Partial differential equations (PDEs) play a prominent role
in many disciplines for describing the governing systems
of interest. Traditionally, PDEs are derived based on first
principles. In the era of big data, the needs of uncovering
PDEs from massive data-set are emerging and become essential. One of the latest advance in PDE discovery models is
PDE-Net, which has shown promising predictive power with
its moment-constrained convolutional filters, but may suffer
from noisy data and numerical instability intrinsic in numerical differentiation. We propose a novel and robust regularization method tailored for moment-constrained convolutional
filters, namely, Differential Spectral Normalization (DSN), to
allow accurate estimation of coefficient functions and stable
prediction of dynamics in a long time horizon. We investigated the effectiveness of DSN against batch normalization,
dropout, spectral normalization, weight decay, weight normalization, jacobian regularization and orthonormal regularization and supported with empirical evidence that DSN owns
the highest effectiveness by learning the convolutional filters
in a robust manner. Numerical experiments further reveal that
with DSN there is a substantial potential to uncover the hidden PDEs in a scarce data setting and predict the dynamical
behavior for a long time horizon, even in a noisy environment
where all data samples are contaminated with noise.

1

It was recently shown that residual network (ResNet) (He
et al. 2016a,b) has close relation with PDEs and may be suitable for PDE modeling and discovery (Haber and Ruthotto
2017; Sonoda and Murata 2017; Qin, Wu, and Xiu 2019;
Wu and Xiu 2020). Exploiting the architecture of convolutional ResNet, Long et al. (2017); Long, Lu, and Dong
(2019) introduced PDE-Net which trains convolutional filters (abbr. filters) with moment constraints and weights matrices to approximate the derivatives terms and variable coefficients of PDE without assumptions on the explicit form
of the PDE being known. PDE-Net possesses high interpretability and requires zero prior knowledge on the PDE
to be discovered, but it lacks regularization on its filters and
suffers from numerical instability intrinsic in numerical differentiation (Burden and Faires 2004; Baydin et al. 2017).
In the PDE-Net approach, (1) is discretized to

Introduction

Partial differential equations (PDEs) play a significant role
in many scientific disciplines for describing the dynamics
in the systems of interest. Traditionally, PDEs are derived
based on first principles. For example, the Navier-Stokes
equations in fluid dynamics are derived from the conservation laws of mass, momentum and energy; the BlackScholes equations in option pricing theory are derived from
the geometric brownian motion assumption of stock price
dynamics. However, these first principles are not always
available as the governing physical laws may be unknown
or the dynamical systems are too complicated. Given the recent advances of machine learning theories, the rapid development of computational powers and the availability of vast
quantities of data, a data-driven approach to uncover the hidden PDEs in dynamical systems was emerging and popular
in the past decade.

i1 +i2 +...,+i
X S =K
∂u
≈
Ai ,i ,...,iS (Di1 ,i2 ,...,iS ~ ~u)
∂t i =0,i =0,...,i =0 1 2
1

2

S

+ Non-linear terms

(2)

where
• Di1 ,i2 ,...,iS are filters. Under moment constraints,
i1 +i2 ...+iS
u
Di1 ,i2 ,...,iS ~ ~u acts as a discretization of ∂ i1 i2
iS .
∂x1 ∂x2 ...∂xS

• Ai1 ,i2 ,...,iS are weight matrices discretizing the coefficient
functions.
• Non-linear terms include (D2,0,...,0 D0,1,...,0 ) ~ ~u
2
which models ∂u
· ∂u with being hadamard product.
∂x2 ∂x2

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9675

