The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stereopagnosia: Fooling Stereo Networks with Adversarial Perturbations
Alex Wong: , Mukund Mundhra: , Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab
alexw@cs.ucla.edu, mukundmundhra@cs.ucla.edu, soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

fer to this phenomenon as stereopagnosia, a geometric analogue of prosopagnosia (Damasio, Damasio, and Van Hoesen 1982).
Specifically, we consider stereo networks, that are functions that take as input a calibrated stereo pair and produce
a depth map as output. A stereo pair consists of two images captured by cameras in known relative configuration
(position and orientation), with non-zero parallax (distance
between the optical centers), projectively rectified so that
corresponding points (points in the two image planes whose
pre-image under perspective projections intersect in space)
lie on corresponding scan-lines. A depth map is a function
that associates to each pixel in a rectified image a positive
real number corresponding to the distance of the point of
first intersection in the scene from the optical center.
Equivalently, the network can output disparity, the displacement between corresponding points in the two images,
from which depth can be computed in closed form. Wherever a point in the scene is supported on a surface that is
Lambertian, locally smooth, seen under constant illumination, co-visible from both images, and sporting a sufficiently
exciting reflectance,1 its distance from the images can be
computed in closed-form (Ma et al. 2012). Where such assumptions are violated, disparity is either not defined, for
instance in occluded regions that are visible from one image
but not the other, or ill-posed, for instance in regions with
constant reflectance where any disparity is equally valid (the
so-called “aperture problem”). To impute disparity to these
regions, regularization can be either generic (e.g., minimalsurface assumptions (Horn and Schunck 1981)) or datadriven, exploiting known relations between stereo pairs and
disparity in scenes other than the one in question. This is
where stereo networks come in.
Our first contribution is to show that stereo networks are
vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, which are small
additive changes in the input images (either one or both),
designed for a specific image pair in a way that maximally changes the output of a specific trained deep network model. The fact that it is possible to alter the disparity,
even in regions that satisfy the assumptions discussed above
(Fig. 3), where disparity is uniquely defined and computable

We study the effect of adversarial perturbations of images on
the estimates of disparity by deep learning models trained
for stereo. We show that imperceptible additive perturbations
can significantly alter the disparity map, and correspondingly
the perceived geometry of the scene. These perturbations not
only affect the specific model they are crafted for, but transfer
to models with different architecture, trained with different
loss functions. We show that, when used for adversarial data
augmentation, our perturbations result in trained models that
are more robust, without sacrificing overall accuracy of the
model. This is unlike what has been observed in image classification, where adding the perturbed images to the training
set makes the model less vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, but to the detriment of overall accuracy. We test our
method using the most recent stereo networks and evaluate
their performance on public benchmark datasets.

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks are seen as fragile, in the sense that
small perturbations of their input, for instance an image, can
cause a large change in the output, for instance the inferred
class of objects in the scene (Moosavi-Dezfooli, Fawzi, and
Frossard 2016) or its depth map (Wong, Cicek, and Soatto
2020). This is not too surprising, since there are infinitely
many scenes that are consistent with the given image, so
at inference time one has to rely on the complex relation
between that image and different scenes portrayed in the
training set. This is not the case for stereo: Under mild assumptions discussed below, a depth map can be uniquely
inferred point-wise from two images. There is no need to
learn stereo, as the images of a particular scene are sufficient to infer its depth without relying on images of different scenes. (The reason we do use learning is to regularize the reconstruction where the assumptions mentioned
below are violated, for instance in regions of homogeneous
reflectance.) It would therefore be surprising if one could
perturb the images in a way that forces the model to overrule the evidence and alter the perceived depth map, especially if such perturbations affect regions of non-uniform reflectance. In this paper, we show that this can be done and re: denotes authors with equal contributions.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
There exist region statistics that exhibit isolated extrema, so
the region around the point is “distinctive” (Lowe 1999).

2879

