The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automated Cross-prompt Scoring of Essay Traits
Robert Ridley, Liang He, Xin-yu Dai,* Shujian Huang, Jiajun Chen
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization, Nanjing, 210023, China
{robertr, heliang}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {daixinyu, huangsj, chenjj}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
The majority of current research in Automated Essay Scoring (AES) focuses on prompt-specific scoring of either the
overall quality of an essay or the quality with regards to certain traits. In real-world applications obtaining labelled data
for a target essay prompt is often expensive or unfeasible,
requiring the AES system to be able to perform well when
predicting scores for essays from unseen prompts. As a result, some recent research has been dedicated to cross-prompt
AES. However, this line of research has thus far only been
concerned with holistic, overall scoring, with no exploration
into the scoring of different traits. As users of AES systems
often require feedback with regards to different aspects of
their writing, trait scoring is a necessary component of an effective AES system. Therefore, to address this need, we introduce a new task named Automated Cross-prompt Scoring
of Essay Traits, which requires the model to be trained solely
on non-target-prompt essays and to predict the holistic, overall score as well as scores for a number of specific traits for
target-prompt essays. This task challenges the model’s ability to generalize in order to score essays from a novel domain
as well as its ability to represent the quality of essays from
multiple different aspects. In addition, we introduce a new,
innovative approach which builds on top of a state-of-the-art
method for cross-prompt AES. Our method utilizes a traitattention mechanism and a multi-task architecture that leverages the relationships between each trait to simultaneously
predict the overall score and the score of each individual trait.
We conduct extensive experiments on the widely used ASAP
and ASAP++ datasets and demonstrate that our approach is
able to outperform leading prompt-specific trait scoring and
cross-prompt AES methods.

Figure 1: AES Tasks Summary

training and test data are drawn from the same distribution
DA .
Early work in prompt-specific AES primarily leveraged
handcrafted features used in combination with regression,
classification or ranking algorithms to award a holistic, overall score (Burstein et al. 1998; Miltsakaki and Kukich 2004;
Rudner and Liang 2002; Farra, Somasundaran, and Burstein
2015; Chen and He 2013).
Following the rise of deep learning, a number of neuralnetwork-based approaches have also been effective for holistic prompt-specific AES (Alikaniotis, Yannakoudakis, and
Rei 2016; Taghipour and Ng 2016; Dong and Zhang 2016;
Dong, Zhang, and Yang 2017; Tay et al. 2018).
In consideration for the need for richer feedback in AES
systems, some research has been dedicated to scoring essays
with regards to different traits. For example, Persing, Davis,
and Ng (2010) and Wachsmuth, Al-Khatib, and Stein (2016)
model the quality of the organization; Ke et al. (2018) score
essays with regards to their persuasiveness; Persing and Ng
(2013) model thesis clarity; and Persing and Ng (2014) provide feedback with regards to prompt adherence. More recently, researchers have explored providing feedback for
both the overall quality and the quality across multiple traits

Introduction
Automated Essay Scoring (AES) is the task of using computation to score an essay according to either its overall quality or its quality with regards to certain traits, e.g., organization, prompt adherence, narrativity, etc. The majority of
AES research focuses on scoring in a prompt-specific setting, whereby the model is both trained and tested on essays belonging to the same prompt. This can be seen in the
top-left and bottom-left images of Figure 1, where both the
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13745

