The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BANANAS: Bayesian Optimization with Neural Architectures for Neural
Architecture Search
Colin White,1 Willie Neiswanger, 23 Yash Savani 1
1
Abacus.AI
Stanford University
3
Petuum, Inc.
colin@abacus.ai, neiswanger@cs.stanford.edu, yash@abacus.ai
2

Abstract
Over the past half-decade, many methods have been considered for neural architecture search (NAS). Bayesian optimization (BO), which has long had success in hyperparameter
optimization, has recently emerged as a very promising strategy for NAS when it is coupled with a neural predictor. Recent
work has proposed different instantiations of this framework,
for example, using Bayesian neural networks or graph convolutional networks as the predictive model within BO. However,
the analyses in these papers often focus on the full-fledged
NAS algorithm, so it is difficult to tell which individual components of the framework lead to the best performance.
In this work, we give a thorough analysis of the “BO + neural
predictor” framework by identifying five main components:
the architecture encoding, neural predictor, uncertainty calibration method, acquisition function, and acquisition function
optimization. We test several different methods for each component and also develop a novel path-based encoding scheme
for neural architectures, which we show theoretically and empirically scales better than other encodings. Using all of our
analyses, we develop a final algorithm called BANANAS,
which achieves state-of-the-art performance on NAS search
spaces. We adhere to the NAS research checklist (Lindauer
and Hutter 2019) to facilitate best practices, and our code is
available at https://github.com/naszilla/naszilla.1

Introduction
Since the deep learning revolution in 2012, neural networks
have been growing increasingly more complex and specialized (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Huang et al.
2017; Szegedy et al. 2017). Developing new state-of-the-art
architectures often takes a vast amount of engineering and
domain knowledge. A rapidly developing area of research,
neural architecture search (NAS), seeks to automate this process. Since the popular work by Zoph and Le (2017), there
has been a flurry of research on NAS (Liu et al. 2018; Pham
et al. 2018; Liu, Simonyan, and Yang 2018; Kandasamy
et al. 2018b; Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter 2018; Jin, Song,
and Hu 2018). Many methods have been proposed, including evolutionary search, reinforcement learning, Bayesian
optimization (BO), and gradient descent. In certain settings,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Full-length paper here: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.11858.

10293

zeroth-order (non-differentiable) algorithms such as BO are
of particular interest over first-order (one-shot) techniques,
due to advantages such as simple parallelism, joint optimization with other hyperparameters, easy implementation,
portability to diverse architecture spaces, and optimization of
other/multiple non-differentiable objectives.
BO with Gaussian processes (GPs) has had success in deep
learning hyperparameter optimization (Golovin et al. 2017;
Falkner, Klein, and Hutter 2018), and is a leading method for
efficient zeroth order optimization of expensive-to-evaluate
functions in Euclidean spaces. However, initial approaches
for applying GP-based BO to NAS came with challenges that
limited its ability to achieve state-of-the-art results. For example, initial approaches required specifying a distance function
between architectures, which involved cumbersome hyperparameter tuning (Kandasamy et al. 2018b; Jin, Song, and Hu
2018), and required a time-consuming matrix inversion step.
Recently, Bayesian optimization with a neural predictor
has emerged as a high-performing framework for NAS. This
is similar to GP-based BO, except the GP is replaced with
a neural network that is trained to predict the accuracy of
unseen neural networks. This framework avoids the aforementioned problems with BO in NAS: there is no need to
construct a distance function between architectures, and the
neural predictor scales far better than a GP model. Recent
work has proposed different instantiations of this framework,
for example, Bayesian neural networks with BO (Springenberg et al. 2016), and graph neural networks with BO (Shi
et al. 2019; Ma, Cui, and Yang 2019). However, the analyses
often focus on the full-fledged NAS algorithm, making it
challenging to tell which components of the framework lead
to the best performance.
In this work, we start by performing a thorough analysis
of the “BO + neural predictor” framework. We identify five
major components of the framework: architecture encoding,
neural predictor, uncertainty calibration method, acquisition
function, and acquisition function optimization. For example,
graph convolutional networks, variational autoencoder-based
networks, or feedforward networks can be used for the neural
predictor, and Bayesian neural networks or different types of
ensembling methods can be used for the uncertainty calibration method. After conducting experiments on all components
of the BO + neural predictor framework, we use this analysis
to define a high-performance instantiation of the framework,

