The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Activity Image-to-Video Retrieval by Disentangling Appearance and Motion
Liu Liu, 1 Jiangtong Li, 1 Li Niu* , 1 Ruicong Xu, 2 Liqing Zhang 1
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MEITUAN
{Shirlley, keep moving-lee, ustcnewly}@sjtu.edu.cn, ranranxu95@gmail.com, zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the rapid emergence of video data, image-to-video retrieval has attracted much attention. There are two types of
image-to-video retrieval: instance-based and activity-based.
The former task aims to retrieve videos containing the same
main objects as the query image, while the latter focuses on
finding the similar activity. Since dynamic information plays
a significant role in the video, we pay attention to the latter task to explore the motion relation between images and
videos. In this paper, we propose a Motion-assisted Activity Proposal-based Image-to-Video Retrieval (MAP-IVR) approach to disentangle the video features into motion features
and appearance features and obtain appearance features from
the images. Then, we perform image-to-video translation to
improve the disentanglement quality. The retrieval is performed in both appearance and video feature spaces. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our MAP-IVR approach
remarkably outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on
two benchmark activity-based video datasets.

Figure 1: The example of the retrieved results of activitybased image-to-video retrieval with APIVR (Xu et al. 2020)
(resp., our expectation) (i.e., a,b,c,d (resp., e,f,g,h)), where
different activities are outlined with different colors. In detail, (b) represents “Frisbee Catch”, (d) represents “Baseball
Pitch”, while (a),(c),(e),(f),(g),(h), and the query image belong to “Long Jump”.

Introduction
Since the rapid growth of multimedia data has brought great
challenges to accurate retrieval across modalities, crossmodal retrieval has become a highlighted research topic in
the retrieval area. Besides, along with the promotion of online video platforms like YouTube, video-related retrieval
applications have drawn more and more attention from both
academia and industry. One of the most basic applications
is image-to-video retrieval, which aims to retrieve relevant
videos based on a query image. In general, image-to-video
retrieval can be categorized into Instance-based Image-toVideo Retrieval (IIVR) (Araujo and Girod 2018; Zhang et al.
2019) and Activity-based Image-to-Video Retrieval (AIVR)
(Xu et al. 2020). IIVR aims to retrieve videos from the
database based on the main instance (i.e., main objects) in
the query image, while AIVR aims to retrieve the videos
containing a similar activity as the query image. Compared
with IIVR, which mainly focuses on the static information
of different instances in the video, AIVR pays attention to
both static appearance and dynamic motion of these objects,
which makes it much more challenging.

For instance-based image-to-video retrieval, a simple
method (Sivic and Zisserman 2003) is to treat each frame in
the video as an individual image and calculate the similarity
between each frame and the query image. Nevertheless, the
heavy computation makes it unsuitable for large-scale data,
especially the long videos. To accelerate the retrieval process, Yu, Wang, and Yuan (2017) extracted object proposals from each frame and measured the similarity between
the query object and the whole video through hamming distance. Additionally, to incorporate the object features from
different views, Sivic, Schaffalitzky, and Zisserman (2004)
learned object representations of query images and returned
the objects of interest in video shots through object-level
matching. However, all the instance-based image-to-video
retrieval methods focus more on object detection and representation while ignoring the dynamic motion tendency of
different objects in videos and images, which makes them
difficult to discover the activity existing in the query image. Unlike IIVR, activity-based image-to-video retrieval
not only searches for the same instances, but also explores
the motion information in the videos. Considering this, in
this paper, we focus on discovering the activity-related con-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2145

