The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Retrieve and Revise: Improving Peptide Identification with Similar Mass Spectra
Zhengcong Fei1,2
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
feizhengcong@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

2019; Fei 2020c,b). Most existing deep learning-based identification methods learn a neural network in a supervised
learning manner based on elaborately designed peptidesequence matches. The essential practice of such models
follows encoder-decoder frameworks. In between, convolutional neural network (CNN) is utilized to encode an input mass spectrum, and recurrent neural network (RNN) is
adopted as a decoder to generate target peptide sequences
(Tran et al. 2017). During inference, the peptide identification models usually generate the sequence through one-pass
decoding from left to right, that is, only conditions on the
extracted spectrum features and previously generated subsequence to determine the next target amino acid.
One major limitation of such a one-pass process is that the
next amino acid generation only uses partial information of
the previously generated incomplete peptide sequence rather
than considering the global information carried by a complete target candidate. Meanwhile, the peptide fragments are
more likely to occur in the middle position in a practical biological experiment, which results in a lower abundance of
useful signal peaks on the sides of spectra and easy to be
concealed by noise peaks (Fei 2020b). Future information
of the target domain is intuitively beneficial for the current
sequence generation since each amino acid in the target peptide has to be consistent with its surrounding subsequences,
i.e., both before and after it. Different approaches have been
proposed to leverage the global information, e.g., (Qiao et al.
2019) designs an order invariant network structure to encode
entire spectrum effectively. (Fei 2020b) introduces a hierarchical multi-stage framework, which starts the inference
with a selected high-confidence guiding tag and provides
the complete sequence based on this tag. (Fei 2020c) train
a value network to estimate all possible sequence extensions
of reward to assist current decision. These approaches are of
relatively good quality, but inefficient to generate and train.
Inspired from (Zhang et al. 2018; Gu et al. 2018), we propose a new paradigm for peptide identification, which consists of a similar spectrum retriever and a peptide sequence
reviser. In specific, given a mass spectrum, we first retrieve
a similar spectrum and its associated peptide sequence from
database, i.e., the original training data. Then, we concatenate both spectrum vectors weighted by attention module to
a difference vector. Finally, we revise the reference peptide
sequence condition on the difference vector. The proposed

Tandem mass spectrometry is an indispensable technology
for identification of proteins from complex mixtures. Accurate and sensitive analysis of large amounts of mass spectra data is a principal challenge in proteomics. Conventional
deep learning-based peptide identification models usually
adopt an encoder-decoder framework and generate target sequence from left to right without fully exploiting the global
information. A few recent approaches seek to employ twopass decoding, yet have limitations when facing the spectra
filled with noise. In this paper, we propose a new paradigm for
improved peptide identification, which first retrieves a similar
mass spectrum from the database as a reference and then revise the matched sequence according to the difference information between the referenced spectrum and current context.
The inspiration of design comes that the retrieved peptidespectrum pair provides a good start point and indirect access
to both past and future information, such that each revised
amino acid can be produced with better noise perception and
global understanding. Moreover, a disturb-based optimization process is introduced to sharpen the attention for difference vector with reinforcement learning before fed to decoder. Experimental results on several public datasets demonstrate that prominent performance boost is obtained with the
proposed method. Remarkably, we achieve new state-of-theart identification results on these datasets.

1

Introduction

Proteins are key actors in all cellular processes and pathways (Bantscheff et al. 2007). Moreover, almost all diseases
are linked to perturbations of proteins. Consequently, the
fundamental study of proteins is underlying most biological
questions (Yates III 1998; Mann, Hendrickson, and Pandey
2001; Venable et al. 2004). Mass spectrometry (MS) is applied to obtain sequential information of proteins, such as
amino acid sequence, composition, and modifications (Yates
et al. 1995). Among these, determining the protein subsequence, named peptide, to each produced mass spectrum is
the workhorses in the entire identification pipelines and has
attracted much research attention recently (Shao and Lam
2017). The advances in deep neural networks (DNNs) have
demonstrated promising performances in peptide identification tasks (Tran et al. 2017; Qiao et al. 2019; Tran et al.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14766

