The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EeLISA: Combating Global Warming Through the Rapid Analysis of Eelgrass
Wasting Disease
Brendan H. Rappazzo,1 Morgan E. Eisenlord, 2 Olivia J. Graham, 2
Lillian R. Aoki, 2 Phoebe D. Dawkins, 3 Drew Harvell, 2 Carla P. Gomes 1
1
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University
3
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Irvine
{bhr54,me367,ojg5,lra53}@cornell.edu, dawkinsp@uci.edu, cdh5@cornell.edu, gomes@cs.cornell.edu
2

Abstract
Global warming is the greatest threat facing our planet, and
is causing environmental disturbance at an unprecedented
scale. We are strongly positioned to leverage the advancements of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) which provide humanity, for the first time in history,
an analysis and decision making tool at massive scale. Strong
evidence supports that global warming is contributing to marine ecosystem decline, including eelgrass habitat. Eelgrass
is affected by an opportunistic marine pathogen and infections are likely exacerbated by rising ocean temperatures.
The necessary disease analysis required to inform conservation priorities is incredibly laborious, and acts as a significant
bottleneck for research. To this end, we developed EeLISA
(Eelgrass Lesion Image Segmentation Application). EeLISA
enables ecologist experts to train a segmentation module to
perform this crucial analysis at human level accuracy, while
minimizing their labeling time and integrating into their existing workflow. EeLISA has been deployed for over 16 months,
and has facilitated the preparation of four manuscripts including a critical eelgrass study ranging from Southern California
to Alaska. These studies, utilizing EeLISA, have led to scientific insight and discovery in marine disease ecology.

Figure 1: Example of a healthy eelgrass bed.
and scaled to fit demand all across the world, allowing for
huge leaps in the democratization of human knowledge and
insight.
One application that can benefit from AI are seagrasses,
one of the world’s most productive ecosystems composed
of the only flowering plants in the marine environment.
These complex ecosystems provide essential services for our
planet, such as the sequestration of consequential amounts
of carbon, actively mitigating the effects of anthropogenic
climate change [Waycott et al. 2009]. Eelgrass (Zostera marina) is one of the most widespread seagrass species, forming extensive meadows throughout the temperate Northern
Hemisphere [Moore et al. 2006]. However, eelgrass is susceptible to Eelgrass Wasting Disease (EWD), which has historically caused precipitous decline, and is threatening to do
the same now [Lefcheck et al. 2017; Groner et al. 2016].
In order to assess EWD, ecologists analyze relevant disease metrics of prevalence and severity. Prevalence is a basic
measure of whether or not the plant is afflicted by EWD,
and is determined by the absence or presence of EWDassociated lesions. Severity yields the extent of the infection, and is calculated by the ratio of lesioned tissue to total
tissue. Using these two metrics, ecologists characterize eelgrass bed health. With auxiliary measurements of environmental conditions (i.e. temperature, salinity, pH), ecologists

Introduction
Humanity has forged a new age known as the Anthropocene,
marked by unprecedented influence of human activity on climate and the environment. Studying the damage to earth’s
ecosystems presents a massive challenge, as it requires collecting vast amounts of samples and fine-grained analysis.
A major limitation of ecological studies is the expertise required to complete the necessary fieldwork and subsequent
analysis. Consequently, the human bandwidth to do these
crucial studies is very limited.
However, recent advances in AI have demonstrated a remarkable ability to perform analysis at or above human
level [Huang et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2017], even when the
task requires expert level knowledge [Lin, RoyChowdhury,
and Maji 2015]. Furthermore, once an AI system has been
trained to perform at expert level accuracy, it can be shared
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15156

