The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Aware Leap-LSTM: Integrating Prior Knowledge into Leap-LSTM
towards Faster Long Text Classification
Jinhua Du, Yan Huang, Karo Moilanen
Investments AI, AIG (American International Group, Inc.)
{jinhua.du, yan.huang, karo.moilanen}@aig.com

Abstract

understood by partial reading (Yu, Lee, and Le 2017). Some
research shows that not all input tokens are equally important in many NLP tasks (Seo et al. 2017).
To accelerate RNNs in processing long text, recent research has been focusing on mechanisms to skip/skim
irrelevant, unimportant or redundant words in input for
RNNs (Yu, Lee, and Le 2017; Campos et al. 2017; Seo et al.
2017; Liu et al. 2018; Hansen et al. 2019; Huang, Shen, and
Deng 2019). We define such models as “selective RNNs”.
Representative selective RNNs include LSTM-Jump (Yu,
Lee, and Le 2017), Skip-RNN (Campos et al. 2017), SkimRNN (Seo et al. 2017) and Leap-LSTM (Huang, Shen, and
Deng 2019). While they involve different modifications of
standard RNNs/LSTM, selective RNNs share a crucial component: a decision making network predicting whether a
word should be skipped/skimmed or not. In general, the decision making component is jointly trained with the classification targets in a supervised learning framework. However,
due to the absence of labelled ground truths on whether a
word should be skipped or not, there is no direct supervision
signal for the training of the decision making component,
resulting in inaccurate skipping process.
To improve the accuracy of skipping process, we propose
a novel architecture using two strategies to integrate prior
human knowledge to partially supervise the skipping process. For the prior human knowledge, we use existing keywords, terminologies or lexicons, which has been beneficial
for many NLP classification tasks such as document categorisation, topic modelling, sentiment analysis etc. In the
following sections, we use the term keyword or keywords
to refer to prior human knowledge. We define our general
architecture as Knowledge-Aware Selective RNNs for long
text and document classification.
The contributions of this paper include:

While widely used in industry, recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) are known to have deficiencies in dealing with long
sequences (e.g. slow inference, vanishing gradients etc.). Recent research has attempted to accelerate RNN models by developing mechanisms to skip irrelevant words in input. Due
to the lack of labelled data, it remains as a challenge to decide which words to skip, especially for low-resource classification tasks. In this paper, we propose Knowledge-Aware
Leap-LSTM (KALL), a novel architecture which integrates
prior human knowledge (created either manually or automatically) like in-domain keywords, terminologies or lexicons
into Leap-LSTM to partially supervise the skipping process.
More specifically, we propose a knowledge-oriented cost
function for KALL; furthermore, we propose two strategies
to integrate the knowledge: (1) the Factored KALL approach
involves a keyword indicator as a soft constraint for the skipping process, and (2) the Gated KALL enforces the inclusion
of keywords while maintaining a differentiable network in
training. Experiments on different public datasets show that
our approaches are 1.1x ∼ 2.6x faster than LSTM with
better accuracy and 23.6x faster than XLNet in a resourcelimited CPU-only environment.

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks, including vanilla RNN, Long
Short-term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) (Chung et al.
2014), are suitable for sequential natural language processing (NLP) tasks. They have been widely used in many industrial areas such as finance (Han et al. 2018) and healthcare (Miotto et al. 2018). Typically, RNNs read in either
all or a fixed length of text sequentially, and output a distributed representation for each token. However, while such
process is essential for some applications like machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), it makes RNNs
slow to process long input text common in e.g. document
classification (Liu et al. 2015) or question answering (Tan,
Xiang, and Zhou 2015). Meanwhile, humans read text by
making a sequence of fixations and saccades, i.e. fixating
some words and skip others (Hahn and Keller 2016), because texts are usually written with redundancy and can be

• We propose a novel architecture to integrate prior knowledge to selective RNNs. We illustrate this architecture
with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) Leap-LSTM (Huang,
Shen, and Deng 2019), and refer to the architecture as
knowledge-aware Leap-LSTM (KALL) in the rest of the
paper. Two different integration strategies are proposed,
namely the factored KALL and gated KALL;
• The factored KALL uses a vector to indicate keywords
and concatenates the indicator with word embeddings for

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12768

