The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Attributes-Guided and Pure-Visual Attention Alignment
for Few-Shot Recognition
Siteng Huang,1,2 Min Zhang,2 Yachen Kang,2 Donglin Wang2∗
1

2

Zhejiang University
Machine Intelligence Lab (MiLAB), AI Division, School of Engineering, Westlake University
{huangsiteng, zhangmin, kangyachen, wangdonglin}@westlake.edu.cn
black and black crown
black eye
white nape

Abstract
The purpose of few-shot recognition is to recognize novel categories with a limited number of labeled examples in each
class. To encourage learning from a supplementary view, recent approaches have introduced auxiliary semantic modalities into effective metric-learning frameworks that aim to
learn a feature similarity between training samples (support
set) and test samples (query set). However, these approaches
only augment the representations of samples with available
semantics while ignoring the query set, which loses the potential for the improvement and may lead to a shift between
the modalities combination and the pure-visual representation. In this paper, we devise an attributes-guided attention
module (AGAM) to utilize human-annotated attributes and
learn more discriminative features. This plug-and-play module enables visual contents and corresponding attributes to
collectively focus on important channels and regions for the
support set. And the feature selection is also achieved for
query set with only visual information while the attributes
are not available. Therefore, representations from both sets
are improved in a fine-grained manner. Moreover, an attention alignment mechanism is proposed to distill knowledge
from the guidance of attributes to the pure-visual branch for
samples without attributes. Extensive experiments and analysis show that our proposed module can significantly improve
simple metric-based approaches to achieve state-of-the-art
performance on different datasets and settings.

support
original image

without attributes

with attributes

query
original image

without attention
alignment

with attention
alignment

Figure 1: An illustration of the effect of our proposed attention alignment mechanism. The network learns to focus
more on discriminative features of support samples with the
guidance of auxiliary attributes. And the attention alignment
mechanism helps the self-guided branch to learn to select
important features without attributes.

unseen classes do not overlap, which makes classical deep
learning methods to have generalization issues. Meanwhile,
only very few labeled samples are available for the test unseen classes, which may cause severe overfitting when trying
common fine-tuning strategies.
An effective approach to the few-shot recognition problem is to train a neural network to embed support and query
samples into a smaller embedding space, where categories
can distinguish with each other based on a distance metric (Vinyals et al. 2016; Sung et al. 2018). Existing works
have achieved promising results by improving the informativeness and discriminability of the learned representations.
Ulteriorly, inspired by the hypothesis that language helps infants to learn to recognize new visual objects (Jackendoff
1987), some recent approaches introduce auxiliary semantic
modalities such as label embeddings (Xing et al. 2019) and
attribute annotations (Tokmakov, Wang, and Hebert 2019)
to compensate for the lack of supervision. These approaches
assume that auxiliary semantic information is only avail-

Introduction
The recent success of visual recognition tasks commonly
relies on supervised learning from a large number of labeled samples. However, in many practical applications, it
is expensive and time-consuming to collect sufficient labeled samples for each category. Inspired by the fact that
humans are good at learning to identify objects with very little direct supervision, few-shot learning (FSL) has attracted
considerable attention. Trained on sufficient labeled samples
from known categories (seen classes) and given very few labeled samples (support set) of a set of new categories (unseen classes), few-shot recognition methods aim at classifying unlabeled samples (query set) into these new categories.
To imitate the process of learning new concepts, seen and
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7840

