The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpretable Actions:
Controlling Experts with Understandable Commands
Shumeet Baluja, David Marwood, Michele Covell
Google Research, Google, Inc.
{shumeet,marwood,covell}@google.com

Abstract
Despite the prevalence of deep neural networks, their single
most cited drawback is that, even when successful, their operations are inscrutable. For many applications, the desired
outputs are the composition of externally-defined bases. For
such decomposable domains, we present a two-stage learning procedure producing combinations of the external bases
which are trivially extractable from the network. In the first
stage, the set of external bases that will form the solution are
modeled as differentiable generator modules, controlled by the
same parameters as the external bases. In the second stage, a
controller network is created that selects parameters for those
generators, either successively or in parallel, to compose the
final solution. Through three tasks, we concretely demonstrate
how our system yields readily understandable commands. In
one, we introduce a new form of artistic style transfer, learning
to draw and color with crayons, in which the transformation
of a photograph or painting occurs not as a single monolithic
computation, but by the composition of thousands of individual, visualizable strokes. The other two tasks, single-pass
function approximation with arbitrary bases and shape-based
synthesis, show how our approach produces understandable
and extractable actions in two disparate domains.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the longest-standing drawback of neural networks
has been their lack of interpretability (Chakraborty et al.
2017; Fan, Xiong, and Wang 2020; Harnad 1990; Smolensky
1986). This work improves interpretability using a training
approach that naturally lends itself to understandable actions
and transformations. For many domains, the target solution is
the composition of externally-defined operations or external
bases. The bases can be complex, non-differentiable, or otherwise ill-behaved. In our approach, these external bases are
individually approximated by differentiable deep neural networks (DNNs) called generator modules. The generators are
frozen and a controller DNN is trained to output interpretable
control commands to the generators. Under the guidance of
the controller, the system composes the output of the generators to create the final output. The control commands are
trivial to extract from the network and reveal how to construct
the output using solely the external bases.
We demonstrate this technique through three tasks:

Figure 1: A network recreates an image with individual
crayon strokes. A: Original. B: first 10 crayon strokes. C-E:
successive strokes. Clear representation of dominant image
features are created quickly. F: Final result. Top-Bottom: A
painting by Hokusai, a portrait and a landscape photograph.
• Function Approximator: Composes an arbitrarily complex input function using simple external bases.
• Style Transfer: Thousands of individual crayon strokes
are composed to stylistically reproduce an image (see Figure 1). This introduces a novel approach to style transfer.
• Inverse Renderer: A target image is deconstructed into
simple geometric shapes.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4912

