The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multiple Kernel Clustering
with Kernel k-Means Coupled Graph Tensor Learning
Zhenwen Ren1,2 , Quansen Sun1∗ and Dong Wei1
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
School of National Defence Science and Technology, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang, China
{rzw, sunquansen}@njust.edu.cn, dongweinjust@163.com

kernel k-means to output the clustering indicator matrix.
Some representative methods, (Huang, Chuang, and Chen
2012; Gönen and Margolin 2014; Du et al. 2015), assume
that the optimal kernel is a linear combination of base kernels. In (Huang, Chuang, and Chen 2012), the algorithm alternatively performs kernel k-means and updates the kernel weights. The method proposed in (Gönen and Margolin 2014) combines the base kernels by sample-adaptive
weights. To improve the robustness with respect to noises
and outliers, (Du et al. 2015) presents a robust kernel kmeans by using `21 -norm to measure the distances between
data points and cluster centers. By relying on neighborhood
kernel learning, there are also other methods (Liu et al. 2016,
2017, 2020a), which learn a non-linearly combination of
base kernels to enhance the representability of the optimal
kernel. Both (Liu et al. 2016) and (Liu et al. 2017) incorporate a matrix-induced regularization to sufficiently consider the correlation among base kernels, with the difference
that the former learns a clustering indicator matrix directly,
and the latter learns a neighborhood consensus kernel as the
input of kernel k-means. Recently, (Liu et al. 2020a) proposes to maximally align the consensus partition with the
weighted base partitions to significantly reduce the computational complexity.

Abstract
Kernel k-means (KKM) and spectral clustering (SC) are two
basic methods used for multiple kernel clustering (MKC),
which have both been widely used to identify clusters that are
non-linearly separable. However, both of them have their own
shortcomings: 1) the KKM-based methods usually focus on
learning a discrete clustering indicator matrix via a combined
consensus kernel, but cannot exploit the high-order affinities
of all pre-defined base kernels; and 2) the SC-based methods require a robust and meaningful affinity graph in kernel
space as input in order to form clusters with desired clustering structure. In this paper, a novel method, kernel k-means
coupled graph tensor (KCGT), is proposed to graciously couple KKM and SC for seizing their merits and evading their
demerits simultaneously. In specific, we innovatively develop
a new graph learning paradigm by leveraging an explicit theoretical connection between clustering indicator matrix and
affinity graph, such that the affinity graph propagated from
KKM enjoys the valuable block diagonal and sparse property. Then, by using this graph learning paradigm, base kernels can produce multiple candidate affinity graphs, which are
stacked into a low-rank graph tensor for capturing the highorder affinity of all these graphs. After that, by averaging all
the frontal slices of the tensor, a high-quality affinity graph is
obtained. Extensive experiments have shown the superiority
of KCGT compared with the state-of-the-art MKC methods.

SC-based MKC methods consist of first constructing an
affinity matrix (graph) based on graphical representations
of the relationships among data points in kernel space, and
then applying spectral clustering algorithm to obtain the label assignments. It is well know that the performance of
such SC-based methods are heavily dependent on the quality of the affinity graph (Huang, Nie, and Huang 2015).
Therefore, these methods aim to learn a more high-quality
affinity graph by jointing some graph learning paradigms. In
the perspective of graph learning, the existing researches on
this aspect can roughly be grouped into two categories. The
first category learns a consensus graph via kernelized selfexpressiveness subspace learning (Kang et al. 2018; Zhou
et al. 2019b; Ren and Sun 2020). In (Kang et al. 2018), a
consensus affinity graph is directly learned for clustering and
semi-supervised classification. (Zhou et al. 2019b) defines a
neighbor kernel and linearly combine these base neighbor
kernels to learn a consensus affinity matrix via an exactrank-constrained. The work in (Ren and Sun 2020) considers
the global and local structure information of the data simul-

Introduction
To overcome the challenging problem of non-linear data
clustering, kernel methods have been widely studied. However, for the traditional kernel methods, the most suitable
kernel and the associated parameter for a specific dataset
are difficult to decide in advance. To alleviate the problem
of kernel choice, multiple kernel clustering (MKC) has attracted intense attention in recent years, which only requires
users to pre-specify a set of base kernels, and automatically
fuse the information of them for clustering purpose. Overall,
kernel k-means (KKM) and spectral clustering (SC) are two
basic methods used for MKC.
KKM-based MKC methods usually learn a consensus kernel by linearly or non-linearly combining the given base
kernels, and simultaneously/subsequently employ the the
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9411

