The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach to First-Order Logic Theorem Proving
Maxwell Crouse∗1 , Ibrahim Abdelaziz∗2 , Bassem Makni2 , Spencer Whitehead3 , Cristina Cornelio2 ,
Pavan Kapanipathi2 , Kavitha Srinivas2 , Veronika Thost4 , Michael Witbrock5 , Achille Fokoue2
1

Northwestern University, 2 IBM Research, 3 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
4
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, 5 The University of Auckland
mvcrouse@u.northwestern.edu, {ibrahim.abdelaziz1, bassem.makni, kavitha.srinivas, veronika.thost}@ibm.com,
{kapanipa,achille}@us.ibm.com, cor@zurich.ibm.com, m.witbrock@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract

Möhrmann 2016), the specifics of when and why to use a
particular strategy are still often hard to define (Schulz 2017).
Many state-of-the-art ATPs use machine learning to automatically determine heuristics for assisting with proof guidance. Generally, the features considered by such learned
heuristics have been manually designed (Kaliszyk, Urban,
and Vyskočil 2015; Jakubuv and Urban 2017), though more
recently they have been learned through deep learning (Loos
et al. 2017; Chvalovský et al. 2019; Paliwal et al. 2019),
which has the appeal of lessening the amount of expert knowledge needed compared with handcrafting new heuristics.
These neural approaches have just begun to yield impressive
results, e.g. Enigma-NG (Jakubuv and Urban 2019) showed
that purely neural proof guidance could be integrated into E
(Schulz 2002) to improve its performance over manually designed proof-search strategies. However, in order to achieve
competitive performance with state-of-the-art ATPs, neural
methods (as they have been applied thus far) have critically
relied on being seeded with proofs from an existing stateof-the-art reasoner (which itself will use a strong manually
designed proof-search strategy). Thus, such approaches are
still subject to the biases inherent to the theorem-proving
strategies used in their initialization.
Reinforcement learning a la AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al.
2017b) has been explored as a natural solution to this problem, where the system automatically learns proof guidance
strategies from scratch. More generally, reinforcement learning has been successfully applied to theorem proving with
first-order logic (Kaliszyk et al. 2018; Piotrowski and Urban 2019; Zombori et al. 2019; Zombori, Urban, and Brown
2020), higher-order logic (Bansal et al. 2019a), and also with
logics less expressive than first-order logic (Kusumoto, Yahata, and Sakai 2018; Lederman, Rabe, and Seshia 2018;
Chen and Tian 2018).
In this work, we target theorem proving for first-order
logic, where tabula rasa reinforcement learning (i.e., learning
from scratch) has been integrated into tableau-based theorem
provers (Kaliszyk et al. 2018; Zombori et al. 2019; Zombori, Urban, and Brown 2020). Connection tableau theorem

Automated theorem provers have traditionally relied on manually tuned heuristics to guide how they perform proof search.
Deep reinforcement learning has been proposed as a way to obviate the need for such heuristics, however, its deployment in
automated theorem proving remains a challenge. In this paper
we introduce TRAIL, a system that applies deep reinforcement
learning to saturation-based theorem proving. TRAIL leverages (a) a novel neural representation of the state of a theorem
prover and (b) a novel characterization of the inference selection process in terms of an attention-based action policy. We
show through systematic analysis that these mechanisms allow
TRAIL to significantly outperform previous reinforcementlearning-based theorem provers on two benchmark datasets for
first-order logic automated theorem proving (proving around
15% more theorems).

1

Introduction

Automated theorem provers (ATPs) have established themselves as useful tools for solving problems that are expressible in a variety of knowledge representation formalisms.
Such problems are commonplace in areas core to computer
science (e.g., compilers (Curzon and Curzon 1991; Leroy
2009), operating systems (Klein 2009), and even distributed
systems (Hawblitzel et al. 2015; Garland and Lynch 1998)),
where ATPs are used to prove that a system satisfies some formal design specification. Unfortunately, while the formalisms
that underlie such problems have been (more or less) fixed,
the strategies needed to solve them have been anything but.
With each new domain added to the purview of automated
theorem proving, there has been a need for the development
of new heuristics and strategies that restrict or order how an
ATP searches for proofs. This process of guiding a theorem
prover during proof search is referred to as proof guidance.
Though proof guidance heuristics have been shown to have a
drastic impact on theorem proving performance (Schulz and
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6279

