The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Generalized Relational Heuristic Networks
for Model-Agnostic Planning
Rushang Karia, Siddharth Srivastava
School of Computing, Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{Rushang.Karia, siddharths}@asu.edu

Abstract

heuristics for planning. However, the current landscape of
learning heuristics using deep learning has two major limitations (see Sec. 6 for details). Firstly, most existing algorithms require either handwritten, symbolic action models or
domain-specific network architectures. Approaches that utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (e.g., Shen, Trevizan,
and Thiébaux (2020)) require action models to be expressed
in a representational language such as the Planning Domain
Definition Language (PDDL) (Fox and Long 2003). Groshev et al. (2018) need domain-specific network architectures and input representations. Second, most approaches require large amounts of training data as input, which in turn
requires good off-the-shelf planners, undermining the utility
of learning heuristics in order to solve planning problems.
Our approach to the problem uses abstraction with deep
learning to learn heuristic generating functions (HGFs) without symbolic action models. We show that domain-wide
heuristics learned using this method can efficiently generalize to problems which contain object quantities much larger
than those in the training set. We also develop and evaluate
leapfrogging, a bootstrapping technique that was proposed
in recent work (Groshev et al. 2018) but has not been sufficiently developed and tested for learning generalized heuristics. We show that this technique facilitates handsfree fewshot learning (Vanschoren 2018) for competitive generalized
relational heuristics without requiring external sources of
training data. Meta-learning techniques like few-shot learning have seen limited applications in relational settings in
prior work.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. 2
presents the necessary formal framework. Sec. 3 defines the
learning problem and describes our approach for learning
followed by a description of using the learned heuristic for
planning (Sec. 4). Sec. 5 discusses obtained results. Sec. 6
summarizes related work followed by conclusions (Sec. 7).

Computing goal-directed behavior is essential to designing
efficient AI systems. Due to the computational complexity of
planning, current approaches rely primarily upon hand-coded
symbolic action models and hand-coded heuristic function
generators for efficiency. Learned heuristics for such problems have been of limited utility as they are difficult to apply
to problems with objects and object quantities that are significantly different from those in the training data. This paper
develops a new approach for learning generalized heuristics
in the absence of symbolic action models using deep neural
networks that utilize an input predicate vocabulary but are
agnostic to object names and quantities. It uses an abstract
state representation to facilitate data-efficient, generalizable
learning. Empirical evaluation on a range of benchmark domains shows that in contrast to prior approaches, generalized
heuristics computed by this method can be transferred easily
to problems with different objects and with object quantities
much larger than those in the training data.

1

Introduction

Given the computational complexity of automated planning (Bylander 1991, 1994), search-based planning algorithms often employ heuristics for efficiency (Hoffmann and
Nebel 2001; Bonet and Geffner 2001; Helmert and Domshlak 2009). Designing good domain-wide heuristics as well
as good domain-independent heuristic-generation principles
such as “delete-relaxation” (Hoffmann and Nebel 2001) often requires a careful study of the representation language
or the structure of the underlying problems; the resulting
heuristic generating functions (HGFs) are limited to planning problems where the agent’s action models can be expressed using the same representation language.
This paper addresses the problem of learning domainwide, generalizable heuristics without relying upon symbolic action models. A key requirement of the problem is
that the learned heuristic be generalizable in the sense that
it can effectively transfer to problems with different object
names and/or object quantities. Recently, techniques that use
deep learning to learn domain-wide (Groshev et al. 2018)
and domain-independent (Shen, Trevizan, and Thiébaux
2020) heuristics have demonstrated that it is possible to learn

2

Formal Framework

A planning problem is a tuple Γ = hO, P, A, sinit , g, δi
where O is a set of objects, P is a set of predicates and A
is a set of unit-cost actions. Object types can be expressed
as unary predicates. The state space S for a planning problem as defined above is the set of all possible assignments
of truth values to predicates in P instantiated with objects
from O. sinit ∈ S is the initial state and g is a goal condition

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8064

