The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

One SPRING to Rule Them Both:
Symmetric AMR Semantic Parsing and Generation without a Complex Pipeline
Michele Bevilacqua

Rexhina Blloshmi

Roberto Navigli

Sapienza NLP Group
Department of Computer Science, Sapienza University of Rome
{bevilacqua,blloshmi,navigli}@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract

Recent state-of-the-art approaches to Text-to-AMR semantic parsing feature very complex pre- and postprocessing pipelines, in which the output of several different
components is integrated. Additionally, they employ finegrained, content-specific heuristics developed on the basis
of the training set that, as a consequence, can be very brittle across domains and genres. The parsing performance of
simpler, full Sequence-to-Sequence (seq2seq) methods has
hitherto lagged behind, mainly because they are less dataefficient than their alternatives.
When it comes to AMR-to-Text generation, which can
be seen as the inverse task to Text-to-AMR parsing, vanilla
seq2seq methods have, instead, achieved state-of-the-art results. This architectural asymmetry is not observed in other
bidirectional transduction tasks such as machine translation,
where the same architecture is used to handle the translation
from language X to language Y , and vice versa. Motivated
by this, a key goal of this paper is to achieve symmetry in
AMR parsing and generation as well, by providing the same
architecture for both. Moreover, we reduce the complexity
of Text-to-AMR architectures by disposing of the need for
content-modifying pipelines and additional syntactic and semantic features, which often depend on external components
and data-specific heuristics. We achieve this by linearizing
the AMR graph efficiently and by extending a pretrained
seq2seq model, i.e., BART (Lewis et al. 2020), to handle
both AMR-to-Text and Text-to-AMR. In fact, the only external resource consistently beneficial for our model is an
off-the-shelf system for Entity Linking – a task that is hard
to perform robustly with pure seq2seq models.
Our contributions are the following:

In Text-to-AMR parsing, current state-of-the-art semantic
parsers use cumbersome pipelines integrating several different modules or components, and exploit graph recategorization, i.e., a set of content-specific heuristics that are developed on the basis of the training set. However, the generalizability of graph recategorization in an out-of-distribution
setting is unclear. In contrast, state-of-the-art AMR-to-Text
generation, which can be seen as the inverse to parsing, is
based on simpler seq2seq. In this paper, we cast Text-toAMR and AMR-to-Text as a symmetric transduction task and
show that by devising a careful graph linearization and extending a pretrained encoder-decoder model, it is possible
to obtain state-of-the-art performances in both tasks using
the very same seq2seq approach, i.e., SPRING (Symmetric
PaRsIng aNd Generation). Our model does not require complex pipelines, nor heuristics built on heavy assumptions. In
fact, we drop the need for graph recategorization, showing
that this technique is actually harmful outside of the standard benchmark. Finally, we outperform the previous state
of the art on the English AMR 2.0 dataset by a large margin:
on Text-to-AMR we obtain an improvement of 3.6 Smatch
points, while on AMR-to-Text we outperform the state of
the art by 11.2 BLEU points. We release the software at
github.com/SapienzaNLP/spring.

1

Introduction

In recent years Abstract Meaning Representation (Banarescu et al. 2013, AMR) has become an influential formalism for capturing the meaning of a given utterance within
a semantic graph (parsing) and, vice versa, producing text
from such a graph (generation). AMR’s flexibility has resulted in promising improvements in Machine Translation
(Song et al. 2019), Text Summarization (Hardy and Vlachos
2018; Liao, Lebanoff, and Liu 2018), Human-Robot Interaction (Bonial et al. 2020) and Information Extraction (Rao
et al. 2017). Moreover, AMR-to-Text and Text-to-AMR systems represent an effective bridge between natural language
and symbolic representations (which can be manipulated by
both humans and computer programs), thus providing a step
towards the decoupling of content planning – what to say –
from language competence – how to say it.

1. We extend a pretrained Transformer encoder-decoder architecture to generate either an accurate linearization of
the AMR graph for a sentence or, vice versa, a sentence
for a linearization of the AMR graph.
2. Contrary to previous reports (Konstas et al. 2017), we find
that the choice between competing graph-isomorphic linearizations does matter. Our proposed Depth-First Search
(DFS)-based linearization with special pointer tokens outperforms both the PENMAN linearization and an analogous Breadth-First Search (BFS)-based alternative, especially on AMR-to-Text.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. We propose a novel Out-of-Distribution (OOD) setting for
12564

