The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Diverse Knowledge Distillation for End-to-End Person Search
Xinyu Zhang1,2 ,

Xinlong Wang2 ,

Jia-Wang Bian2 ,

Chunhua Shen2,3 ,

Mingyu You1

1

Tongji University, China
The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
Monash University, Australia
{zhangxinyu, myyou}@tongji.edu.cn, {xinlong.wang, jiawang.bian, chunhua.shen}@adelaide.edu.au
2

(a) End-to-end

Abstract
Image

Person search aims to localize and identify a specific person
from a gallery of images. Recent methods can be categorized
into two groups, i.e., two-step and end-to-end approaches.
The former views person search as two independent tasks
and achieves dominant results using separately trained person detection and re-identification (Re-ID) models. The latter
performs person search in an end-to-end fashion. Although
the end-to-end approaches yield higher inference efficiency,
they largely lag behind those two-step counterparts in terms
of accuracy. In this paper, we argue that the gap between the
two kinds of methods is mainly caused by the Re-ID subnetworks of end-to-end methods. To this end, we propose a
simple yet strong end-to-end network with diverse knowledge
distillation to break the bottleneck. We also design a spatialinvariant augmentation to assist model to be invariant to inaccurate detection results. Experimental results on the CUHKSYSU and PRW datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
method against existing approaches—it achieves on par accuracy with state-of-the-art two-step methods while maintaining high efficiency due to the single joint model. Code is
available at: https://git.io/DKD-PersonSearch

1

Backbone

RoIAlign

Re-ID
Head

(b) Ours
Image

Backbone

RoIAlign

Re-ID
Head

Spatial-invariant
Augmentation

Re-ID
Model

Diverse
Knowledge
Distillation

Figure 1: Structure comparison between (a) the plain endto-end model and (b) our method for person search. Dashed
lines are only involved during training. Our method maximizes the usage of guidance
from
Re-ID
model
Training
Processthe externalTraining
and test
Process
via the proposed terms—see dashed boxes.

tures for matching. These methods have shown high matching accuracy, but lag behind those end-to-end methods in
efficiency due to the cascaded processing.
Thanks to the shared backbone for detection and Re-ID,
the end-to-end methods boost the speed significantly. However, the performance is limited due to the conflict objectives of these two components in the joint learning framework (Chen et al. 2020a). Specifically, the detection head
tends to find a common embedding space for all pedestrians, while the Re-ID head distinguishes different pedestrians
with unique representations. Besides, feature maps of the
proposals involve redundant context information (Zhu et al.
2019; Dong et al. 2020a), as they are pooled from the middle layer in the deep network, in which one pixel perceives a
large area in the raw image. These issues consequently result
in the inferior Re-ID accuracy.
In this paper, we boost the performance of end-to-end
models towards efficient yet accurate person search. We first
analyze the gap of both detection and Re-ID accuracy separately between two-step and end-to-end solutions. As shown
in Table 1, the detection results are nearly the same in both
settings, while there exists a large gap between final results
(i.e., Re-ID accuracy). Therefore, we argue that the Re-ID
head is the main bottleneck of end-to-end models. We conjecture the reasons are twofold: (1) Two subtasks have conflicts when learning the shared features, which causes the
learned features less discriminative for distinguishing fine-

Introduction

Person search (Xu et al. 2014) is a recent hot topic in computer vision. The goal is to find a target person in a gallery
of images, and hence involves both person detection and reidentification (Re-ID). Compared with solo Re-ID problem,
person search faces greater challenges posed by detection,
e.g., inaccurate and misaligned bounding boxes may lead to
poor identification.
Existing approaches for person search can be classified
into two categories, i.e., two-step strategy (Han et al. 2019;
Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018; Han et al. 2019; Wang et al.
2020a; Dong et al. 2020b) and end-to-end strategy (Xiao
et al. 2017, 2019; Liu et al. 2017; Chang et al. 2018; He and
Zhang 2018; Yan et al. 2019; Munjal, Amin, and Tombari
2019; Munjal, Galasso, and Amin 2019; Zhong, Wang, and
Zhang 2020; Dong et al. 2020a; Chen et al. 2020a). Two-step
approaches tackle the detection and Re-ID problem independently, in which the detection model crops the candidate
persons from raw images, and the Re-ID model extracts feaCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3412

Detection
Head

