The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Epidemiological Modeling by Black-box Knowledge Distillation:
An Accurate Deep Learning Model for COVID-19
Dongdong Wang,1 Shunpu Zhang, 2 Liqiang Wang 1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
Department of Statistics and Data Science, University of Central Florida
daniel.wang@knights.ucf.edu, {Shunpu.Zhang, Liqiang.Wang}@ucf.edu
2

Abstract

dimensionality. When prior knowledge about an infectious
disease, such as COVID-19, is limited, exhaustive search
in such large space is inevitable for accurate model calibration, which can easily render a mixture model impractical. In
reality, some modelers propose some assumptions to truncate search space with coarse grid and trade for efficiency
and feasibility, but it can cause large uncertainty and model
degradation.
To address this problem, we formulate a new approach
with black-box knowledge distillation. This approach is developed based on three-fold objectives, including higher prediction accuracy, lower modeling cost, and higher data efficiency. To achieve higher prediction accuracy, we first leverage mixture models to create a comprehensive, accurate, but
probably impractical epidemic simulation system. This system is viewed as a black-box teacher model which contains
sophisticated modeling knowledge. To reduce modeling cost
and make this system feasible, we employ knowledge distillation to transfer the accurate modeling knowledge from
this impractical black-box teacher model to a deep neural
network for practical use. To realize this knowledge transfer, we collect a set of simulated observation sequences to
query the teacher model and acquire their corresponding
simulated projection sequences as knowledge. Particularly,
for improvement in model performance with limited data,
we propose sequence mixup to augment data pool, thus reducing model queries, increasing sequence diversity, and
boosting modeling accuracy. With all retrieved and mixed
observation-projection sequence pairs, we train a student
deep neural network for infection prediction. This student
network can perform prediction as accurately as teacher
model, but save lots of computation cost, and require fewer
observation data.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose a
black-box knowledge distillation based framework to solve
epidemiological modeling by leveraging mixture models.
Besides this novelty, our work also includes the following
contributions: (1) the distilled student deep neural network
enables accurate model calibration and projection automatically. (2) Sequence mixup is proposed to reduce teacher
model queries for higher efficiency, improve the coverage
of obtained data for better accuracy, and further enhance
knowledge transfer with fewer observation data. (3) We justify our approach by solving COVID-19 infection projection

An accurate and efficient forecasting system is imperative
to the prevention of emerging infectious diseases such as
COVID-19 in public health. This system requires accurate
transient modeling, lower computation cost, and fewer observation data. To tackle these three challenges, we propose
a novel deep learning approach using black-box knowledge
distillation for both accurate and efficient transmission dynamics prediction in a practical manner. First, we leverage
mixture models to develop an accurate, comprehensive, yet
impractical simulation system. Next, we use simulated observation sequences to query the simulation system to retrieve
simulated projection sequences as knowledge. Then, with the
obtained query data, sequence mixup is proposed to improve
query efficiency, increase knowledge diversity, and boost distillation model accuracy. Finally, we train a student deep
neural network with the retrieved and mixed observationprojection sequences for practical use. The case study on
COVID-19 justifies that our approach accurately projects infections with much lower computation cost when observation
data are limited.

Introduction
The spread of infectious diseases is a serious threat to public
health and may cause million deaths every year. To effectively battle against infectious diseases, accurate modeling
on their transmission patterns is critical. This issue becomes
more pressing when the infectious disease, like COVID-19,
is unprecedented, transmission dynamics is complex, and
observation data are limited. Due to data limitation, we need
to solve this problem with the help of conventional physicsbased epidemiological models. However, it is still difficult to
accurately describe complex dynamics with a single model.
Mixture models are widely used to accurately solve complex transient modeling problems. They can refine temporal
scale into several states with different onsets, model these
states separately, and then mix modeling results to represent complex dynamics. Although this refinement on temporal scale more accurately depicts the variation in a physical system, the difficulty of calibrating a mixture model and
computational complexity can exponentially increase since
it can result in very large parameter space, i.e., curse of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15424

