The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Structure-Consistent Weakly Supervised Salient Object Detection with Local
Saliency Coherence
Siyue Yu, Bingfeng Zhang, Jimin Xiao * , Eng Gee Lim
School of Advanced Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou, China
{siyue.yu, bingfeng.zhang, jimin.xiao, enggee.lim}@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
Sparse labels have been attracting much attention in recent
years. However, the performance gap between weakly supervised and fully supervised salient object detection methods
is huge, and most previous weakly supervised works adopt
complex training methods with many bells and whistles. In
this work, we propose a one-round end-to-end training approach for weakly supervised salient object747
detection via
447
scribble annotations without pre/post-processing
108 operations
or extra supervision data. Since scribble labels fail to offer
detailed salient regions, we propose a local coherence loss
to propagate the labels to unlabeled regions based on image
features and pixel distance, so as to predict integral salient regions with complete object structures. We design a saliency
structure consistency loss as self-consistent mechanism to ensure consistent saliency maps are predicted with different
scales of the same image as input, which could be viewed
as a regularization technique to enhance the model generalization ability. Additionally, we design an aggregation module (AGGM) to better integrate high-level features, low-level
features and global context information for the decoder to aggregate various information. Extensive experiments show that
our method achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on
six benchmarks (e.g. for the ECSSD dataset: Fβ = 0.8995,
Eξ = 0.9079 and MAE = 0.0489), with an average gain
of 4.60% for F-measure, 2.05% for E-measure and 1.88% for
MAE over the previous best method on this task. Source code
is available at http://github.com/siyueyu/SCWSSOD.

Image

GT

MSW

WSSA

Ours

Figure 1: Our predicted saliency maps are compared with
that of other weakly supervised methods. From left to
right: Input image; Ground-truth; MSW (Zeng et al. 2019);
WSSA (Zhang et al. 2020b); Ours.

highly dependent on pixel-wise saliency labels, which are
time-consuming and costly with manual annotations.
In recent years, sparse labeling methods have attracted
much attention. Many weakly supervised salient object detection methods have been proposed to improve label efficiency while maintaining model performance. Image level
labels are utilized in some methods (Wang et al. 2017; Li,
Xie, and Lin 2018) to learn salient object detection. However, these works usually use image-level tags for saliency
localization and then further train their models with predicted saliency maps through multiple-stage learning. Besides, some other works (Nguyen et al. 2019; Zhang, Han,
and Zhang 2017) train their models with noisy pseudo labels
from handcrafted methods and/or predicted maps by other
weakly supervised SOD models, where pre-processing steps
are used to clean noisy labels. All above mentioned works
need complex training steps to obtain final saliency maps.
Additionally, scribble annotations are proposed recently
due to their flexibility to label winding objects and low-cost
compared to annotating per-pixel saliency masks. However,
scribble annotations cannot cover the whole object region
or directly provide object structure. Therefore, edge detection is used in the framework (Zhang et al. 2020b) to obtain object boundaries, and the SOD model is trained with
predicted edge maps from other trained edge detection models. However, this step introduces extra data information into
the SOD training process to recover integral object structure.
The training process of (Zhang et al. 2020b) is also complex,

Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) aims to detect the most attractive regions in an image according to the human perception. It can be further applied in different computer
vision tasks, such as image-sentence matching (Ji et al.
2019), image segmentation (Sun and Li 2019) and image retrieval (Wang et al. 2020a). In the last decade, deep learning
based salient object detection algorithms (Chen et al. 2020;
Liu et al. 2019; Qin et al. 2019) have become popular due to
their superior performance. These methods usually design
different modules to help their networks learn better feature
representations for saliency prediction. However, they are
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3234

