The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal-Coded Deep Spiking Neural Network with Easy Training and Robust
Performance
Shibo Zhou,1 Xiaohua Li,1 Ying Chen,2 Sanjeev T. Chandrasekaran,3 Arindam Sanyal 3
1

Dept. of ECE, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY, USA
(Corresponding Author) Harbin Institute of Technology, China
3
Dept. of EE, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
{szhou19, xli}@binghamton.edu, yingchen@hit.edu.cn, {stannirk, arindams}@buffalo.edu
2

Abstract

SNNs are targeting neuromorphic hardware implementations. Their robustness on low-cost neuromorphic hardware
with limited memory, high noise, and large parameter drifting is critical for them to be competitive to DNNs in practical
applications. This special yet important problem has been
largely open.
In this paper, we resolve the difficult training problem
by developing a direct-train framework that does not need
calculating neuron membrane potentials. We address the robustness problem by developing a neuron circuit to evaluate
timing jitter and by training deep SNNs under weight quantizations. Our major contributions are listed as follows.

Spiking neural network (SNN) is promising but the development has fallen far behind conventional deep neural networks (DNNs) because of difficult training. To resolve the
training problem, we analyze the closed-form input-output response of spiking neurons and use the response expression to
build abstract SNN models for training. This avoids calculating membrane potential during training and makes the direct
training of SNN as efficient as DNN. We show that the nonleaky integrate-and-fire neuron with single-spike temporalcoding is the best choice for direct-train deep SNNs. We
develop an energy-efficient phase-domain signal processing
circuit for the neuron and propose a direct-train deep SNN
framework. Thanks to easy training, we train deep SNNs
under weight quantizations to study their robustness over
low-cost neuromorphic hardware. Experiments show that our
direct-train deep SNNs have the highest CIFAR-10 classification accuracy among SNNs, achieve ImageNet classification
accuracy within 1% of the DNN of equivalent architecture,
and are robust to weight quantization and noise perturbation.

1

• Closed-form analytical input-output responses of spiking neurons are studied systematically, which shows that
the nonleaky integrate-and-fire neuron with single-spike
temporal-coding is the best choice for direct-train SNNs.
• Deep SNNs such as SpikingVGG16 and SpikingGoogleNet are developed and trained over the CIFAR-10
and ImageNet datasets. New benchmark results are obtained. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time
that direct-train SNN is reported for ImageNet.

Introduction

Spiking neural network (SNN) is interesting theoretically
due to its strong bio-plausibility and practically because
of its outstanding energy efficiency. Neurons communicate via spikes just as biological neurons. They work asynchronously, i.e., generate output spikes without waiting for
all input neurons to spike. This leads to advantages such as
spike sparsity, low latency, and high energy efficiency that
are attractive for practical applications (Pfeiffer and Pfeil
2018; Tavanaei et al. 2019).
The performance of SNNs has fallen far behind conventional deep neural networks (DNNs). One of the primary
reasons is that SNNs are difficult to train. DNNs are formulated with the standard layer response y = f (xW +
b) where gradient backpropagation can be efficiently conducted. In contrast, for SNNs we have to simulate the
temporal-domain neuron membrane potentials with nondifferentiable spikes. Gradient evaluation is both difficult
and time-consuming. Direct training of SNN has so far been
limited to shallow networks only. No one has trained directly
the SNNs on large datasets such as ImageNet.

• A phase-domain signal processing neuron circuit is designed to show that our neuron is more energy-efficient
than others and is robust to input timing jitter and weight
quantization. Besides, our deep SNNs are trained under
weight quantization and noise perturbation to demonstrate
their robustness.
This paper is organized as follows. Related works are introduced in Section 2. Spiking neurons and deep SNNs are
described in Section 3. Experiments are presented in Section
4. Conclusions are given in Section 5.

2

Related Works

SNN training methods can be categorized into three classes:
unsupervised learning, supervised learning with indirect
training, and supervised learning with direct training (Pfeiffer and Pfeil 2018). For unsupervised learning, spike timingdependent plasticity (STDP) is well known (Caporale and
Dan 2008; Diehl and Cook 2015; Kheradpisheh et al. 2018;
Lee et al. 2018). Nevertheless, the dependency on the local
neuronal activities without a global supervisor makes it have
low performance in deep networks.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11143

