The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Convergence Analysis of No-Regret Bidding Algorithms in Repeated Auctions
Zhe Feng,1 Guru Guruganesh, 2 Christopher Liaw, 3 Aranyak Mehta, 2 Abhishek Sethi 2
1

Harvard University
Google Research
3
University of British Columbia
zhe_feng@g.harvard.edu, gurug@google.com, cvliaw@cs.ubc.ca, aranyak@google.com, arsethi@google.com
2

Abstract

as well. In this setting, an auction takes input bids and determines the allocation of ad-slots and the prices for each advertiser. This is a highly repeated auction setting over a huge
number of queries which arrive over time. Advertisers get
feedback on the allocation and cost achieved by their chosen
bidding strategy, and can respond by changing their bids,
and often do so in an automated manner (we will assume
throughout that advertisers are profit-maximizing, although
there are potentially other goals as well). As each advertiser
responds to the feedback, it changes the cost landscape for
every other competing advertiser via the auction rules. As
advertisers respond to the auction and to each other, the dynamics lead them to an equilibrium. This results in the following fundamental question: Given a fixed auction rule, do
such bidding dynamics settle in an equilibrium and if so,
what equilibrium do they choose.
Surprisingly, neither the Auction Theory literature from
Economics nor the literature on Learning in Games provides
a definitive answer. Consider the simplest setting: a repeated
auction for a single item, where the allocation is either firstprice or second-price. Auction Theory suggests that bidders
converge to canonical equilibria (see, e.g., (Krishna 2002)):

The connection between games and no-regret algorithms has
been widely studied in the literature. A fundamental result
is that when all players play no-regret strategies, this produces a sequence of actions whose time-average is a coarsecorrelated equilibrium of the game. However, much less is
known about equilibrium selection in the case that multiple
equilibria exist. In this work, we study the convergence of
no-regret bidding algorithms in auctions. Besides being of
theoretical interest, bidding dynamics in auctions is an important question from a practical viewpoint as well. We study
repeated game between bidders in which a single item is sold
at each time step and the bidder’s value is drawn from an
unknown distribution. We show that if the bidders use any
mean-based learning rule then the bidders converge with high
probability to the truthful pure Nash Equilibrium in a second price auction, in VCG auction in the multi-slot setting
and to the Bayesian Nash equilibrium in a first price auction. We note mean-based algorithms cover a wide variety
of known no-regret algorithms such as Exp3, UCB, ε-Greedy
etc. Also, we analyze the convergence of the individual iterates produced by such learning algorithms, as opposed to the
time-average of the sequence. Our experiments corroborate
our theoretical findings and also find a similar convergence
when we use other strategies such as Deep Q-Learning.

1

• For a second-price auction (or more generally a VCG auction), bidders will choose to be truthful (bid their true
value every time) as this strategy weakly dominates every other strategy, i.e., no other strategy can yield more
profit. This is a weakly dominating strategy Nash equilibirum (NE).

Introduction

The connection between Learning and Games has proven to
be a very innovative, practical, and elegant area of research
(see, e.g., (Fudenberg and Levine 1998; Cesa-Bianchi and
Lugosi 2006; Nisan et al. 2007)). Several fundamental connections have been made between Learning and Game Theory. A folklore result is that if all players play low-regret
strategies in a repeated general-sum game, then the timeaveraged history of the plays converges to a coarse correlated equilibrium (see, e.g., (Blum and Mansour 2007)).
Similarly, low-swap-regret play leads to correlated equilibria.
In this work, we are interested in the setting of multi-agent
learning in auction environments. Given the importance of
auctions and bidding in the online advertising ecosystem,
this is an important question from a practical point of view

• For a first price auction in which each advertiser’s value
is picked from some commonly known distribution in an
i.i.d. manner, each advertiser will underbid in a specific
way to achieve a Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE). For
example, when there are two bidders and the value distribution is the uniform distribution on [0, 1], then each
advertiser will set its bid to be half of its true value.
While these canonical equilibria make intuitive sense,
they are not the only equilibria in the respective games.
For example, consider a single-item setting in which bidder 1 has a value of 1.0 and bidder 2 has a value of 0.5 for
the item. While truthful bidding is an NE, any two values
b1 , b2 ∈ [0.5, 1.0]2 , with b1 > b2 also form an NE (in fact, an
Envy-Free NE). Thus, there are an infinite number of NEs,
with very different revenues. Similarly, in the Bayesian set-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5399

