The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disentangled Multi-Relational Graph Convolutional Network
for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Inhwan Bae and Hae-Gon Jeon
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology (GIST)
inhwanbae@gm.gist.ac.kr and haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is one of the important tasks
required for autonomous navigation and social robots in
human environments. Previous studies focused on estimating social forces among individual pedestrians. However,
they did not consider the social forces of groups on pedestrians, which results in over-collision avoidance problems.
To address this problem, we present a Disentangled MultiRelational Graph Convolutional Network (DMRGCN) for
socially entangled pedestrian trajectory prediction. We first
introduce a novel disentangled multi-scale aggregation to
better represent social interactions, among pedestrians on a
weighted graph. For the aggregation, we construct the multirelational weighted graphs based on distances and relative
displacements among pedestrians. In the prediction step, we
propose a global temporal aggregation to alleviate accumulated errors for pedestrians changing their directions. Finally,
we apply DropEdge into our DMRGCN to avoid the overfitting issue on relatively small pedestrian trajectory datasets.
Through the effective incorporation of the three parts within
an end-to-end framework, DMRGCN achieves state-of-theart performances on a variety of challenging trajectory prediction benchmarks.

1

Figure 1: An illustration of the DMRGCN. The social interactions and temporal relations of each pedestrian are
represented by pedestrian graphs. Our disentangled multirelational graph establishes relevant connections between
pedestrians well. Our global temporal aggregation then
learns to correct the initial prediction, which is associated
with over-avoidance.
in (Alahi et al. 2016) introduced a Social-LSTM that predicts human trajectories using recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) with social pooling to model the interactions of
neighboring pedestrians. In (Gupta et al. 2018), a generative adversarial networks (GANs)-based encoder-decoder
framework was proposed with a global pooling mechanism
to learn the social norm. However, we observe that important features needed to learn the trajectories sometimes leak
through the heuristic pooling methods.
An alternative approach to capture human interactions
with relevant neighbors involves learning a graph representation, which consists of a set of nodes and edges, (Kosaraju
et al. 2019; Mohamed et al. 2020). In pedestrian trajectory
prediction, the node represents each pedestrian in a scene
and the edges correspond to distances from other pedestrians. The use of a graph convolutional network (GCN) enables it to better learn the physical and the social interactions
among pedestrians. Although the GCN-based works have
shown promising performance for predicting further trajectories, most of them suffer from two limitations: (1) only
simple social relationship like collision avoidance is aggregated; (2) an inevitable error in final destination occurs because modeling social norms is not suitable for determining
the end-points of pedestrians in the last frame.
In this paper, we present a Disentangled Multi-Relational
Graph Convolutional Network (DMRGCN), a GCN-based

Introduction

Pedestrian trajectory prediction attempts to predict the paths
of persons based on their previous steps, and is an important
part of autonomous navigation and social robot platforms. It
assumes that a person walks toward a destination, while taking interactions with other people into account. To be specific, pedestrians move together with their companions by
selecting an optimal route to avoid collisions, and tend to
follow the footsteps of their surrounding flows. Pioneering
works in (Helbing and Molnar 1995; Mehran, Oyama, and
Shah 2009) have modeled these human-human interactions
as social forces. However, the social force relies on parametric models, which have a difficult time generalizing complex
interpersonal relations.
The adoption of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
has recently alleviated the generalization issue. A work
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Corresponding author: Hae-Gon Jeon

911

