The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforced History Backtracking for Conversational Question Answering
∗

∗

†

Minghui Qiu1, , Xinjing Huang2, , Cen Chen1, , Feng Ji1 , Chen Qu1 ,
†
Wei Wei3 , Jun Huang1 , Yin Zhang2,
1

Alibaba Group, China
Zhejiang University
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
minghui.qmh@alibaba-inc.com,chencen.cc@antfin.com,{huangxinjing,zhangyin98}@zju.edu.cn,weiw@hust.edu.cn
2

Abstract

et al. 2019a) or question attention (Qu et al. 2019b), which
can be viewed as a form of soft selection for related history.
However, considering the whole history in the single
model will inevitably face some challenges. First, it requires
more computation resources to incorporate the representation of all the history, including both the relevant and irrelevant ones, which may be unnecessary for understanding the
query. Moreover, this issue gets even worse when we adopt a
heavy model such as BERT large, as a longer input sequence
with the whole history need to be maintained. Second, existing works that model the whole history usually employ
attention or gating based mechanisms to selectively attend
to different history turns (Yeh and Chen 2019; Huang, Choi,
and Yih 2018). However, those methods still achieve less
ideal results due to the irrelevant parts that appeared in the
dialogue history. In other words, the existing methods can
benefit from an additional step of relevant history extraction.
To alleviate the above-mentioned problems, in this paper we work from a different perspective and seek to make
meaningful selections of conversation history. The advantage of our method is that it can avoid the negative impact
of unimportant history turns from the source by not considering them. We model the ConvQA task as two subtasks: a
conversational QA task using a neural MRC model and a
conversation history selection task with a reinforced backtracker. The reinforced backtracker is an agent that interacts
with the environment constructed by the ConvQA.
More specifically, for each query, we view the process of
finding the related history as a sequential decision-making
process. The agent acts on the available conversation history and backtracks the history question-answer pairs turn
by turn to decide whether it is relevant/useful based on the
observations. The MRC model then uses the selected history
turns to help itself answer the current question and generates
a reward to evaluate the utility of the history selection. However, the rewards generated by the MRC model are sparse, as
they can only be obtained at the end of the decision process.
To address this sparse reward problem, we further propose a
novel training scheme, in which the agent first learns from
the examples with only one history turn, followed by learning from examples with two history turns, and so on so forth.
As irrelevant histories are filtered, the MRC model can
be better trained with a more sophisticated mechanism and
concentrate on fitting the history turns with higher confi-

To model the context history in multi-turn conversations has
become a critical step towards a better understanding of the
user query in question answering systems. To utilize the context history, most existing studies treat the whole context
as input, which will inevitably face the following two challenges. First, modeling a long history can be costly as it requires more computation resources. Second, the long context
history consists of a lot of irrelevant information that makes
it difficult to model appropriate information relevant to the
user query. To alleviate these problems, we propose a reinforcement learning based method to capture and backtrack
the related conversation history to boost model performance
in this paper. Our method seeks to automatically backtrack
the history information with the implicit feedback from the
model performance. We further consider both immediate and
delayed rewards to guide the reinforced backtracking policy.
Extensive experiments on a large conversational question answering dataset show that the proposed method can help to
alleviate the problems arising from longer context history.
Meanwhile, experiments show that the method yields better performance than other strong baselines, and the actions
made by the method are insightful.

Introduction
Conversational Question Answering (ConvQA) have recently interested a lot of researchers in both research community and industry (Choi et al. 2018b; Reddy, Chen, and
Manning 2018a). Under the ConvQA setting, the current
query in each dialogue turn may not be self-contained and
depends greatly on the dialogue history, as the phenomenon
of coreference and pragmatic omission frequently occurs in
the dialogs. Thus modeling the dialogue history becomes a
critical step towards better understanding the query. Most
of the existing works tend to model the semantic changes
using the whole history as the input and perform coreference resolution in a single model, such as FlowQA (Huang,
Choi, and Yih 2018), FlowDelta (Yeh and Chen 2019) and
M C 2 (Zhang 2019). Recent state-of-the-art studies append
all dialogue history by using history answer embedding (Qu
∗

Equal contributions.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

13718

