The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Static-Dynamic Interaction Networks for Offline Signature Verification
Huan Li, Ping Wei* , Ping Hu
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
huanli@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, helenhu@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline signature verification is a challenging issue that is
widely used in various fields. Previous approaches model this
task as a static feature matching or distance metric problem of two images. In this paper, we propose a novel StaticDynamic Interaction Network (SDINet) model which introduces sequential representation into static signature images.
A static signature image is converted to sequences by assuming pseudo dynamic processes in the static image. A static
representation extracting deep features from signature images
describes the global information of signatures. A dynamic
representation extracting sequential features with LSTM networks characterizes the local information of signatures. A
dynamic-to-static attention is learned from the sequences to
refine the static features. Through the static-to-dynamic conversion and the dynamic-to-static attention, the static representation and dynamic representation are unified into a compact framework. The proposed method was evaluated on four
popular datasets of different languages. The extensive experimental results manifest the strength of our model.

Signature
Verification
Model

test

reference

genuine or forged
(a)

...
step 1

step 2

step 3

...

step n

...
step 1

step 2

step 3

(b)

...

step m

Figure 1: (a) Static signature verification. (b) Two examples
that signatures are signed part by part in a sequential order.
zigzags contains abundant style information. Modeling the
dynamic process could be helpful for signature verification.
However, the real signing process of finishing a signature
can not be observed in the static signature image. Driven by
this consideration, we can assume a pseudo dynamic process in the static image since any handwritten signature is
signed part by part in sequential steps. Fig. 1 (b) illustrates
the pseudo dynamic signing processes of two static signatures. In a sequential order these two signatures are signed
part by part and eventually the signatures are finished. By
assuming the pseudo signing process, the local patches in
a static image can be converted into ‘dynamic’ sequences
from which the effective signature features can be mined.
Inspired by this idea, we propose a novel Static-Dynamic
Interaction Network (SDINet) model for offline signature
verification. The SDINet model hypothesizes a pseudo dynamic process in a signature image and converts the signature image into a sequence of image patches. Based on this
hypothesis, the model is composed of a static representation, a dynamic representation, and the interactions between
the two representations. The static representation extracts
deep convolutional features from the signature images and
describes the global static information of signatures. The
dynamic representation extracting sequential features with
long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997) characterizes the sequential and local informa-

Introduction
Offline handwritten signature verification is one of the
most important biometric technologies in forensic, commercial, and financial applications. Given a reference signature
image and a test signature image, signature verification is
to discriminate whether the test signature is forged or genuine with respect to the reference signature (Wei, Li, and Hu
2019), as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
This is a challenging problem for the arbitrariness of personal signing habits, the sparsity of stroke information, and
the camouflage of skillful forgery. The essence of signature verification is to compare the similarity of the subtle
styles hidden in the reference signature and the test signature, rather than the specific contents of the signatures (Wei,
Li, and Hu 2019). Previous studies model signature verification as a static feature matching problem of the two signature images. However, static features mainly describing the
global patterns are insufficient to characterize the signature
styles. The dynamic signing process which strings up a serials of local stroke structures such as corners, curves, and
* Ping Wei is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1893

