The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gradient Regularized Contrastive Learning for Continual Domain Adaptation
Shixiang Tang∗ ,1 3 Peng Su∗ , 2 Dapeng Chen, 3 Wanli Ouyang 1
1

University of Sydney, Australia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
Sensetime Group Limited, Hong Kong
{stan3906,wanli.ouyang}@uni.sydney.edu.au, psu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, chendapeng@sensetime.com
2

Abstract

conventional DA, i.e. not continual DA, requires to use all
samples collected to train the model from scratch, which is
time-consuming. Continual DA can address the problem as it
enables the model incrementally adapts to the new domain
without losing generalization ability on old domains.
In this paper, we consider keeping the discriminative ability
of source features can benefit adapting the model to different
target domains. Intuitively, as the labels of source domain
samples are given, the discriminative ability learned from
labelled source samples can guide the adaptation to all target
domains. Existing DA methods (Ganin et al. 2016; Long et al.
2017; Tzeng et al. 2017; Saito et al. 2018; Su et al. 2020;
Peng et al. 2019b) cannot retrain such discriminative ability
on source features because they adopt multitask learning, i.e.
one classification loss on the source domain and one domain
adaptation loss. When minimizing the multitask loss, the
classification loss on the source domain may still increase,
meaning the model’s discriminative ability on the source
domain is weakened. In contrast, our method constrains the
classification loss on the source domain non-increase (source
discriminative constraint) in every training iteration. In this
way, we maintain the discriminative ability of source features
and more importantly improve the adaptation ability of the
learned model to the target domain.
Furthermore, the model trained with sequential data suffers from catastrophic forgetting. Existing method (Bobu
et al. 2018) handles catastrophic forgetting by incorporating
a replay in the adversary training framework. However, this
approach assumes that the sequential target domain shift follows some specific patterns and suffers from catastrophic
forgetting when the assumption breaks. In contrast, when
adapting the model to a new target domain, we propose to
enforce the classification loss not to increase for every old target domain (target memorization constraint). This constraint
ensures the model not to lose the generalization ability on
old target domains when adapting to a new target domain.
Based on the observations above, we propose gradient
regularized contrastive learning (GRCL), to tackle continual
DA. GRCL leverages the contrastive loss to learn domaininvariant representations using the samples in the source domain, the old target domains and the new target domain. Two
constraints, i.e. source discriminative constraint and target
memorization constraint, are proposed when optimizing the
network. Specifically, the source discriminative constraint is

Human beings can quickly adapt to environmental changes
by leveraging learning experience. However, adapting deep
neural networks to dynamic environments by machine learning algorithms remains a challenge. To better understand this
issue, we study the problem of continual domain adaptation,
where the model is presented with a labelled source domain
and a sequence of unlabelled target domains. The obstacles
in this problem are both domain shift and catastrophic forgetting. We propose Gradient Regularized Contrastive Learning
(GRCL) to solve the obstacles. At the core of our method,
gradient regularization plays two key roles: (1) enforcing the
gradient not to harm the discriminative ability of source features which can, in turn, benefit the adaptation ability of the
model to target domains; (2) constraining the gradient not to
increase the classification loss on old target domains, which
enables the model to preserve the performance on old target
domains when adapting to an in-coming target domain. Experiments on Digits, DomainNet and Office-Caltech benchmarks
demonstrate the strong performance of our approach when
compared to the state-of-the-art.

Introduction
Generalizing models learned from one domain (source domain) to novel domains (target domains) has been a major
challenge of machine learning. The performance of the model
learned on one domain may degrade significantly on other domains because of different data distribution (Luo et al. 2019;
Ben-David et al. 2010; Moreno-Torres et al. 2012; Storkey
2009; Yu et al. 2020). In this work, we investigate continual domain adaptation (continual DA), where models are
trained in multi-steps and only part of training samples are
presented in each step. Continual DA considers the real-world
setting where target domain data are acquired sequentially.
As an example, autonomous driving requires adapting to
scenes (target domains) in different weathers and different
countries. And these training data are usually collected in
different seasons: snowy scenes can only be collected in winter while rainy scenes are mostly in summer. Continual DA
also considers efficiency when the model is deployed in the
real world. When samples from a novel domain are acquired,
∗

denotes equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2665

