The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

IDOL: Inertial Deep Orientation-Estimation and Localization
Scott Sun, Dennis Melamed, Kris Kitani
Carnegie Mellon University

IMU Signal
Sequence

Abstract
Many smartphone applications use inertial measurement
units (IMUs) to sense movement, but the use of these sensors for pedestrian localization can be challenging due to
their noise characteristics. Recent data-driven inertial odometry approaches have demonstrated the increasing feasibility
of inertial navigation. However, they still rely upon conventional smartphone orientation estimates that they assume to
be accurate, while in fact these orientation estimates can be a
significant source of error. To address the problem of inaccurate orientation estimates, we present a two-stage, data-driven
pipeline using a commodity smartphone that first estimates
device orientations and then estimates device position. The
orientation module relies on a recurrent neural network and
Extended Kalman Filter to obtain orientation estimates that
are used to then rotate raw IMU measurements into the appropriate reference frame. The position module then passes those
measurements through another recurrent network architecture
to perform localization. Our proposed method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both orientation and position error on a large dataset we constructed that contains 20 hours
of pedestrian motion across 3 buildings and 15 subjects. Code
and data are available at https://github.com/KlabCMU/IDOL.

Orientation
IMU
Module
Orientations

Position
Module

Location

Figure 1: Overview of our proposed method.

fectiveness. However, WiFi and Bluetooth beacon-based solutions are costly due to requiring heavy instrumentation
of the environment for accurate localization (Ahmetovic
et al. 2016). While LiDAR-based localization is highly accurate, it is expensive and power-hungry (Zhang and Singh
2014). Image-based localization is effective with ample light
and texture, but is also power-intensive and a privacy concern. IMUs would address many of these problems because
they are infrastructure-free, highly energy-efficient, do not
require line-of-sight with the environment, and are highly
ubiquitous by function of their cost and size.
Recent deep-learning approaches, like IONet (Chen et al.
2018a) and RoNIN (Herath, Yan, and Furukawa 2020), have
demonstrated the possibility of estimating 3D device (or
user) motion using an IMU, but they do not directly address
device orientation estimation. These new approaches have
been able to address the problem of drift suffered by traditional inertial localization techniques through the use of
supervised learning to directly estimate the spatial displacement of the device. However, most existing work uses the
3D orientation estimates generated by the device (typically
with conventional filtering-based approaches), which can be
inaccurate (>20◦ RMS error for an iPhone 8). This orientation is typically used as an initial step to rotate the local IMU
measurements to a common reference frame before applying a deep network (Chen et al. 2018a). This is flawed as the
deep network output can be corrupted by these orientation
estimate errors, leading to significant error growth.
Our approach to this problem involves designing a supervised deep network architecture with an explicit orientation estimation module to complement a position estimation
module, shown in Figure 1. In addition to the gyroscope, the

Introduction
Inertial localization techniques typically estimate 3D motion from inertial measurement unit (IMU) samples of linear
acceleration (accelerometer), angular velocity (gyroscope),
and magnetic flux density (magnetometer). A well-known
weakness that has plagued inertial localization is the dependence on accurate 3D orientation estimates (e.g., roll, pitch,
yaw; quaternion; rotation matrix) to properly convert sensorframe measurements to a global reference frame. Small errors in this component can result in substantial localization errors that have limited the feasibility of inertial pedestrian localization (Shen, Gowda, and Roy Choudhury 2018).
Since orientation estimation plays a central role in inertial
odometry, we hypothesize that improvements in 3D orientation estimation will result in improvements to localization
performance.
Existing localization methods typically rely on WiFi,
Bluetooth, LiDAR, or camera sensors because of their efCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6128

