The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Multi-Task Learning for Diabetic Retinopathy Grading in Fundus Images
Xiaofei Wang,1 Mai Xu,1 * Jicong Zhang,2* Lai Jiang,1 Liu Li 3
1

2

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
{xfwang, maixu, jicongzhang, jianglai.china}@buaa.edu.cn, liu.li20@imperial.ac.uk

Recent years have witnessed the growing interest in disease
severity grading, especially for ocular diseases based on fundus images. The existing grading methods are usually trained
with high resolution (HR) images. However, the grading performance decreases a lot given low resolution (LR) images,
which are common in practice. In this paper, we mainly focus on diabetic retinopathy (DR) grading with LR fundus
images. According to our analysis on the DR task, we find
that: 1) image super-resolution (ISR) can boost the performance of DR grading and lesion segmentation; 2) the lesion
segmentation regions of fundus images are highly consistent
with pathological regions for DR grading. Thus, we propose
a deep multi-task learning based DR grading (DeepMT-DR)
method for LR fundus images, which simultaneously handles
the auxiliary tasks of ISR and lesion segmentation. Specifically, based on our findings, we propose a hierarchical deep
learning structure that simultaneously processes the low-level
task of ISR, the mid-level task of lesion segmentation and the
high-level task of DR grading. Moreover, a novel task-aware
loss is developed to encourage ISR to focus on the pathological regions for its subsequent tasks: lesion segmentation
and DR grading. Extensive experimental results show that our
DeepMT-DR method significantly outperforms other stateof-the-art methods for DR grading over two public datasets.
In addition, our method achieves comparable performance in
two auxiliary tasks of ISR and lesion segmentation.

Network Visualization
Semi-Supervision

Joint Learning Pipeline

Task-Aware Loss

Abstract

High-Level Task 3:

Output

Grading Results

DR Grading

Mid-Level Task 2:

Lesion Segmentation

Lesion Segmented Maps

Low-Level Task 1 :

Image Super-Resolution
Super-Resolved Image

Input
LR Image

Figure 1: Brief framework of the proposed DeepMT-DR for
DR grading with multiple tasks at low, mid and high-levels.

clinic are often down-sampled to LR before transmitting to
the medical systems, e.g., PACS, due to the limited storage
capacity and high cost of data migration (Alhajeri and Shah
2019). However, the existing DR grading methods focus on
relatively high resolution (HR) images, which ignores the
practical clinical condition. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical deep learning structure for DR grading on LR fundus images, which offers great potential in practical applications.
On the other hand, DR diagnosis in clinic highly depends
on the detected retinal pathologies, such as microaneurysm.
However, in LR fundus images, the small lesions are usually inconspicuous, which hinders the early detection of the
disease. It is therefore intuitive to apply lesion segmentation
and image super resolution (ISR) to boost the performance
of DR grading with LR images. Accordingly, we thoroughly
analyze the correlation among the three tasks of ISR, lesion
segmentation and DR grading, and then find that: 1) ISR
can actually boost the performance of DR grading and lesion
segmentation and 2) the lesion segmentation regions of fundus images are highly consistent with pathological regions
for DR grading. Thus, the above three tasks are closely correlated with each other, indicating the potential gain of DR
grading with the lesion segmentation and ISR tasks.

Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the great success in the
interdisciplinary research of artificial intelligence and medical image analysis (Zhou et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a), especially for the task of severity grading of diabetic retinopathy
(DR) on fundus images (Gulshan et al. 2016; Gargeya and
Leng 2017), which is one of the leading cause of blindness
and visual disability among working-age people. In clinic,
the fundus images are sometimes at low resolution (LR)
(Mahapatra et al. 2017), mainly due to the following reasons. 1) Many LR retinal imaging devices currently used
in clinic are with only around 550×550 resolution (Singh
et al. 2019), e.g., Topcon TRV-50 and Canon CR6–45NM
(Weber and Mertz 2018). 2) The acquired fundus images in
* Corresponding Authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2826

