The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning with REINFORCE
Junzi Zhang1 , Jongho Kim2 , Brendan O’Donoghue3 , Stephen Boyd2
1

Institute for Computational & Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University, USA
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, USA
3
DeepMind, Google
junziz@stanford.edu, jkim22@stanford.edu, bodonoghue85@gmail.com, boyd@stanford.edu

Abstract

works have established global convergence results. These
recent developments cover a broad range of issues including
global optimality characterization (Fazel et al. 2018; Bhandari and Russo 2019), convergence rates (Zhang et al. 2019;
Mei et al. 2020; Bhandari and Russo 2020; Cen et al. 2020),
the use of function approximation (Agarwal et al. 2019;
Wang et al. 2019; Fu, Yang, and Wang 2020), and efficient
exploration (Agarwal et al. 2020) (for more details, see the
related work section, which we defer to the longer version
of this paper (Zhang et al. 2020, Appendix E) due to space
limits). Nevertheless, prior work on vanilla policy gradient
methods either requires exact and deterministic policy gradients or only guarantees convergence up to Θ(1/M p ) with a
fixed mini-batch size M > 0 of trajectories collected when
performing a single update (where p > 0 is 1/2 in most
cases), while global convergence is only achieved when the
batch size M goes to infinity. By contrast, practical implementations of policy gradient methods typically use either a
single or a fixed number of sample trajectories, which tends
to perform well. In addition, prior theoretical results (for
general MDPs) have used the state-action visitation measure based gradient estimation (see e.g., (Wang et al. 2019,
(3.10))), which are typically not used in practice.

Policy gradient methods are among the most effective methods for large-scale reinforcement learning, and their empirical success has prompted several works that develop the
foundation of their global convergence theory. However, prior
works have either required exact gradients or state-action visitation measure based mini-batch stochastic gradients with a
diverging batch size, which limit their applicability in practical scenarios. In this paper, we consider classical policy gradient methods that compute an approximate gradient with a
single trajectory or a fixed size mini-batch of trajectories under soft-max parametrization and log-barrier regularization,
along with the widely-used REINFORCE gradient estimation
procedure. By controlling the number of “bad” episodes and
resorting to the classical doubling trick, we establish an anytime sub-linear high probability regret bound as well as almost sure global convergence of the average regret with an
asymptotically sub-linear rate. These provide the first set of
global convergence and sample efficiency results for the wellknown REINFORCE algorithm and contribute to a better understanding of its performance in practice.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the global convergence rates of the
REINFORCE algorithm (Williams 1992) for episodic reinforcement learning. REINFORCE is a vanilla policy gradient method that computes a stochastic approximate gradient
with a single trajectory or a fixed size mini-batch of trajectories with particular choice of gradient estimator, where we
use ‘vanilla’ here to disambiguate the method from more exotic variants such as natural policy gradient methods. REINFORCE and its variants are among the most widely used policy gradient methods in practice due to their good empirical
performance and implementation simplicity (Mnih and Gregor 2014; Gu et al. 2015; Zoph and Le 2016; Rennie et al.
2017; Guu et al. 2017; Johnson et al. 2017; Yi et al. 2018;
Kool, van Hoof, and Welling 2018, 2020). Related methods
include the actor-critic family (Konda and Tsitsiklis 2003;
Mnih et al. 2016) and deterministic and trust-region based
variants (Silver et al. 2014; Schulman et al. 2017, 2015).
The theoretical results for policy gradient methods have,
up to recently, been restricted to convergence to local stationary points (Agarwal et al. 2019). Lately, a series of

The main purpose of this paper is to bridge this gap between theory and practice. We do this in two major ways.
First, we derive performance bounds for the case of a fixed
mini-batch size, rather than requiring diverging size. Second, we remove the need for the state-action visitation measure based gradient, instead using the REINFORCE gradient
estimator. It is nontrivial to go from a diverging mini-batch
size to a fixed one. In fact, by allowing for an arbitrarily large
batch size, existing works in the literature were able to make
use of IID samples to decouple the analysis into deterministic gradient descent/ascent and error control of stochastic
gradient estimations. In contrast, with a single trajectory or
a fixed batch size, such a decoupling is no longer feasible.
In addition, the state-action visitation measure based gradient estimations are unbiased and unbounded, while REINFORCE gradient estimations are biased and bounded. Hence
a key to the analysis is to deal with the bias while making
better use of the boundedness. Our analysis not only addresses these challenges, but also leads to convergence results in almost sure and high probability senses, which are
stronger than the expected convergence results that dominate

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10887

