The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tracking Disease Outbreaks from Sparse Data with Bayesian Inference
Bryan Wilder,1 Michael Mina2 , Milind Tambe1
1

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2
T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard University
bwilder@g.harvard.edu, mmina@hsph.harvard.edu, milind tambe@harvard.edu

Rt is typically estimated using daily case counts, i.e.,
the number of new infections detected via testing each day.
Standard methods, including prominent dashboards developed for COVID-19, provide accurate estimates under idealized conditions for the observation of cases and have been
successfully used at a national or state level where many observations are available and sampling variation averages out
(Abbott et al. 2020; Flaxman et al. 2020; Systrom, Vladek,
and Krieger 2020). However, successful reopening will require programs which track spread at the level of particular colleges, workplaces, or towns, where partial observability poses several challenges. First, only a small number
of infected people may be tested. It is estimated that only
about 10% of SARS-COV-2 infections in the US result in
a confirmed test (Havers et al. 2020) and we could expect
even fewer in populations with a high prevalence of asymptomatic or mild infections (e.g., college students). Second,
the biological properties of the test play an important role.
For example, a PCR test which detects viral RNA will show
positive results at different times than an antibody or antigen
test. Further, there can be substantial heterogeneity across
individuals. Third, testing programs may collect samples in
a particular way which impacts the observations. For example, one suggestion for schools and workplaces to reopen is
to institute regular surveillance testing of a fraction of the
population in order to detect outbreaks and catch asymptomatic carriers (Larremore et al. 2020). The observations
will depend on the fraction of the population enrolled in testing (potentially small due to budget constraints) along with
the sampling design (e.g., cross-sectional vs longitudinal).

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic provides new motivation for a
classic problem in epidemiology: estimating the empirical
rate of transmission during an outbreak (formally, the timevarying reproduction number) from case counts. While standard methods exist, they work best at coarse-grained national
or state scales with abundant data, and struggle to accommodate the partial observability and sparse data common at
finer scales (e.g., individual schools or towns). For example,
case counts may be sparse when only a small fraction of infections are caught by a testing program. Or, whether an infected individual tests positive may depend on the kind of
test and the point in time when they are tested. We propose
a Bayesian framework which accommodates partial observability in a principled manner. Our model places a Gaussian
process prior over the unknown reproduction number at each
time step and models observations sampled from the distribution of a specific testing program. For example, our framework can accommodate a variety of kinds of tests (viral RNA,
antibody, antigen, etc.) and sampling schemes (e.g., longitudinal or cross-sectional screening). Inference in this framework is complicated by the presence of tens or hundreds of
thousands of discrete latent variables. To address this challenge, we propose an efficient stochastic variational inference method which relies on a novel gradient estimator for
the variational objective. Experimental results for an example
motivated by COVID-19 show that our method produces an
accurate and well-calibrated posterior, while standard methods for estimating the reproduction number can fail badly.

Introduction

This paper presents GPRt, a novel Bayesian approach to
estimating Rt which accounts for partial observability in
a flexible and principled manner (illustrated in Figure 1).
This method yields well-calibrated probabilistic estimates
(the posterior distribution). Our model places a Gaussian
process (GP) prior over Rt , allowing it to be an arbitrary
smooth function. Then, we explicitly model the sampling
process which generates the observations from the true trajectory of infections. While this substantially improves accuracy (as we show experimentally) it creates a much more
difficult inference problem than has been previously considered. Specifically, our model contains tens or hundreds of
thousands of discrete latent variables, preventing the application of out-of-the-box methods. Moreover, the values of

A key goal for public health is effective surveillance and
tracking of infectious disease outbreaks. This work is motivated in particular by the COVID-19 pandemic but the methods we describe are applicable to other diseases as well. A
central question is to estimate the empirical rate of transmission over time, often formalized via the reproduction
number Rt , t = 1...T . Rt describes the expected number
of secondary infections caused by someone infected at time
t. Accurate estimates of Rt are critical to detect emerging
outbreaks, forecast future cases, and measure the impact of
interventions imposed to limit spread.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4883

