The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Classification by Attention:
Scene Graph Classification with Prior Knowledge
Sahand Sharifzadeh,1 Sina Moayed Baharlou,1 * Volker Tresp1,2
1

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich
2
Siemens AG
sharifzadeh@dbs.ifi.lmu.de
Input Image

Abstract
A major challenge in scene graph classification is that the appearance of objects and relations can be significantly different
from one image to another. Previous works have addressed
this by relational reasoning over all objects in an image or
incorporating prior knowledge into classification. Unlike previous works, we do not consider separate models for perception and prior knowledge. Instead, we take a multi-task
learning approach by introducing schema representations and
implementing the classification as an attention layer between
image-based representations and the schemata. This allows
for the prior knowledge to emerge and propagate within the
perception model. By enforcing the model also to represent
the prior, we achieve a strong inductive bias. We show that
our model can accurately generate commonsense knowledge
and that the iterative injection of this knowledge to scene representations, as a top-down mechanism, leads to significantly
higher classification performance. Additionally, our model can
be fine-tuned on external knowledge given as triples. When
combined with self-supervised learning and with 1% of annotated images only, this gives more than 3% improvement in
object classification, 26% in scene graph classification, and
36% in predicate prediction accuracy.

Contextualize

Classify (Assign to Schemata)

''

Fruits

Ne
a

r

Orange
Unknown ?

''

''

Ne

Fruits
In

ar

Orange

In
Bowl

Classify (Assign to Schemata)

Contextualize

Prior Knowledge

''

Image-based Representations

Schema Representations

Figure 1: An example of scene graph classification where
the Bowl lacks sufficient visual input. The top right is the
initially predicted graph from the visual inputs only. The
bottom left is the prediction of our model after considering
both image-based representations and the prior knowledge
about Fruits and Oranges (schemata). The long arrow near
the bottom indicates recursion.

Introduction
Classifying objects and their relations in images, also known
as scene graph classification, is a fundamental task in scene
understanding and can play an essential role in applications
such as recommender systems, visual question answering and
decision making. Scene graph (SG) classification methods
typically have a perception model that takes an image as input
and generates a graph that describes the given image as a collection of (head, predicate, tail). One of the main
challenges that current models face is diverse appearances
of objects and relations across different images. This can be
due to variations in lighting conditions, viewpoints, object
poses, occlusions, etc. For example, the Bowl in Figure 1
is highly occluded and has very few image-based features.
Therefore, a typical perception model fails to classify it. One
approach to tackle this problem is to collect supportive evidence from the neighbors before classifying an entity. This

can be done, for example, by message passing between all the
image-based object representations in an image, using graph
convolutional neural networks (GCN) (Kipf and Welling
2016) or LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997). The
main issue with this approach is the combinatorial explosion
of all possible image-based neighbor representations1 .
A current theory in cognitive psychology states that humans solve this challenge by reasoning over the pre-existing
representations of neighboring objects instead of relying on
the perceptual inputs only (Piaget 1923); philosophers often
argue that humans have a form of mental representation for
objects and concepts (Kant 1787). These representations do
not depend on a given image but are rather symbol-based.
There are different opinions on how these representations
come to be. Piaget called these representations schema (plu-

* S.M. Baharlou contributed to this project while he was a visiting
researcher at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
For a more detailed probabilistic analysis of this issue, refer to
the section GCN vs. Prior Model: A matter of inductive biases.

5025

