The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Content Learning with Structure-Aware Writing: A Graph-Infused
Dual Conditional Variational Autoencoder for Automatic Storytelling
Meng-Hsuan Yu,1 * Juntao Li,1∗ Zhangming Chan1
Rui Yan2 and Dongyan Zhao1†
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
{yumenghsuan,lijuntao,zhangming.chan,zhaody}@pku.edu.cn
ruiyan@ruc.edu.cn
Case A

Abstract

Case B

fran
walked
edna
judges
Sent 1
fran

Recent automatic storytelling methods mainly rely on keyword planning or plot skeleton generation to model longrange dependencies and create consistent narrative texts.
However, these approaches generate story plans or plots sequentially, leaving the non-sequential conception and structural design processes of human writers unexplored. To
mimic human writers and exploit the fine-grained, intrinsic
structural information of each story, we decompose automatic story generation into sub-problems of graph construction, graph generation, and graph-infused sequence generation. Specifically, we propose a graph-infused dual conditional variational autoencoder model to capture multi-level
intra-story structures (i.e., graph) by continuous variational
latent variables and generate consistent stories through dualinfusion of story structure planning and content learning. Experimental results on the ROCStories dataset and the CMU
Movie Summary corpus confirm that our proposed model
outperforms strong baselines in both human judges and
widely-used automatic metrics.

edna

walked
lamb
fran
judges

Sent 2
Sent 3

Sent 3

Sent 4
Sent 4
Sent 5

judging time

Sent 1

Sent 2

Sent 5

Sent 1: the announcer called out fran 's name.

Sent 2: she walked her lamb, edna, into the small arena.
Sent 3: edna 's white coat looked like a giant cotton ball.
Sent 4: fran stopped walking allowing the judges
to look over edna.

Introduction

Sent 5: after the judges handed in their scorecards, fran exited the arena.

Human-made stories generally consist of a series of locally coherent events or actions, connected by an overarching structure (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2019). To automatically generate coherent and fluent content, current stateof-the-art techniques mainly consist of two themes. Some
existing models (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018a; Zhang
et al. 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant, Feng, and Peng 2019) exploit a hierarchical generation pipeline to model long-range
dependencies. Others have generated stories by first creating intermediate elements e.g., events (Martin et al. 2018),
skeletons (Xu et al. 2018a), keywords (Yao et al. 2019),
verbs (Tambwekar et al. 2019), arguments (Fan, Lewis, and
Dauphin 2019) and then generating the story conditioned on
these given elements. By converting long sequence modeling to relatively short dependency learning, these methods
effectively enhance the consistency of generated stories. Although they achieve noticeable improvements, these methods rely highly on the recent success of sequence modeling

Figure 1: Case A is a typical case of planning based story
generation process, while case B represents a more humanlike situation for story composition.
methods via sequentially outputting each intermediate element. By doing so, the modeling of intermediate elements
with multi-level structure information degenerates to constructing a sequential learning model, which neglects intrastory structures, i.e., interactions between the intermediate
elements and story sentences.
To capture intra-story structures, we proposed to leverage multi-level interconnected structural information to
automatically generate full stories. Specifically, we combine state-of-the-art storyline planning (Yao et al. 2019;
Goldfarb-Tarrant, Feng, and Peng 2019) and hierarchical
generation methods (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2018a) to
structure both the keywords and each sentence of the story.
We consider different types of structured interactions, including sentence-level connections and keyword-sentence
interactions, which presents a more human-like situation for

* Equal contribution
†

Corresponding author: Dongyan Zhao (zhaody@pku.edu.cn)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6021

