The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Encoding Human Domain Knowledge to Warm Start Reinforcement Learning
Andrew Silva, Matthew Gombolay
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Institute of Technology
andrew.silva@gatech.edu, matthew.gombolay@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract

Nets (P RO L O N ETS), a new approach to directly encode domain knowledge as a set of propositional rules into a neural
network, as depicted in Figure 1. Our approach leverages decision tree policies from humans to directly initialize a neural
network (Figure 2). We use decision trees to allow humans to
specify behaviors to guide the agent through a given domain,
such as high-level instructions for keeping a pole balanced on
the cart pole problem. Importantly, this policy specification
does not require the human to demonstrate the balancing act
in all possible states, nor does it require the human to label
actions as being “good” or “bad.”
By directly imbuing logical propositions from the tree into
neural network weights, an RL agent can immediately begin
learning productive strategies. This approach leverages readily available domain knowledge while still retaining the ability to learn and improve over time, eventually outperforming
the expertise with which it was initialized. By exploiting the
structural and logical rules inherent to many tasks to which
RL is applied, we can bypass early random exploration and
expedite an agent’s learning in a new domain.
We demonstrate that our approach can outperform standard
deep RL across two OpenAI gym domains (Brockman et al.
2016) and two modified StarCraft II domains (Vinyals et al.
2017), and that our framework is superior to state-of-the-art,
IL-based RL, even with observation of that same domain
expert knowledge. Finally, in a wildfire simulation domain,
we show that our framework can work with untrained human
participants. Our three primary contributions include:

Deep reinforcement learning has been successful in a variety
of tasks, such as game playing and robotic manipulation. However, attempting to learn tabula rasa disregards the logical
structure of many domains as well as the wealth of readily
available knowledge from domain experts that could help
“warm start” the learning process. We present a novel reinforcement learning technique that allows for intelligent initialization of a neural network weights and architecture. Our
approach permits the encoding domain knowledge directly
into a neural decision tree, and improves upon that knowledge with policy gradient updates. We empirically validate
our approach on two OpenAI Gym tasks and two modified
StarCraft 2 tasks, showing that our novel architecture outperforms multilayer-perceptron and recurrent architectures. Our
knowledge-based framework finds superior policies compared
to imitation learning-based and prior knowledge-based approaches. Importantly, we demonstrate that our approach can
be used by untrained humans to initially provide > 80% increase in expected reward relative to baselines prior to training
(p < 0.001), which results in a > 60% increase in expected
reward after policy optimization (p = 0.011).

1

Introduction

As reinforcement learning (RL) is applied to increasingly
complex domains, such as real-time strategy games or robotic
manipulation, RL and imitation learning (IL) approaches fail
to quickly capture the wealth of expert knowledge that already exists for many domains. Existing approaches to using
IL as a warm start require large datasets or tedious human
labeling as the agent learns everything, from vision to control
to policy, all at once. Unfortunately, these large datasets often
do not exist, as collecting these data is impractical or expensive, and humans will not patiently label data for IL-based
agents (Amershi et al. 2014). While humans may not label
enough state-action pairs to train IL-based agents , there is
an opportunity to improve warm starts by soliciting expertise from a human once, and then leveraging this expertise
to initialize an RL agent’s neural network architecture and
policy. With this approach, we circumvent the need for IL
and instead directly imbue human expertise into an RL agent.
To achieve this blending of human domain knowledge
with the strengths of RL, we propose Propositional Logic

1. We formulate a novel approach for capturing human domain expertise in a trainable RL framework via our architecture, P RO L O N ETS, which we show outperforms baseline RL approaches, including IL-based (Cheng et al. 2018)
and knowledge-based techniques (Humbird, Peterson, and
McClarren 2018), obtaining > 100% more average reward
on a StarCraft 2 mini-game.
2. We introduce dynamic growth to P RO L O N ETS, enabling
greater expressivity over time to surpass original initializations and yielding twice as much average reward in the
lunar lander domain.
3. We conduct a user study in which non-expert humans
leveraged P RO L O N ETS to specify policies that resulted in
higher cumulative rewards, both before and after training,
relative to all baselines (p < 0.05).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5042

