The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DIBS: Diversity Inducing Information Bottleneck in Model Ensembles
Samarth Sinha∗1,2 Homanga Bharadhwaj∗ 1.2 , Anirudh Goyal 3 ,
Hugo Larochelle 3 , Animesh Garg1,2 , Florian Shkurti 1,2
1

University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute
3
Mila
4
Google Brain
samarth.sinha@mail.utoronto.ca, homanga@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract

Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) (Neal 2012) and MCdropout (Gal and Ghahramani 2016) are theoretically motivated Bayesian methods, and have seen many applications in modeling predictive uncertainty. However, BNNs
are: difficult to train, do not scale well to high-dimensional
data, and do not perform well under dataset-shift (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Anonymous 2020;
Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019). In addition, the choice
of priors over the model weights is a crucial factor in their effectiveness. (Hafner et al. 2018; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel,
and Blundell 2017). MC-dropout is a fast and easy to train
alternative to BNNs, and can be interpreted as an ensemble model followed by model averaging. However, recent
works highlight its limitations in deep learning for uncertainty prediction (Sinha, Ebrahimi, and Darrell 2019; Sener
and Savarese 2017), generalization, and predictive accuracy (Kendall and Gal 2017; Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and
Blundell 2017).

Although deep learning models have achieved state-of-the
art performance on a number of vision tasks, generalization over high dimensional multi-modal data, and reliable
predictive uncertainty estimation are still active areas of research. Bayesian approaches including Bayesian Neural Nets
(BNNs) do not scale well to modern computer vision tasks, as
they are difficult to train, and have poor generalization under
dataset-shift. This motivates the need for effective ensembles
which can generalize and give reliable uncertainty estimates.
In this paper, we target the problem of generating effective ensembles of neural networks by encouraging diversity in prediction. We explicitly optimize a diversity inducing adversarial loss for learning the stochastic latent variables and thereby
obtain diversity in the output predictions necessary for modeling multi-modal data. We evaluate our method on benchmark
datasets: MNIST, CIFAR100, TinyImageNet and MIT Places
2, and compared to the most competitive baselines show significant improvements in classification accuracy, under a shift
in the data distribution and in out-of-distribution detection.
: over 10% relative improvement in classification accuracy,
over 5% relative improvement in generalizing under dataset
shift, and over 5% better predictive uncertainty estimation as
inferred by efficient out-of-distribution (OOD) detection.

Our work is motivated to provide better generalization
and provide reliable uncertainty estimates, which we obtain
from inferring multiple plausible hypotheses that are sufficiently diverse from each other. This is even more important
in cases of high dimensional inputs, like images, because the
data distribution is inherently multimodal. Ensemble learning is a natural candidate for learning multiple hypotheses
from data. We address the problem of introducing diversity among the different ensemble components (Melville and
Mooney 2004) and at the same time ensuring that the predictions balance data likelihood and diversity. To achieve
this, we propose an adversarial diversity inducing objective with a information bottleneck (IB) constraint (Tishby,
Pereira, and Bialek 2000; Alemi et al. 2016) to enforce forgetting the input as much as possible, while being predictive about the output. IB (Tishby, Pereira, and Bialek 2000)
formalizes this in terms of minimizing the mutual information (MI) between the bottleneck representation layer with
the input, while maximizing its MI with the correct output,
which has been shown to improve generalization in neural
networks (Alemi et al. 2016; Achille and Soatto 2018; Goyal
et al. 2019).

Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-theart performance in a wide variety of vision tasks, where
the goal is to perform a single task efficiently (He et al.
2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis 2016; Yu, Koltun, and
Funkhouser 2017; He et al. 2017). However, most state-ofthe-art approaches in computer vision, train a single network for solving a particular task, which may not generalize
when there is a change in the input distribution during evaluation. Related to the issue of generalization, the notion of
predictive uncertainty quantification remains an open problem. To achieve this, it is important for the learned model to
be uncertainty-aware, or to know what it does not know. One
of the ways of estimating this is to show the network out-ofdistribution (OOD) examples, and evaluate it on the effectiveness of the model to determine OOD samples (Liang, Li,
and Srikant 2017).

Recent methods in ensemble learning (Lakshminarayanan, Pritzel, and Blundell 2017; Anonymous 2020)
illustrate the drawbacks of applying classical ensembling

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). *equal contribution

9666

