The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Coalition Formation in Multi-defender Security Games
Dolev Mutzari,1 Jiarui Gan,2 Sarit Kraus1
1

Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University
2
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
dolevmu@gmail.com, jrgan@mpi-sws.org, sarit@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract

Indeed, collaboration in the form of coalition formation is
a natural way of achieving efficient defense in the real world.
In multi-defender SSGs, defenders’ movements can be synchronized by collaboration, avoiding overspending of resources. Nevertheless, a recent attempt by Gan et al. (2020)
to use mechanism design to promote defense collaboration
in multi-defender SSGs shows that it’s often not possible
to achieve voluntary collaboration among all defenders in
a multi-defender SSG, no matter what mechanism is used.
The result is primarily due to the heterogeneous preferences
of the defenders over candidate joint strategies to be carried out, which are hard to tame. Indeed, it would be very
demanding to expect defenders with conflicting preferences
to collaborate, but this does not mean that nothing can be
done with those who share similar views or when external
enforcement of cooperative behavior (e.g., via contracting)
is possible. This motivates us to study multi-defender SSGs
using cooperative game theory—a powerful tool for analyzing how agents form stable groups to compete based on their
collective payoffs.
To fit the multi-defender SSG model into the framework
of cooperative game theory, we face two major challenges.
First, SSG is a game with externalities, meaning that the payoff value of a coalition is dependent on the other coalitions.
Second, the game is a non-transferable utility game (NTU),
meaning that the defenders’ payoffs cannot be transferred
between each other as monetary payoffs. These two properties introduce great difficulties in generalizing the model to
allow for coalition formation. To begin with, we cannot define a utility value for a coalition that depends only on who
are in the coalition; instead, we need to define a utility value
for each defender separately, where a coalition structure is
specified in advance. Furthermore, coalition’s value depends
on the attacker’s strategy (which target they attack), who is a
strategic player but will not be a participant in the coalition
formation. Basically, the attacker will take the best response
that maximizes her utility. However, in general there may be
multiple targets that are equally optimal for the attacker but
each of which results in different utilities for every defender,
making it a challenge to define a defender’s utility.

We study Stackelberg security game (SSG) with multiple defenders, where heterogeneous defenders need to allocate security resources to protect a set of targets against a strategic attacker. In such games, coordination and cooperation
between the defenders can increase their ability to protect
their assets, but the heterogeneous preferences of the selfinterested defenders often make such cooperation very difficult. In this paper, we approach the problem from the perspective of cooperative game theory and study coalition formation
among the defenders. Our main contribution is a number of
algorithmic results for the computation problems that arise in
this model. We provide a poly-time algorithm for computing
a solution in the core of the game and show that all of the elements in the core are Pareto efficient. We show that the problem of computing the entire core is NP-hard and then delve
into a special setting where the size of a coalition is limited up
to some threshold. We analyse the parameterized complexity
of deciding if a coalition structure is in the core under this
special setting, and provide a poly-time algorithm for computing successful deviation strategies for a given coalition.

Introduction
The Multi-defender Stackelberg Security Game (SSG) is a
model developed for studying real-world scenarios where
multiple defenders protect a set of targets against a strategic
attacker, who is their common enemy. The game is a generalization of the classic single-defender SSG, which was
studied extensively in recent years in the multi-agent community (Paruchuri et al. 2008; Tambe 2011; Nguyen et al.
2013; Sinha et al. 2018; An and Tambe 2017). The augmentation of defenders makes the model fundamentally different
from single-defender SSGs; understanding the relation between the defenders becomes the key to analysing the game.
Though there is very limited research, some recent work
proposed non-cooperative game models for multi-defender
SSGs with corresponding equilibrium concepts for independent movement of the defenders (Lou and Vorobeychik
2015; Gan, Elkind, and Wooldridge 2018), which lay foundations for further development of research along this line.
In this paper, we approach this model from the perspective
of cooperative game theory, and aim at understanding formation of defender coalitions in the game.

Our Contribution We make the following contributions
in this paper. First, we present a multi-defender SSG model
that allows coalition formation. The core of this game con-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5603

