The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Quantum Cognitively Motivated Decision Fusion for Video Sentiment Analysis
Dimitris Gkoumas1 , Qiuchi Li2 , Shahram Dehdashti 3 , Massimo Melucci2 , Yijun Yu1 , Dawei Song1,4
1

The Open University, Milton Keynes, UK
2
University of Padua, Padua, Italy
3
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
4
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
1
{dimitris.gkoumas, yijun.yu, dawei.song}@open.ac.uk, 2 {qiuchili, melo}@dei.unipd.it, 3 shahram.dehdashti@qut.edu.au
Abstract

Video sentiment analysis is inherently a complex human cognition process. Recent research in cognitive science
found that in some cases human decision making could be
highly irrational (Tversky and Kahneman 1983), and such
behaviour does not always obey the classical axioms of
probability (Kolmogorov 1950) and utility theory (Morgenstern 1949). On the other hand, the mathematical formalism
of Quantum Mechanics (QM) has been shown able to address paradoxes of classical probability theory in modelling
human cognition (Busemeyer and Bruza 2012). Conceptually, quantum cognition challenges the notion that human’s
cognitive states underpinning the decisions have pre-defined
values and that a measurement merely records them. Instead,
the cognitive system is fundamentally uncertain and in an
indefinite state. The act of measurement would then create a
definite state and change the state of the system.
We hypothesise that uni-modal sentiment judgments do
not happen independently, like a pre-defined value being
read out of the internal cognitive state. They are rather constructed at the point of information interaction and thus influenced by the other modalities, which serve as a context for
sentiment judgment under the current modality. For example, there might be cases that the order of different decision
perspectives, e.g., when someone focuses first on the linguistic and then on the visual view, or vice versa, could lead to
controversial sentiment judgements. That is, the measurement from the first perspective provides a context that affects the subsequent one, influencing the probabilities used
to compute the utility function of multimodal sentiment decision. In this case, we say that these two decision perspectives are incompatible with each other. Such incompatibility
implies that judgements over different modalities cannot be
measured jointly, and quantum probability as a generalization of the classical probability theory should hence be in
place (Uprety et al. 2020). We argue that video sentiment
analysis could benefit from the generalised framework of
quantum cognition by capturing the cases of incompatibility that cannot be accommodated by classical probabilities.
This paper introduces a novel decision-level fusion strategy inspired by quantum cognition (Fell et al. 2019). The
goal is to predict the sentiment of utterances in videos, associated with linguistic, visual, and acoustic streams. We
formulate an utterance as a quantum superposition state of
positive and negative sentiments (i.e., it can be positive and

Video sentiment analysis as a decision-making process is inherently complex, involving the fusion of decisions from multiple modalities and the so-caused cognitive biases. Inspired
by recent advances in quantum cognition, we show that the
sentiment judgment from one modality could be incompatible with the judgment from another, i.e., the order matters
and they cannot be jointly measured to produce a final decision. Thus the cognitive process exhibits “quantum-like”
biases that cannot be captured by classical probability theories. Accordingly, we propose a fundamentally new, quantum cognitively motivated fusion strategy for predicting sentiment judgments. In particular, we formulate utterances as
quantum superposition states of positive and negative sentiment judgments, and uni-modal classifiers as mutually incompatible observables, on a complex-valued Hilbert space
with positive-operator valued measures. Experiments on two
benchmarking datasets illustrate that our model significantly
outperforms various existing decision level and a range of
state-of-the-art content-level fusion approaches. The results
also show that the concept of incompatibility allows effective
handling of all combination patterns, including those extreme
cases that are wrongly predicted by all uni-modal classifiers.

Introduction
Video sentiment analysis is an emerging interdisciplinary
area, bringing together artificial intelligence (AI) and cognitive science. It studies a speaker’s sentiment expressed by
distinct modalities, i.e., linguistic, visual, and acoustic. At its
core, effective modality fusion strategies are in place. Existing neural structures have achieveed the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance (Tsai et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019b;
Dumpala et al. 2019; Zadeh et al. 2017) by integrating features after being extracted, called feature-level fusion. Other
approaches simulate logic reasoning and human cognitive
biases (Morvant, Habrard, and Ayache 2014; Glodek et al.
2011b,a) by aggregating decisions of uni-modal classifiers
into a joint decision, called decision-level fusion. Additionally, hybrid fusion approaches benefit from the advantages
of both strategies. In this paper, we target at the generally
less effective but more flexible decision-level fusion.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

827

