The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AI-Assisted Scientific Data Collection with Iterative Human Feedback
Travis Mandel, James Boyd, Sebastian J. Carter, Randall H. Tanaka, Taishi Nammoto
University of Hawai‘i at Hilo, Hilo, HI
{tmandel, boyd4, sjc7, dh404, nammoto}@hawaii.edu

Abstract

increase as expected, except for N=10, where reaction time
is very low. In this case, they would want to confirm the
anomaly by gathering more data at N=10. So a datapoint
from a trial with N=10 would be much more scientifically
interesting than one with N=5 or N=15. We wish to direct
more data towards the interesting conditions, but this is difficult to do manually, especially if data is collected at a rapid
pace. Therefore, this is an ideal fit for AI systems, which can
process large amounts of data in real-time.
Past work in using AI to guide data collection, such as
active learning (Settles 2009), reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998), and online learning (Erraqabi et al.
2017) assume a known and fully-defined (estimation) objective, which is extremely difficult to define in settings where
the goal is to uncover new and unexpected phenomena. Previous work focusing on using AI to achieve scientific objectives (Liu 2015) requires humans to instead specify expected
experimental results; however, specifying such a prediction
accurately for a novel experiment is difficult.
Specifying precise scientific objectives a priori is particularly difficult because the most impactful scientific discoveries are often unrelated to the main purpose of the experiment. For example, Alexander Fleming was running experiments to study Staphylococcus and noticed that one of
his samples was unexpectedly dying off due to an unknown
contaminant - that contaminant turned out to be penicillin.
Such completely unexpected discoveries cannot be captured
by pre-programmed objectives, but instead must come from
keeping humans “in the loop” of scientific data collection,
leveraging their background knowledge, experience, and intuition to help the AI system collect the most useful data.
In this paper, we investigate a new paradigm for scientific data collection that allows humans (e.g. scientists) to
periodically provide feedback to the AI system to help it
more efficiently collect data1 . Specifically, as an AI collects
data, humans will iteratively add points (called “keypoints”)
indicating areas which appear to be scientifically interesting based on the data collected so far. This complicates the
role of the AI system, which must tradeoff sampling existing
keypoints more to increase confidence in their values, while

Although artificial intelligence has revolutionized data analysis, significantly less work has focused on using AI to improve scientific data collection. Past work in AI for data collection has typically assumed the objective function is welldefined by humans before starting an experiment; however,
this is a poor fit for scientific domains where new discoveries
and insights are made as data is being collected. In this paper
we present a new framework to allow AI systems to work
together with humans (e.g. scientists) to collect data more
effectively in simple scientific domains. We present a novel
algorithm, TESA, which seeks to achieve good performance
by learning from past human behavior how to direct data to
places that are likely to become scientifically interesting in
the future. We analyze the problem theoretically, defining a
novel notion of regret in this setting and showing that TESA
is zero regret. Next, we show that TESA outperforms other
related algorithms in simulations using real data drawn from
three diverse domains (economics, mental health, and cognitive psychology). Finally, we run experiments with human
subjects across these scientific domains to compare our iterative human-in-the-loop process to a (more standard) workflow in which information is communicated to the AI a priori.

Introduction
Scientists in domains such as psychology, behavioral economics, and ecology spend a large amount of time and effort designing experiments and collecting large datasets. Although artificial intelligence (AI) has dramatically impacted
the process of scientific data analysis (Ardila et al. 2019;
Weinstein et al. 2019), it has not yet had a similar impact on
scientific data collection. Indeed, in many scientific domains
the typical process for collecting data is simply to sample the
space uniformly as possible; for instance, by allocating an
equal number of participants to each condition. While this
approach makes intuitive sense, the truth is that not all data
are created equal - some datapoints are inherently more scientifically interesting. For example, in general reaction time
tends to increase with the number of stimuli (Hick 1952),
but say a psychologist is running an experiment varying the
number of stimuli (N) between 1 and 20. After collecting
some initial data, they find that in general reaction time does

1

We consider both cases where an AI system collects data directly (e.g. an online experiment) and cases where it collects data
indirectly (e.g. by directing scientific divers).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5957

