The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Curriculum Labeling: Revisiting Pseudo-Labeling for Semi-Supervised Learning
Paola Cascante-Bonilla, Fuwen Tan, Yanjun Qi, Vicente Ordonez
University of Virginia
{pc9za, fuwen.tan, yanjun, vicente}@virginia.edu

Abstract

on a combination of labeled and pseudo-labeled samples.
While pseudo labeling has been proposed before (Lee 2013;
Shi et al. 2018; Iscen et al. 2019; Arazo et al. 2020), we
revise it by using a self-paced curriculum that we refer to
as curriculum labeling, and restarting the model parameters before every iteration in the pseudo-labeling process.
We empirically demonstrate through extensive experiments
that an implementation of pseudo-labeling trained under curriculum labeling, achieves comparable performance against
many other recent methods.
When training a classifier, a common assumption is
that the decision boundary should lie in low-density regions in order to improve generalization (Chapelle and
Zien 2005); therefore unlabeled samples that lie either near
or far from labeled samples should be more informative
for decision boundary estimation. Pseudo-labeling generally
works by iteratively propagating labels from labeled samples to unlabeled samples using the current model to relabel the data (Scudder 1965; Fralick 1967; Agrawala 1970;
Chapelle, Schlkopf, and Zien 2010). Typically, a classifier
is first trained with a small amount of labeled data and then
used to estimate the labels for all the unlabeled data. High
confident predictions are then added as training samples for
the next step. This procedure repeats for a specific number of steps or until the classifier cannot find more confident predictions on the unlabeled set. However, pseudolabeling (Lee 2013; Iscen et al. 2019; Arazo et al. 2020) has
been largely surpassed by recent methods (Xie et al. 2019;
Berthelot et al. 2019, 2020), and there is little recent work
on using this approach for this task.
Our work borrows ideas from curriculum learning (Bengio et al. 2009) where a model first uses samples that are
easy and progressively moves toward hard samples. Prior
work has shown that training with a curriculum improves
performance in several machine learning tasks (Bengio et al.
2009; Hacohen and Weinshall 2019). The main challenge
in designing a curriculum is how to control the pace – going over the easy examples too fast may lead to more confusion than benefit while moving too slowly may lead to
unproductive learning. In particular, we show in our experiments, vanilla handpicked thresholding, as used in previous pseudo-labeling approaches (Oliver et al. 2018), cannot
guarantee success out of the box. Instead, we design a selfpacing strategy by analyzing the distribution of the predic-

In this paper we revisit the idea of pseudo-labeling in the
context of semi-supervised learning where a learning algorithm has access to a small set of labeled samples and a large
set of unlabeled samples. Pseudo-labeling works by applying pseudo-labels to samples in the unlabeled set by using a
model trained on the combination of the labeled samples and
any previously pseudo-labeled samples, and iteratively repeating this process in a self-training cycle. Current methods
seem to have abandoned this approach in favor of consistency
regularization methods that train models under a combination
of different styles of self-supervised losses on the unlabeled
samples and standard supervised losses on the labeled samples. We empirically demonstrate that pseudo-labeling can
in fact be competitive with the state-of-the-art, while being
more resilient to out-of-distribution samples in the unlabeled
set. We identify two key factors that allow pseudo-labeling
to achieve such remarkable results (1) applying curriculum
learning principles and (2) avoiding concept drift by restarting model parameters before each self-training cycle. We obtain 94.91% accuracy on CIFAR-10 using only 4, 000 labeled
samples, and 68.87% top-1 accuracy on Imagenet-ILSVRC
using only 10% of the labeled samples.

Introduction
Access to annotated examples has been critical in achieving
significant improvements in a wide range of computer vision
tasks (Halevy, Norvig, and Pereira 2009; Sun et al. 2017).
However, annotated data is typically limited or expensive
to obtain. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods promise
to leverage unlabeled samples in addition to labeled examples to obtain gains in performance. Recent SSL methods
for image classification have achieved remarkable results on
standard datasets while only relying on a small subset of
the labeled data and using the rest as unlabeled data (Tarvainen and Valpola 2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Verma et al.
2019; Berthelot et al. 2019). These methods often optimize
a combination of supervised and unsupervised objectives to
leverage both labeled and unlabeled samples during training. Our work instead revisits the idea of pseudo-labeling
where unlabeled samples are iteratively added into the training data by pseudo-labeling them with a weak model trained
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6912

