The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Show Me How To Revise:
Improving Lexically Constrained Sentence Generation with XLNet
Xingwei He, Victor O.K. Li
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
hexingwei15@gmail.com, vli@eee.hku.hk

Abstract

models is limited, as they can generate sentences with only
one lexical constraint. To generate sentences with multiple
lexical constraints, Hokamp and Liu (2017) proposed grid
beam search (GBS) by controlling the decoding process. But
this may degrade the quality of the generated sentence since
the constraints are not considered when generating previous
tokens. Applying GBS to unconditional generative models
will suffer from this issue more seriously because the solution space is much wider than that of conditional generative
models. In addition, beam search-based models tend to generate generic and repetitive sentences in unconditional text
generation (Holtzman et al. 2020).
Another line of work applies MCMC sampling to lexically constrained sentence generation. Berglund et al. (2015)
first used Gibbs sampling to generate sentences from the
bidirectional RNN. Then, Wand and Cho (2019) extended
Gibbs sampling to generate sentences from BERT (Devlin
et al. 2019). Su et al. (2018) incorporated soft constraints
such as sentiments via discriminators into the generated sentences. Furthermore, Miao et al. (2019) proposed CGMH,
which can generate flexible-length sentences under the given
lexical constraints with replacement, insertion, and deletion
actions. Different from GBS, MCMC-based models generate the constrained sentence via many refinements instead
of one pass, which allows them to utilize both the past and
future contexts to refine tokens one by one iteratively.
However, previous MCMC-based models typically conduct many invalid and redundant refinements because of
the randomly chosen actions and positions. This problem is
more serious when generating sentences with lexical constraints since it needs many more operations to generate a
complete sentence. To demonstrate this problem, we showed
an example in Figure 1. It is easy for us to realize that a token should be inserted before “very” to complete this sentence. Therefore, operations such as replacing a token with
another token or inserting a token at some other position are
very likely to be rejected since these refinements can hardly
improve the quality of the candidate sentence. Without sufficient refinements, these models will risk generating ungrammatical sentences.
To reduce the redundant refinements conducted by
MCMC-based models, we proposed a two-step approach,
“Predict and Revise”, for constrained sentence generation,
shown in Figure 1. Intuitively, suppose a classifier can tell

Lexically constrained sentence generation allows the incorporation of prior knowledge such as lexical constraints into
the output. This technique has been applied to machine translation, and dialog response generation. Previous work usually used Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling to
generate lexically constrained sentences, but they randomly
determined the position to be edited and the action to be
taken, resulting in many invalid refinements. To overcome
this challenge, we used a classifier to instruct the MCMCbased models where and how to refine the candidate sentences. First, we developed two methods to create synthetic
data on which the pre-trained model is fine-tuned to obtain a reliable classifier. Next, we proposed a two-step approach, “Predict and Revise”, for constrained sentence generation. During the predict step, we leveraged the classifier
to compute the learned prior for the candidate sentence. During the revise step, we resorted to MCMC sampling to revise the candidate sentence by conducting a sampled action at a sampled position drawn from the learned prior.
We compared our proposed models with many strong baselines on two tasks, generating sentences with lexical constraints and text infilling. Experimental results have demonstrated that our proposed model performs much better than
the previous work in terms of sentence fluency and diversity.
Our code, pre-trained models and Appendix are available at
https://github.com/NLPCode/MCMCXLNet.

Introduction
Recently, there has been much interest in generating sentences in a controlled manner. Lexically constrained sentence generation aims to incorporate some pre-specified keywords or phrases into the generated sentences, and has been
widely used for many natural language processing (NLP)
tasks. For example, Mou et al. (2016) alleviated generating
universal dialog responses by injecting a keyword into the
dialogue replies. Some researchers (Hokamp and Liu 2017;
Post and Vilar 2018) incorporated the domain-specific terminologies into the translated sentences.
To generate sentences with lexical constraints, Mou et al.
(2015) proposed a novel backward and forward language
model (B/F-LM). Liu et al. (2019b) extended B/F-LM by introducing a discriminator. However, the capability of these
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12989

