The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Clinical Trial of an AI-Augmented Intervention for HIV prevention in Youth
Experiencing Homelessness
Bryan Wilder1 , Laura Onasch-Vera2 , Graham Diguiseppi2 , Robin Petering3 ,
Chyna Hill2 , Amulya Yadav4 , Eric Rice2 , Milind Tambe1
1
Center for Research on Computation and Society,
John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
2
Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work and Center for Artificial Intelligence in Society,
University of Southern California
3
Lens Co
4
College of Information Sciences and Technology, Pennsylvania State University

Abstract

youth experiencing homelessness (YEH) to serve as advocates for HIV awareness and prevention. Use of peer leaders
has been suggested in the public health and social science
literature due to the central role that peers play in risk behaviors for YEH, including related to HIV spread (Green Jr
et al. 2013; Rice et al. 2010, 2012). Indeed, peer change
agent models have succeeded in past HIV prevention interventions in other contexts (Medley et al. 2009). However,
there have also been notable failures (Group et al. 2010), and
it has been argued such failures may be attributable to how
peer leaders are selected (Schneider, Zhou, and Laumann
2015). The long-standing and most widely adopted method
in the public health literature for selecting peer leaders is to
identify the most popular individuals in the social network
of the youth (Kelly et al. 1997) (formally, the highest degree nodes). This poses the question: are high-degree youth
the best peer leaders to disseminate messages about HIV
prevention? This question has relevance far beyond HIV
prevention; analogous social network interventions are used
widely across development, medicine, education, etc. (Kim
et al. 2015; Paluck, Shepherd, and Aronow 2016; Banerjee
et al. 2013; Valente and Pumpuang 2007).
Information dissemination on social networks is the focus of a long line of research in computer science. In particular, the influence maximization problem, formalized by
(Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos 2003), asks how a limited
number of seed nodes can be selected from a social network to maximize information diffusion. Influence maximization has been the subject of extensive work by the theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence communities (Chen, Wang, and Yang 2009; Chen, Wang, and Wang
2010; Goyal, Lu, and Lakshmanan 2011; Borgs et al. 2014;
Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014). However, to our knowledge, no
work prior to this project had connected the computational
literature on influence maximization to the use of networkdriven interventions in public health and related fields. Computational work has mainly focused on developing highly
efficient algorithms for use on large-scale social media networks (often motivated by advertising), while interventionists in health domains have not used explicitly algorithmic
approaches to optimize the selection of peer leaders. Pre-

Youth experiencing homelessness (YEH) are subject to substantially greater risk of HIV infection, compounded both by
their lack of access to stable housing and the disproportionate representation of youth of marginalized racial, ethnic, and
gender identity groups among YEH. A key goal for health
equity is to improve adoption of protective behaviors in this
population. One promising strategy for intervention is to recruit peer leaders from the population of YEH to promote
behaviors such as condom usage and regular HIV testing to
their social contacts. This raises a computational question:
which youth should be selected as peer leaders to maximize
the overall impact of the intervention? We developed an artificial intelligence system to optimize such social network
interventions in a community health setting. We conducted a
clinical trial enrolling 713 YEH at drop-in centers in a large
US city. The clinical trial compared interventions planned
with the algorithm to those where the highest-degree nodes in
the youths’ social network were recruited as peer leaders (the
standard method in public health) and to an observation-only
control group. Results from the clinical trial show that youth
in the AI group experience statistically significant reductions
in key risk behaviors for HIV transmission, while those in the
other groups do not. This provides, to our knowledge, the first
empirical validation of the usage of AI methods to optimize
social network interventions for health. We conclude by discussing lessons learned over the course of the project which
may inform future attempts to use AI in community-level interventions.

Introduction
Each year, approximately 4.2 million youth in the United
States experience some form of homelessness (Morton et al.
2018). One of the key health challenges for this population is
high HIV prevalence, with reported prevalence in the range
of 2-11% (Young and Rice 2011), up to 10 times that for
youth with stable housing (National HCH Council 2012).
One proposed mechanism for fostering behavior change
in high-risk populations is the peer change agent model. The
main idea is to recruit peer leaders from the population of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14948

