The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Conversational Neuro-Symbolic Commonsense Reasoning
Forough Arabshahi1 * , Jennifer Lee1 , Mikayla Gawarecki2
Kathryn Mazaitis2 , Amos Azaria3 , Tom Mitchell2
1
Facebook,
Carnegie Mellon University,
3
Ariel University
{forough, jenniferlee98}@fb.com, {mgawarec, krivard}@cs.cmu.edu,
amos.azaria@ariel.ac.il, tom.mitchell@cs.cmu.edu
2

Abstract

A study, in which we collected such if(state)-then(action)
commands from human subjects, revealed that humans often
under-specify conditions in their statements; perhaps because
they are used to speaking with other humans who possess the
common sense needed to infer their more specific intent by
making presumptions about their statement.
The inability to make these presumptions makes it challenging for computers to engage in natural sounding conversations with humans. While conversational AI systems such
as Siri, Alexa, and others are entering our daily lives, their
conversations with us humans remains limited to a set of preprogrammed tasks. We propose that handling unseen tasks
requires conversational agents to develop common sense.
Therefore, we propose a new commonsense reasoning
benchmark for conversational agents where the task is to
infer commonsense presumptions in commands of the form
“If state holds Then perform action Because I want to
achieve goal .” The if-(state), then-(action) clause arises
when humans instruct new conditional tasks to conversational
agents (Azaria, Krishnamurthy, and Mitchell 2016; Labutov,
Srivastava, and Mitchell 2018). The reason for including the
because-(goal) clause in the commands is that some presumptions are ambiguous without knowing the user’s purpose, or goal. For instance, if Alice’s goal in the previous
example was to see snow for the first time, Bob would have
presumed that even a snow flurry would be excuse enough to
wake her up. Since humans frequently omit details when stating such commands, a computer possessing common sense
should be able to infer the hidden presumptions; that is, the
additional unstated conditions on the If and/or Then portion
of the command. Please refer to Tab. 1 for some examples. In
this paper, in addition to the proposal of this novel task and
the release of a new dataset to study it, we propose a novel
initial approach that infers such missing presumptions, by extracting a chain of reasoning that shows how the commanded
action will achieve the desired goal when the state holds.
Whenever any additional reasoning steps appear in this reasoning chain, they are output by our system as assumed
implicit presumptions associated with the command. For our
reasoning method we propose a neuro-symbolic interactive,
conversational approach, in which the computer combines its
own commonsense knowledge with conversationally evoked
knowledge provided by a human user. The reasoning chain

In order for conversational AI systems to hold more natural
and broad-ranging conversations, they will require much more
commonsense, including the ability to identify unstated presumptions of their conversational partners. For example, in
the command “If it snows at night then wake me up early
because I don’t want to be late for work” the speaker relies on
commonsense reasoning of the listener to infer the implicit presumption that they wish to be woken only if it snows enough
to cause traffic slowdowns. We consider here the problem of
understanding such imprecisely stated natural language commands given in the form of if-(state), then-(action), because(goal) statements. More precisely, we consider the problem
of identifying the unstated presumptions of the speaker that
allow the requested action to achieve the desired goal from
the given state (perhaps elaborated by making the implicit presumptions explicit). We release a benchmark data set for this
task, collected from humans and annotated with commonsense
presumptions. We present a neuro-symbolic theorem prover
that extracts multi-hop reasoning chains, and apply it to this
problem. Furthermore, to accommodate the reality that current
AI commonsense systems lack full coverage, we also present
an interactive conversational framework built on our neurosymbolic system, that conversationally evokes commonsense
knowledge from humans to complete its reasoning chains.

Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning in the last few decades, commonsense
reasoning remains an unsolved problem at the heart of AI
(Levesque, Davis, and Morgenstern 2012; Davis and Marcus 2015; Sakaguchi et al. 2020). Common sense allows us
humans to engage in conversations with one another and to
convey our thoughts efficiently, without the need to specify much detail (Grice 1975). For example, if Alice asks
Bob to “wake her up early whenever it snows at night” so
that she can get to work on time, Alice assumes that Bob
will wake her up only if it snows enough to cause traffic
slowdowns, and only if it is a working day. Alice does not
explicitly state these conditions since Bob makes such presumptions without much effort thanks to his common sense.
* work done when FA and JL were at Carnegie Mellon University.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4902

