The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distribution Adaptive INT8 Quantization for Training CNNs
Kang Zhao, Sida Huang, Pan Pan, Yinghan Li, Yingya Zhang, Zhenyu Gu, Yinghui Xu
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{zhaokang.zk, sida.hsd, panpan.pp, lyh238099, yingya.zyy, zhenyu.gu, renji.xyh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Researches have demonstrated that low bit-width (e.g., INT8)
quantization can be employed to accelerate the inference process. It makes the gradient quantization very promising since
the backward propagation requires approximately twice more
computation than forward one. Due to the variability and uncertainty of gradient distribution, a lot of methods have been
proposed to attain training stability. However, most of them
ignore the channel-wise gradient distributions and the impact
of gradients with different magnitudes, resulting in the degradation of final accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel
INT8 quantization training framework for convolutional neural network to address the above issues. Specifically, we adopt
Gradient Vectorized Quantization to quantize the gradient,
based on the observation that layer-wise gradients contain
multiple distributions along the channel dimension. Then,
Magnitude-aware Clipping Strategy is introduced by taking
the magnitudes of gradients into consideration when minimizing the quantization error, and we present a theoretical
derivation to solve the quantization parameters of different
distributions. Experimental results on broad range of computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection and video classification, demonstrate that the proposed
Distribution Adaptive INT8 Quantization training method has
achieved almost lossless training accuracy for different backbones, including ResNet, MobileNetV2, InceptionV3, VGG
and AlexNet, which is superior to the state-of-the-art techniques. Moreover, we further implement the INT8 kernel that
can accelerate the training iteration more than 200% under
the latest Turing architecture, i.e., our method excels on both
training accuracy and speed.

Figure 1: The observation of layer-wise gradient distribution from sample and channel perspectives, with respect to
conv6, 21, 34, 46 of ResNet-50 on ImageNet. It is obvious
there exist two categories of gradient distribution observed
along channel dimension: a bell-shaped distribution, and a
sharp with long-tailed shape distribution. But the distributions observed from sample perspective look similar.

efficiency and accuracy. On the one hand, INT8 operation is
twice faster than FP16/INT16, and supported by more architectures compared with FP8. On the other hand, INT8 has a
larger quantization range (-128∼127) than INT4 (-8∼7) or
other lower bit-widths (less than 4-bits).
Although quantizing gradient with INT8 to accelerate
training is appealing, there still remains a big challenge, because the quantization error of gradient easily misleads the
direction of convergence as analyzed in (Zhu et al. 2020).
Many methods have been proposed to keep the training process reliable, most of them either use floating point numbers
to simulate INT8 calculation, which has no actual acceleration effect, or resort to inappropriate quantization schemes
that result in large deterioration of final accuracy. (Zhu et al.
2020) adopts a unified solution to make INT8 training stable
for a variety of networks, but it still suffers from some loss
of accuracy (up to 1% on ImageNet), which is not acceptable in practice. Combining INT16 with INT8 (Zhang et al.
2020) is another option to compensate the quantization loss
of gradient but outside the scope of our work.
In this paper, we propose a Distribution Adaptive INT8
Quantization training framework from the aspects of training accuracy and speedup. The main contributions of our
work are outlined as follows:

Introduction
Many literatures (Jacob et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2018b;
Zhuang et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Jain et al. 2019) have
demonstrated that low bit-width quantization can be utilized
to speed up the inference stage (weight or activation) with
minor hurt of accuracy. It makes quantization of gradient
quite promising since the backward propagation consumes
twice more computing resources than forward propagation
(Banner et al. 2018). Among the family of low bit-width
formats (e.g., FP16, INT16, FP8, INT8, INT4, etc), INT8
is widely adopted in community for the trade-off between
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Based on an important observation ignored by previous
3483

