The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Improving Continuous-time Conflict Based Search
Anton Andreychuk,1, 2 Konstantin Yakovlev, 2, 3 Eli Boyarski, 4 Roni Stern 4, 5
1

2

Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University)
Federal Research Center for Computer Science and Control of Russian Academy of Sciences
3
HSE University 4 Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
5
Palo Alto Research Center
andreychuk@mail.com, yakovlev@isa.ru, eli@boyar.ski, sternron@post.bgu.ac.il
Abstract

time steps. MAPFR (Walker, Sturtevant, and Felner 2018)
is a generalization of the classical MAPF problem in which
actions’ durations can be non-uniform, agents have geometric shapes that must be considered, and time is continuous.
Handling continuous time is challenging because it implies
an agent may wait in a location for an arbitrary amount of
time, i.e., the number of wait actions is infinite.
Several recently proposed algorithms address the MAPFR
problem or its variants, such as Extended ICTS (EICTS) (Walker, Sturtevant, and Felner 2018), CBS with
Continuous Time-steps (CBS-CT) (Cohen et al. 2019), and
Continuous-time conflict-based search (CCBS) (Andreychuk et al. 2019). In this work, we propose several improvements to CCBS that allow it to solve MAPFR problems with significantly more agents. CCBS is based on the
Conflict-based search (CBS) algorithm for classical MAPF,
and the improvements we propose for CCBS are based on
known improvements of CBS, namely Disjoint Splitting
(DS), Prioritizing Conflicts (PC), and high-level heuristics.
Adapting the DS technique to the continuous-time setting of
MAPFR requires solving a single-agent pathfinding problem with temporally-constrained action landmarks (Karpas
and Domshlak 2009). We show how to efficiently solve this
pathfinding problem in our context by applying a generalized version of the SIPP algorithm (Phillips and Likhachev
2011). A naive applying of PC to CCBS is shown to be ineffective, and we propose an adapted version of PC that can
cut the number of expanded nodes significantly. The third
CCBS improvement we propose is an admissible heuristic
function for CCBS that require only a negligable amount of
overhead when applied together with the PC technique.
Finally, we evaluate the impact of these improvements individually and collectively on several benchmarks, including
both roadmaps and grids. The results show that the number
of MAPFR instances solved by CCBS with all the proposed
improvements compared to vanilla CCBS has increased by
49.2% — from 3,792 to 5,659. In some cases, it can even
solve problems with approximately twice the number of
agents compared to vanilla CCBS and reduce the runtime
up to two orders of magnitude.

Conflict-Based Search (CBS) is a powerful algorithmic
framework for optimally solving classical multi-agent path
finding (MAPF) problems, where time is discretized into the
time steps. Continuous-time CBS (CCBS) is a recently proposed version of CBS that guarantees optimal solutions without the need to discretize time. However, the scalability of
CCBS is limited because it does not include any known improvements of CBS. In this paper, we begin to close this
gap and explore how to adapt successful CBS improvements,
namely, prioritizing conflicts (PC), disjoint splitting (DS),
and high-level heuristics, to the continuous time setting of
CCBS. These adaptions are not trivial, and require careful
handling of different types of constraints, applying a generalized version of the Safe interval path planning (SIPP) algorithm, and extending the notion of cardinal conflicts. We
evaluate the effect of the suggested enhancements by running
experiments both on general graphs and 2k -neighborhood
grids. CCBS with these improvements significantly outperforms vanilla CCBS, solving problems with almost twice as
many agents in some cases and pushing the limits of multiagent path finding in continuous-time domains.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Pathfinding (MAPF) is the problem of finding
paths for n agents in a graph such that each agent reaches
its goal vertex and the agents do not collide with each other
while moving along these paths. Many real-world applications require solving variants of MAPF, including managing aircraft-towing vehicles (Morris et al. 2016), video game
characters (Silver 2005), office robots (Veloso et al. 2015),
and warehouse robots (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz
2007). Solving MAPF optimally (for common objective
functions) is NP-Hard (Surynek 2010; Yu and LaValle
2013), but modern optimal MAPF algorithms can scale to
problems with over a hundred agents (Sharon et al. 2015;
Boyarski et al. 2015; Felner et al. 2018; Lam et al. 2019;
Gange, Harabor, and Stuckey 2019; Surynek et al. 2016).
However, such scaling was shown mostly on the classical version of the MAPF problem (Stern et al. 2019), which
embodies several simplifying assumptions such as all actions have the same duration and time is discretized into

Background and Problem Statement
In a MAPFR problem (Walker, Sturtevant, and Felner 2018),
the agents are confined to a weighted graph G = (V, E)

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11220

