The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimating Card Fitness for Discard in Gin Rummy
Jacob Gallucci,1 Richard Bowser,2 Sarah Kettell,3 Christian Overton4
The Pennsylvania State University
jag6241@psu.edu,1 rjb5973@psu.edu,2 sxk1552@psu.edu,3 cto5068@psu.edu4

knocking, and melding cards. We combine all of these strategies together to create an agent that can be trained in a reasonable amount of time without requiring a large amount of
storage.
Our preliminary results show that a bot that used heuristics and CFR performed on average about 4% better than a
bot that just used heuristics.

Abstract
Due to the computation time and resources required, there is
no known optimal strategy for the game of Gin Rummy. Previous work in extensive games, such as Texas Hold’em
Poker, has found that hand fitness and information sets about
the state of the game can be used to determine an improved
strategy. These information sets, combined with algorithms
for Counterfactual Regret Minimization, can arrive at a Nash
Equilibrium strategy for smaller abstractions of extensive
games. This paper builds on previous research by extending
the premise of hand fitness to card fitness in the discard decision point of Gin Rummy. We argue that a card can be ranked
based on whether it meets four specific characteristics at that
stage in the game. These characteristics include its effect on
deadwood points after one more turn, its utility to the opponent, and if it can contribute to a meld. An optimal discard
choice can then be picked from the highest-ranked card by
using a simplified Counterfactual regret minimization strategy that can be trained in less time due to its limited information set. While this does not look at every potential characteristic of card fitness, it outperformed other bots when
evaluated in a large number of games. These bots did not consider card fitness as a whole, but rather considered characteristics separately. We argue that the characteristics defined are
a part of the total information set that can determine the discard fitness of a card within a hand in the game of Gin
Rummy.

Game of Gin Rummy
History
Gin Rummy is yet another card game in the realm of poker.
With the score relying on similar though different mechanics such as straights, runs, sets to create melds. A more
closely related game however of course is Rummy.
“The earliest true Rummy, a kind of proto-Gin, was first
described briefly under the name Coon Can in The Standard
Hoyle (New York, 1887), and in more detail under the name
Conquian by R. F. Foster in Foster's Complete Hoyle of
1897.” (Parlett, n.d.)
The basic premise of Rummy is the idea of drawing a card
and discarding on the same turn. This style of card games
was very popular in Mexico and also found in various Chinese card games with more focus on melding. The popularity of Rummy and Gin Rummy in the United States could
come from either Chinese immigrants or from a similarly
popular Spanish game called “Chinchón” which plays
nearly the same as Gin Rummy but with a smaller deck of
cards. It seems like with any new game or idea it is a culmination of various card games through the years, with each
new culture having their own take on how to play and the
rules creating new versions such as another notable game
“Conquian”.

Introduction
Our purpose was to provide a Gin Rummy bot that was more
advanced than a purely heuristic-based one. We decided to
do this because implementing a bot that can train itself is an
area not too thoroughly researched.
Since Gin Rummy is an imperfect information game, or a
game in which the bot does not know everything that is going on (such as what is in the opponent’s hand), our bot uses
a combination of heuristics and counterfactual regret minimization to make decisions when drawing, discarding,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15503

