The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parameterized Algorithms for MILPs with Small Treedepth
Cornelius Brand,1 Martin Koutecký,1 Sebastian Ordyniak,2
1

Computer Science Institute, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic,
2
School of Computing, University of Leeds, United Kingdom,
{cbrand, koutecky}@iuuk.mff.cuni.cz, s.ordyniak@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract

be solved efficiently using a translation to ILP. This naturally motivates the search for tractable classes for ILP. In
the ’80s, Lenstra and Kannan (Kannan 1987; Lenstra 1983)
and Papadimitriou (Papadimitriou 1981) have shown that the
classes of ILPs with few variables or few constraints and
small coefficients, respectively, are polynomially solvable.
A line of research going back almost 20 years (Hemmecke,
Onn, and Romanchuk 2013; Chen and Marx 2018; Eisenbrand, Hunkenschröder, and Klein 2018; Aschenbrenner and
Hemmecke 2007; Hemmecke, Köppe, and Weismantel 2014;
Ganian, Ordyniak, and Ramanujan 2017; Ganian and Ordyniak 2018; Dvorák et al. 2017) has recently culminated with
the discovery of another tractable class of ILPs (Eisenbrand
et al. 2019; Koutecký, Levin, and Onn 2018), namely ILPs
with small treedepth and coefficients. The obtained results
already found various algorithmic applications in areas such
as scheduling (Knop and Koutecký 2018; Chen et al. 2017;
Jansen et al. 2018), stringology and social choice (Knop,
Koutecký, and Mnich 2017a,b), and the travelling salesman
problem (Chen and Marx 2018).

Solving (mixed) integer (linear) programs, (M)I(L)Ps for short,
is a fundamental optimisation task with a wide range of applications in artificial intelligence and computer science in
general. While hard in general, recent years have brought
about vast progress for solving structurally restricted, (nonmixed) ILPs: n-fold, tree-fold, 2-stage stochastic and multistage stochastic programs admit efficient algorithms, and all
of these special cases are subsumed by the class of ILPs of
small treedepth.
In this paper, we extend this line of work to the mixed case, by
showing an algorithm solving MILP in time f (a, d) poly(n),
where a is the largest coefficient of the constraint matrix, d is
its treedepth, and n is the number of variables.
This is enabled by proving bounds on the denominators (fractionality) of the vertices of bounded-treedepth (non-integer)
linear programs. We do so by carefully analysing the inverses
of invertible sub-matrices of the constraint matrix. This allows
us to afford scaling up the mixed program to the integer grid,
and applying the known methods for integer programs.
We then trace the limiting boundary of our “bounded fractionality” approach both in terms of going beyond MILP (by
allowing non-linear objectives) as well as its usefulness for
generalising other important known tractable classes of ILP.
On the positive side, we show that our result can be generalised from MILP to MIP with piece-wise linear separable
convex objectives with integer breakpoints. On the negative
side, we show that going even slightly beyond such objectives
or considering other natural related tractable classes of ILP
leads to unbounded fractionality.
Finally, we show that restricting the structure of only the integral variables in the constraint matrix does not yield tractable
special cases.

Introduction
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) is a fundamental hard
problem as well as a widely used and highly successful
framework for solving difficult computational problems in
AI, e.g., problems related to planning (van den Briel, Vossen,
and Kambhampati 2005; Vossen et al. 1999), vehicle routing (Toth and Vigo 2001), process scheduling (Floudas and
Lin 2005), packing (Lodi, Martello, and Monaci 2002), and
network hub location (Alumur and Kara 2008) that can often
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12249

The language of “special tractable cases” has been developed in the theory of parameterized complexity (Cygan et al. 2015). We say that a problem is fixed-parameter
tractable (FPT) parameterized by k if it has an algorithm
solving every instance I in time f (k) poly(|I|) for some
computable function f , and we call this an FPT algorithm.
Say that the height of a rooted forest is its largest root-leaf
distance. A graph G = (V, E) has treedepth d if d is the
smallest height of a rooted forest F = (V, E 0 ) in which
each edge of G is between an ancestor-descendant pair in
F , and we write td(G) = d. The primal graph GP (A) of
a matrix A ∈ Rm×n has a vertex for each column of A,
and two vertices are connected if an index k ∈ [m] =
{1, . . . , m} exists such that both columns are non-zero in
row k. The dual graph GD (A) is defined as GD (A) :=
GP (A| ). Define the primal treedepth of A to be tdP (A) =
td(GP (A)), and analogously tdD (A) = td(GD (A)). The
recent results state that there is an algorithm solving ILP in
time f (kAk∞ , min{tdP (A), tdD (A)}) poly(n), hence ILP
is FPT parameterized by kAk∞ and min{tdP (A), tdD (A)}.
Besides this class, other parameterizations of ILP have been
successfully employed to show tractability results, such as
bounding the treewidth of the primal graph and the largest
variable domain (Jansen and Kratsch 2015), the treewidth of

