The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HR-Depth: High Resolution Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation
Xiaoyang Lyu 1 , Liang Liu 1 , Mengmeng Wang 1 , Xin Kong 1 ,
Lina Liu 1 , Yong Liu* 1 , Xinxin Chen 1 , Yi Yuan 2
1

Zhejiang University
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase
{shawlyu, leonliuz, mengmengwang, xinkong, linaliu}@zju.edu.cn,
yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn, cxx-compiler@zju.edu.cn, yuanyi@corp.netease.com
2

Abstract
Self-supervised learning shows great potential in monocular
depth estimation, using image sequences as the only source
of supervision. Although people try to use high-resolution
image for depth estimation, the accuracy of prediction has
not been significantly improved. In this work, we find the
core reason comes from the inaccurate depth estimation in
large gradient regions, making the bilinear interpolation error gradually disappear as the resolution increases. To obtain
more accurate depth estimation in large gradient regions, it
is necessary to obtain high-resolution features with spatial
and semantic information. Therefore, we present an improved
DepthNet, HR-Depth, with two effective strategies: (1) redesign the skip-connection in DepthNet to get better highresolution features and (2) propose feature fusion Squeezeand-Excitation(fSE) module to fuse feature more efficiently.
Using Resnet-18 as the encoder, HR-Depth surpasses all previous state-of-the-art(SoTA) methods with the least parameters at both high and low resolution. Moreover, previous
SoTA methods are based on fairly complex and deep networks with many parameters which limits their real applications. Thus we also construct a lightweight network which
uses MobileNetV3 as encoder. Experiments show that the
lightweight network can perform on par with many large
models like Monodepth2 at high-resolution with only 20%
parameters. All codes and models will be available at https:
//github.com/shawLyu/HR-Depth.

Figure 1: Depth prediction from single image on KITTI.
We compared our method with Monodepth2(Godard et al.
2019), our method can predict higher quality and sharper
depth map with fewer parameters. The input resolution for
all three models is 1024 × 320.

of the model. However, with the improvement of computing and storage capacity, high-resolution images are used by
more and more computer vision tasks. In depth estimation,
(Pillai et al. 2019) introduce sub-pixel-convolutional (Shi
et al. 2016) layers replacing the deconvolution and resizeconvolution layers to improve the effect of up-sampling.
And (Godard et al. 2019) directly leverage high-resolution
images for depth estimation. Although the above works explore high resolution depth estimation, but the performance
has not improved significantly on KITTI. Inspired by this
observation, we perform an analysis of existing method and
find the core reason comes from the inaccurate depth estimation at object boundaries.
In depth estimation, object boundaries are mainly determined by two parts: semantic and spatial information. Semantic information obtains clear boundaries by constraining
the categories of pixels, while spatial information uses geometric constraints to describe the outline of objects. In the
previous work, the depth estimation network is based on the
U-Net(Ronneberger et al. 2015) architecture, which mainly
uses skip-connection to fuse semantic information and spatial information. However, the semantic gap between the encoder and decoder feature maps is too large, which leads to
a poor integration of spatial and semantic information. So
the previous work is difficult to get an accurate depth estimation at object boundaries. In order to reduce the semantic
gap, we redesigned the skip connection to better fuse feature
maps. Besides, we also found that the basic convolution can
not integrate spatial information and semantic information

Introduction
Accurate depth estimation from single image is an active
research filed to help computer reconstruct and understand
the real scenes. It also has a large range of applications in
diverse fields such as autonomous vehicles, robotics, augmented reality, etc. While supervised monocular depth estimation has been successful, it is suffering from the expensive access to ground truth. Self-supervised methods use geometrical constraints on image sequences or stereo images
as the sole source of supervision.
Recent works (Zhou et al. 2017; Godard et al. 2017) in
self-supervised depth estimation are limited to training in
low-resolution inputs due to the large memory requirements
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2294

