The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Spiking Neural Network with Neural Oscillation and Spike-Phase
Information
Yi Chen,1 Hong Qu,1 Malu Zhang,1,2 Yuchen Wang,1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
{chenyi, wangyuchen}@std.uestc.edu.cn, hongqu@uestc.edu.cn, maluzhang@u.nus.edu
Abstract

such as edge devices. Spiking neural networks (SNNs) simulate the biological brain at neuronal level and hold the
potential of ultra-low-power neuromorphic implementation
through event-driven computation. Besides, the spiking neurons model the signal processing of biological neurons in
more detail, then the SNNs model can capture more types of
information such as neural oscillation and spike phase information. The study of deep spiking neural networks (DSNNs)
benefits from both DNNs and SNNs, and is a promising way
towards human-level artificial intelligence. However, how to
efficiently train DSNNs remains an open question as the binary nature of spike train and non-differentiable spike function limit usage of BP learning algorithm. To resolve this
problem, many learning algorithms and training strategies
have been proposed. Depending on the training mechanisms,
they can be divided into three categories.
The first category adopts the ANN-SNN transformation
strategy, which means that the parameters of a pre-trained
ANN are transplanted to the SNN with a similar structure
(Esser et al. 2015; Hunsberger and Eliasmith 2015; Esser
et al. 2016; Peter et al. 2013; Liu, Chen, and Furber 2017;
Diehl et al. 2015, 2016; Bodo et al. 2017; Rueckauer and
Liu 2018; Han, Srinivasan, and Roy 2020). The original intention of this transformation strategy is to make full use
of the state-of-the-art ANNs, and make the converted SNN
have a comparable performance. However, these attempts do
not meet the expectation that the loss of accuracy caused
by approximation in the transformation process seems inevitable. Although some mitigation strategies have been proposed, such as weight/activation normalization (Diehl et al.
2015, 2016; Bodo et al. 2017) and additional noise (Peter
et al. 2013; Liu, Chen, and Furber 2017), the problem is not
completely resolved. Furthermore, in order to better match
the activation of ANNs, the corresponding SNNs normally
use the spike rate coding, which means that the SNN needs
to generate a relatively large number of spikes, resulting in
obscure time information of spike activity and huge energy
consumption (Mostafa 2017).
The second category is the local learning method based
on spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), an unsupervised form of synaptic plasticity observed in different brain
areas. This category update DSNNs layer-by-layer so that
derivative transport between layers in BP is not needed. Besides, STDP updates synaptic weights by considering the

Deep spiking neural network (DSNN) is a promising computational model towards artificial intelligence. It benefits from
both the DNNs and SNNs through a hierarchy structure to extract multiple levels of abstraction and the event-driven computational manner to provide ultra-low-power neuromorphic
implementation, respectively. However, how to efficiently
train the DSNNs remains an open question because of the
non-differentiable spike function that prevents the traditional
back-propagation (BP) learning algorithm directly applied to
DSNNs. Here, inspired by the findings from the biological
neural networks, we address the above-mentioned problem
by introducing neural oscillation and spike-phase information
to DSNNs. Specifically, we propose an Oscillation Postsynaptic Potential (Os-PSP) and phase-locking active function,
and further put forward a new spiking neuron model, namely
Resonate Spiking Neuron (RSN). Based on the RSN, we propose a Spike-Level-Dependent Back-Propagation (SLDBP)
learning algorithm for DSNNs. Experimental results show
that the proposed learning algorithm resolves the problems
caused by the incompatibility between the BP learning algorithm and SNNs, and achieves state-of-the-art performance
in single spike-based learning algorithms. This work investigates the contribution of introducing biologically inspired
mechanisms, such as neural oscillation and spike-phase information to DSNNs and providing a new perspective to design
future DSNNs.

Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in computer vision(He et al. 2016), natural language processing(Young et al. 2018; Ghaeini et al. 2018; Lee and
Li 2020), speech processing(Abdel-Hamid et al. 2014; Lam
et al. 2019) and other fields(Liu et al. 2018; Shao, Liew,
and Wang 2020). The hierarchical organization inspired by
the biological brain enables DNNs to extract multiple levels of features and the back-propagation (BP) learning algorithm offers an efficient global learning method. However, DNNs’ training performs highly rely on large-scale
computing resources (e.g., GPUs and server cluster). The
high requirements for hardware devices limit the deployment of DNNs on power-critical computation platforms,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7073

