The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Wasserstein Distributionally Robust Inverse Multiobjective Optimization
Chaosheng Dong1 * , Bo Zeng2
1

Amazon
University of Pittsburgh
chaosd@amazon.com, bzeng@pitt.edu
2

Abstract

This tool is generally applicable in many scenerios. These
underlying multiobjective decision making schemes, once
obtained, would presumably play critical roles in various aspects, such as assisting agents in automating the process of
providing professional services for clients. For example, the
modern portfolio theory—risk and profit are two objectives
to optimize—is often used by portfolio managers when buying or selling stocks on behalf of clients (Markowitz 1952).
To automate the portfolio management, one could leverage
the portfolio manager’s investment records to learn the key
parameters of this model, e.g., the risk aversion score or expected returns of the assets.
Despite its widely applications, inverse multiobjective optimization relies critically on the availability of an accurate
decision making model, sufficient decisions of high quality, and a parameter space that contains as much information about the objective functions or constraints as possible.
In practice, however, it is highly unlikely that all of these
critical factors would be satisfied. For example, outliers in a
limited amount of decisions would render the empirical distribution of decisions deviate from the true distribution, and
thus significantly weaken the predictive power of the inverse
optimization multiobjective estimator. We note that this issue is not unique for inverse multiobjective optimization
and one can observe similar findings in inverse optimization models that has only one objective function (Keshavarz,
Wang, and Boyd 2011; Bertsimas, Gupta, and Paschalidis
2015; Aswani, Shen, and Siddiq 2018; Esfahani et al. 2018;
Dong, Chen, and Zeng 2018).
To hedge against these uncertainties contained in the
hypothetical decision making model, the data and the selected parameter space, we investigate the distributionally
robust approach for inverse multiobjective optimization.
More specifically, motivated by Shafieezadeh-Abadeh, Esfahani, and Kuhn (2015); Gao and Kleywegt (2016); Esfahani
and Kuhn (2018), etc., we use the Wasserstein metric (Villani 2008) to construct the uncertainty set centered at the empirical distribution of the observed decisions. Subsequently,
we propose a distributionally robust inverse multiobjective
optimization program that minimizes the worst-case risk of
loss, where the worst case is taken over all distributions in
the uncertainty set. By such a distributionally robust framework, we aim to bridge the discrepancy between the lack
of certainties in the information and the expectation for the

Inverse multiobjective optimization provides a general framework for the unsupervised learning task of inferring parameters of a multiobjective decision making problem (DMP),
based on a set of observed decisions from the human expert.
However, the performance of this framework relies critically
on the availability of an accurate DMP, sufficient decisions of
high quality, and a parameter space that contains enough information about the DMP. To hedge against the uncertainties
in the hypothetical DMP, the data, and the parameter space,
we investigate in this paper the distributionally robust approach for inverse multiobjective optimization. Specifically,
we leverage the Wasserstein metric to construct a ball centered at the empirical distribution of these decisions. We then
formulate a Wasserstein distributionally robust inverse multiobjective optimization problem (WRO-IMOP) that minimizes a worst-case expected loss function, where the worst
case is taken over all distributions in the Wasserstein ball.
We show that the excess risk of the WRO-IMOP estimator
has a sub-linear convergence rate. Furthermore, we propose
the semi-infinite reformulations of the WRO-IMOP and develop a cutting-plane algorithm that converges to an approximate solution in finite iterations. Finally, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method on both a synthetic multiobjective quadratic program and a real world portfolio optimization problem.

Introduction
Inverse multiobjective optimization provides a compelling
tool to learn humans’ decision making scheme or emulate
their behaviors (Dong and Zeng 2020). Its goal is to infer the
parameters of the multiobjective decision making problem
(DMP), based on a set of observed decisions from the human
experts. More precisely, it seeks to learn θ given {yi }i∈[N ]
that are observations of the Pareto optimal solutions of the
multiobjective optimization problem (MOP):
min
x
s.t.

{f1 (x, θ), f2 (x, θ), . . . , fp (x, θ)}
x ∈ X(θ),

where θ indicates the true but unknown parameter for the
expert’s multiobjective DMP.
* Work was done prior to joining Amazon
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5914

