The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Contextual Conditional Reasoning
Giovanni Casini,1,4 Thomas Meyer, 2,4 Ivan Varzinczak 3,4
1

ISTI–CNR, Italy
University of Cape Town
3
CRIL, Univ. Artois & CNRS, France
4
CAIR, South Africa
giovanni.casini@isti.cnr.it, tmeyer@cs.uct.ac.za, varzinczak@cril.fr
2

Abstract

it would be impossible to distinguish between atypical (exceptional) entities such as penguins, and non-existing entities such as dodos. In the other, it would be possible to draw
this type of distinction, but at the expense of being unable to
reason coherently about counterfactuals—the agent would
be forced to conclude anything and everything from the existence of dodos.
In this work we introduce a logic of contextual conditionals to overcome this problem. The central insight is that
adding an explicit notion of context to standard conditionals allows for a refined semantics of this enriched language
in which the problems described in Example 1 can be dealt
with adequately. It also allows us to reason coherently with
counterfactual conditionals such as ‘Had Mauritius not been
colonised, the dodo would not fly’. Moreover, it is possible to reason coherently with contextual conditionals without needing to know whether their premises are plausible or
counterfactual. In the case of penguins and dodos, for example, it allows us to state that penguins usually fly in the context of penguins existing, and that dodos usually fly in the
context of dodos existing, while being unaware of whether
or not penguins and dodos actually exist. At the same time, it
remains possible to make statements about what necessarily
holds, regardless of any plausible or counterfactual premise.
The paper is structured as follows. Section outlines the
formal preliminaries of propositional logic and the preferential semantic approach to conditionals on which our work
is based. Section is the heart of the paper. It describes
the language of contextual conditionals, furnishes it with an
appropriate and intuitive semantics, and motivates the corresponding logic by way of examples, formal properties,
and a formal representation result. With the basics of the
logic in place, Section defines a form of entailment for
it that is based on the well-known notion of Rational Closure (Lehmann and Magidor 1992), and shows that it is reducible to classical propositional reasoning. Section reviews
related work, while Section concludes and considers future
avenues to explore.

We extend the expressivity of classical conditional reasoning by introducing context as a new parameter. The enriched
conditional logic generalises the defeasible conditional setting in the style of Kraus, Lehmann, and Magidor, and allows
for a refined semantics that is able to distinguish, for example, between expectations and counterfactuals. In this paper
we introduce the language for the enriched logic and define
an appropriate semantic framework for it. We analyse which
properties generally associated with conditional reasoning are
still satisfied by the new semantic framework, provide a suitable representation result, and define an entailment relation
based on Lehmann and Magidor’s generally-accepted notion
of Rational Closure.

Introduction
Conditionals are at the heart of human everyday reasoning
and play an important role in the logical formalisation of
reasoning. They can usually be interpreted in many ways:
necessity, presumption, deontic, causal, probabilistic, counterfactual, and many others. Two very common interpretations, that are also strongly interconnected, are conditionals representing expectations (‘If it is a bird, then presumably it flies’), and conditionals representing counterfactuals
(‘If Napoleon had won at Waterloo, all Europe would be
speaking French’). Although they are connected by virtue
of being conditionals, the types of reasoning they aim to
model differ somewhat. E.g., the first example above assumes that the premises of conditionals are consistent with
what is believed, while the second example assumes that
those premises are inconsistent with an agent’s beliefs. That
this is problematic can be made concrete with an extended
version of the (admittedly over-used) penguin example.
Example 1. Suppose we know that birds usually fly, that
penguins are birds that usually do not fly, that dodos were
birds that usually did not fly, and that dodos do not exist anymore. As outlined in more detail in Example 2, the standard
preferential semantic approach to representing conditionals
(Lehmann and Magidor 1992) is limited in that it allows for
two forms of representation of an agent’s beliefs. In the one,

Formal Background
In this paper, we assume a finite set of propositional atoms P
and use p, q, . . . to denote its elements. Sentences of the
underlying propositional language are denoted by α, β, . . .,
and are built up from the atomic propositions and the

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6254

