The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepCollaboration: Collaborative Generative and Discriminative Models for
Class Incremental Learning
Bo Cui1,3 , Guyue Hu1,3 , Shan Yu1,2,4
1

Brainnetome Center and National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{bo.cui, guyue.hu, shan.yu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
An important challenge for neural networks is to learn incrementally, i.e., learn new classes without catastrophic forgetting. To overcome this problem, generative replay technique
has been suggested, which can generate samples belonging
to learned classes while learning new ones. However, such
generative models usually suffer from increased distribution
mismatch between the generated and original samples along
the learning process. In this work, we propose DeepCollaboration (D-Collab), a collaborative framework of deep generative and discriminative models to solve this problem effectively. We develop a discriminative learning model to incrementally update the latent feature space for continual classification. At the same time, a generative model is introduced
to achieve conditional generation using the latent feature distribution produced by the discriminative model. Importantly, the generative and discriminative models are connected
through bidirectional training to enforce cycle-consistency of
mappings between feature and image domains. Furthermore,
a domain alignment module is used to eliminate the divergence between the feature distributions of generated images
and real ones. This module together with the discriminative
model can perform effective sample mining to facilitate incremental learning. Extensive experiments on several visual
recognition datasets show that our system can achieve stateof-the-art performance.

(a) GAN

(b) D-Collab

Figure 1: (a) Problem of generative replay (Shin et al. 2017)
based incremental learning: when new classes 3 and 4 come,
raw training data for class 1 and 2 are not available. Using
samples generated from a GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
with distribution shift from raw data for training, will result in mis-classfication. (b) Our D-Collab model can dramatically alleviate the domain shift between the generated
data and raw samples, meanwhile drop the performanceharming generated samples. Red: features of generated samples; Blue: features of raw samples; Black line: decision
boundaries for the incremental learning task; Triangle, Circle, Star and Diamond indicate four different classes, respectively.

Introduction
Deep neural networks trained end-to-end have achieved encouraging results on supervised learning tasks (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016). Typically all the
samples and labels must be available for training these systems. However, intelligent systems should be able to learn
continually, in other words, sequentially learn new tasks
without access to the past data, while preserving the knowledge learned from old tasks. For incremental representation learning, the new task means classifying samples from
new classes together with old classes. Catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey and Cohen 1989) is the core problem with
class incremental learning. The networks are severely biased
by the data of new classes as the past data are not available

during training. So the classification accuracy for old classes
may quickly deteriorate. To alleviate this problem, most of
previous approaches need to store exemplars for old classes and utilize knowledge distillation technique. Storing past
samples results in increasing memory cost as new classes
come. To handle this, generative replay technique has been
proposed (Shin et al. 2017). Using standard deep generative
model, generative replay generates pseudo-samples for old
classes and mixes them with new samples for further incremental learning. But this method suffers from the distribution shift between the generated data and original samples.
Typically the generated samples are visually quite different
from natural images. What’s more, large distribution divergence exists between the generated samples and real images
in feature space, as illustrated in Figure 1. If using them di-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1175

