The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Probing Product Description Generation via Posterior Distillation
Haolan Zhan,1 * Hainan Zhang,2† Hongshen Chen,2† Lei Shen,3,4 Zhuoye Ding,2
Yongjun Bao,2 Weipeng Yan,2 Yanyan Lan3,4†
1

Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Data Science Lab, JD.com, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
University of Chiense Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
zhanhaolan316@gmail.com, zhanghainan6@jd.com, ac@chenhongshen.com, {shenlei17z, lanyanyan}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
In product description generation (PDG), the user-cared aspect is critical for the recommendation system, which can
not only improve user’s experiences but also obtain more
clicks. High-quality customer reviews can be considered as
an ideal source to mine user-cared aspects. However, in reality, a large number of new products (known as long-tailed
commodities) cannot gather sufficient amount of customer reviews, which brings a big challenge in the product description
generation task. Existing works tend to generate the product
description solely based on item information, i.e., product attributes or title words, which leads to tedious contents and
cannot attract customers effectively. To tackle this problem,
we propose an adaptive posterior network based on Transformer architecture that can utilize user-cared information
from customer reviews. Specifically, we first extend the selfattentive Transformer encoder to encode product titles and
attributes. Then, we apply an adaptive posterior distillation
module to utilize useful review information, which integrates
user-cared aspects to the generation process. Finally, we apply a Transformer-based decoding phase with copy mechanism to automatically generate the product description. Besides, we also collect a large-scare Chinese product description dataset to support our work and further research in this
field. Experimental results show that our model is superior
to traditional generative models in both automatic indicators
and human evaluation.

Figure 1: A product description example from our dataset.

Introduction

characteristics in a product description for the E-commerce
system to help customers learn the recommended products
directly.
Furthermore, products with well-written description is capable to attract more customer’s attentions. For instance, as
showed in Figure 1, the product description below the product depicts some user-cared aspects, i.e., “comfortable and
soft” and “improving the wearing experience”, which can
arouse customer’s interests and encourage them to buy it.
With this appealing user-cared description, customers could
select their interested products easily and feel more satisfied
with the entire recommending process. In a word, generating
an user-cared product description is an important and practical research problem in E-commerce scenario.
High-quality customer reviews are an ideal source to mine
user-cared aspects (Pecar 2018). The customer post their re-

In E-commerce, the goal of online product recommendation system is to post suitable commodities to customers and
stimulate their purchasing behaviors. However, ranking the
products and display them to users can no longer meet the
requirements of customers (Zhang et al. 2019; Gong et al.
2019; Chen et al. 2019a). While browsing the recommendation system, customers face the problem of information
explosion. To save costs and find products in need straightforwardly, customers would like to see some refined product
descriptions rather than complex product details, as shown
in Figure 1. Therefore, it is important to present product
* Work done at Data Science Lab, JD.com.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14301

