The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How RL Agents Behave When Their Actions Are Modified
Eric D. Langlois1,2,3 , Tom Everitt1
1

DeepMind
University of Toronto
3
Vector Institute
edl@cs.toronto.edu, tomeveritt@google.com
2

Abstract

prevent an autonomous car from driving off the road) then
the policy should not learn to rely on the presence of these
interventions (Orseau and Armstrong 2016). Agents should
recognize the possibility of self damage and avoid it. Agent
responses to these action modifications influence the safety
and effectiveness of the resulting policies so it is crucial to
study and understand the implications of action modifications
on reinforcement learning.

Reinforcement learning in complex environments may require
supervision to prevent the agent from attempting dangerous
actions. As a result of supervisor intervention, the executed
action may differ from the action specified by the policy. How
does this affect learning? We present the Modified-Action
Markov Decision Process, an extension of the MDP model
that allows actions to differ from the policy. We analyze the
asymptotic behaviours of common reinforcement learning algorithms in this setting and show that they adapt in different
ways: some completely ignore modifications while others go
to various lengths in trying to avoid action modifications that
decrease reward. By choosing the right algorithm, developers
can prevent their agents from learning to circumvent interruptions or constraints, and better control agent responses to other
kinds of action modification, like self-damage.

Related Work

Introduction
When reinforcement learning (RL) agents are deployed in
practice it can sometimes be desirable to constrain their actions or alter their policies. For example, action constraints
have been used to prevent damage when training robot policies (Gu et al. 2017; Lin, Talathi, and Annapureddy 2016)
and transformations to the policy can be used to ensure
that an agent stays within some safe region of state space
(Berkenkamp et al. 2017; Dalal et al. 2018). When unsafe
states are difficult to specify formally, a human overseer may
interrupt the agent instead (Orseau and Armstrong 2016;
Saunders et al. 2018). In other cases, changes to the learned
policy are undesirable yet difficult to avoid: an agent may
damage its actuators and lose the ability to reliably perform
certain actions, or errors can be introduced when a policy is
compressed to satisfy hardware limitations of the agent (e.g.
quantization, Krishnan et al. 2019).
What effect will these kinds of action modifications have
on the policy learned by an RL algorithm? Will the policy
try to circumvent constraints or act as if they don’t exist?
It will be easier to effectively apply safety constraints to
an RL policy if the learning algorithm can be made to ignore the modification than if the learning algorithm chooses
policies that interfere with it. If a supervisor overrides an
agent during training but not deployment (for example to
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11586

The concept of modifying an agent’s actions appears in the
safe exploration and human-in-the-loop literature. Dalal et al.
(2018) and Abel et al. (2017) both propose approaches that
construct a wrapper around an inner reinforcement learning
agent. While they focus on developing wrappers that enforce
constraints or guide the inner agent, we are interested in
understanding how different inner agents will react to the
wrapper. This can help avoid problems like those experience
by Saunders et al. (2018) in which the inner agent learned
to produce adversarial examples that defeat a learned action
filter.
Orseau and Armstrong (2016) studied learning in the
presence of interruptions that temporarily replace the policy with some fixed alternate policy (for both history-based
and Markov environments). They showed that Q-learning
and “Safe Sarsa” (a modification of Sarsa) both ignore interruptions while Sarsa does not. We provide a new formalism called the Modified-Action Markov Decision Process
(MAMDP) that generalizes (and arguably simplifies) the
framework of Orseau and Armstrong to describe a broad
class of action modifications, and allows us to study the behaviour of other optimization algorithms such as evolution
strategies. In addition, we distinguish between different ways
that algorithms adapt to the presence of action modifications
using the concept of incentives (Everitt et al. 2021).
Policy modifications have been studied experimentally by
Leike et al. (2017). The authors found that Sarsa chooses a
policy that accounts for the effect of policy modifications
while Q-learning ignores them. They hypothesized that the
difference was off-policy vs. on-policy learning. However,
we show that the on/off-policy division is not predictive for
policy-modification adaptation: one possible generalization
of Sarsa (on-policy) asymptotically matches Q-learning (offpolicy), while both Sarsa and Evolution Strategies (on-policy)

