The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Two-Stream Convolution Augmented Transformer for
Human Activity Recognition
Bing Li1 , Wei Cui2∗ , Wei Wang3,1∗ , Le Zhang2 , Zhenghua Chen2 , Min Wu2
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (ASTAR), Singapore
3
Dongguan University of Technology, China
{bing.li, weiw}@unsw.edu.au, {cuiw, zhang_le, chen_zhenghua, wumin}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract

Recognition of human activities is an important task due
to its far-reaching applications such as healthcare system,
context-aware applications, and security monitoring. Recently, WiFi based human activity recognition (HAR) is becoming ubiquitous due to its non-invasiveness. Existing WiFibased HAR methods regard WiFi signals as a temporal sequence of channel state information (CSI), and employ deep
sequential models (e.g., RNN, LSTM) to automatically capture channel-over-time features. Although being remarkably
effective, they suffer from two major drawbacks. Firstly, the
granularity of a single temporal point is blindly elementary
for representing meaningful CSI patterns. Secondly, the timeover-channel features are also important, and could be a natural data augmentation. To address the drawbacks, we propose
a novel Two-stream Convolution Augmented Human Activity Transformer (THAT) model. Our model proposes to utilize a two-stream structure to capture both time-over-channel
and channel-over-time features, and use the multi-scale convolution augmented transformer to capture range-based patterns. Extensive experiments on four real experiment datasets
demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art models in terms of both effectiveness and efficiency 1 .

Figure 1: A human with different activities brings unique
multi-path reflections and refractions in wireless signals
from a transmitter (TX) to a receiver (RX).

2011), wearable sensors (Ertin et al. 2011), and radars (Lien
et al. 2016). However, these methods commonly require limited working conditions and special treatments on deployment and commissioning. E.g., cameras have limited viewing angles, illumination requirement, and needs line-of-sight
(LOS) condition (no fog, smoke, or other obstacles). The reliance on dedicated devices and limited working conditions
generally leads to high costs yet low efficacy, which hinders
their applications from daily-life scenes.
Recently, the research community has sought using offthe-shelf devices to recognize human activities in a “devicefree” manner, primarily based on the WiFi, an ubiquitously
available device. WiFi-based solutions build upon the principle that human actions between WiFi transmitters and receivers (as shown in Fig. 1) will incur subtle yet unique variations (a.k.a. multi-path and the fading effect) on WiFi signals (Wang et al. 2015). There are two kinds of commonly used WiFi signal data: received signal strength (RSS)
and channel state information (CSI). Due to being finergrained and containing abundant environment information
that would benefit HAR task, CSI becomes the de-facto standard. However, different from RSS where the patterns are
simple and explicit, in CSI, the patterns are often implicit
because they underneath the large amount of raw data (90
times more than RSS data), leading to a high noise-feature
ratio. Thus, it is hard to obtain satisfactory results solely relying on extracting simple yet effective patterns.
Observing this, pioneer research efforts have sought
for various deep learning (DL) techniques, such as CNN (Chowdhury 2018), RNN (Yousefi et al. 2017), or LSTM (Chen et al. 2018), to automatically extract informative
features. Despite being effective, existing DL-based solu-

Introduction
Human activity recognition (HAR) aims to recognize various human activities such as walking, sitting, falling down,
etc. It is widely used in many fields such as healthcare
system (Zheng et al. 2017; Jobanputra, Bavishi, and Doshi
2019), smart building solutions (Pu et al. 2013), and Internet
of Things (IoT) applications. For examples, elderly people
monitoring (Jobanputra, Bavishi, and Doshi 2019), energyefficiency system for smart buildings (Pu et al. 2013), daily
activity recognition for robot-assisted living (Zhu and Sheng
2011). Other applications include fall detection (Wang, Wu,
and Ni 2017), security monitoring (Zheng et al. 2017), rescue systems (Grzonka et al. 2010), etc.
Due to its importance, numerous research efforts are devoted to HAR in recent years, mostly rely on various sensors
or dedicated devices, such as cameras (Aggarwal and Ryoo
∗
W. Wang and W. Cui are the corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code: https://github.com/windofshadow/THAT

286

