The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncertain Graph Neural Networks for Facial Action Unit Detection
Tengfei Song1,2 , Lisha Chen3 , Wenming Zheng1 , Qiang Ji3
1

Key Laboratory of Child Development and Learning Science, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
3
Department of Electrical, Computer and Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, New York, USA
songtf@seu.edu.cn, chenl21@rpi.edu, wenming zheng@seu.edu.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract

of training data with precise annotation. For AU detection,
the annotation of the ground truth requires strong domain
expertise and hence the annotations are often noisy (Zhang
et al. 2013). Besides, the annotations are often unbalanced as
some AUs appear frequently while other AUs rarely appear.
All these make the AU detection still a challenging task.

Capturing the dependencies among different facial action
units (AU) is extremely important for the AU detection
task. Many studies have employed graph-based deep learning
methods to exploit the dependencies among AUs. However,
the dependencies among AUs in real world data are often
noisy and the uncertainty is essential to be taken into consideration. Rather than employing a deterministic mode, we
propose an uncertain graph neural network (UGN) to learn
the probabilistic mask that simultaneously captures both the
individual dependencies among AUs and the uncertainties.
Further, we propose an adaptive weighted loss function based
on the epistemic uncertainties to adaptively vary the weights
of the training samples during the training process to account
for unbalanced data distributions among AUs. We also provide an insightful analysis on how the uncertainties are related to the performance of AU detection. Extensive experiments, conducted on two benchmark datasets, i.e., BP4D and
DISFA, demonstrate our method achieves the state-of-the-art
performance.

Typically, AU detection can be treated as a multi-label
classification task in terms of different AU types with some
intrinsic dependencies among different AUs. Rather than designing more complex networks to learn features in a datadriven manner to detect each AU independently, recent studies (Zhang et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2013) begin to exploit
the intrinsic dependencies among different facial muscles
due to the underlying facial anatomy and the need to form a
meaningful expression. For example, ‘raise cheek’ and ‘pull
lip corners’ generally appear simultaneously when we show
the happiness expression. On the other hand, ‘raise cheek’
and ‘stretch mouth’ are not likely to appear simultaneously.
Recently, more researchers (Niu et al. 2019a,b; Corneanu,
Madadi, and Escalera 2018; Wang, Gan, and Ji 2017) capture these dependencies among AUs with a graph, which
provides an effective way to combine the appearance features with semantic dependencies. The graph-based method
can capture the complex geometric and semantic relationships between nodes based on strong mathematical graph
theory (Chung and Graham 1997). Most of these existing
works about AU detection employ some prior knowledge
to define a fixed graph, which cannot effectively capture
the dynamic and individual dependencies among AUs. The
graph can also be learned by an end-to-end manner (Shi
et al. 2019), which can capture better graph dependencies
from the distribution of the data. However, it still assumes
the same graph structure for all images. Inspired by the attention mechanism, the graph attention network (Veličković
et al. 2017) was proposed recently to focus on partial set
of the most relevant edges based on input, which can adaptively provide larger weight for the edge with high contribution in the graph. Although these methods provide effective
ways to exploit the individual dependencies among AUs and
can extract more discriminative features, most of them are
deterministic deep models for AU detection. Generally, the
deterministic model cannot effectively capture the data uncertainty, including label noise, and cannot quantify its prediction confidence.

Introduction
Analyzing and recognizing the facial expressions are significant to realize the natural human-robot interaction in the
field of artificial intelligence. Facial Action Unites (AU)
defined in the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) (Ekman 1997) characterize the facial muscle movements, which
underpin multiple facial expressions. Thus, researchers increasingly conduct AU detection to estimate the human
emotion and facial behaviors (Danelakis, Theoharis, and
Pratikakis 2018; Wang, Hao, and Ji 2018).
Recently, deep neural networks (He et al. 2016; Simonyan
and Zisserman 2014; Ertugrul, Le Yang, and Cohn 2019)
have been the dominant methods to perform the computer
vision tasks with large scale datasets and high performance
computing. Many studies (Li, Abtahi, and Zhu 2017; Niu
et al. 2019a) employed deep neural networks to extract appearance features for AU detection and the performance has
been remarkably improved compared with traditional methods (Jiang, Valstar, and Pantic 2011; Simon et al. 2010).
Most of the existing deep learning methods for AU detection
are deterministic models, which rely on the large amount
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5993

