The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DPFPS: Dynamic and Progressive Filter Pruning for Compressing Convolutional
Neural Networks from Scratch
Xiaofeng Ruan1,2 * , Yufan Liu1,2∗ , Bing Li1,4† , Chunfeng Yuan1 , Weiming Hu1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
PeopleAI Inc.
{ruanxiaofeng2017, yufan.liu}@ia.ac.cn, {bli, cfyuan, wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Multi-pass

Filter pruning is a commonly used method for compressing Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets), due to its
friendly hardware supporting and flexibility. However, existing methods mostly need a cumbersome procedure, which
brings many extra hyper-parameters and training epochs. This
is because only using sparsity and pruning stages cannot obtain a satisfying performance. Besides, many works do not
consider the difference of pruning ratio across different layers. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel dynamic and progressive filter pruning (DPFPS) scheme that
directly learns a structured sparsity network from Scratch.
In particular, DPFPS imposes a new structured sparsityinducing regularization specifically upon the expected pruning parameters in a dynamic sparsity manner. The dynamic
sparsity scheme determines sparsity allocation ratios of different layers and a Taylor series based channel sensitivity criteria is presented to identify the expected pruning parameters. Moreover, we increase the structured sparsity-inducing
penalty in a progressive manner. This helps the model to be
sparse gradually instead of forcing the model to be sparse
at the beginning. Our method solves the pruning ratio based
optimization problem by an iterative soft-thresholding algorithm (ISTA) with dynamic sparsity. At the end of the training, we only need to remove the redundant parameters without other stages, such as fine-tuning. Extensive experimental
results show that the proposed method is competitive with
11 state-of-the-art methods on both small-scale and largescale datasets (i.e., CIFAR and ImageNet). Specifically, on
ImageNet, we achieve a 44.97% pruning ratio of FLOPs by
compressing ResNet-101, even with an increase of 0.12%
Top-5 accuracy. Our pruned models and codes are released
at https://github.com/taoxvzi/DPFPS.

Well-trained
network
Original
network

Pruning

Finetuning

Cumbersome pruning procedure

Compressed
network

(a)

Training with DPFPS
Original network

Pruning

Structured sparsity network

Compressed network

(b)

Figure 1: Block diagrams of two types of filter pruning.
(a) This pruning procedure needs pre-trained models and
fine-tuning after pruning, even a multi-pass scheme. (b) Our
method directly learns a structured sparsity network from
scratch, without any fine-tuning or multi-pass.

2016) and video understanding (Venugopalan et al. 2015).
However, a large number of parameters and FLoating-point
OPerations (FLOPs) make it difficult to deploy ConvNets
in the application of embedded or mobile devices. Therefore, model compression and acceleration of ConvNets is a
fundamental problem that has been extensively studied in
recent years. Several techniques, including weight sparsity,
low-rank approximation, parameter quantization, and filter
pruning, have been applied to the study of model compression and acceleration. Among them, filter pruning methods
have been widely explored and possessed excellent performances on the compression and acceleration ratio because
of their hardware-friendly capabilities without the support
of special libraries. For example, by using SSL (Wen et al.
2016), convolutional layer computation of AlexNet is accelerated on average 5.1x and 3.1x speedups against CPU and
GPU, respectively, with off-the-shelf libraries.
Though previous filter pruning algorithms have achieved
promising results, there still exist several problems. Specifically, a common procedure of filter pruning (Liu et al.

Introduction
With the development of computer science and artificial intelligence, ConvNets have significantly improved
performance in several fields, such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), object detection (Girshick et al. 2014), object tracking (Bertinetto et al.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2495

