The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Metric Learning with Graph Consistency
Binghui Chen,1 Pengyu Li, 1 Zhaoyi Yan 1,2 Biao Wang 1 Lei Zhang 1,3
1

Artificial Intelligence Center, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, lipengyu007@gmail.com, yanzhaoyi@outlook.com, wangbiao225@foxmail.com,
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract
decrease the intraclass variations

Deep Metric Learning (DML) has been more attractive and
widely applied in many computer vision tasks, in which a discriminative embedding is requested such that the image features belonging to the same class are gathered together and
the ones belonging to different classes are pushed apart. Most
existing works insist to learn this discriminative embedding
by either devising powerful pair-based loss functions or hardsample mining strategies. However, in this paper, we start
from another perspective and propose Deep Consistent Graph
Metric Learning (CGML) framework to enhance the discrimination of the learned embedding. It is mainly achieved by
rethinking the conventional distance constraints as a graph
regularization and then introducing a Graph Consistency regularization term, which intends to optimize the feature distribution from a global graph perspective. Inspired by the characteristic of our defined ’Discriminative Graph’, which regards DML from another novel perspective, the Graph Consistency regularization term encourages the sub-graphs randomly sampled from the training set to be consistent. We
show that our CGML indeed serves as an efficient technique
for learning towards discriminative embedding and is applicable to various popular metric objectives, e.g. Triplet, N-Pair
and Binomial losses. This paper empirically and experimentally demonstrates the effectiveness of our graph regularization idea, achieving competitive results on the popular CUB,
CARS, Stanford Online Products and In-Shop datasets.

α

Randomly
sampled G1

Randomly
sampled G2

regularize to be
consistent
β

increase the interclass variations

Figure 1: Graph Consistency. The circles indicate the data
points, green/red/blue color represent three classes, resp. For
the left two sub-figures, the highlighted colors means the
current sampled data. From the left two sub-figures, one can
observe that since the overall feature representations are not
discriminative enough, i.e. with large intra-class variations
and relatively small inter-class margins, the randomly sampled graphs are different with each other. Then by regularizing them to be consistent, in other words, aligning them to
be the same, the intra-class distance can be decreased and
the inter-class margin can be enlarged to some extend, resulting in the more discriminative representation space than
before.

(Oh Song et al. 2016), visual tracking (Leal-Taixé, CantonFerrer, and Schindler 2016; Tao, Gavves, and Smeulders
2016) and cross-modal retrieval (Deng et al. 2018).
Deep Metric Learning (DML) is generally achieved by
learning feature representations for the input images such
that the instances from the same class are mapped to the
small vicinity in the low-dimensional representation space
while the samples from different classes are placed relatively apart. The representations are learned under an endto-end optimization framework where the objective function utilizes the loss terms to impose the desired intra-class
and inter-class distance constraints in the feature space.
Thus, in order to obtain the discriminative feature representations, most of the DML works dedicate to mining the
expressive instance pairs as many as possible. For example, many research works focus on exploring the tuple-based
loss functions. such as contrastive loss (Sun et al. 2014), binomial deviance loss (Yi et al. 2014), triplet loss (Schroff,
Kalenichenko, and Philbin 2015) and quadruplet loss (Chen

Introduction
In the context of end-to-end feature learning framework of
deep convolutional neural network where the convolutional
neural network actually is a powerful non-linear mapping
function and can be arbitrarily modeled by loss functions
to some extend, Deep Metric Learning (DML) focuses on
the design of discriminative objective loss function, so as
to constrain the learned embedding to be more discriminative. By reason of the powerful representation ability of
the learned embedding, Deep Metric Learning (DML) has
been widely explored and applied in many computer vision
tasks, such as image retrieval (Gordo et al. 2017; Noh et al.
2017), face recognition (Schroff, Kalenichenko, and Philbin
2015; Wen et al. 2016), person re-identification (Hermans,
Beyer, and Leibe 2017; Chen et al. 2017), zero-shot learning
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

982

