The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bayesian Optimized Monte Carlo Planning
John Mern,1 Anil Yildiz,1 Zachary Sunberg,2 Tapan Mukerji,3 and Mykel J. Kochenderfer1
1

2

Stanford University, Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 496 Lomita Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
University of Colorado Boulder, Department of Aerospace Engineering Sciences, 3775 Discovery Drive, Boulder, CO 80303
3
Stanford University, Department of Energy Resources Engineering, 367 Panama Street, Stanford, CA 94305
{jmern91, yildiz, mukerji, mykel}@stanford.edu, zachary.sunberg@colorado.edu

Abstract

based on Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) have been particularly effective in recent years as online-solvers. MCTS
methods work by incrementally building a search tree over
trajectories reachable from the agent’s current belief and using the resulting tree to estimate the value of the available actions. While tree-search methods typically handle POMDPs
with large state spaces well, they often perform poorly on
problems with large action spaces (Browne et al. 2012b).
Large action and observation spaces tend to lead to excessive branching in approximate tree-search solvers such as
POMCP (Silver and Veness 2010). High branching results
in wide, shallow trees with relatively fewer visits per-branch,
resulting in poor value estimates.
Progressive widening limits tree-width by sampling a
subset of the available actions for addition to the search
tree (Couëtoux et al. 2011). Random action sampling, however, may often fail to select good actions for evaluation, requiring expert-biased sampling for acceptable performance (Browne et al. 2012a).
This work frames progressive action selection as an optimization problem to be solved within MCTS. The proposed method models the problem at each branching step
using a Bayesian optimization framework (Mockus 2002).
Under this framework, the optimization objective is to select the action with the highest expected improvement in the
action-value returned by the subsequent MCTS search. To
calculate expected improvement, a distribution over the unknown action-value function is modeled as a Gaussian process (Rasmussen and Williams 2006). The procedure uses
knowledge gained during tree search to guide action selection by conditioning the Gaussian process on the values of
nodes already in the tree.
We implemented the proposed method in a new MCTS
planner called Bayesian Optimized Monte Carlo Planning
(BOMCP). The BOMCP algorithm builds on the stateof-the-art solver, POMCPOW (Sunberg and Kochenderfer
2018), to better scale to large action spaces. To efficiently
scale the Bayesian optimization procedure, we do Gaussian
process inference using a k-nearest neighbor approximation
to model the value function distribution in the Bayesian optimizing procedure. Experiments show that this new algorithm outperforms POMCPOW, on several problems with
large action-spaces.

Online solvers for partially observable Markov decision processes have difficulty scaling to problems with large action
spaces. Monte Carlo tree search with progressive widening
attempts to improve scaling by sampling from the action
space to construct a policy search tree. The performance of
progressive widening search is dependent upon the action
sampling policy, often requiring problem-specific samplers.
In this work, we present a general method for efficient action sampling based on Bayesian optimization. The proposed
method uses a Gaussian process to model a belief over the
action-value function and selects the action that will maximize the expected improvement in the optimal action value.
We implement the proposed approach in a new online tree
search algorithm called Bayesian Optimized Monte Carlo
Planning (BOMCP). Several experiments show that BOMCP
is better able to scale to large action space POMDPs than existing state-of-the-art tree search solvers.

Introduction
The partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP)
is a mathematical model of sequential decision making problems under state uncertainty (Littman, Cassandra, and Kaelbling 1995). In a POMDP, an agent takes actions while receiving noisy observations of the world state in order to accumulate reward. A policy that solves a POMDP maps histories of observations, represented as a belief over the state,
to actions that maximize the expected sum of discounted rewards.
Solving POMDPs exactly is generally intractable and
has been shown to be PSPACE-complete over finite horizons (Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis 1987). A policy for a
POMDP with n distinct states requires a function over an
(n − 1)-dimensional continuous belief space (Silver and Veness 2010). Computing exact solutions over this space requires evaluating a number of potential trajectories that is
exponential in the time horizon (Pineau, Gordon, and Thrun
2006). These phenomena are referred to as the curse of dimensionality and the curse of history, respectively.
Because of these challenges, sample-based methods are
often used to solve POMDPs approximately (Smith and
Simmons 2004; Kurniawati, Hsu, and Lee 2008). Methods
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11880

