The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Rationalize for Nonmonotonic Reasoning with Distant Supervision
Faeze Brahman1 * , Vered Shwartz2,3 , Rachel Rudinger4 , and Yejin Choi2,3
1 University of California Santa Cruz
2 Allen Institute for AI
3 Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
4 University of Maryland, College Park, MD

fbrahman@ucsc.edu, rudinger@umd.edu, {vereds,yejinc}@allenai.org

NLI

δ-NLI Rationale Generation
δ-NLI

Abstract
The black-box nature of neural models has motivated a line
of research that aims to generate natural language rationales
to explain why a model made certain predictions. Such rationale generation models, to date, have been trained on datasetspecific crowdsourced rationales, but this approach is costly
and is not generalizable to new tasks and domains. In this
paper, we investigate the extent to which neural models can
reason about natural language rationales that explain model
predictions, relying only on distant supervision with no additional annotation cost for human-written rationales. We investigate multiple ways to automatically generate rationales
using pre-trained language models, neural knowledge models, and distant supervision from related tasks, and train generative models capable of composing explanatory rationales
for unseen instances. We demonstrate our approach on the
defeasible inference task, a nonmonotonic reasoning task in
which an inference may be strengthened or weakened when
new information (an update) is introduced. Our model shows
promises at generating post-hoc rationales explaining why an
inference is more or less likely given the additional information, however, it mostly generates trivial rationales reflecting
the fundamental limitations of neural language models. Conversely, the more realistic setup of jointly predicting the update or its type and generating rationale is more challenging,
suggesting an important future direction.

A group of people sitting around a rectangular table
having either pieces of paper or laptops in front of them.
They have a work meeting.
Strengthener

Weakener

They are in a conference room.

They are in a library.

A conference room is where
people have meetings at work.

You must be quiet in the library
but work meetings involve talking.

Figure 1: An illustration of the NLI, δ -NLI (Defeasible
NLI), and δ -NLI Rationale Generation tasks.
approach. Recent work by Camburu et al. (2018) and Rajani et al. (2019) collected human-written explanations for
the natural language inference (NLI; Bowman et al. 2015)
and commonsense question answering (CommonSenseQA;
Talmor et al. 2019) tasks and trained models to predict explanations for new instances. Such supervision is not always
accessible, is expensive to obtain, and is unlikely to generalize well across datasets.
In this work, we explore learning to rationalize using a
distant supervision approach without additional annotation
cost. We focus on the Defeasible Inference task (δ -NLI;
Rudinger et al. 2020), illustrated in Figure 1. Given premise
and hypothesis sentences, and an update sentence, the goal
of the (discriminative) δ -NLI task is to recognize whether
the update weakens or strengthens the entailment of the hypothesis by the premise. For example, the update that the
people are in a conference room strengthens the hypothesis
that they are in a work meeting. An alternative (generative)
task is to generate the update given the premise, hypothesis,
and update type (strengthener or weakener).
We present the Defeasible Inference Rationale Generation
task, with the goal of generating natural language rationales
that explain why a hypothesis is more likely after learning
about a strengthener update and less likely after learning
about a weakener update. To that end, we create the e-δ NLI dataset by augmenting the δ -NLI dataset with rationales from various sources, including pre-trained language
models, knowledge bases, and supervision from a related
task. We then train two types of language model-based ra-

Introduction
Deep neural models perform increasingly well across NLP
tasks, but due to their black-box nature, their success comes
at the cost of our understanding of the system. The lack
of transparency for why a model made a particular prediction may—among other problems—introduce fairness issues (Dodge et al. 2019), and hide the fact that often a model
is right for the wrong reasons due to learning dataset-specific
shortcuts and annotation artifacts (Gururangan et al. 2018;
Poliak et al. 2018). There is growing interest in NLP in
opening the black-box, through surrogate models (Ribeiro,
Singh, and Guestrin 2016), counterfactual evaluation (Tenney et al. 2020), examining the inner structure of the neural
network (Raffel et al. 2017; Jain et al. 2020), or generating natural language explanations. We focus on the latter
* Work done during internship at AI2.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12592

