The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Reinforced Imitative Graph Representation Learning for Mobile User Profiling:
An Adversarial Training Perspective
Dongjie Wang1 Pengyang Wang 1 Kunpeng Liu 1
Yuanchun Zhou 2 Charles E Hughes 1 Yanjie Fu 1∗
1
University of Central Florida
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
wangdongjie@knights.ucf.edu, pengyang.wang@knights.ucf.edu, kunpengliu@knights.ucf.edu, zyc@cnic.cn,
charles.hughes@ucf.edu, yanjie.fu@ucf.edu
Abstract
2017), urban surveillance (Yi et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2017),
etc.
In this paper, we study the problem of mobile user proIn this paper, we study the problem of learning with a
filing, which is a critical component for quantifying users’
mixed
user-event stream for mobile user profiling.
characteristics in the human mobility modeling pipeline. HuIn recent literature, mobile user profiling is usually forman mobility is a sequential decision-making process depenmulated as a representation learning task to map user behavdent on the users’ dynamic interests. With accurate user proior data into lower-dimensional vectors (Wang et al. 2019,
files, the predictive model can perfectly reproduce users’ mobility trajectories. In the reverse direction, once the predic2020). To obtain optimal user profiles, we leverage a novel
tive model can imitate users’ mobility patterns, the learned
imitation-based learning criterion (Wang et al. 2020), in
user profiles are also optimal. Such intuition motivates us
which user profiles are optimal when an agent can perfectly
to propose an imitation-based mobile user profiling frameimitate users’ activities. In the imitation based criteria, we
work by exploiting reinforcement learning, in which the
create an imitation task to mimic user activities over time
agent is trained to precisely imitate users’ mobility patterns
based on the user profiles generated by the representation
for optimal user profiles. Specifically, the proposed frametask, in order to provide performance feedback to improve
work includes two modules: (1) representation module, that
user profiling. Therefore, a joint and sequential learning
produces state combining user profiles and spatio-temporal
paradigm is highly desired to achieve the mutual enhancecontext in real-time; (2) imitation module, where Deep Qment between the representation and imitation tasks. The
network (DQN) imitates the user behavior (action) based on
the state that is produced by the representation module. Howemerging reinforcement learning provides great potential to
ever, there are two challenges in running the framework effecfill this gap: (1) reinforcement learning can model sequential
tively. First, epsilon-greedy strategy in DQN makes use of the
decision making data, (e.g., mobile user visit sequences); (2)
exploration-exploitation trade-off by randomly pick actions
we can analogize user profiling as state learning, and imitawith the epsilon probability. Such randomness feeds back to
tion based on user profiles as policy learning. Along these
the representation module, causing the learned user profiles
lines, we propose a Reinforcement Imitative Representation
unstable. To solve the problem, we propose an adversarial
Learning (RIRL) method for user profiling. Specifically, the
training strategy to guarantee the robustness of the repreproposed framework includes two modules: (1) representasentation module. Second, the representation module updates
tion module, which generates state combing user profiles
users’ profiles in an incremental manner, requiring integratand spatio-temporal context in real-time, and (2) imitation
ing the temporal effects of user profiles. Inspired by Longshort Term Memory (LSTM), we introduce a gated mechmodule, which exploits an agent and a policy network to
anism to incorporate new and old user characteristics into
imitate the user behavior (action) based on the state that is
the user profile. In the experiment, we evaluate our proposed
generated by the representation module. The imitation perframework on real-world datasets. The extensive experimenformance will be evaluated as the feedback to the represental results validate the superiority of our method comparing
tation module for updating user profiles. The generated user
to baseline algorithms.
profiles will be optimized once the imitation module can perfectly reproduce users’ mobility trajectories.
However, there are two challenges towards the practically
Introduction
deployment of the proposed framework. First, although the
Mobile user profiling is to learn users’ profiles from historexploration in reinforcement learning improves imitated perical mobility records. Mobile user profiling has drawn sigformance, it jeopardizes the quality of user profiles due to
nificant attentions from various disciplines, such as mobile
gradient sharing between imitation module and represenadvertising (Grewal et al. 2016; Haver and Haver 2017), rectation module. Second, the representation module updates
ommended system (Zhao, Lyu, and King 2018; Yin et al.
users’ profiles in an incremental manner, requiring integrating the temporal effects of user profiles. We will detail how
∗
Contact Author
we tackle these two challenges as follows.
c
Copyright
2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
First, reinforcement learning aims at learning the opti2

4410

