The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HiABP: Hierarchical Initialized ABP for Unsupervised Representation Learning
Jiankai Sun,1,2 Rui Liu,2 Bolei Zhou1,2
1

Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sj019, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ruiliu@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

An alternative to MCMC sampling is Variational Inference (VI) (Bishop 2006), which is typically more computationally efficient. Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) (Kingma
and Welling 2014), a type of generative model adopting VI
strategy, proves that the cost of VI can be amortized with
an inference model and thus could quickly approximate the
posterior over the local latent variables. Despite the success
of VAE, the improved speed comes at many significant costs,
such as the inability of the approximation family to capture
the true posterior and the asymmetry of the true distribution
under penalization of the KL divergence with too-light tails.
In this paper, we explore the possibility of marrying the
high efficiency of the inference network with the exact approximation of ABP method in generative modeling. To
achieve this, we propose to take an inference model as
an initializer for ABP method, dubbed initialized alternating back-propagation (IABP). The pipeline is composed
of Initializing, Improving and Learning back-propagation,
which iterates the following three steps: (1) Initializing latent variable for each training example by parameterized
inference model; (2) Improving the continuous latent factors by Langevin dynamics; and (3) Learning both inference model and generator given the improved latent factors.
The parameter update in the first step is typically performed
using Maximum Likelihood estimation (MLE) in unsupervised learning. The MLE provides only a point estimate of
the fitted model parameters, while the second step recovers the entire posterior distribution of the model parameters
given the data by Langevin dynamics, providing additional
information such as parameter uncertainty and correlations.
Since the inference time in the first step is negligible compared to the Langevin search time, our model improves the
efficiency of ABP model to a great extent. In addition, as
the iteration of updating inference model goes, Langevin
dynamics obtains a better starting point, which improves
its quality as well. Thus we seamlessly combine the amortized inference model and Langevin strategy in our proposed
IABP, which makes all the sub-components cooperate in a
harmonious manner and thus promotes each other well.
To sum up, this work makes the following contributions:

Although Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is useful
for generating samples from the posterior distribution, it often suffers from intractability when dealing with large-scale
datasets. To address this issue, we propose Hierarchical Initialized Alternating Back-propagation (HiABP) for efficient
Bayesian inference. Especially, we endow Alternating Backpropagation (ABP) method with a well-designed initializer
and hierarchical structure, composing the pipeline of Initializing, Improving, and Learning back-propagation. It saves
much time for the generative model to initialize the latent
variable by constraining a sampler to be close to the true
posterior distribution. The initialized latent variable is then
improved significantly by an MCMC sampler. Thus the proposed method has the strengths of both methods, i.e., the effectiveness of MCMC and the efficiency of variational inference. Experimental results validate our framework can outperform other popular deep generative models in modeling
natural images and learning from incomplete data. We further demonstrate the unsupervised disentanglement of hierarchical latent representation with controllable image synthesis.

Introduction
Alternating Back-propagation (ABP) (Nijkamp et al. 2019;
Han et al. 2017) is a newly-introduced generative model that
learns a generator mapping latent variables to observations.
It performs an EM-like algorithm that infers latent variable
and updates generator parameters alternately, following the
tradition of alternating operations in unsupervised learning,
such as alternating linear regression in the EM algorithm for
factor analysis, alternating least squares algorithm for matrix
factorization (Kim and Park 2008), and alternating gradient
descent algorithm for sparse coding (Olshausen and Field
1997). As a powerful tool which is asymptotically exact to
infer latent variables based on the joint posterior distribution of both the latent variables and observations, Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods such as Langevin dynamics or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) (Neal 2012) are
typically adopted for inference. However, MCMC sampling
takes a great amount of time to converge, thus making it difficult to cope with large-scale training data.

1 We introduce a novel framework Initialized Alternating
Back-propagation (IABP), which consists of Initializing,
Improving and Learning back-propagation. Our framework integrates both fast thinking (through qφ ) and slow

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9747

