The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Error-Aware Density Isomorphism Reconstruction for Unsupervised
Cross-Domain Crowd Counting
Yuhang He1 , Zhiheng Ma1 , Xing Wei2 , Xiaopeng Hong3,4∗ , Wei Ke2 , Yihong Gong2
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
School of Software Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{hyh1379478,mazhiheng}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {weixing,hongxiaopeng, wei.ke,ygong}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

as they are, these methods often rely on instance-level annotations and a massive number of training data to train the
deep convolutional network. If the training data is scarce,
these methods are easily prone to overfit the training data
and may suffer performance deterioration when applied to
other scenarios, (i.e., target domain), in which data distributions are noticeably different from the training domain (i.e.,
the source domain). This hampers their applications to realworld scenarios.

This paper focuses on the unsupervised domain adaptation
problem for video-based crowd counting, in which we use
labeled data as source domain and unlabelled video data as
target domain. It is challenging as there is a huge gap between the source and the target domain and no annotations
of samples are available in the target domain. The key issue
is how to utilize unlabelled videos in the target domain for
knowledge learning and transferring from the source domain.
To tackle this problem, we propose a novel Error-aware Density Isomorphism REConstruction Network (EDIREC-Net)
for cross-domain crowd counting. EDIREC-Net jointly transfers a pre-trained counting model to target domains using
a density isomorphism reconstruction objective and models
the reconstruction erroneousness by error reasoning. Specifically, as crowd flows in videos are consecutive, the density maps in adjacent frames turn out to be isomorphic. On
this basis, we regard the density isomorphism reconstruction
error as a self-supervised signal to transfer the pre-trained
counting models to different target domains. Moreover, we
leverage an estimation-reconstruction consistency to monitor
the density reconstruction erroneousness and suppress unreliable density reconstructions during training. Experimental
results on four benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method and ablation studies investigate
the efficiency and robustness. The source code is available at
https://github.com/GehenHe/EDIREC-Net.

1

To mitigate the gap between the source domain and target
domains, several semi- and un-supervised domain adaptation methods have been proposed for crowd counting. Semisupervised methods (Change Loy, Gong, and Xiang 2013;
Reddy et al. 2020) transfer the source-domain pre-trained
counting model to target domains using a small number of
labeled data from the target domain. These methods require
data annotation in target domains, which are still expensive
and laborious for practical usage. To address this problem,
several unsupervised domain adaptation methods (Zhang
et al. 2015; Wang, Li, and Xue 2019; Han et al. 2020) are
proposed to transfer the pre-trained counting model to an
unlabeled target domain by adversarial learning (Wang, Li,
and Xue 2019; Han et al. 2020) or cross-domain image retrieval (Zhang et al. 2015). These unsupervised methods only focus on the image-level information, such as the image
similarity (Zhang et al. 2015) and the domain distinctiveness (Wang, Li, and Xue 2019), but neglect the consistency
information of videos sequences. As videos contain more
information than static images, it is of great importance to study the problem of transferring pre-trained counting model
to target domains using unlabeled videos.

Introduction

Counting the number of targets in crowd scenarios, i.e., the
crowd counting, has drawn remarkable attention in recent
years. It has a wide range of applications in video surveillance, traffic control, crowd behavior analysis, and so forth.
Recently, benefited from the rapid development of Deep
Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) (He et al. 2016; Ke
et al. 2020), DCNN based crowd counting methods (Zhang
et al. 2019a; Liu et al. 2019; Guo et al. 2019; Bai et al. 2020;
Ma et al. 2021) have achieved significant progresses and become the main stream of this field. Accurate and efficient

In this paper, we focus on the cross-domain adaptation
problem for video-based unsupervised crowd counting. The
major challenge is how to explore concealed information
in unlabeled videos for knowledge transfer from a sourcedomain to an unseen target domain. To address it, we propose a density isomorphism reconstruction objective for
cross-domain knowledge transfer. As the crowd flow is smooth in a video sequence, the number of objects in a short
period is consistent as well. It is thus reasonable to assume
that the target distributions between adjacent frames are isomorphic, i.e., mutually transformable using bijective map-

∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1540

