The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LREN: Low-Rank Embedded Network for Sample-Free Hyperspectral Anomaly
Detection
Kai Jiang ∗ , Weiying Xie∗ , Jie Lei, Tao Jiang, Yunsong Li
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
xdjiangkai@foxmail.com, wyxie@xidian.edu.cn, {jielei, ysli}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, tjiang 2@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Hyperspectral anomaly detection (HAD) is a challenging task
because it explores the intrinsic structure of complex highdimensional signals without any samples at training time.
Deep neural networks (DNNs) can dig out the underlying
distribution of hyperspectral data but are limited by the labeling of large-scale hyperspectral datasets, especially the
low spatial resolution of hyperspectral data, which makes labeling more difficult. To tackle this problem while ensuring
the detection performance, we present an unsupervised lowrank embedded network (LREN) in this paper. LREN is a
joint learning network in which the latent representation is
specifically designed for HAD, rather than merely as a feature input for the detector. And it searches the lowest rank
representation based on a representative and discriminative
dictionary in the deep latent space to estimate the residual
efficiently. Considering the physically mixing properties in
hyperspectral imaging, we develop a trainable density estimation module based on Gaussian mixture model (GMM) in
the deep latent space to construct a dictionary that can better
characterize the complex hyperspectral images (HSIs). The
closed-form solution of the proposed low-rank learner surpasses existing approaches on four real hyperspectral datasets
with different anomalies. We argue that this unified framework paves a novel way to combine feature extraction and
anomaly estimation-based methods for HAD, which intends
to learn the underlying representation tailored for HAD without the prerequisite of manually labeled data. Code available
at https://github.com/xdjiangkai/LREN.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Background-anomaly separability results on (a)
SanDiego, (b) Hydice, (c) Coast, and (d) Pavia. Each detector row corresponds to two boxes, where the red box indicates the distribution interval of the anomaly and the blue
box indicates the distribution interval of the background.
The distance between the upper boundary of the blue box
and the lower boundary of the red box indicates the separability of the background-anomaly. The existing HAD methods cannot suppress the background and enhance the separation of the anomaly box from the background box.

Introduction
Recently, great strides have been made towards more precise target detection in natural images thanks in part to the
large scale of labeled datasets, such as the COCO dataset
(Lin et al. 2014), ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) and DOTA
dataset (Xia et al. 2018). In hyperspectral anomaly detection
(HAD), however, it is difficult to manually and accurately
label because of unavailable prior knowledge, complicated imaging environment, and low spatial resolution (Zare,
Jiao, and Glenn 2018). Due to these real-world resource constraints, no labeled samples are captured for HAD, forming

a typical sample-free detection task. Under these circumstances, it is highly essential to design a network specifically
for the task of HAD.
A series of efforts dedicated to determining hyperspectral
anomalies by DNNs without any prior knowledge have been
developed. Most of which employ generative models including AE (Dong et al. 2018), DBN (Hinton and Salakhutdinov 2006) and GAN (Goodfellow et al. 2014) to extract features in the deep latent space or the reconstruction space by
minimizing the error between the original and reconstructed
spectra. Subsequently, separate detectors such as RX (Reed
and Yu 1990), LRX (Matteoli et al. 2013), CRD (Li and Du

∗

These authors contribute equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4139

