The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Joint Semantic Analysis with Document-Level Cross-Task Coherence Rewards
Rahul Aralikatte, Mostafa Abdou, Heather C Lent,
Daniel Hershcovich and Anders Søgaard
University of Copenhagen
{rahul, abdou, hcl, dh, soegaard}@di.ku.dk

Abstract
ARG0

Coreference resolution and semantic role labeling are NLP
tasks that capture different aspects of semantics, indicating
respectively, which expressions refer to the same entity, and
what semantic roles expressions serve in the sentence. However, they are often closely interdependent, and both generally
necessitate natural language understanding. Do they form a
coherent abstract representation of documents? We present a
neural network architecture for joint coreference resolution
and semantic role labeling for English, and train graph neural
networks to model the coherence of the combined shallow
semantic graph. Using the resulting coherence score as a reward for our joint semantic analyzer, we use reinforcement
learning to encourage global coherence over the document and
between semantic annotations. This leads to improvements on
both tasks in multiple datasets from different domains, and
across a range of encoders of different expressivity, calling,
we believe, for a more holistic approach to semantics in NLP.

Nadine

COREF

COREF

ARG1

ARG0

likes tea .

She

ARG1

always

drinks

it .

ROOT

likes

Introduction
Coreference resolution and semantic role labeling (SRL)
contribute in complimentary ways to forming coherent discourse representations. SRL establishes predicate-argument
relations between expressions, and coreference resolution
determines what entities these expressions refer to. While
often treated separately (He et al. 2017, 2018; Lee et al. 2017;
Lee, He, and Zettlemoyer 2018; Joshi et al. 2019), some
frameworks consider coreference and semantic roles part of
a more holistic meaning representation (Shibata and Kurohashi 2018). For example, the Groningen Meaning Bank (Bos
et al. 2017) annotates documents with discourse representation structures (Kamp and Reyle 2013), which subsume
both levels of analysis; the same holds for other meaning
representation frameworks, such as UCCA (Abend and Rappoport 2013; Prange, Schneider, and Abend 2019) and AMR
(Banarescu et al. 2013; O’Gorman et al. 2018). However,
these frameworks do not offer the simplicity of SRL and
coreference annotation, and perhaps consequently require
more effort to annotate, and do not have the same amounts
of training data (Abend and Rappoport 2017). Furthermore,
comprehensive meaning representation parsing approaches
(Liu, Cohen, and Lapata 2018; Hershcovich, Abend, and
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12516

always

drinks

ARG0

ARG1

Nadine

tea

She

COREF

COREF

ARG0

ARG1

it

Figure 1: Example coreference and semantic role annotation
for a two-sentence document. Top: the original annotation
shown as dependencies. Bottom: shallow semantic graph
(SSG), where sub-graph heads are connected (with dotted
lines) to a dummy root node.

Rappoport 2017; Cai and Lam 2020) tend to be more complex than the sequence tagging or span-based models often
used for coreference resolution and SRL, often referred to as
shallow semantic parsing.
In this paper, we investigate a “minimal” approach to
discourse-level semantic parsing, combining coreference and
semantic roles in shallow semantic graphs (SSGs) that can
be seen as a simple, yet rich, discourse-level meaning representations. Consider the two sentences shown in Figure 1,
augmented with a (partial) annotation of coreference and
semantic roles. A coreference resolver is expected to resolve
Nadine as an antecedent of she, and tea as an antecedent of
it, since these mentions refer to the same entities. A semantic
role labeler is expected to detect that these entities are arguments of the predicates like and drink. The overall semantic
analysis corresponds to a coherent and common situation,
where someone likes something and consumes it—a very
plausible interpretation. This paper presents a model that
scores the plausibility or coherence of an interpretation based

