The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Project RISE: Recognizing Industrial Smoke Emissions
Yen-Chia Hsu1 , Ting-Hao (Kenneth) Huang2 , Ting-Yao Hu1 , Paul Dille1 , Sean Prendi1 ,
Ryan Hoffman1 , Anastasia Tsuhlares1 , Jessica Pachuta1 , Randy Sargent1 , Illah Nourbakhsh1
1
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, USA
{yenchiah, tingyaoh, pdille, sprendi, ryanhoff, anastt, jpachuta, rsargent, illah}@andrew.cmu.edu, txh710@psu.edu
2

Abstract
Industrial smoke emissions pose a significant concern to human health. Prior works have shown that using Computer Vision (CV) techniques to identify smoke as visual evidence can
influence the attitude of regulators and empower citizens to
pursue environmental justice. However, existing datasets are
not of sufficient quality nor quantity to train the robust CV
models needed to support air quality advocacy. We introduce
RISE, the first large-scale video dataset for Recognizing
Industrial Smoke Emissions. We adopted a citizen science
approach to collaborate with local community members to
annotate whether a video clip has smoke emissions. Our
dataset contains 12,567 clips from 19 distinct views from
cameras that monitored three industrial facilities. These daytime clips span 30 days over two years, including all four
seasons. We ran experiments using deep neural networks to
establish a strong performance baseline and reveal smoke
recognition challenges. Our survey study discussed community feedback, and our data analysis displayed opportunities
for integrating citizen scientists and crowd workers into the
application of Artificial Intelligence for Social Impact.

Figure 1: Dataset samples and the deployed camera system.

driven evidence, when integrated with community narratives, is essential for citizens to make sense of environmental
issues and take action (Ottinger 2017; Hsu et al. 2017).
However, it is tough to collect large-scale data required
to build a practical industrial smoke recognition model. Recent state-of-the-art models based on deep learning typically
have millions of parameters and are data-hungry. Training
these models with insufficient data can lead to overfitting.
Table 1 lists publicly available datasets for smoke recognition. Compared to object and action recognition datasets,
such as ImageNet (14M images, Russakovsky et al. 2015)
and Kinetics (650K videos, Kay et al. 2017), existing ones
for smoke recognition are small. There have been successes in prior works using deep learning for smoke recognition (Yuan et al. 2019a; Ba et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2017,
2019a,b; Filonenko, Kurnianggoro, and Jo 2017; Liu et al.
2019; Yin et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2019; Hu
and Lu 2018; Zhang et al. 2018), but these models were
trained and evaluated on relatively small datasets. In response to data sparsity, some works have attempted to create artificial data, where smoke with a transparent background were synthesized with various views (Yuan et al.
2019b; Zhang et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2019a). But such synthetic data cannot capture the rich behavior and appear-

Introduction
Air pollution has been associated with adverse impacts on
human health (Kampa and Castanas 2008; Pope III and
Dockery 2006; Dockery et al. 1993). According to the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA),
air pollutants emitted from industrial sources pose a significant concern1 . Currently, citizens who wish to advocate for
better air quality rely on a manual approach (US EPA Visual Opacity Reading2 ) to determine if smoke emissions violate the permit issued to the facility. This laborious approach
requires certification every six months and involves taking
multiple field measurements. Prior works have shown that
using Computer Vision to identify industrial smoke emissions automatically can empower citizens to pursue environmental justice and urge regulators to respond to local concerns publicly (Hsu et al. 2016, 2017). This type of dataCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Link to US EPA Air Pollution Sources:
https://www.epa.gov/stationary-sources-air-pollution
2
Link to US EPA Visual Opacity Reading:
https://www.epa.gov/emc/method-9-visual-opacity

14813

