The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling Deep Learning Based Privacy Attacks on Physical Mail
Bingyao Huang, Ruyi Lian, Dimitris Samaras, Haibin Ling
Stony Brook University, NY, USA
{bihuang, rulian, samaras, hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract

2019; Pan et al. 2020). Afterwards, we design three learnable
CNN modules to model the three subprocesses. By studying
why and how sealed paper mail privacy is subject to deep
learning-based attacks, we show that our model can be used
to test whether a paper envelope is safe against such attacks
and to design safer envelopes in the future.
For the deep learning-based attacks part, to account for
perspective transformations in camera image formation, we
use WarpingNet, a module similar to a spatial transformer
network (STN) (Jaderberg et al. 2015), to warp the cameracaptured envelope front face image to the canonical camera
frontal view (aligned with the ground truth hidden content).
Then, we extend the traditional dehazing formulation (He,
Sun, and Tang 2010; Ren et al. 2016) to account for the paper envelope’s blur operation, transmittance and surface reflectance under the environment light, such that the cameracaptured image is a linear combination of the radiance of
blurred hidden content, the transmittance of the paper envelope and the reflected light of the surface. Finally, we incorporate such formulation into a deep neural network and explicitly infer these essential intermediate components using
respective CNN modules (i.e., WarpingNet, DehazingNet
and RefineNet). This model is trained using sample image
pairs of the camera-captured envelope front face (with a hidden printed paper in it) and the ground truth of the printed
pattern. In order to counter hypothetical deep learning-based
attacks, we first use our model to test the privacy protection
ability of an envelope, and then leverage the envelope properties learned by our attack model to design envelopes that
are safe against deep learning-based attacks.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• The proposed Neural-STE is the first to model deep
learning-based privacy attacks on physical mail.
• Neural-STE is non-trivially designed as a combination of
perspective transformation, image dehazing and deblurring.
• Neural-STE can be used to test the privacy-preserving
properties of an envelope, and to design envelopes that
are safe against deep learning-based attacks.
• We propose the first benchmark for modeling privacy
attacks on physical mail. The source code, benchmark
dataset and experimental results are publicly available at
https://github.com/BingyaoHuang/Neural-STE.

Mail privacy protection aims to prevent unauthorized access
to hidden content within an envelope since normal paper envelopes are not as safe as we think. In this paper, for the first
time, we show that with a well designed deep learning model,
the hidden content may be largely recovered without opening the envelope. We start by modeling deep learning-based
privacy attacks on physical mail content as learning the mapping from the camera-captured envelope front face image to
the hidden content, then we explicitly model the mapping as
a combination of perspective transformation, image dehazing and denoising using a deep convolutional neural network,
named Neural-STE (See-Through-Envelope). We show experimentally that hidden content details, such as texture and
image structure, can be clearly recovered. Finally, our formulation and model allow us to design envelopes that can
counter deep learning-based privacy attacks on physical mail.

Introduction
With the recent advances in optical devices and deep learning algorithms, traditional paper envelopes may not be as
safe as we think. For example, (Redo-Sanchez et al. 2016)
show that a closed book can be read through using terahertz
time-domain spectroscopy; and imaging through scattering
media methods (Xin et al. 2019; Satat et al. 2017; Popoff
et al. 2010a,b; Kim et al. 2015; Drémeau et al. 2015; Feng
et al. 1988; Freund, Rosenbluh, and Feng 1988; Katz, Small,
and Silberberg 2012; Katz et al. 2014; Bertolotti et al. 2012;
Judkewitz et al. 2015; Yoon et al. 2020) can recover the hidden content behind a volume of refractive media, such as
ground glass and human tissue. These methods may be extended and applied to attack sealed physical mail.
In this paper, we show that with a carefully designed deep
learning model and sampled images captured in a controlled
lab environment (see Fig. 1), the hidden content within the
envelope such as the texture and image structure can be
recovered without opening it. We start by formulating privacy attacks on physical mail as learning the mapping from
the camera-captured envelope image to the hidden content,
then we decompose this mapping into a combination of
perspective transformation, image dehazing (He, Sun, and
Tang 2010; Ren et al. 2016) and deblurring (Ren et al.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1593

