The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Patch-Wise Attention Network for Monocular Depth Estimation
Sihaeng Lee, 1 Janghyeon Lee, 2 Byungju Kim, 2,3 Eojindl Yi, 2 Junmo Kim 1,2
1

Division of Future Vehicle, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
3
Mathpresso Inc, Seoul, South Korea
{haeng, wkdgus9305, feidfoe, djwld93, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

2

Input Feature

Abstract

Output Feature
Attention1

In computer vision, monocular depth estimation is the problem of obtaining a high-quality depth map from a twodimensional image. This map provides information on threedimensional scene geometry, which is necessary for various
applications in academia and industry, such as robotics and
autonomous driving. Recent studies based on convolutional
neural networks achieved impressive results for this task.
However, most previous studies did not consider the relationships between the neighboring pixels in a local area of
the scene. To overcome the drawbacks of existing methods,
we propose a patch-wise attention method for focusing on
each local area. After extracting patches from an input feature map, our module generates attention maps for each local patch, using two attention modules for each patch along
the channel and spatial dimensions. Subsequently, the attention maps return to their initial positions and merge into one
attention feature. Our method is straightforward but effective. The experimental results on two challenging datasets,
KITTI and NYU Depth V2, demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves significant performance. Furthermore, our
method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods on the
KITTI depth estimation benchmark.

Attention2
Attention3
Attention4

Figure 1: Example of proposed patch-wise attention. Each
local patch extracted from an input feature has a corresponding attention module. Attention maps that pass through each
attention module return to their initial position and merge
into one output feature.
tive geometry to overcome this ambiguity (Saxena, Chung,
and Ng 2006; Saxena, Sun, and Ng 2008; Malik and Choi
2008; Karsch, Liu, and Kang 2014). In recent years, approaches based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have made breakthroughs with excellent performance in
numerous computer vision tasks. Based on the success of
CNNs in other tasks, many previous studies (Fu et al. 2018;
Lee et al. 2019; Yin et al. 2019; Diaz and Marathe 2019;
Zhang et al. 2019; Kim et al. 2020) on monocular depth estimation employed CNNs to extract features that are more
significant than hand-crafted ones, by using a large amount
of labeled data.
However, these methods do not include a component to
consider the relationships between the neighboring pixels in
a local area. Intuitively, it can be considered that neighboring depth values of the same object should be close (Gan
et al. 2018). That is, the relationship between the neighboring pixels representing the same object in a local area
should be close, whereas those of different objects should be
far. Few studies have considered the relationships between
neighboring pixels. Saxena, Chung, and Ng (2006) introduced the first learning-based method for monocular depth
estimation and employed a Markov random field (MRF) to
learn the relationships between different points or parts of
the image (Saxena, Sun, and Ng 2008). Gan et al. (2018)
proposed the affinity layer to extract relative features, which
represents the correlation of the values with the surrounding
pixels. This layer can be integrated into a fully end-to-end

Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is the task of generating a dense
depth map from a single RGB image. It has been studied
extensively as a fundamental problem in computer vision,
which is relevant in various applications such as robotics
and autonomous vehicles. An accurate dense depth map provided for a corresponding RGB image is particularly useful for understanding the three-dimensional (3D) geometric
information of a scene for solving various computer vision
tasks. Therefore, an estimated high-quality depth map could
be used as prior information for processing an RGB image,
and it is practical in both academia and industry. For this
reason, the depth estimation task is critical and requires a
solution. However, the estimation of a depth map from a
monocular image is ambiguous and ill-posed since a twodimensional (2D) scene may be projected from an infinite
number of real-world 3D scenes.
Early researchers used statistically useful hand-crafted
features based on texture, color information, and perspecCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1873

