The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Dynamics Models with Stable Invariant Sets
Naoya Takeishi 1,2 , Yoshinobu Kawahara 3,1
1

2

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland
3
Kyushu University
naoya.takeishi@riken.jp, kawahara@imi.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

self-sustained oscillations in physical, chemical, or biological phenomena are modeled as systems with stable closed
orbits (Strogatz 2015). In the dynamical systems study, analyzing system’s stability has been a classical yet challenging
problem. In contrast, synthesizing (i.e., achieving) stability of
some dynamics models is a problem that has been addressed
mainly in automatic control and machine learning. Whereas
control theory has been trying to achieve stable systems by
designing control inputs, another possible strategy is to learn
a dynamics model from data with a constraint that the model
attains some desired stability property.
In this work, we tackle the problem of learning dynamics
models with guaranteed invariance and stability. This problem is important in many practices of machine learning. For
example, we often have prior knowledge that a target phenomenon shows self-sustained oscillations (Strogatz 2015).
Such prior knowledge is a powerful inductive bias in learning
and can be incorporated into learning by forcing a model to
have a stable limit cycle. Likewise, we often want to assure
the invariance and stability (i.e., time-asymptotic behavior)
of a learned forecasting model for meaningful prediction or
safety issues. To these ends, we need a method to guarantee
invariance and stability of a dynamics model.
Learning dynamics models with provable stability is not a
new task. Learning linear dynamical systems with stability
(e.g., Lacy and Bernstein 2003; Siddiqi, Boots, and Gordon
2008; Huang et al. 2016) is a long-standing problem, and
learning stable nonlinear dynamics has also been addressed
by many researchers (e.g., Khansari-Zadeh and Billard 2011;
Neumann, Lemme, and Steil 2013; Umlauft and Hirche 2017;
Duncker et al. 2019; Chang, Roohi, and Gao 2019; Manek
and Kolter 2019; Massaroli et al. 2020). However, these
methods can only handle the stability of a finite number
of equilibria (i.e., points where a state remains if no external
perturbation applies) and are not suitable for guaranteeing
general stable invariant sets (e.g., limit cycles, limit tori, and
continuous sets of infinitely many equilibria). This limitation
has been hindering useful applications of machine learning
on dynamical systems, for example in physics and biology.
We develop a dynamics model with provable stability of
general invariant sets. The starting point of our model is
the approach by Manek and Kolter (2019), where they use
a learnable Lyapunov function to modify a base dynamics
model to ensure the stability of an equilibrium. We generalize

Invariance and stability are essential notions in dynamical systems study, and thus it is of great interest to learn a dynamics
model with a stable invariant set. However, existing methods
can only handle the stability of an equilibrium. In this paper,
we propose a method to ensure that a dynamics model has
a stable invariant set of general classes such as limit cycles
and line attractors. We start with the approach by Manek and
Kolter (2019), where they use a learnable Lyapunov function
to make a model stable with regard to an equilibrium. We
generalize it for general sets by introducing projection onto
them. To resolve the difficulty of specifying a to-be stable
invariant set analytically, we propose defining such a set as a
primitive shape (e.g., sphere) in a latent space and learning
the transformation between the original and latent spaces. It
enables us to compute the projection easily, and at the same
time, we can maintain the model’s flexibility using various
invertible neural networks for the transformation. We present
experimental results that show the validity of the proposed
method and the usefulness for long-term prediction.

1

Introduction

Machine learning of dynamical systems appears in diverse
disciplines, such as physics (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019), biology (Costello and Martin 2018), chemistry
(Li, Kermode, and De Vita 2015), and engineering (Morton
et al. 2018). Recent progress in dynamics models includes
the Gaussian process dynamics models (Wang, Fleet, and
Hertzmann 2006) and models based on deep neural networks
(e.g., Takeishi, Kawahara, and Yairi 2017; Lusch, Kutz, and
Brunton 2018; Chen et al. 2018; Manek and Kolter 2019;
Greydanus, Dzamba, and Yosinski 2019). Whatever models are employed, we often would like to know and control
the nature of a learned dynamics model, for example, to reflect prior knowledge of the dynamics and to ensure specific
behavior of the learned dynamics model.
Invariance and stability of some subsets of a state space
play a key role in dynamical systems study as they concisely
describe the asymptotic behavior (i.e., in t → ∞) of a system.
For example, dynamical systems with stable invariant sets
are used to explain neurological functions such as working
memory and eye control (Eliasmith 2005). Moreover, various
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9782

