The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Importance of Modeling Data Missingness
in Algorithmic Fairness: A Causal Perspective
Naman Goel 1 , Alfonso Amayuelas 2 , Amit Deshpande 3 , Amit Sharma 3
1

ETH Zürich, 2 EPFL Lausanne, 3 Microsoft Research
naman.goel@alumni.epfl.ch, amitdesh@microsoft.com, amshar@microsoft.com

Abstract

and features. However, a critical (and often unavoidable)
limitation of this approach is that the datasets present only
one side of the reality. There are often systematic biases that determine whose data is included in (or excluded
from) the datasets. For example, consider the German credit
dataset (Dua and Graff 2017) that contains profiles of people whose loans were approved and the outcome measured
is whether they repaid their loan or not. The phenomenon
is further illustrated in Figure 1. One may train a classifier
on this data that satisfies certain fairness constraints (e.g., as
done by Hardt et al. (2016)) to predict potential defaulters.
But when the classifier is used to decide credit-worthiness
of future applicants, it can be arbitrarily unfair, even if it
satisfies the fairness constraints on the training data (Kallus
and Zhou 2018). The reason is, in the real-world, the classifier needs to decide for all incoming applications, whereas
the training dataset only contains profiles of people who
were given loans. Similar results follow for applications in
recidivism prediction (Lakkaraju et al. 2017) and healthcare (Nordling 2019; Rajkomar et al. 2018).

Training datasets for machine learning often have some form
of missingness. For example, to learn a model for deciding
whom to give a loan, the available training data includes individuals who were given a loan in the past, but not those
who were not. This missingness, if ignored, nullifies any fairness guarantee of the training procedure when the model is
deployed. Using causal graphs, we characterize the missingness mechanisms in different real-world scenarios. We show
conditions under which various distributions, used in popular fairness algorithms, can or can not be recovered from the
training data. Our theoretical results imply that many of these
algorithms can not guarantee fairness in practice. Modeling
missingness also helps to identify correct design principles
for fair algorithms. For example, in multi-stage settings where
decisions are made in multiple screening rounds, we use our
framework to derive the minimal distributions required to design a fair algorithm. Our proposed algorithm decentralizes
the decision-making process and still achieves similar performance to the optimal algorithm that requires centralization
and non-recoverable distributions.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic decision making is increasingly being used in
applications of societal importance such as hiring (Miller
2015), university admissions (Matthews 2019), lending (Levin 2019), predictive policing (Hvistendahl 2016),
and criminal justice (Northpointe 2012). It is well known
that algorithms can learn to discriminate between individuals based on their sensitive attributes such as gender
and race, even if the sensitive attribute is not explicitly
used (Barocas and Selbst 2016). As a result, there has been
a lot of recent research on ensuring the fairness of automated (Barocas, Hardt, and Narayanan 2018), and machineaided (Green and Chen 2019) decision making. A common
way to mitigate fairness concerns is to include fairness constraints in the training process. For example, demographic
parity constrains acceptance probability to be same across
sensitive groups whereas equalized odds constrains acceptance probability given true outcome to be the same.
These fairness-enhanced classifiers are generally trained
and evaluated on datasets containing historical outcomes

𝐷=1
Loan Approved

Loan Applicant a,
with features 𝑿𝒂
Decision Maker
e.g. Bank
Loan Applicant b,
with features 𝑿𝒃

𝐷=0
Loan Denied

𝑌!

True outcome is observed,
𝑋# , 𝑌# included in training data.

?

True outcome is never observed,
𝑋$ , 𝑌$ excluded from training data.

𝑋 (features) can be age, gender, salary, education, job, references, credit history etc.

Figure 1: Missingness in Training Data due to Past Decisions
In this paper, we provide a formal framework to reason
about the effect of data missingness on algorithmic fairness,
a generalized version of the special cases discussed above.
We use a recently proposed causal graph framework (Mohan and Pearl 2020) to model how different types of past
decisions affect data missingness. We formally show, for example, that if the past decisions are fully automated, missingness in data is relatively easier to handle. On the other
hand, if missingness is caused by human (or machine-aided)
decisions, then it is often impossible to learn many distributions correctly, no matter how large the dataset is. This im-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7564

