The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Efficient License Plate Recognition via Holistic Position Attention
Yesheng Zhang, Zilei Wang∗ , Jiafan Zhuang
University of Science and Technology of China
{ysyzhang, jfzhuang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
License plate recognition (LPR) is a fundamental component of various intelligent transportation systems, and is always expected to be accurate and efficient enough in realworld applications. Nowadays, recognition of single character has been sophisticated benefiting from the power of deep
learning, and extracting position information for forming a
character sequence becomes the main bottleneck of LPR. To
tackle this issue, we propose a novel holistic position attention (HPA) in this paper that consists of position network
and shared classifier. Specifically, the position network explicitly encodes the character position into the maps of HPA,
and then the shared classifier performs the character recognition in a unified and parallel way. Here the extracted features
are modulated by the attention maps before feeding into the
classifier to yield the final recognition results. Note that our
proposed method is end-to-end trainable, character recognition can be concurrently performed, and no post-processing
is needed. Thus our LPR system can achieve good effectiveness and efficiency simultaneously. The experimental results
on four public datasets, including AOLP, Media Lab, CCPD,
and CLPD, well demonstrate the superiority of our method to
previous state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and speed.

Figure 1: Hard license plate examples and corresponding
recognition results by our proposed method. They are from
AOLP, Media Lab, and CCPD from top to bottom, respectively. Here some complicated situations are shown, including uneven lighting, blurring, staining, and serious tilting.

corresponding character sequence. Traditional methods take
an intuitive way that first detects all characters in a license
plate and then recognizes the cropped character subimages
one-by-one. Obviously, the two involved procedures are performed separately. Nowadays, the recognition of single character has been sophisticated by exploiting the powerful capacity of deep learning. But character detection is still a
challenging problem in practice because it is usually sensitive to variations of lighting, angles, fonts, colors, and background (Du et al. 2012; Saha 2019).
Recently, some methods attempt to extract the semantic and position information jointly, and consequently better
recognition performance can be achieved. Here we roughly
divide them into three broad categories. The first one is
to utilize the RNN/LSTM techniques (Li and Shen 2016;
Li, Wang, and Shen 2018; Cheang, Chong, and Tay 2017;
Kessentini et al. 2019) over densely extracted features in a
sliding-window manner, which encodes both semantic and
position information. However, the mismatch between receptive fields and character areas would bring noises to the
features, and meanwhile the dense feature extraction and sequential processing would hinder the run-time performance.
The second one is to employ multiple classifiers (Xu et al.
2018; Špaňhel et al. 2017; Jain et al. 2016; Gonçalves et al.
2018) to separately recognize the characters at different positions. Here the same features are fed into the classifiers
without position information and the classifiers are expected

Introduction
At present, intelligent transportation systems (ITS) have
been widely applied in various fields, e.g., improving transportation security (Zhang et al. 2011) and enhancing productivity (Anagnostopoulos et al. 2006). License plate recognition (LPR) is one of the key techniques in ITS since the
license plates are generally used as the identification of vehicles. For example, a scout car uses the LPR deployed at the
edge device to identify the vehicles violating the traffic rules.
In the real-world applications, it is always expected that the
LPR system is highly efficient along with enough accuracy
as the edge devices usually have limited resources. However,
it is still challenging for LPR to achieve good trade-off between high accuracy and efficiency, especially for the complicated images as shown in Fig. 1.
For the LPR task, we indeed need extract the two key attributes of a license plate, i.e., semantic category and position information for each character, in order to produce the
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3438

