The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Time Series Domain Adaptation via Sparse Associative Structure Alignment
Ruichu Cai1 , Jiawei Chen1 , Zijian Li1 , Wei Chen1 , Keli Zhang2 , Junjian Ye2 , Zhuozhang Li1 ,
Xiaoyan Yang1 , Zhenjie Zhang1
1

Guangdong University of Technology
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn, chenjiawei952@gmail.com, leizigin@gmail.com, chenweidelight@gmail.com,
zhangkeli1@huawei.com, yejunjian@huawei.com, chokjohnlee@gmail.com, yangxiaoyan@gmail.com,
zhenjie.zhang@pvoice.io
Source

Abstract
Domain adaptation on time series data is an important but
challenging task. Most of the existing works in this area are
based on the learning of the domain-invariant representation
of the data with the help of restrictions like MMD. However, such extraction of the domain-invariant representation
is a non-trivial task for time series data, due to the complex
dependence among the timestamps. In detail, in the fully dependent time series, a small change of the time lags or the
offsets may lead to difficulty in the domain invariant extraction. Fortunately, the stability of the causality inspired us to
explore the domain invariant structure of the data. To reduce
the difficulty in the discovery of causal structure, we relax it
to the sparse associative structure and propose a novel sparse
associative structure alignment model for domain adaptation.
First, we generate the segment set to exclude the obstacle of
offsets. Second, the intra-variables and inter-variables sparse
attention mechanisms are devised to extract associative structure time-series data with considering time lags. Finally, the
associative structure alignment is used to guide the transfer of
knowledge from the source domain to the target one. Experimental studies not only verify the good performance of our
methods on three real-world datasets but also provide some
insightful discoveries on the transferred knowledge.

Target

𝐵

𝐵

𝐺

𝐺

𝐼

𝐼
t-6

t-4

t-2

t

t-6

t-4

t-2

t

Figure 1: The illustration of the physiological mechanism in
the human body among “Blood glucose (B) ↓”, “Glucagon
(G) ↓” and “Insulin (I) ↑”. The decrease of “Blood glucose”
leads to the decrease of “Glucagon” and the increase of “Insulin”. The colored blocks denote the segments of change
of variables. The different lengths of red double-head arrows denote different offsets. And the different lengths of
blue double-head arrows denote different response times between “Blood glucose” and “Glucagon”. Different response
time means different time lags. (Best view in color.)
RNN (Chung et al. 2015), to learn representation from time
series and using the gradient reversal layer (GRL) to align
the representations learned from source and target time series data.
However, extracting domain-invariant information from
time series data is a challenging task. Existing methods (da Costa et al. 2020; Purushotham et al. 2017),
which simply employ the RNN based feature extractor,
essentially assume that the conditional distributions are
equal (Pan et al. 2010), i.e., PS (y|ϕ(x1 , x2 , · · · , xt ) =
PT (y|ϕ(x1 , x2 , · · · , xt ), in which ϕ(·) is the feature transformation mapping. This assumption works well in the static
data but is difficult to satisfy in the time series data. Take
Figure 1 as an example, due to the complex dependency
structure among the timestamps, even small discrepancies
from different domains (e.g. offsets and varying of time lags)
may result in the difficulty to learn the domain invariant representation. Furthermore, as for the multivariable time series data, variables are not always i.i.d. Existing methods for
time series domain adaptation, which ignore the associative
structure among variables, might suffer from overfitting.
Motivated by the toy example of Figure 2(a), data from
the source and the target domains share the same stable

Introduction
Domain adaptation (Pan and Yang 2009; Long et al. 2015;
Cai et al. 2019), utilizing both the labeled source domain
data and the unlabeled target domain data, has a wide range
of applications (Ganin and Lempitsky 2015; Lin and Lu
2018). To address the well-known phenomenon named domain shift, a large number of methods have been proposed
by exploring various assumptions between the source and
target domains (Tzeng et al. 2014; Cai et al. 2019; Zhang
et al. 2019).
One of the most widely used assumptions in domain adaptation is the existence of domain-invariant representation in
both source and target domains. Since such an assumption
has achieved great performance in non-time series data (Cai
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019), researchers have extended it
to the time series data, by employing models like Recurrent
Neural Network(RNN) (Mikolov et al. 2010) and variational
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6859

