The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Graph Neural Networks
with Experience Replay
Fan Zhou, Chengtai Cao*
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn, cct447131988@gmail.com

7DVN 1

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently received significant research attention due to their superior performance
on a variety of graph-related learning tasks. Most of the current works focus on either static or dynamic graph settings,
addressing a single particular task, e.g., node/graph classification, link prediction. In this work, we investigate the question: can GNNs be applied to continuously learning a sequence of tasks? Towards that, we explore the Continual
Graph Learning (CGL) paradigm and present the Experience
Replay based framework ER-GNN for CGL to alleviate the
catastrophic forgetting problem in existing GNNs. ER-GNN
stores knowledge from previous tasks as experiences and replays them when learning new tasks to mitigate the catastrophic forgetting issue. We propose three experience node
selection strategies: mean of feature, coverage maximization,
and influence maximization, to guide the process of selecting
experience nodes. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our ER-GNN and
shed light on the incremental graph (non-Euclidean) structure
learning.

7DVN 1

7DVN

(YROYH

7DVN

7DVN 1

(YROYH

7DVN
95%

&RQWLQXDO
/HDUQLQJ
)RJHWWLQJ7DVN

94%
55%

&RQWLQXDO
/HDUQLQJ

94%
60%

56%

)RJHWWLQJ7DVN

Figure 1: A CGL example. Nodes are papers and links indicate there is a citation between two papers. The task is to
classify each node into several predefined classes (e.g., topics). From left to right is the evolution of the citation network. The histograms in different colors denote the node
classification performance for each corresponding task.

Ying, and Leskovec 2017), GAT (Veličković et al. 2018),
SGC (Wu et al. 2019a), and GIN (Xu et al. 2019).
Despite significant breakthroughs achieved in GNNs, existing models – in both static and dynamic graph settings
– primarily focus on a single task. Learning multiple tasks
in sequence remains a fundamental challenge for GNNs. A
natural question is how do these popular GNNs perform on
learning a series of graph-related tasks, which is termed as
Continual Graph Learning (CGL) in this paper. Take Cora
citation data as an illustrative scenario, as shown in Figure 1.
In the beginning, there are several nodes in the citation network representing some papers belong to a set of classes. We
can train a node classification model on the current graph.
However, the real-word citation network is naturally evolving overtime. Consequently, a group of new nodes from new
classes (some are labeled and the others are unlabeled) will
be added into the graph. We expect that the same model can
classify the new nodes. Over time, multiple groups of nodes
have been added to the network at different time-points. We
term classifying each group of nodes as a task and expect
to learn a common node classifier across all tasks, rather
than one for the entire graph. Towards that, we train the
classifier using each set of nodes in a sequential way. However, this kind of training process can easily lead to the phe-

Introduction
Applying deep learning methods for graph data analytics
tasks has recently generated a significant research interest (Wu et al. 2019b). Plenty of models have been developed to tackle various graph-related learning tasks, including node classification, link prediction, broader graph
classifications, etc. Earlier efforts (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and
Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015; Grover and Leskovec 2016)
mainly focused on encoding nodes in networks/graphs1
into a low-dimensional vector space, while preserving both
the topological structure and the node attribute information in an unsupervised manner. However, researchers have
recently shifted from developing sophisticated deep learning models on Euclidean-like domains (e.g., image, text)
to non-Euclidean graph structure data. This, in turn, resulted in many notable Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) –
e.g., GCN (Kipf and Welling 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton,
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Whenever there is no ambiguity, the terms networks and
graphs will be used interchangeably throughout this paper.

4714

