The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Responsibility Attribution in Parameterized Markovian Models
Christel Baier1 , Florian Funke1 , and Rupak Majumdar2
1

Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany
2
MPI-SWS, Kaiserslautern, Germany
{christel.baier, florian.funke}@tu-dresden.de, rupak@mpi-sws.org

Abstract

in pMCs and does not relate to moral, epistemic, or organizational considerations. In an abstract setting, attribution
schemes consider a function f (x1 , . . . , xn ) in n parameters.
When the parameters change from one setting to another,
thereby changing the value of the function, the attribution
problem is to determine what portion of the overall change
in f should be attributed to each parameter. Attribution problems formalize the informal notion of responsibility in a
quantitative sense: the attribution of a specific parameter can
be interpreted as its responsibility in the overall change.
Attribution problems formalize the notion of responsibility in many areas of economics and engineering. For an economics example, suppose that multiple suppliers cooperate
to produce a product. The profit f (x1 , . . . , xn ) has to be
shared between them. For an example pertaining to pMCs,
consider a fault tree modeling the overall failure probability
of an entire system based on the failure probabilities of its
components. A natural question is how “responsible” each
component is to the overall failure of the system; that is,
how should the responsibility of failure be allocated to the
failure of each individual component?
One can write down some properties that an attribution
function must satisfy (the “axiomatic approach”). For example, the sum of attributions over all parameters should be the
change in the value of the function, if the function is independent of a parameter then its attribution should be zero,
and the attribution should not depend on the identity of the
parameters.
When f is a linear function, f (x1 , . . . , xn ) =
P
i ci xi , and each parameter changes from an initial value
ai to a final value bi , a simple attribution scheme could assign the attribution ci (bi −ai ) to the ith parameter. However,
when f is non-linear, a small change in one parameter may
be responsible for a large change in f and a linear attribution would not take this into account. When each parameter
changes infinitesimally, one can compute the partial derivative of the function f with respect to each parameter at the
current valuation; this corresponds to approximating f locally by a linear function. If the parameters change by a significant amount, the partial derivative is a poor choice.
Instead, the cooperative game theory literature, and
more recently, the machine learning literature, has considered path-based attribution schemes (Friedman and Moulin
1999). Given an initial and a final value of the parameters, a
path-based attribution scheme fixes a family of paths and as-

We consider the problem of responsibility attribution in the
setting of parametric Markov chains. Given a family of
Markov chains over a set of parameters, and a property, responsibility attribution asks how the difference in the value
of the property should be attributed to the parameters when
they change from one point in the parameter space to another.
We formalize responsibility as path-based attribution
schemes studied in cooperative game theory. An attribution
scheme in a game determines how a value (a surplus or a
cost) is distributed among a set of participants. Path-based attribution schemes include the well-studied Aumann-Shapley
and the Shapley-Shubik schemes. In our context, an attribution scheme measures the responsibility of each parameter on
the value function of the parametric Markov chain.
We study the decision problem for path-based attribution
schemes. Our main technical result is an algorithm for deciding if a path-based attribution scheme for a rational (ratios
of polynomials) cost function is over a rational threshold. In
particular, it is decidable if the Aumann-Shapley value for a
player is at least a given rational number. As a consequence,
we show that responsibility attribution is decidable for parametric Markov chains and for a general class of properties
that include expectation and variance of discounted sum and
long-run average rewards, as well as specifications in temporal logic.

Introduction
Methods that explain the behavior of complex mathematical
models has become an important research direction in recent years, as such models are increasingly used in making
decisions that affect our lives in crucial ways. An important problem in explainability is responsibility attribution: a
quantitative estimation of the relative importance of model
features to a final outcome. While explainability and responsibility has been broadly studied for many statistical models,
to the best of our knowledge, they have never been formalized for Markov chains.
In this paper, we develop a theory of responsiblity for
parametric Markov chains (pMCs) based on attribution
schemes from game theory. Our perspective on responsibility focuses on the influence of a parameter on properties
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11734

