The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Supervised Training of Dense Object Nets using Optimal Descriptors for
Industrial Robotic Applications
Andras Gabor Kupcsik1 , Markus Spies1 , Alexander Klein2 , Marco Todescato1 , Nicolai Waniek1 ,
Philipp Schillinger1 , Mathias Bürger1
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
2
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
andrasgabor.kupcsik@de.bosch.com

Abstract

DONs can be readily applied to learn arbitrary objects
with relative ease, including non-rigid objects. The selfsupervised training objective of DONs uses contrastive loss
(Hadsell, Chopra, and LeCun 2006) between pixels of image
pairs depicting the object and its environment. The pixelwise contrastive loss minimizes descriptor space distance
between corresponding pixels (pixels depicting the same
point on the object surface in an image pair) and pushes
away non-correspondences. In essence, minimizing the contrastive loss defined on descriptors of pixels leads to a view
invariant map of the object surface in descriptor space.
The contrastive loss formulation belongs to the broader
class of projective nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques (Van Der Maaten, Postma, and Van Den Herik 2009).
The motivation behind most of these methods is to perform
a mapping from an input manifold to a typically lower dimensional output space while ensuring that similar inputs
map to similar outputs. While the contrastive loss formulation relies on a similarity indicator (e.g., matching vs. nonmatching pixels), other techniques also exploit the magnitude of similarity implying local information about the data
(e.g., ISOMAP (Tenenbaum, De Silva, and Langford 2000)
and LE (Belkin and Niyogi 2003)).
While generating similarity indicators, or pixel correspondences, is suitable for self-supervised training, its accuracy inherently depends on the quality of the recorded
data. Based on our observations, noisy depth data can deteriorate the quality of correspondence matching especially
in the case of smaller objects. As an alternative, in this paper
we generate an optimal descriptor space embedding given a
3D mesh model, leading to a supervised training approach.
Optimality here refers to embedding the model vertices into
a descriptor space with minimal distortion of their local connectivity information. We rely on discrete exterior calculus to compute the Laplacian of the object model (Crane
et al. 2013), which generates the geometrically accurate local connectivity information. We exploit this information in
combination with Laplacian Eigenmaps to create the corresponding optimal descriptor space embedding. Finally, we
render target descriptor space images to input RGB images
depicting the object (see Fig. 1). Ultimately, our approach
generates dense object descriptors akin the original, selfsupervised method without having to rely on depth information.

Dense Object Nets (DONs) by Florence, Manuelli and
Tedrake (2018) introduced dense object descriptors as a novel
visual object representation for the robotics community. It is
suitable for many applications including object grasping, policy learning, etc. DONs map an RGB image depicting an object into a descriptor space image, which implicitly encodes
key features of an object invariant to the relative camera pose.
Impressively, the self-supervised training of DONs can be applied to arbitrary objects and can be evaluated and deployed
within hours. However, the training approach relies on accurate depth images and faces challenges with small, reflective
objects, typical for industrial settings, when using consumer
grade depth cameras. In this paper we show that given a 3D
model of an object, we can generate its descriptor space image, which allows for supervised training of DONs. We rely
on Laplacian Eigenmaps (LE) to embed the 3D model of an
object into an optimally generated space. While our approach
uses more domain knowledge, it can be efficiently applied
even for smaller and reflective objects, as it does not rely
on depth information. We compare the training methods on
generating 6D grasps for industrial objects and show that our
novel supervised training approach improves the pick-andplace performance in industry-relevant tasks.

Introduction
Dense object descriptors for perceptual object representation received considerable attention in the robot learning
community (Florence, Manuelli, and Tedrake 2018, 2020;
Sundaresan et al. 2020). To learn and generate dense visual representation of objects, Dense Object Nets (DONs)
were proposed by Florence, Manuelli, and Tedrake (2018).
DONs map an h × w × 3 RGB image to its descriptor space
map of size h × w × D, where D ∈ N+ is an arbitrarily chosen dimensionality. DONs can be trained in a selfsupervised manner using a robot and a wrist-mounted consumer grade RGBD camera, and can be deployed within
hours. Recently, several impactful applications and extensions of the original approach have been shown, including rope manipulation (Sundaresan et al. 2020), behavior
cloning (Florence, Manuelli, and Tedrake 2020) and controller learning (Manuelli et al. 2020).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6093

