The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

T RIPLE T REE: A Versatile Interpretable Representation
of Black Box Agents and their Environments
Tom Bewley and Jonathan Lawry
Department of Engineering Mathematics, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
{tom.bewley, j.lawry}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

priori, we know nothing of the agent’s provenance – its
governing policy may be a product of reinforcement learning (RL), optimal control algorithms, evolution, or explicit
manual design – but we assume that it can be analysed using the theoretical formalism of a Markov decision process
(MDP). We refer readers to (Sutton and Barto 2018) for an
overview of MDPs, and adopt the MDPNv1 notational standard (Thomas and Okal 2015).
To learn anything about the agent we must gather data,
and in doing so we make the black box assumption (Wachter,
Mittelstadt, and Russell 2017; Guidotti et al. 2019; Coppens
et al. 2019). That is, we take the role of an observer of the
agent-environment complex, with no access to the internal
structure of either system, but the ability to record environment states s ∈ S, agent actions a ∈ A, and instantaneous
rewards r ∈ R, and their order of occurrence. We thereby
assemble D, an ordered dataset of triplets (St , At , Rt ). St ,
At and Rt are the state, action and reward from one timestep,
uniquely indexed by t. If the MDP is episodic (see (Sutton
and Barto 2018)), we keep a record of which states are the
initial and terminal ones in each episode. Importantly, we
assume that states are represented by vectors of real-valued
features, each with a straightforward semantic interpretation
(such as a physical quantity). In doing so, we bypass a challenging phase of state representation learning.1
The data in D are generated by the interaction of opaque
and complex mechanisms. How might they get us to a position of understanding? Following prior work across the academic spectrum (Carnap 1967; Rosch et al. 1976; Edelman
1998), we take the view that understanding arises by searching for similarities in observed data. A variant of this idea is
Gärdenfors’ theory of conceptual spaces (Gärdenfors 2004).

In explainable artificial intelligence, there is increasing interest in understanding the behaviour of autonomous agents to
build trust and validate performance. Modern agent architectures, such as those trained by deep reinforcement learning,
are currently so lacking in interpretable structure as to effectively be black boxes, but insights may still be gained from
an external, behaviourist perspective. Inspired by conceptual
spaces theory, we suggest that a versatile first step towards
general understanding is to discretise the state space into convex regions, jointly capturing similarities over the agent’s action, value function and temporal dynamics within a dataset
of observations. We create such a representation using a novel
variant of the CART decision tree algorithm, and demonstrate
how it facilitates practical understanding of black box agents
through prediction, visualisation and rule-based explanation.

Introduction
This paper explores representational tools for understanding the behaviour of extant autonomous agents while treating them and their environments as black boxes. In popular taxonomies of explainable artificial intelligence (XAI),
this is categorised as post hoc, model-agnostic, global explanation (Adadi and Berrada 2018). While black box behaviourist analysis is inherently limited (Chomsky 1959),
it can nonetheless serve the practical goals of XAI, which
include building trust among human stakeholders and validating the performance of safety-critical systems. It is also
viable in contexts where theoretical understanding of the
agent’s internal mechanism is lacking, as with modern deep
learning systems (Samek, Wiegand, and Müller 2017), or
where access to this mechanism is impractical or restricted.
We introduce a new data-driven model of black box
agents, called T RIPLE T REE, which builds on the flexible and
interpretable architecture of a binary decision tree. As such,
it provides a powerful tool for answering many meaningful
questions about agent behaviour.

Conceptual Spaces and Decision Trees
Gärdenfors views sensory observations as embedded in
high-dimensional mathematical spaces, and proposes that
the building blocks of abstract reasoning are convex regions
of such spaces, within which all contained observations are
similar according to some salient measure. Such regions are
deemed natural properties of the system being observed,
and can be combined to form semantic concepts such as ob-

Problem Setup
Suppose that we need to understand the behaviour, performance and possible failure modes of an autonomous agent
operating within a dynamic and complex environment. A

1
We address the problem of interpretable feature construction
and selection in (Bewley, Lawry, and Richards 2020).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11415

