The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Detecting Beneficial Feature Interactions for Recommender Systems
Yixin Su, 1 Rui Zhang, 2 Sarah Erfani, 1 Zhenghua Xu 3
1

University of Melbourne
2
Tsinghua University
3
Hebei University of Technology
yixins1@student.unimelb.edu.au, rui.zhang@ieee.org, sarah.erfani@unimelb.edu.au, zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn

Abstract

account the interaction between every pair of features. However, in practice, not all feature interactions are relevant to
the recommendation result (Langley et al. 1994; Siegmund
et al. 2012). Modeling the feature interactions that provide
little useful information may introduce noise and cause overfitting, and hence decrease the prediction accuracy (Zhang
et al. 2017; Louizos, Welling, and Kingma 2018). For example, a user may use Gmail on a workday no matter what
weather it is. However, if the interaction of workday and specific weather is taking into account in the model and due to
the bias in the training set (e.g., the weather of the days when
the Gmail usage data are collected happens to be cloudy), the
interaction < Monday, Cloudy > might be picked up by the
model and make less accurate recommendations on Gmail
usage. Some work considers each feature interaction’s importance through the attention mechanism (Xiao et al. 2017;
Song et al. 2019). However, these methods still take all feature interactions into account. Moreover, they capture each
individual feature interaction’s contribution to the recommendation prediction, failing to capture the holistic contribution of a set of feature interactions together.

Feature interactions are essential for achieving high accuracy in recommender systems. Many studies take into
account the interaction between every pair of features.
However, this is suboptimal because some feature interactions may not be that relevant to the recommendation result, and taking them into account may introduce
noise and decrease recommendation accuracy. To make
the best out of feature interactions, we propose a graph
neural network approach to effectively model them, together with a novel technique to automatically detect
those feature interactions that are beneficial in terms
of recommendation accuracy. The automatic feature interaction detection is achieved via edge prediction with
an L0 activation regularization. Our proposed model is
proved to be effective through the information bottleneck principle and statistical interaction theory. Experimental results show that our model (i) outperforms existing baselines in terms of accuracy, and (ii) automatically identifies beneficial feature interactions.

Introduction

In this paper, we focus on identifying the set of feature
interactions that together produce the best recommendation
performance. To formulate this idea, we propose the novel
problem of detecting beneficial feature interactions, which
is defined as identifying the set of feature interactions that
contribute most to the recommendation accuracy (see Definition 1 for details). Then, we propose a novel graph neural
network (GNN)-based recommendation model, L0 -SIGN,
that detects the most beneficial feature interactions and utilizes only the beneficial feature interactions for recommendation, where each data sample is treated as a graph, features
as nodes and feature interactions as edges. Specifically, our
model consists of two components. One component is an
L0 edge prediction model, which detects the most beneficial
feature interactions by predicting the existence of edges between nodes. To ensure the success of the detection, an L0
activation regularization is proposed to encourage unbeneficial edges (i.e. feature interactions) to have the value of 0,
which means that edge does not exist. Another component
is a graph classification model, called Statistical Interaction
Graph neural Network (SIGN). SIGN takes nodes (i.e., features) and detected edges (i.e., beneficial feature interactions) as the input graph, and outputs recommendation pre-

Recommender systems play a central role in addressing information overload issues in many Web applications, such as
e-commerce, social media platforms, and lifestyle apps. The
core of recommender systems is to predict how likely a user
will interact with an item (e.g., purchase, click). An important technique is to discover the effects of features (e,g., contexts, user/item attributes) on the target prediction outcomes
for fine-grained analysis (Shi, Larson, and Hanjalic 2014).
Some features are correlated to each other, and the joint effects of these correlated features (i.e., feature interactions)
are crucial for recommender systems to get high accuracy
(Blondel et al. 2016; He and Chua 2017). For example, it
is reasonable to recommend a user to use Uber on a rainy
day at off-work hours (e.g., during 5-6pm). In this situation, considering the feature interaction < 5-6pm, rainy > is
more effective than considering the two features separately.
Therefore, in recent years, many research efforts have been
put in modeling the feature interactions (He and Chua 2017;
Lian et al. 2018; Song et al. 2019). These models take into
* Rui Zhang and Zhenghua Xu are corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4357

