The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Winning Lottery Tickets in Deep Generative Models
Neha Mukund Kalibhat, Yogesh Balaji, Soheil Feizi
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland - College Park
{nehamk,yogesh,sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract

CNN-based architectures such as VGG and ResNet) (Morcos et al. 2019), Reinforcement Learning and Natural Language Processing tasks (Yu et al. 2020). While research in
finding lottery tickets has primarily focused on the classification problem, to the best of our knowledge, no prior work
exists on understanding the lottery ticket hypothesis in deep
generative models. This will be the focus of our work.
In particular, we investigate if winning tickets exist in
two popular families of deep generative models — Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling 2014)
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014). VAEs are relatively easier to train compared
to GANs since their optimization involves a single minimization objective (i.e. the evidence lower bound). Training
GANs, on the other hand, is notoriously difficult as it involves a min-max game between the generator and the critic
networks, causing instability in training (Goodfellow et al.
2014; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017). In both GANs
and VAEs, models are in the over-parameterized regime
(Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Razavi, van den
Oord, and Vinyals 2019) to improve the quality of reconstructions and sample generations, especially in large-scale
datasets such as Celeb-A (Liu et al. 2015) and ImageNet
(Deng et al. 2009). This results in significant overhead in
training time, compute and memory requirements. Thus, it
will be useful, in terms of model storage, training time and
training stability, to address the fundamental issue of overparameterization in deep generative models.
Another motivation is to see if winning tickets can be
transferred across different generative models. In particular,
the generator network in GANs and the decoder network in
VAEs fundamentally perform the same task, i.e. transforming the input vectors in the latent space to realistic images.
This hints that winning tickets (sub-networks and their initializations) on one generative model (e.g. VAE) might be
also a successful ticket on another generative model (e.g.
GAN) of the same architecture, although they are based on
completely different loss functions. If this is indeed the case,
this would imply that a wide range of generative models
with different loss functions can share similar network structures and initializations, showing generalizability and scalability of winning tickets. Therefore, to verify transferability
of winning tickets, we train the generator of a GAN using the
winning ticket obtained from the decoder of VAE, and vice

The lottery ticket hypothesis suggests that sparse, subnetworks of a given neural network, if initialized properly,
can be trained to reach comparable or even better performance to that of the original network. Prior works in lottery tickets have primarily focused on the supervised learning
setup, with several papers proposing effective ways of finding winning tickets in classification problems. In this paper,
we confirm the existence of winning tickets in deep generative models such as GANs and VAEs. We show that the popular iterative magnitude pruning approach (with late resetting)
can be used with generative losses to find the winning tickets.
This approach effectively yields tickets with sparsity up to
99% for AutoEncoders, 93% for VAEs and 89% for GANs on
CIFAR and Celeb-A datasets. We also demonstrate the transferability of winning tickets across different generative models (GANs and VAEs) sharing the same architecture, suggesting that winning tickets have inductive biases that could help
train a wide range of deep generative models. Furthermore,
we show the practical benefits of lottery tickets in generative models by detecting tickets at very early stages in training called early-bird tickets. Through early-bird tickets, we
can achieve up to 88% reduction in floating-point operations
(FLOPs) and 54% reduction in training time, making it possible to train large-scale generative models over tight resource
constraints. These results out-perform existing early pruning
methods like SNIP (Lee, Ajanthan, and Torr 2019) and GraSP
(Wang, Zhang, and Grosse 2020). Our findings shed light towards existence of proper network initializations that could
improve convergence and stability of generative models.

Introduction
The lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle and Carbin 2018),
suggests that there exist sparse sub-networks in overparameterized neural networks that can be trained to achieve
similar or better accuracy than the original network, under the same parameter initialization. These sub-networks
and their associated initializations form winning tickets.
In addition to saving memory, winning tickets have also
been shown to achieve improved performance (Frankle and
Carbin 2018).
Evidence of the existence of winning tickets has been
shown successfully on Visual Recognition tasks (on various
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8038

