The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncertainty-Aware Multi-View Representation Learning
Yu Geng, 1 Zongbo Han, 1 Changqing Zhang, 1,2∗ Qinghua Hu 1,2
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
{gengyu, zhangchangqing, huqinghua}@tju.edu.cn, hanzb1997@gmail.com

Abstract

should be maximized (Kumar, Rai, and Daume 2011; Wang
et al. 2015). While there is also complementary information that is vital to comprehensive representations. Therefore, some methods are proposed to explore the complete
information of multi-view data (Zhang, Liu, and Fu 2019;
Hu and Chen 2019). More importantly, different sources of
data may contain different amounts of information and possible noise. For example, due to the various sensor qualities
or environmental factors, the information of different observations varies from each other. The quality of data usually
varies for different samples (even for different views), i.e.,
one view may be informative for one sample but not the
same case for another. Above challenges make multi-view
learning rather difficult. In the context of unsupervised representation learning, it is even more challenging due to the
lack of label guidance.
In this work, we propose a novel algorithm termed Dynamic Uncertainty-Aware Networks (DUA-Nets) to address
these issues. As shown in Fig. 1, we employ Reversal Networks (R-Nets) to integrate intrinsic information from different views into a unified representation. R-Nets reconstruct
each view from a latent representation, and thus the latent
representation can encode complete information from multiple views. Furthermore, we are devoted to modeling the
quality of each sample-specific view. This is quite different
from the straightforward ways which ignore the differences
between views and samples (Andrew et al. 2013; Wang et al.
2015). Another common approach is assigning each view
a fixed weight (Huang et al. 2019; Peng et al. 2019). Although it considers view differences and is more effective
than equal weighting, it cannot be adaptive to the noise variation inherent in different samples. In this paper, we employ
uncertainty to estimate the quality of data. Specifically, under the assumption that each observation is sampled from
a Gaussian distribution, R-Nets are applied to generate the
mean and variance of the distribution, where the variance
determines the sharpness of Gaussian distribution, and thus
can be interpreted as uncertainty. Modeling data uncertainty
can adaptively balance different views for different samples,
which results in superior and robust performance. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed DUA-Nets. We further provide insightful analyses
about the estimated uncertainty.
For clarification, the main contributions of this work are

Learning from different data views by exploring the underlying complementary information among them can endow
the representation with stronger expressive ability. However,
high-dimensional features tend to contain noise, and furthermore, the quality of data usually varies for different samples
(even for different views), i.e., one view may be informative for one sample but not the case for another. Therefore,
it is quite challenging to integrate multi-view noisy data under unsupervised setting. Traditional multi-view methods either simply treat each view with equal importance or tune the
weights of different views to fixed values, which are insufficient to capture the dynamic noise in multi-view data. In
this work, we devise a novel unsupervised multi-view learning approach, termed as Dynamic Uncertainty-Aware Networks (DUA-Nets). Guided by the uncertainty of data estimated from the generation perspective, intrinsic information
from multiple views is integrated to obtain noise-free representations. Under the help of uncertainty, DUA-Nets weigh
each view of individual sample according to data quality so
that the high-quality samples (or views) can be fully exploited
while the effects from the noisy samples (or views) will be
alleviated. Our model achieves superior performance in extensive experiments and shows the robustness to noisy data.

Introduction
In recent years, there is a growing interest in multi-view
learning. Information in the real world is usually in different forms simultaneously. When watching videos, the optic nerve receives visual signal while the auditory nerve receives speech signal. These two different types of signals
complete each other and provide more comprehensive information. Accordingly, conducting representation learning
from multi-view data has the potential to improve data analysis tasks (Yang and Wang 2018; Baltrušaitis, Ahuja, and
Morency 2018; Li, Yang, and Zhang 2018).
However, the relationship among multiple views is usually very complex. There are two well-known principles
in multi-view learning, i.e., consistency and complementary
(Li, Yang, and Zhang 2018; Zhang et al. 2020). Most existing methods mainly focus on the consistency of multiple views which assume that the correlations among views
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7545

