The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dynamic Position-aware Network for Fine-grained Image Recognition
Shijie Wang1, 2 , Haojie Li1, 2∗ , Zhihui Wang1, 2 , Wanli Ouyang3
1

International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China
3
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Research Group, Australia
1027@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {hjli, zhwang}@dlut.edu.cn, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Most weakly supervised fine-grained image recognition (WFGIR) approaches predominantly focus on learning the discriminative details which contain the visual variances and
position clues. The position clues can be indirectly learnt
by utilizing context information of discriminative visual content. However, this will cause the selected discriminative regions containing some non-discriminative information introduced by the position clues. These analysis motivates us to
directly introduce position clues into visual content to only
focus on the visual variances, achieving more precise discriminative region localization. Though important, position
modelling usually requires significant pixel/region annotations and therefore is labor-intensive. To address this issue,
we propose an end-to-end Dynamic Position-aware Network
(DP-Net) to directly incorporate the position clues into visual content and dynamically align them without extra annotations, which eliminates the effect of position information
for discriminative variances among subcategories. In particular, the DP-Net consists of: 1) Position Encoding Module,
which learns a set of position-aware parts by directly adding
the learnable position information into the horizontal/vertical
visual content of images; 2) Position-vision Aligning Module, which dynamically aligns both visual content and learnable position information via performing graph convolution
on position-aware parts; 3) Position-vision Reorganization
Module, which projects the aligned position clues and visual
content into the Euclidean space to construct a position-aware
feature maps. Finally, the position-aware feature maps are
used which is implicitly applied the aligned visual content
and position clues for more accurate discriminative regions
localization. Extensive experiments verify that DP-Net yields
the best performance under the same settings with most competitive approaches, on CUB Bird, Stanford-Cars, and FGVC
Aircraft datasets.

Figure 1: The motivation of the Dynamic Position-aware
Network (DP-Net). FHL denotes the high-level semantic
feature maps and FP A denotes the position-aware feature
maps. (a) is the original image, (b)(d) are the discriminative
response maps to guide network to sample the discriminative
regions and (c) (e) are localization results without and with
DP-Net learning, respectively. We can see that after introducing position clues, (d) is more compact and sparse than
(b) and the resulted regions in (e) are more accurate and discriminative than those in (c).

the inherently subtle intra-class object variations among subcategories. As a result, the key to fine-grained image recognition lies in picking out the discriminative regions in an image to address the aforementioned challenge of WFGIR.
Existing fine-grained image recognition methods can be
roughly divided into three categories. The first category,
multi-stage schemes is that the object and local parts/patches
are localized either by explicitly detecting semantic parts
(Zhang et al. 2016; Wei, Xie, and Wu 2016) or via implicit saliency localization (He and Peng 2017; He, Peng,
and Zhao 2017; Peng, He, and Zhao 2018). The shortcoming of multi-stage schemes is that they are difficult to guarantee the selected regions are discriminative enough. Therefore, the second category, end-to-end setting focuses on automatically localizing the most discriminative patches via
the attention mechanism in a weakly supervised manner (Fu,
Zheng, and Mei 2017; Ding et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2019b).

Introduction
Weakly Supervised Fine-grained Image Recognition (WFGIR) aims at identifying sub-category of a given image label, e.g., different species of birds, and models of cars and
aircrafts (Guo, Ouyang, and Xu 2020). It is a much more
challenging problem than general image recognition due to
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2791

