The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Almost Envy-freeness, Envy-rank, and Nash Social Welfare Matchings
Alireza Farhadi,1 MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, 1 Mohamad Latifian, 2 Masoud Seddighin, 3 Hadi
Yami 4
1

University of Maryland
University of Toronto
3
Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM)
4
Microsoft
farhadi@cs.umd.edu, Hajiagha@cs.umd.edu, latifian@cs.toronto.edu, seddighin.masood@gmail.com,
hayami@microsoft.com
the agent that receives no good envies the other party. ThereAbstract
fore, several relaxations of envy-freeness are introduced for
Envy-freeness up to one good (EF1) and envy-freeness up
the case of indivisible items (Lipton et al. 2004; Budish
to any good (EFX) are two well-known extensions of envy2011; Caragiannis et al. 2019). One of these relaxations,
freeness for the case of indivisible items. It is shown that EF1
suggested by Budish (Budish 2011), is envy-freeness up to
can always be guaranteed for agents with subadditive valuone good (EF1)1 . An allocation of indivisible goods is EF1
ations (Lipton et al. 2004). In sharp contrast, it is unknown
if
any possible envy of an agent for the share of another can
whether or not an EFX allocation always exists, even for four
be resolved by removing some good from the envied share.
agents and additive valuations. In addition, the best approximation guarantee for EFX is (φ − 1) ≃ 0.61 by Amanatidis
In contrast to envy-freeness, EF1 allocation always exists.
et al. (Amanatidis, Markakis, and Ntokos 2020).
Indeed, a simple round-robin algorithm always guarantees
In order to find a middle ground to bridge this gap, in this
EF1 for additive valuations, and a standard envy-graph based
paper we suggest another fairness criterion, namely envyallocation guarantees EF1 for more general (sub-additive)
freeness up to a random good or EFR, which is weaker
valuations. Furthermore, it is shown that any Nash welfare
than EFX, yet stronger than EF1. For this notion, we promaximizing allocation (allocation that maximizes the prodvide a polynomial-time 0.73-approximation allocation algouct of the agents’ utilities) is both Pareto efficient and EF1.
rithm. For our algorithm we use Nash Social Welfare MatchRecently, Caragiannis et al. (Caragiannis et al. 2019)
ing which makes a new connection between Nash Social Welsuggested another intriguing relaxation of envy-freeness,
fare and envy freeness.
namely envy-free up to any good (EFX), which attracted
great deal of attention. An allocation is said to be EFX, if
Introduction
no agent envies another agent after the removal of any item
from the other agent’s bundle. Theoretically, this notion is
Fair division is a fundamental and interdisciplinary problem
strictly stronger than EF1 and is strictly weaker than EF. In
that has been extensively studied in economics, mathematcontrast to EF1, questions related to the EFX notion are relics, political science, and computer science. Generally, the
atively unexplored. As an example, despite significant effort
goal is to find an allocation of a resource to n agents, which
(Caragiannis et al. 2019), the existence of such allocations
is agreeable to all the agents according to their preferences.
is still unknown. The most impressive breakthrough in this
The first formal treatment of this problem was in 1948 by
area is the recent work of Chaudhury, Garg, and Mehlhorn
Steinhaus (Steinhaus 1948). Following his work, a vast liter(Chaudhury, Garg, and Mehlhorn 2020), which shows that
ature has been developed and several notions for measuring
for the case of 3 agents with additive valuations an EFX alfairness have been suggested (Steinhaus 1948; Foley 1967;
location always exists. Furthermore, unlike EF1, Nash soBudish 2011; Lipton et al. 2004; Caragiannis et al. 2019).
cial welfare maximizing allocations are not necessarily EFX
One of the most prominent and well-established fairness no(Caragiannis et al. 2019).
tions, introduced by Foley (Foley 1967), is envy-freeness,
Given this impenetrability of EFX, a growing strand of
which requires that each agent prefers his share over that of
research started considering its relaxations. For example,
any other agent.
Plaut and Roughgarden (Plaut and Roughgarden 2020), conTraditionally, envy-freeness has been studied for both disider an approximate version of EFX2 and provide a 1/2
visible and indivisible resources. When the resource is a single heterogeneous divisible item (i.e, can be fractionally al1
It is worth mentioning that before the work of Budish (Budish
located), envy-freeness admits strong theoretical guarantees.
2011)
EF1 was implicitly addressed by Lipton et. al (Lipton et al.
However, beyond divisibility, when dealing with a set of in2004).
divisible goods, envy-freeness is too strong to be attained;
2
An allocation is α-approximate EFX, if for every pair of agents
for example, for two agents and a single indivisible good,
2

i and j, agent i believes that the share allocated to him is worth at
least α fraction of the share allocated to agent j, after removal of
agent j’s least valued item (according to agent i’s preference).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5355

