The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpretable Clustering on Dynamic Graphs
with Recurrent Graph Neural Networks
Yuhang Yao, Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
{yuhangya,cjoewong}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract

extreme approach that does not consider edges formed in
the past risks ignoring useful information about the majority of nodes whose memberships have not changed. On
the other hand, making no distinction between historical
and more recently formed edges may lead to slow detection
of nodes’ membership changes, as the historically formed
edges would dominate until the nodes have enough time
to make connections within their new clusters. Prior works
have balanced these effects by introducing a decay rate: the
weight of each edge is reduced by a constant decay factor
in each time step between the connection formation and the
time at which cluster membership is estimated. The cluster
membership can then be estimated at any given time, by taking the weighted connections as input to a static algorithm
like the well-studied spectral clustering (Abbe 2017).
Accounting for historical node connections with a single
decay rate parameter offers the advantage of interpretability: the decay rate quantifies the emphasis put on historically
formed edges, which can be tuned for specific datasets. Yet
while prior works have examined the optimal decay rate for
stylized network models, they use a single decay rate for
all edges (Keriven and Vaiter 2020). In practice, the optimal
rate will likely vary, e.g., with higher decay rates for clusters
with higher membership turnover where historical information might reflect outdated cluster memberships, making it
less useful. Introducing different decay rates for each cluster,
on the other hand, raises a new challenge: since we do not
know the true cluster memberships for each node, we may
use the wrong decay rate if a node is erroneously labeled.
Moreover, the optimal decay rates for different clusters will
be correlated due to connections between nodes in different
clusters that themselves must be optimally weighted, potentially making the decay rates difficult to optimize.
More sophisticated semi-supervised clustering methods
combine LSTM (long-short-term memory) or RNN (recurrent neural network) structures with graph convolutional networks (GCNs), producing a neural network that classifies
nodes based on their cluster membership labels. This network can be carefully trained to optimize the use of historical edge information, without explicitly specifying different
node decay rates (Pareja et al. 2020). However, while such
algorithms show impressive empirical performance on large
graph datasets, they are generally not easily interpretable.
Our work seeks to connect the theoretical analysis of

We study the problem of clustering nodes in a dynamic graph,
where the connections between nodes and nodes’ cluster
memberships may change over time, e.g., due to community
migration. We first propose a dynamic stochastic block model
that captures these changes, and a simple decay-based clustering algorithm that clusters nodes based on weighted connections between them, where the weight decreases at a fixed
rate over time. This decay rate can then be interpreted as signifying the importance of including historical connection information in the clustering. However, the optimal decay rate
may differ for clusters with different rates of turnover. We
characterize the optimal decay rate for each cluster and propose a clustering method that achieves almost exact recovery of the true clusters. We then demonstrate the efficacy of
our clustering algorithm with optimized decay rates on simulated graph data. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs), a popular algorithm for sequence learning, use a similar decay-based
method, and we use this insight to propose two new RNNGCN (graph convolutional network) architectures for semisupervised graph clustering. We finally demonstrate that the
proposed architectures perform well on real data compared to
state-of-the-art graph clustering algorithms.

Introduction
Clustering nodes based on their connections to each other
is a common goal of analyzing graphs, with applications
ranging from social to biological to logistics networks. Most
such clustering approaches assume that the connections (i.e.,
edges) between nodes, and thus the optimal clusters, do
not change over time (Lei, Rinaldo et al. 2015; Qin and
Rohe 2013). In practice, however, many graph structures
will evolve over time. Users in social networks, for example, may migrate from one community to another as their
interests or employment status changes, forming new connections with other users (i.e., new edges in the graph) and
changing the cluster or community to which they belong.
Thus, clustering algorithms on such evolving graphs should
be able to track changes in cluster membership over time.
A major challenge in tracking cluster membership
changes is to carefully handle historical information and
assess its value in predicting the current cluster membership. Since clusters will often evolve relatively slowly, an
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4608

