The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Proportional Representation under Single-Crossing Preferences Revisited
Andrei Costin Constantinescu, Edith Elkind
University of Oxford
andrei.costin.constantinescu@gmail.com, elkind@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

NP-hard even when the disutility function takes a very simple form (Procaccia, Rosenschein, and Zohar 2008; Lu and
Boutilier 2011). Accordingly, there is substantial body of
work that focuses on identifying special classes of voters’
preferences for which a winning committee can be determined efficiently. In particular, polynomial-time algorithms
have been obtained for various structured preference domains, such as single-peaked preferences (Betzler, Slinko,
and Uhlmann 2011), single-crossing preferences (Skowron
et al. 2015), and preferences that are single-peaked on trees,
as long as the underlying trees have few leaves or few internal vertices (Yu, Chan, and Elkind 2013; Peters and Elkind
2016) (see also (Peters et al. 2020)). These results extend to preferences that are nearly single-peaked or nearly
single-crossing, for a suitable choice of distance measure
(Cornaz, Galand, and Spanjaard 2012; Skowron et al. 2015;
Misra, Sonar, and Vaidyanathan 2017); see also the survey
by Elkind, Lackner, and Peters (2017) for a summary of results for restricted domains and the survey by Faliszewski
et al. (2017) for a discussion of other approaches to circumventing hardness results for the Chamberlin–Courant rule.
Recently, Kung (2015) and, independently, Clearwater,
Puppe, and Slinko (2015) introduced the domain of preferences that are singe-crossing on trees, which considerably
extends the domain of single-crossing preferences, while
sharing some if its desirable properties, such as existence
of (weak) Condorcet winners. Clearwater, Puppe, and
Slinko (2015) also proposed an algorithm for computing the
Chamberlin–Courant winners when voters’ preferences belong to this domain. Unfortunately, a close inspection of this
algorithm shows that its running time scales approximately
with the number of subtrees of the underlying tree, which
may be exponential in the number of voters; we discuss this
issue in Section 4.

We study the complexity of determining a winning committee under the Chamberlin–Courant voting rule when voters’
preferences are single-crossing on a line, or, more generally,
on a tree. For the line, Skowron et al. (2015) describe an
O(n2 mk) algorithm (where n, m, k are the number of voters, the number of candidates and the committee size, respectively); we show that a simple tweak improves the time
complexity to O(nmk). We then improve this bound for
k = Ω(log n) by reducing our problem to the k-link path
problem for
DAGs with concave Monge weights, obtaining
√
a nm2O( log k log log n) algorithm for the general case and a
nearly linear algorithm for the Borda misrepresentation function. For trees, we point out an issue with the algorithm proposed by Clearwater, Puppe, and Slinko (2015), and develop
a O(nmk) algorithm for this case as well.

1

Introduction

The problem of computing election winners under various
voting rules is perhaps the most fundamental research challenge in computational social choice (Brandt et al. 2016).
While this problem is typically easy for single-winner voting rules (with a few notable exceptions (Hemaspaandra,
Hemaspaandra, and Rothe 1997; Rothe, Spakowski, and Vogel 2003)), for many rules that are supposed to return a set
of winners, the winner determination problem is computationally demanding. In particular, this is the case for one
of the most prominent and well-studied multiwinner voting
rules, namely, the Chamberlin–Courant rule (Chamberlin
and Courant 1983). Under this rule, each voter is assumed
to assign a numerical disutility to each candidate; these disutilities are then lifted to sets of candidates, so that a voter’s
disutility for a set of candidates S is his minimum disutility
for a member of S, and the goal is to identify a committee
that minimizes the sum of voters’ disutilities given an upper
bound on the committee size (see Section 2 for formal definitions). It has been argued that this rule is well-suited for a
variety of tasks, ranging from selecting a representative student assembly to deciding which movies to show on a plane
(Faliszewski et al. 2017).
Decision problems related to winner determination under the Chamberlin–Courant rule have been shown to be

Our Contribution In this paper, we revisit the problem of
computing the winners under the Chamberlin–Courant rule
when the voters’ preferences are single-crossing, or, more
broadly, single-crossing on a tree. For the former setting,
we observe that a simple tweak of the algorithm of Skowron
et al. (2015) improves the running time from O(n2 mk) to
O(nmk). We then reduce the Chamberlin–Courant winner determination problem to the well-studied DAG k-L INK
PATH problem, and show that the instances of the latter
problem that are produced by our reduction have the con-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5286

