The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Peer Collaborative Learning for Online Knowledge Distillation
Guile Wu, Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London
guile.wu@qmul.ac.uk, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

2015) or an online ensemble (Lan, Zhu, and Gong 2018)
to a student model, which is more suitable for deployment.
Traditionally, knowledge distillation (KD) requires to pretrain a high-capacity teacher model in the first stage, and
then transfer the knowledge of the teacher to a smaller student model in the second stage (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Romero et al. 2015; Phuong and Lampert 2019). Via
aligning soft predictions (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015)
or feature representations (Romero et al. 2015) between the
teacher and the student, a student model usually significantly reduces the model complexity for deployment but still
achieves competitive accuracy as the teacher model. However, since the teacher and the student are trained in two separate stages, this traditional strategy usually requires more
training time and computational cost.
Recent online knowledge distillation (Lan, Zhu, and
Gong 2018; Zhang et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2020) alleviates
this limitation by directly optimising a target network, following a one-stage end-to-end training fashion. Instead of
pre-training a high-capacity teacher, online knowledge distillation typically integrates the teacher into the student using a hierarchical network with shared intermediate-level
representations (Song and Chai 2018) (Fig. 1(a)), multiple parallel networks (Zhang et al. 2018)(Fig. 1(b)), or a
multi-branch network with online ensembling (Lan, Zhu,
and Gong 2018) (Fig. 1(c)). Although these methods have
shown their superiority over the traditional counterparts, collaborative learning and mutual learning fail to construct an
online high-capacity teacher to facilitate the optimisation of
the student, whilst online ensembling ignores the collaboration among branches and its logit summation impedes the
further optimisation of the ensemble teacher.
In this work, we propose a novel Peer Collaborative
Learning (PCL) method for online knowledge distillation.
As shown in Fig. 1(d), we integrate online ensembling
and network collaboration into a unified framework to take
full advantage of them for improving the quality of online
knowledge distillation. Specifically, in training, we construct
a multi-branch network by adding auxiliary branches (highlevel layers) to a given target network. We call each branch
“a peer” and design two types of online teachers for peer
collaborative learning to improve the generalisation of a target network. The first teacher, peer ensemble teacher, is an
online high-capacity model, which helps to distil knowledge

Traditional knowledge distillation uses a two-stage training
strategy to transfer knowledge from a high-capacity teacher
model to a compact student model, which relies heavily on
the pre-trained teacher. Recent online knowledge distillation alleviates this limitation by collaborative learning, mutual learning and online ensembling, following a one-stage
end-to-end training fashion. However, collaborative learning
and mutual learning fail to construct an online high-capacity
teacher, whilst online ensembling ignores the collaboration
among branches and its logit summation impedes the further
optimisation of the ensemble teacher. In this work, we propose a novel Peer Collaborative Learning method for online
knowledge distillation, which integrates online ensembling
and network collaboration into a unified framework. Specifically, given a target network, we construct a multi-branch
network for training, in which each branch is called a peer.
We perform random augmentation multiple times on the inputs to peers and assemble feature representations outputted
from peers with an additional classifier as the peer ensemble teacher. This helps to transfer knowledge from a highcapacity teacher to peers, and in turn further optimises the
ensemble teacher. Meanwhile, we employ the temporal mean
model of each peer as the peer mean teacher to collaboratively
transfer knowledge among peers, which helps each peer to
learn richer knowledge and facilitates to optimise a more stable model with better generalisation. Extensive experiments
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet show that the proposed method significantly improves the generalisation of
various backbone networks and outperforms the state-of-theart methods.

Introduction
Deep learning has achieved incredible success in many computer vision tasks in recent years. Whilst many studies focus
on developing deeper and/or wider networks for improving
the performance (He et al. 2016; Zagoruyko and Komodakis
2016; Xie et al. 2017), these cumbersome networks require
more computational resources, which hinders their deployments in resource-limited scenarios. To alleviate this problem, knowledge distillation is developed to transfer knowledge from a stronger teacher (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10302

