The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Coupled Layer-wise Graph Convolution for Transportation Demand Prediction
Junchen Ye1 , Leilei Sun1,∗ , Bowen Du1 , Yanjie Fu2 , Hui Xiong3
1

SKLSDE and BDBC Lab, Beihang University, Beijing 100083, China,
Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida, FL 32816, USA,
3
Management Science and Information Systems Department, Rutgers University, NJ 07102, USA
{yjchen,leileisun,dubowen}@buaa.edu.cn, yanjie.fu@ucf.edu, hxiong@rutgers.edu
2

Abstract
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) has been widely applied in transportation demand prediction due to its excellent
ability to capture non-Euclidean spatial dependence among
station-level or regional transportation demands. However,
in most of the existing research, the graph convolution was
implemented on a heuristically generated adjacency matrix,
which could neither reflect the real spatial relationships of
stations accurately, nor capture the multi-level spatial dependence of demands adaptively. To cope with the above problems, this paper provides a novel graph convolutional network
for transportation demand prediction. Firstly, a novel graph
convolution architecture is proposed, which has different adjacency matrices in different layers and all the adjacency matrices are self-learned during the training process. Secondly, a
layer-wise coupling mechanism is provided, which associates
the upper-level adjacency matrix with the lower-level one. It
also reduces the scale of parameters in our model. Lastly, a
unitary network is constructed to give the final prediction result by integrating the hidden spatial states with gated recurrent unit, which could capture the multi-level spatial dependence and temporal dynamics simultaneously. Experiments
have been conducted on two real-world datasets, NYC Citi
Bike and NYC Taxi, and the results demonstrate the superiority of our model over the state-of-the-art ones.

Figure 1: A visual comparison of CGC with other GCNs.

Introduction
Recently Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) has become a hot research spot, which is mainly contributed by
the two following factors: 1) the rapid development of urban
transportation, and 2) the wide application of big data technology in transportation information system. Even though,
there are still several important problems that remain to be
dug into, such as traffic environment monitoring, travel route
recommendation, in which transportation demand prediction
is the most essential and crucial issue. By obtaining the precise number of the demand in each region in advance, the
transport resource can be pre-allocated and re-balanced to
maximize the transportation capacity, and residents will be
provided with a better service in daily travel.
Due to the importance of transportation demand prediction, many efforts have been made in this field in the past

few years. The development of mainstream could be divided
into three stages: 1) The researches in the early time employed the empirical statistical analysis which mainly focus
on forecasting the demand in a specific region instead of the
whole city (Moreira-Matias et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2016), and
the incapability of capturing spatial and temporal correlation simultaneously leads to relatively low prediction accuracy. 2) Recently, deep learning grows up quickly and gives
us a new solution of modeling spatio-temporal correlations.
By treating the entire city as an image and partitioning it into
several grids, researchers employ Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to extract spatial correlations (Zhang, Zheng,
and Qi 2017) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to extract temporal correlations (Yao et al. 2018), which makes
a huge progress on the formalization. However, aggregating
with neighbors in space makes CNN-based methods insensitive to long-distance transition patterns and only fit for Euclidean spatial relationship. 3) Graph convolutional network,

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4617

