The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Frugal Optimization for Cost-related Hyperparameters
Qingyun Wu * , Chi Wang* , Silu Huang
Microsoft Research
{Qingyun.Wu, Wang.Chi, Silu.Huang}@microsoft.com

Problem Formulation

Abstract
The increasing demand for democratizing machine learning
algorithms calls for hyperparameter optimization (HPO) solutions at low cost. Many machine learning algorithms have
hyperparameters which can cause a large variation in the training cost. But this effect is largely ignored in existing HPO
methods, which are incapable to properly control cost during
the optimization process. To address this problem, we develop
a new cost-frugal HPO solution. The core of our solution is a
simple but new randomized direct-search method, for which
we provide theoretical guarantees on the convergence rate and
the total cost incurred to achieve convergence. We provide
strong empirical results in comparison with state-of-the-art
HPO methods on large AutoML benchmarks.

Introduction
Machine learning algorithms usually involve a number of hyperparameters that have a large impact on model accuracy and
need to be set appropriately for each task (Melis, Dyer, and
Blunsom 2018). For practitioners to easily and confidently
apply generic ML algorithms, methods that can automatically tune these hyperparameters at low cost are needed. It
motivates research in efficient hyperparameter optimization
(HPO) (Falkner, Klein, and Hutter 2018). HPO is generally
considered as a black-box function optimization problem
where evaluating the black-box function is expensive as training and validating a model can be time-consuming. Further,
this evaluation cost can be directly affected by a subset of
hyperparameters. For example, in gradient boosted trees, the
variation of the number of trees and the depth per tree can
result in a large variation on training and validation time. In
such scenarios, sample efficiency cannot be directly translated to cost frugality. Unfortunately, there has not been a
generic HPO formulation that considers the existence of such
cost-related hyperparameters, as previous work is mostly focused on the case where the evaluation cost is constant or
some special case of variable cost (detailed in Related Work
Section). In this paper, we provide such a formulation to fill
this gap and propose a cost-frugal solution.
* Equal contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10347

Let f (x) denote the validation loss of the concerned machine learning algorithm under the given training dataset1
and hyperparameter configuration x. Let g(x) denote the
evaluation cost2 incurred when obtaining f (x). In general,
g(x) is not constant in the hyperparameter configuration
space X . Instead, there may exist x1 , x2 ∈ X such that
g(x1 )  g(x2 ). The goal of an HPO algorithm π is to find
x∗ = arg minx∈X f (x). The total cost incurred during this
PKπ∗
loss optimization process is G(π) = i=1
g(xi ), where Kπ∗
is the number of function evaluations involved when x∗ is
found by algorithm π. In this paper, we formulate the costfrugal HPO problem as follows: the HPO algorithm π needs
to find x∗ while keeping its total cost G(π) small. When cost
is indeed constant with respect to x, G(π) naturally degenerates to the number of iterations for convergence times a
constant, and thus π is naturally cost-frugal as long as it has
a good convergence property. In the case where cost-related
hyperparameters exist, this formulation enables a characterization of the HPO algorithm π’s cost behavior.

Contribution
In this paper, we take a fresh and unique path of addressing
this problem based on randomized direct search, and develop
a frugal optimization method CFO. Our solution is designed
toward both small iteration number before convergence and
bounded cost per iteration, which lead to low total evaluation
cost under mild conditions. Specifically, CFO is built upon
our newly proposed randomized direct search method FLOW2 ,
which can have an approximately optimal total cost when
minimizing loss. Our solution is backed by both theoretical
and empirical studies.
On the theoretical side, √we first prove that FLOW2 enjoys
d
a convergence rate of O( √K
) even in the non-convex case
under a common smoothness condition. This convergence
result is of independent interest in the theory of derivativefree optimization. Then we prove that due to FLOW2 ’s unique
1
We assume the concerned ML algorithm, training datasets and
validation methods are all fixed.
2
Throughout this paper, evaluation cost refers to the computation/time needed for training and validating an ML algorithm with
the given training and validation dataset.

