The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Traffic Shaping in E-Commercial Search Engine: Multi-Objective Online Welfare
Maximization
Liucheng Sun1,2 , Chenwei Weng1 , Chengfu Huo1 , Weijun Ren1 , Guochuan Zhang2 , Xin Li1
1

Alibaba Group , 2 Zhejiang University
liucheng.slc@alibaba-inc.com, wengchenwei.pt@alibaba-inc.com, chengfu.huocf@alibaba-inc.com
afei@alibaba-inc.com, zgc@zju.edu.cn, xin.l@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

sellers), but simply maximizing users’ immediate engagement may fail to satisfy many sellers’ demands. For example, since the items from top sellers are usually temporarily
more attractable (higher predicted CTR and CVR) than that
of new sellers, new sellers may be hard to survive. The attention given to sellers as a result of predicted relevance is often
vastly unequal. A relatively small group of superstar sellers
receive a large portion of attention in the platform while the
majority of sellers in the long tail receives very little. In order to boost market vitality, the e-commerce platform, as a
distribution channel to match items/sellers and users, needs
to balance different stakeholders’ short/long-term desires.
Therefore, the traffic shaping is crucial and has received
significant attention by scholars and practitioners, which
aims at re-ranking the candidate items to consider additional
business requirements. Shaping traffic in such scenarios often entails balancing multiple conflicting objectives and becomes a non-trivial task. Another challenge is the online aspect of the problem: each time a query arrives dynamically,
one needs to make an instant and irrevocable decision on
what items to display while satisfying global business requirements over the entire set of queries. In this paper, we
aim to design a smoothly online matching policy (between
items and queries) that balances the trade-off among multiple objectives.
Before we proceed, we very briefly review the existing
literature on the traffic shaping problem and position our
contributions. Most previous studies consider the problem
of maximizing myopic objectives like CTR but subject to
some constraints that are intuitive and help in driving longterm value the platform seeks to attain (Agarwal et al. 2011,
2012; Chen and Wang 2015; Gupta et al. 2016; Ding, Govindaraj, and Vishwanathan 2019). In this way, the traffic shaping is regarded as an online constrained optimization problem. To design an online algorithm, they draw on ideas from
the primal-dual method by incorporating a dual-learning
phase followed by an online decision-making phase (Devanur and Hayes 2009; Agrawal, Wang, and Ye 2014; Chen
and Wang 2015). The algorithm is empirically shown to
be effective under the assumption that the traffic distribution is stationary. However, the stationariness is generally
not true due to the traffic spike as pointed out by (Esfandiari, Korula, and Mirrokni 2018), and the algorithm may
suffer severely degenerated performance. Besides, most of

The e-commercial search engine is the primary gateway for
customers to find desired products and engage in online
shopping. Besides displaying items to optimize for a single objective (i.e., relevance), ranking items needs to satisfy
some other business requirements in practice. Recently, traffic shaping was introduced to incorporate multiple objectives
in a constrained optimization framework. However, many
practical business requirements can not explicitly represented
by linear constraints as in the existing work, and this may
limit the scalability of their framework. This paper presents a
unified framework from the aspect of multi-objective welfare
maximization where we regard all business requirements as
objectives to optimize. Our framework can naturally incorporate a wide range of application-driven requirements. In addition to formulating the problem, we design an online traffic
splitting algorithm that allows us to flexibly adjust the priorities of different objectives, and it has rigorous theoretical
guarantees over the adversarial scenario. We also run experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets to validate
our algorithms.

Introduction
With the rapid growth of e-commerce, online product search
has emerged as a popular and effective paradigm for users to
find desired products and engage in online shopping. When
a user enters a query, search engine returns a page consists
of relevant items. To maximize user engagement, it is practical and common to predict the relevance scores by a welldesigned machine learning model (or multiple models) and
select the top K items with the highest relevance to the query
as the final ranking result.
Proxies such as click-through rate (CTR) or conversion
rate (CVR) are used for computing relevance scores. While
such a single metric-focused ranking method drives up
short-term engagement, it ignores long-term sustainability.
A click or purchase is only a part of a user’s journey in
the platform and subsequent downstream utilities such as
retention, re-purchase and browsing time-spent are also important. On the other hand, the e-commerce platform is a
two-sided marketplace that have customers not only on the
demand side (e.g. users), but also on the supply side (e.g.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

574

