The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Graphons via Structured Gromov-Wasserstein Barycenters
Hongteng Xu1, 2 , Dixin Luo3∗ , Lawrence Carin4 , Hongyuan Zha5
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institue of Technology
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
5
School of Data Science, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen†
dixin.luo@bit.edu.cn
2

Abstract

process:
vn ∼ Uniform(Ω), ∀ n = 1, .., N,

We propose a novel and principled method to learn a nonparametric graph model called graphon, which is defined
in an infinite-dimensional space and represents arbitrary-size
graphs. Based on the weak regularity lemma from the theory of graphons, we leverage a step function to approximate
a graphon. We show that the cut distance of graphons can
be relaxed to the Gromov-Wasserstein distance of their step
functions. Accordingly, given a set of graphs generated by an
underlying graphon, we learn the corresponding step function
as the Gromov-Wasserstein barycenter of the given graphs.
Furthermore, we develop several enhancements and extensions of the basic algorithm, e.g., the smoothed GromovWasserstein barycenter for guaranteeing the continuity of
the learned graphons and the mixed Gromov-Wasserstein
barycenters for learning multiple structured graphons. The
proposed approach overcomes drawbacks of prior state-ofthe-art methods, and outperforms them on both synthetic and
real-world data. The code is available at https://github.com/
HongtengXu/SGWB-Graphon.

ann0 ∼ Bernoulli(W (vn , vn0 )), ∀ n, n0 = 1, .., N.

(1)

The first step samples N nodes independently from a uniform distribution defined on Ω. The second step generates
an adjacency matrix A = [ann0 ] ∈ {0, 1}N ×N , whose
elements yield the Bernoulli distributions determined by
the graphon. Accordingly, we derive a graph G(V, E) with
V = {1, ..., N } and E = {(n, n0 ) | ann0 = 1}.
This graphon model is useful theoretically to characterize complex graphs (Chung and Radcliffe 2011; Lovász
2012), which has been widely used in many applications,
e.g., network centrality (Ballester, Calvó-Armengol, and
Zenou 2006; Avella-Medina et al. 2018), control (Jackson
and Zenou 2015; Gao and Caines 2019), and optimization (Nagurney 2013; Parise and Ozdaglar 2018). A fundamental problem connected to these applications concerns
how to robustly learn graphons from observed graphs.
Many learning methods have been developed to solve this
problem. Most of them are based on the weak regularity
lemma of graphon (Frieze and Kannan 1999). This lemma
indicates that an arbitrary graphon can be approximated well
by a two-dimensional step function. To learn step functions
as target graphons, existing methods either leverage stochastic block models, e.g., the sorting-and-smoothing (SAS)
method (Chan and Airoldi 2014), the stochastic block approximation (SBA) (Airoldi, Costa, and Chan 2013), and its
variant “largest gap” (LG) (Channarond et al. 2012), or they
apply low-rank approximation directly to observed graphs,
e.g., the matrix completion (MC) method (Keshavan, Montanari, and Oh 2010) and the universal singular value thresholding (USVT) algorithm (Chatterjee and others 2015).
These methods require the observed graphs to be wellaligned1 and generated by a single graphon. However, realworld graphs, e.g., the social networks collected from different platforms and different time slots, often have complicated clustering structure, and the correspondence between
their nodes is unknown in general. This violation limits the
feasibility of the above learning methods in practice. Specifically, these methods have to solve a multi-graph match-

Introduction
Given a set of graphs, e.g., social networks and biological
networks, we are often interested in modeling their generative mechanisms and building statistical graph models (Kolaczyk 2009; Goldenberg et al. 2010). Many efforts have
been made to achieve this aim, leading to such methods as
the stochastic block model (Nowicki and Snijders 2001), the
graphlet (Soufiani and Airoldi 2012), and the latent space
model (Hoff, Raftery, and Handcock 2002). However, when
dealing with large-scale complex networks, the parametric
models above are often oversimplified, and thus, suffer from
underfitting. To enhance the model capacity, a nonparametric graph model called graphon (or graph limit) was proposed (Janson and Diaconis 2008; Lovász 2012). Mathematically, a graphon is a two-dimensional symmetric Lebesgue
measurable function, denoted as W : Ω2 7→ [0, 1], where Ω
is a measure space, e.g., Ω = [0, 1]. Given a graphon, we can
generate arbitrarily sized graphs by the following sampling
∗

Correspondence author.
Currently on leave from College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1
“Well-aligned” graphs have comparable size and the correspondence between their nodes is provided.

10505

