The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GTA: Graph Truncated Attention for Retrosynthesis
Seung-Woo Seo * †1 , You Young Song* 1
June Yong Yang , Seohui Bae2 , Hankook Lee2 , Jinwoo Shin2 , Sung Ju Hwang2 , Eunho Yang2
2

1

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), Samsung Electronics
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sw32.seo, yysong02}@gmail.com, {laoconeth, shbae73, hankook.lee, jinwoos, sjhwang82, eunhoy}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Retrosynthesis is the task of predicting reactant molecules
from a given product molecule and is, important in organic
chemistry because the identification of a synthetic path is as
demanding as the discovery of new chemical compounds. Recently, the retrosynthesis task has been solved automatically
without human expertise using powerful deep learning models. Recent deep models are primarily based on seq2seq or
graph neural networks depending on the function of molecular representation, sequence, or graph. Current state-of-theart models represent a molecule as a graph, but they require joint training with auxiliary prediction tasks, such as the
most probable reaction template or reaction center prediction.
Furthermore, they require additional labels by experienced
chemists, thereby incurring additional cost. Herein, we propose a novel template-free model, i.e., Graph Truncated Attention (GTA), which leverages both sequence and graph representations by inserting graphical information into a seq2seq
model. The proposed GTA model masks the self-attention
layer using the adjacency matrix of product molecule in the
encoder and applies a new loss using atom mapping acquired
from an automated algorithm to the cross-attention layer in
the decoder. Our model achieves new state-of-the-art records,
i.e., exact match top-1 and top-10 accuracies of 51.1 % and
81.6 % on the USPTO-50k benchmark dataset, respectively,
and 46.0 % and 70.0 % on the USPTO-full dataset, respectively, both without any reaction class information. The GTA
model surpasses prior graph-based template-free models by
2 % and 7 % in terms of the top-1 and top-10 accuracies
on the USPTO-50k dataset, respectively, and by over 6 %
for both the top-1 and top-10 accuracies on the USPTO-full
dataset.

Figure 1: Example of reaction: Synthesis of benzene (right)
from furan (left) and ethylene (middle). Each molecule is
expressed in SMILES notation.
attempted to adopt computer-assisted methods in retrosynthetic analysis to achieve fast and efficient reactant candidate searches. Owing to the recent success of deep learning in solving various chemical tasks (Feinberg et al. 2018;
You et al. 2018; Altae-Tran et al. 2017; Sanchez-Lengeling
and Aspuru-Guzik 2018), studies have been conducted to
address the retrosynthesis problem in a data-driven manner
using deep learning (Liu et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2019; Coley et al. 2017; Dai et al. 2019; Segler and Waller 2017; Shi
et al. 2020). These deep learning-based approaches attempt
to improve the current retrosynthesis performance and enable task automation by excluding human intervention and
domain knowledge usage, resulting in both time and cost effectiveness.
Recent deep-learning-based approaches for retrosynthesis
can be categorized into two groups: ‘template-based’ and
‘template-free’. A template is a set of rules describing the
manner in which reactants transform into a product using
atom-wise mapping information. Blending such information
into a model requires well-established domain knowledge
managed by a professional. Hence, current state-of-the-art
template-based models such as that by Dai et al. exhibit
better performances compared with those of template-free
models (Shi et al. 2020). However, reactions not included
by extracted templates are barely predicted using templatebased models (Liu et al. 2017; Chen et al. 2019), resulting
in coverage limitation, which hinders generalization. Therefore, template-free models can perform generalization beyond the extracted templates by learning data pertaining to
reactions, reactors, and products.
Template-free retrosynthesis models, i.e., the focus of
this study, are further dichotomized by molecule representations, i.e., sequences or graphs. The dominant representation among recent studies involving template-free models

Introduction
In pharmaceuticals and organic chemistry, the synthesis of
a certain chemical compound is equally important as identifying new compounds with the desired properties. Retrosynthesis first formulated by (Corey 1988, 1991), is the
task of predicting a set of reactant molecules that is synthesized to a specified product molecule by identifying the
inverse reaction pathway. Since its coinage, chemists have
* Equal contribution.
†

At Standigm, Inc. seungwoo.seo@standigm.com
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

531

