The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semi-Supervised Sequence Classification through Change Point Detection
Nauman Ahad, Mark A. Davenport
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
{nahad3, mdav}@gatech.edu

Abstract

In such settings, semi-supervised techniques can provide significant advantages over traditional supervised techniques. Over the past decade, there have been great advances
in semi-supervised learning methods. Impressive classification performance – particularly in the fields of computer vision – has been achieved by using large amounts of unlabeled data on top of limited labeled data. However, despite
these advances, there has been comparatively much less
work on semi-supervised classification of sequential data.
A key intuition that most semi-supervised learning methods share is that the data should (in the right representation) exhibit some kind of clustering, where different classes
correspond to different clusters. In the context of sequential
data, the equivalent assumption is that data segments within
a sequence corresponding to different classes should map to
distinct clusters. In the context of sequential data, the challenge is that exploiting this clustering would require the sequence to be appropriately segmented, but segment boundaries are generally unknown a priori. If the start/end points
of each segment were actually known, it would be much easier to apply traditional semi-supervised learning methods.
In this paper, we show that standard (unsupervised)
change point detection algorithms provide a natural and useful approach to segmenting an unlabeled sequence so that
it can be more easily exploited in a semi-supervised context. Specifically, change point-detection algorithms aim to
identify instances in a sequence where the data distribution
changes (indicating an underlying class change). We show
that the resulting change points can be leveraged to learn
improved representations for semi-supervised learning.
We propose a novel framework for semi-supervised sequential classification using change point detection. We first
apply unsupervised change point detection to the unlabeled
data. We assume that segments between two change points
belong to the same distribution and should be classified similarly, whereas adjacent segments which are on opposite sides
of a change point belong to different distributions and should
be classified differently. These similar/dissimilar pairs, derived from change points, can then be combined with similar/dissimilar pairs derived from labeled data. We use these
combined similar/dissimilar constraints to train a neural network that preserves similarity/dissimilarity. The learned representation can then be fed into a multilayer feedforward
network trained via existing semi-supervised techniques.

Sequential sensor data is generated in a wide variety of realworld applications. A fundamental machine learning challenge involves learning effective classifiers for such sequential data. While deep learning has led to impressive performance gains in recent years within domains such as speech,
this has relied on the availability of large datasets of sequences with high-quality labels. In many applications, however, the associated class labels are often extremely limited,
with precise labelling/segmentation being too expensive to
perform in a high volume. However, large amounts of unlabeled data may still be available. In this paper we propose a novel framework for semi-supervised learning in such
contexts. In an unsupervised manner, change point detection methods can be used to identify instances where classes
change within a sequence. We show that change points provide examples of similar/dissimilar pairs of sequences which,
when coupled with class labels, can be used in a semisupervised classification setting. Pairs from labels and change
points are used by a neural network to learn improved representations for classification. We provide extensive synthetic
simulations and show that the learned representations are better than those learned through an autoencoder and obtain improved results on simulations and human activity recognition
datasets.

Introduction
As devices ranging from smart watches to smart toasters are
equipped with ever more sensors, machine learning problems involving sequential data are becoming increasingly
ubiquitous. Sleep tracking, activity recognition and characterization, and machine health monitoring are just a few applications where machine learning can be applied to sequential data. In recent years, deep networks have been widely
used for such tasks as these networks are able to automatically learn suitable representations, helping them achieve
state-of-the-art performance (Wang et al. 2019). However,
such methods typically require large, accurately labeled
training datasets in order to obtain these results. Unfortunately, especially in the context of sequential data, it is often
the case that despite the availability of huge amounts of unlabeled data, labeled data is often scarce and expensive to
obtain.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6574

