The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GRASP: Generic Framework for Health Status Representation Learning Based on
Incorporating Knowledge from Similar Patients
Chaohe Zhang1,3 , Xin Gao1,3 , Liantao Ma1,3 , Yasha Wang1,2 * , Jiangtao Wang4 and Wen Tang5
1
2

Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China
National Engineering Research Center of Software Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
The Centre for Intelligent Healthcare, Coventry University, UK
5
Division of Nephrology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China
{wangyasha, choc}@pku.edu.cn, {jiangtao.wang}@coventry.ac.uk

Abstract

patient into a representation separately and perform medical
tasks based on it (Baytas et al. 2017; Choi et al. 2018; Ma
et al. 2020b). However, EMR data are usually sparse (Xu
et al. 2018), and while dealing with a patient record with low
quality, such methods will learn inadequate representations
and lead to inferior performance. Thus, some researchers
try to enhance the performance by incorporating external
information. For example, GRAM (Choi et al. 2017) and
KAME (Ma et al. 2018b) incorporate the ontologies of the
medical codes. Their essence is to incorporate external information beyond the dataset to learn a better representation
for the patient, and they achieve improvements in some conditions. However, these approaches do not work well when
people hardly obtain external information or prior knowledge about them, especially for some rare diseases or emerging diseases (e.g., COVID-19) (Huang et al. 2020). Furthermore, such ontology information is often not applicable due
to the idiosyncratic use of terminology (Choi et al. 2018). A
challenge arises now, that is, how to fully utilize such EMR
data to learn adequate patient representations without external knowledge?
In fact, in addition to the methods of using external information, fully mining the correlation between similar patients
can also improve the performance. This intuition is based on
the observation of how human doctors use the similarity between patients to assist the clinical analysis. When a patient

Deep learning models have been applied to many healthcare
tasks based on electronic medical records (EMR) data and
shown substantial performance. Existing methods commonly
embed the records of a single patient into a representation
for medical tasks. Such methods learn inadequate representations and lead to inferior performance, especially when the
patient’s data is sparse or low-quality. Aiming at the above
problem, we propose GRASP, a generic framework for healthcare models. For a given patient, GRASP first finds patients in
the dataset who have similar conditions and similar results
(i.e., the similar patients), and then enhances the representation learning and prognosis of the given patient by leveraging knowledge extracted from these similar patients. GRASP
defines similarities with different meanings between patients
for different clinical tasks, and finds similar patients with useful information accordingly, and then learns cohort representation to extract valuable knowledge contained in the similar patients. The cohort information is fused with the current patient’s representation to conduct final clinical tasks.
Experimental evaluations on two real-world datasets show
that GRASP can be seamlessly integrated into state-of-the-art
models with consistent performance improvements. Besides,
under the guidance of medical experts, we verified the findings extracted by GRASP, and the findings are consistent with
the existing medical knowledge, indicating that GRASP can
generate useful insights for relevant predictions.

Introduction
With the rapid growth and accumulation of electronic medical records (EMR) data, deep learning methods have been
widely applied in many healthcare tasks, such as mortality prediction, patients subtyping, and diagnosis prediction.
These methods can assist doctors in analyzing patients’
health status, formulating reasonable treatment, and preventing adverse outcomes in a more intelligent and effective way.
EMR data are temporally sequenced by patient clinical
records that are represented by a set of medical variables.
Most existing methods embed the EMR data of each single

Young Men

* Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Old Men

Young Women

Figure 1: The similar patients can provide auxiliary information for current analysis and treatment.

715

