The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automatic Curriculum Learning With
Over-repetition Penalty for Dialogue Policy Learning
Yangyang Zhao, Zhenyu Wang * , Zhenhua Huang
School of software engineering, South China University of Technology
msyyz@mail.scut.edu.cn, wangzy@scut.edu.cn, sezhhuangscut@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract

settings, the entire conversation revolves around the sampled user goal implicitly. Nevertheless, the dialogue agent’s
objective is to help the user to accomplish this goal even
though the agent knows nothing about this sampled user goal
(Schatzmann and Young 2009; Li et al. 2016), as shown in
Figure 1a.
The randomly sampling-based user simulator neglects the
fact that human learning supervision is often accompanied
by a curriculum (Ren et al. 2018). For instance, when a
human-teacher teaches students, the order of presented examples is not random but meaningful, from which students
can benefit (Bengio et al. 2009). Therefore, this randomly
sampling-based user simulators bring two issues:

Dialogue policy learning based on reinforcement learning
is difficult to be applied to real users to train dialogue
agents from scratch because of the high cost. User simulators, which choose random user goals for the dialogue agent
to train on, have been considered as an affordable substitute for real users. However, this random sampling method
ignores the law of human learning, making the learned dialogue policy inefficient and unstable. We propose a novel
framework, Automatic Curriculum Learning-based Deep QNetwork (ACL-DQN), which replaces the traditional random sampling method with a teacher policy model to realize
the dialogue policy for automatic curriculum learning. The
teacher model arranges a meaningful ordered curriculum and
automatically adjusts it by monitoring the learning progress
of the dialogue agent and the over-repetition penalty without
any requirement of prior knowledge. The learning progress
of the dialogue agent reflects the relationship between the dialogue agent’s ability and the sampled goals’ difficulty for
sample efficiency. The over-repetition penalty guarantees the
sampled diversity. Experiments show that the ACL-DQN significantly improves the effectiveness and stability of dialogue
tasks with a statistically significant margin. Furthermore, the
framework can be further improved by equipping with different curriculum schedules, which demonstrates that the framework has strong generalizability.

• efficiency issue: since the ability of the dialogue agent
does not match the difficulty of the sampled user goal,
it takes a long time for the dialogue agent to learn the optimal strategy (or fail to learn). For example, in the early
learning phase, it is possible that the random sampling
method arranges the dialogue agent to learn more complex user goals first, and then learn simpler user goals.
• stability issue: using random user goals to collect experience online is not stable enough, making the learned dialogue policy unstable and difficult to reproduce. Since
RL is highly sensitive to the dynamics of the training process, dialogue agents trained with stable experience can
guide themselves more effectively and stably than dialogue agents trained with instability.

Introduction
Learning dialogue policies are typically formulated as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem (Sutton and Barto 1998;
Young et al. 2013). However, dialogue policy learning via
RL from scratch in real-world dialogue scenarios is expensive and time-consuming, because it requires real users to interact with and adjusts its policies online (Mnih et al. 2015;
Silver et al. 2016; Dhingra et al. 2017; Su et al. 2016b; Li
et al. 2017). A plausible strategy is to use user simulators
as an inexpensive alternative for real users, which randomly
sample a user goal from the user goal set for the dialogue
agent training (Schatzmann et al. 2007; Su et al. 2016a; Li
et al. 2017; Budzianowski et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2017; Liu
and Lane 2017; Peng et al. 2018a). In task-oriented dialogue

Most previous studies of dialogue policy have focused on
the efficiency issue, such as reward shaping (Kulkarni et al.
2016; Lu, Zhang, and Chen 2019; Zhao et al. 2020), companion learning (Chen et al. 2017a,b), incorporate planning
(Peng et al. 2018b; Su et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2019; Zhao
et al. 2020), etc. However, stability is a pre-requisite for the
method to work well in real-world scenarios. It is because,
no matter how effective an algorithm is, an unstable online
leaned policy may be ineffective when applied in the real
dialogue environment. This can lead to bad user experience
and thus fail to attract sufficient real users to continuously
improve the policy. As far as we know, little work has been
reported about the stability of dialogue policy. Therefore, it
is essential to address the stability issue.
In this paper, we propose a novel policy learning framework that combines curriculum learning and deep reinforce-

* Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14540

