The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Achieving Proportionality up to the Maximin Item with Indivisible Goods
Artem Baklanov, 1 Pranav Garimidi, 2 Vasilis Gkatzelis, 3 Daniel Schoepflin 3
1

HSE University, Russian Federation
2
Conestoga High School
3
Drexel University
apbaklanov@hse.ru, pg2682@columbia.edu, gkatz@drexel.edu, schoep@drexel.edu

of them should be receiving at least a 1/n fraction of it; in
fact, they could potentially all receive more than that if they
each value different resources. However, it is well-known
that achieving proportionality may be impossible when the
resources are indivisible, i.e., cannot be divided into smaller
parts and shared among the agents. This can be readily verified with the simple example involving only a single indivisible resource and at least two agents competing for it. In
this case, whoever is allocated that resource will receive all
of her value but all other agents will receive none of it, violating proportionality.
In light of this impossibility to achieve proportionality
in the presence of indivisible resources, the literature has
turned to relaxations of this property. A natural candidate
would be a multiplicative approximation of proportionality,
aiming to guarantee that every agent receives at least a λ/n
fraction of their total value, for some λ ∈ [0, 1]. However,
the single resource example provided above directly implies
that no λ > 0 is small enough to guarantee the existence
of such an approximation. As a result, research has instead
considered additive approximations, leading to two interesting notions: PROP1 and PROPx. These relaxations allow
the value of each agent i to be less than a 1/n fraction of
her total value but by no more than some additive difference di . For the case of PROP1, di corresponds to the maximum value of agent i over all the items that were allocated to
some other agent (Conitzer, Freeman, and Shah 2017). For
the case of PROPx, di corresponds to the minimum value of
agent i over all the items that were allocated to some other
agent (Aziz, Moulin, and Sandomirskiy 2020). On one hand,
PROP1 is a bit too forgiving, and is known to be easy to satisfy, while on the other PROPx is too demanding and is not
guaranteed to exist even for instances with just three agents.
In a parallel line of work, an alternative relaxation that has
received a lot of attention is the maximin share (MMS) (Budish 2010). According to this notion, every agent’s “fair
share” is defined as the value that the agent could secure if
she could choose any feasible partition of the resources into
n bundles, but was then allocated her least preferred bundle among them. It is not hard to verify that this benchmark
is weakly smaller than the one imposed by proportionality,
yet prior work has shown that this too may be impossible to
achieve, even for instances with just three agents.
In this paper, we propose PROPm, a new notion that pro-

Abstract
We study the problem of fairly allocating indivisible goods
and focus on the classic fairness notion of proportionality.
The indivisibility of the goods is long known to pose highly
non-trivial obstacles to achieving fairness, and a very vibrant
line of research has aimed to circumvent them using appropriate notions of approximate fairness. Recent work has
established that even approximate versions of proportionality (PROPx) may be impossible to achieve even for small
instances, while the best known achievable approximations
(PROP1) are much weaker. We introduce the notion of proportionality up to the maximin item (PROPm) and show how
to reach an allocation satisfying this notion for any instance
involving up to five agents with additive valuations. PROPm
provides a well-motivated middle-ground between PROP1
and PROPx, while also capturing some elements of the wellstudied maximin share (MMS) benchmark: another relaxation of proportionality that has attracted a lot of attention.

Introduction
We consider the well-studied problem of fairly distributing
a set of scarce resources among a group of n agents. This
problem is at the heart of the long literature on fair division,
initiated by Steinhaus (1948), which has recently received
renewed interest, partly due to the proliferation of automated
resource allocation processes. To reach a fair outcome, such
processes need to take into consideration the preferences of
the agents, i.e., how much each agent values each of the resources. The most common modelling assumption regarding
these preferences is that they are additive: each agent i has a
value vij ≥ 0 for eachP
resource j, and her value for a set S of
resources is vi (S) = j∈S vij . But, what would constitute
a “fair” outcome given such preferences?
One of the classic notions of fairness is proportionality.
An outcome satisfies proportionality if the value of every
agent for the resources that were allocated to them is at least
a 1/n fraction of her total value for all of the resources. For
the case of additive valuations, if M is the set of all the
resources,
P then every agent i should receive a value of at
least n1 j∈M vij . This captures fairness in a very intuitive
way: since there are n agents in total, if they were to somehow divide the total value equally among them, then each
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5143

