The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Constructing a Fair Classifier with the Generated Fair Data
Taeuk Jang1 , Feng Zheng2 , Xiaoqian Wang1∗
1

2

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA, 47907
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China, 518055
jang141@purdue.edu, zfeng02@gmail.com, joywang@purdue.edu

Abstract

In addition, a recent algorithm for advertisement recommendation shows different performance in different gender
groups, such that the model tends to promote more job advertisements related with Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Math (STEM) fields to men than women (Lambrecht
and Tucker 2019).
One major reason behind this inequality in model prediction is data bias. As the collected data are based on humanmade decisions, data itself can be biased due to underrepresentation, sample size disparity, or existence of sensitive relevant features in the data e.g., length of hair, location of residence. As a matter of fact, the predictive bias occurs because the model replicates or even amplifies the bias
in the data. The biased prediction towards the unprivileged
group of population greatly impairs the trustworthiness in
the model and also results in enormous economical and societal issues. As such, fairness in machine learning has becoming a rising concern.
In order to mitigate the prediction outcome discrimination and prediction quality disparity (Du et al. 2019), recent works have been proposed from different perspectives.
One strategy is to minimize the influence of the sensitive attribute - reformulating the data to be independent of the sensitive attribute (Wang and Huang 2019; Zemel et al. 2013;
Madras et al. 2018; Adel et al. 2019). In addition to addressing the influence of the sensitive attribute, there are various methods proposed to deal with the bias originated from
sample size disparity or under-representation (Kamiran and
Calders 2012; Jiang and Nachum 2019). Meanwhile, other
works (Frid-Adar et al. 2018) adopt generative adversarial
network (GAN) to balance the dataset by augmenting data
in the under-represented group.
In spite of the recent efforts, it is inevitable that the processed data still contains bias - such as remaining dependence on the sensitive attribute in the reformulated data, or
disparity in data quality. For methods that address the influence of sensitive attribute by cleaning the raw data or learning a fair representation, the models are designed to handle
the data bias while sacrificing minimum predictive performance - which will introduce a trade-off between fairness
and predictive performance (e.g., accuracy). In the fairness
and accuracy trade-off, the processed data may not be “fair”
enough when the remaining dependence on the sensitive attribute is needed to ensure accuracy (i.e., the reformulated

Fairness in machine learning is getting rising attention as it
is directly related to real-world applications and social problems. Recent methods have been explored to alleviate the
discrimination between certain demographic groups that are
characterized by sensitive attributes (such as race, age, or gender). Some studies have found that the data itself is biased, so
training directly on the data causes unfair decision making.
Models directly trained on raw data can replicate or even exacerbate bias in the prediction between demographic groups.
This leads to vastly different prediction performance in different demographic groups. In order to address this issue, we
propose a new approach to improve machine learning fairness by generating fair data. We introduce a generative model
to generate cross-domain samples w.r.t. multiple sensitive attributes. This ensures that we can generate infinite number of
samples that are balanced w.r.t. both target label and sensitive
attributes to enhance fair prediction. By training the classifier solely with the synthetic data and then transfer the model
to real data, we can overcome the under-representation problem which is non-trivial since collecting real data is extremely
time and resource consuming. We provide empirical evidence
to demonstrate the benefit of our model with respect to both
fairness and accuracy.

Introduction
Machine learning has achieved great success in many fields
due to its great flexibility and power to represent various
types of data. As the model learns from the data to improve
the model prediction, it may get influenced by the bias in the
data and cause fairness issues. The discrimination in prediction pervasively exists in all kinds of applications including criminal justice (Dressel and Farid 2018), banking (Lee
and Floridi 2020), and hiring (Raghavan et al. 2020), where
state-of-the-art models have been found to make biased predictions towards different demographic groups (i.e., behaving differently when predicting for samples from different
gender, race, or age group). For example, the risk assessment tool COMPAS has been found to give more false alert
(mistakenly predicting people as future crime) for AfricanAmericans than Caucasians with similar profile (Dressel and
Farid 2018) - higher false positive rate in unprivileged group.
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7908

