The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disposable Linear Bandits for Online Recommendations
Melda Korkut, Andrew Li
Tepper School of Business
Carnegie Mellon University
{melda,aali1}@cmu.edu

Abstract

The key problem we seek to address is for a particular
subset of recommender systems in which the number of recommendations of an item made to a person may not exceed
a certain limit, a property we will refer to as disposability.
One natural example of disposability in practice is personalized styling services (e.g. Stitch Fix, BeautyFIX, Trunk
Club) which by and large operate by sending personalized
“boxes” of items to users. Users can choose to purchase any
subset of the box, and these companies do not re-send an
item to the same user. Another application area is online dating where some online dating platforms do not want to show
the same person multiple times to a user.

We study the classic stochastic linear bandit problem under
the restriction that each arm may be selected for limited number of times. This simple constraint, which we call disposability, captures a common restriction that occurs in recommendation problems from a diverse array of applications ranging from personalized styling services to dating platforms.
We show that the regret for this problem is characterized
by a previously-unstudied function of the reward distribution
among optimal arms. Algorithmically, our upper bound relies
on an optimism-based policy which, while computationally
intractable, lends itself to approximation via a fast alternating heuristic initialized with a classic similarity score. Experiments show that our policy dominates a set of benchmarks
which includes algorithms known to be optimal for the linear
bandit without disposability, along with natural modifications
to these algorithms for the disposable setting.

This Paper: Thus motivated, we study the linear bandit
problem under the additional rule that each arm may be selected at most a certain amount for each user. Our primary
observation is that this disposability constraint impacts both
(a) the performance of algorithms known to be optimal when
disposability is not imposed, and (b) the nature of algorithms
that achieve meaningful theoretical (regret) guarantees. Our
specific contributions are as follows:
√
1. We prove a minimax lower bound of Ω(𝜙𝑑 𝑇) on the
regret of the disposable linear bandit problem which suggests that disposability should allow for lower regret than
the standard linear bandit. In particular, while the dependence on the dimensionality 𝑑 and time horizon 𝑇 remains the same as in the standard linear bandit, a new
term 𝜙 ∈ [0, 1] loosely captures the ‘spread’ of the optimal set of arms.
2. We propose an optimism-based algorithm, which generalizes the optimal upper confidence bound algorithm (called
LinUCB) for the p
standard
√ linear bandit. We prove an upper bound of 𝑂 ( 𝛾𝑑 𝑇) on its regret, where 𝛾 is a parameter that again encodes a notion of the spread of the
optimal arm set. Noting that our algorithm involves a
computationally hard optimization formulation, we propose a fast alternating heuristic. While this heuristic is not
guaranteed to find the true optimum, we observe that it
performs well in practice when combined with a clever
initialization based on similarity scores.
3. We evaluate our algorithm’s performance on a recommendation task based on synthetically generated data. Compared to a number of benchmarks, including LinUCB and

Introduction
Consider the stochastic linear bandit problem: given a set of
“arms” 𝑎 1 , . . . , 𝑎 𝐾 ∈ R𝑑 , the task is to select a single arm
in each of a sequence of time periods so as to maximize the
total reward gained. The rewards are random, but there exists
some (unknown) 𝜃 ∗ ∈ R𝑑 such that the mean reward when
an arm 𝑎 𝑖 is chosen is equal to h𝑎 𝑖 , 𝜃 ∗ i. Algorithms known to
be theoretically optimal (in a sense we will review later on)
for this problem successfully balance the trade-off between
arms that are known to yield high reward, with arms that
may reveal more information about the unknown 𝜃 ∗ .
These algorithms are now a core component of most modern recommender systems, as the linear bandit model provides an extremely close fit to a common problem in recommendations: the cold-start problem. Succinctly, this is the
problem of making recommendations to newer users whose
amount of activity is insufficient to accurately estimate their
preferences. To map the cold-start problem to the linear
bandit model: the 𝑎 𝑖 ’s encode the “features” for each item,
which have been previously estimated using past data, and
𝜃 ∗ encodes the unknown features of the new user. The linear
form of the mean reward matches the underlying preference
model of a variety of recommendation algorithms including
those based on matrix factorization.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4172

