The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PDO-eS2 CNNs: Partial Differential Operator Based Equivariant Spherical CNNs
Zhengyang Shen1 , Tiancheng Shen2,3 , Zhouchen Lin 4,5 * , Jinwen Ma 1*
1

School of Mathematical Sciences and LMAM, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of EECS, Peking University
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
{shenzhy, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, tcshen@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jwma@math.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

and (Esteves et al. 2018) propose spherical CNNs that are
rotation equivariant. However, these methods represent the
sphere using the spherical coordinates, which over-sample
near the poles and cause significant distortion.
To avoid the impact of distortion, many recent works process spherical data using much more uniform representations. Among these methods, (Cohen et al. 2019) and (Zhang
et al. 2019) approximate the sphere using the icosahedron
and propose Icosahedral CNN and orientation-aware CNN,
respectively. Specifically, Icosahedral CNN (Cohen et al.
2019) is rotation equivariant while orientation-aware CNN
(Zhang et al. 2019) is beneficial for some orientation-aware
tasks, such as semantic segmentation with preferred orientation. However, these methods need project spherical data to
the icosahedron, resulting in inaccurate representations.
Actually, there exist some discretizations of the sphere
that are both uniform and accurate, like the icosahedral
spherical mesh (Baumgardner and Frederickson 1985) and
the HealPIX (Gorski et al. 2005). However, these representations are non-Euclidean structured grids (Bronstein et al.
2017), which have no uniform locality, thus conventional
convolutions defined in the Euclidean case (e.g., square lattices) cannot work on them. Accordingly, (Jiang et al. 2019)
propose MeshConvs, which use orientable parameterized
partial differential operators (PDOs) to process spherical
signals represented by non-Euclidean structured grids. However, MeshConvs are not rotation equivariant.
In order to address the above problems, we combine the
advantages of (Cohen et al. 2019) and (Jiang et al. 2019) together, and propose PDO-eS2 CNN, which is an orientable
rotation equivariant spherical CNN based on PDOs. The
distinction from (Cohen et al. 2019) is that our model is
orientation-aware and can work on much more accurate nonEuclidean structured representations instead of icosahedron,
and the difference from (Jiang et al. 2019) is that ours is rotation equivariant.
Our contributions are as follows:

Spherical signals exist in many applications, e.g., planetary
data, LiDAR scans and digitalization of 3D objects, calling
for models that can process spherical data effectively. It does
not perform well when simply projecting spherical data into
the 2D plane and then using planar convolution neural networks (CNNs), because of the distortion from projection and
ineffective translation equivariance.
Actually, good principles of designing spherical CNNs are
avoiding distortions and converting the shift equivariance
property in planar CNNs to rotation equivariance in the spherical domain. In this work, we use partial differential operators (PDOs) to design a spherical equivariant CNN, PDOeS2 CNN, which is exactly rotation equivariant in the continuous domain. We then discretize PDO-eS2 CNNs, and analyze the equivariance error resulted from discretization. This
is the first time that the equivariance error is theoretically
analyzed in the spherical domain. In experiments, PDOeS2 CNNs show greater parameter efficiency and outperform
other spherical CNNs significantly on several tasks.

Introduction
Nowadays, many machine learning problems in computer
vision require to process spherical data found in various
applications; for instance, omnidirectional RGB-D images
such as Matterport (Chang et al. 2017), 3D LiDAR scans
from self-driving cars (Dewan et al. 2016) and molecular modelling (Boomsma and Frellsen 2017). Unfortunately,
naively mapping spherical signals to R2 and then using planar convolution neural networks (CNNs) is destined to fail,
because this projection will result in space-varying distortions, and make shift equivariance ineffective.
Actually, the success of planar CNNs is mainly attributed
to their shift equivariance (Cohen and Welling 2016): shifting an image and then feeding it through multiple layers is
the same as feeding the original image and then shifting
the resulted feature maps. Since there do not exist translation symmetries in the spherical domain, a good principle of
modifying planar CNNs to spherical CNNs is to convert the
shift equivariance property to 3D rotation equivariance in
the spherical domain. Motivated by this, (Cohen et al. 2018)

• We use PDOs to design an orientable spherical CNN that
is exactly rotation equivariant in the continuous domain.
• The equivariance of the PDO-eS2 CNN becomes approximate after the discretization, and it is the first time that the
theoretical equivariance error analysis is provided when
the equivariance is approximate in the spherical domain.

* Corresponding authors
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9585

