The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Persuading Voters in District-based Elections
Matteo Castiglioni, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, I-20133, Milan, Italy
matteo.castiglioni@polimi.it, nicola.gatti@polimi.it

As recently showed by Allcott and Gentzkow (2017) and
Guess, Nyhan, and Reifler (2018) for the 2016 US presidential election, the spread of fake news has become a major
public concern for democracy. The problem of assessing the
extent to which it is possible to manipulate an election has
received considerable attention under the general framework
of election control and has been investigated according to
several perspectives, such as control by bribery (Faliszewski
et al. 2009; Erdélyi, Reger, and Yang 2020) or by adding and
deleting candidates and voters (Loreggia et al. 2015; Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra 2011; Liu et al.
2009; Chen et al. 2017). More recently, Sina et al. (2015),
Faliszewski et al. (2018), Wilder and Vorobeychik (2018),
Wilder and Vorobeychik (2019), and Castiglioni, Ferraioli,
and Gatti (2020) studied social influence as a means of election control. In this paper, we pose the following question:
can an informed agent use his information advantage to influence an election’s outcome by the partial disclosure of
information to rational voters?

Abstract
We focus on the scenario in which an agent can exploit his
information advantage to manipulate the outcome of an election. In particular, we study district-based elections with two
candidates, in which the winner of the election is the candidate that wins in the majority of the districts. District-based
elections are adopted worldwide (e.g., UK and USA) and
are a natural extension of widely studied voting mechanisms
(e.g., k-voting and plurality voting). We resort to the Bayesian
persuasion framework, where the manipulator (sender) strategically discloses information to the voters (receivers) that update their beliefs rationally. We study both private signaling,
in which the sender can use a private communication channel per receiver, and public signaling, in which the sender
can use a single communication channel for all the receivers.
Furthermore, for the first time, we introduce semi-public signaling in which the sender can use a single communication
channel per district. We show that there is a sharp distinction between private and (semi-)public signaling. In particular, optimal private signaling schemes can provide an arbitrarily better probability of victory than (semi-)public ones
and can be computed efficiently, while optimal (semi-)public
signaling schemes cannot be approximated to within any factor in polynomial time unless P = NP. However, we show
that reasonable relaxations allow the design of multi-criteria
PTASs for optimal (semi-)public signaling schemes. In doing
so, we introduce a novel property, namely comparative stability, and we design a bi-criteria PTAS for public signaling
in general Bayesian persuasion problems beyond elections
when the sender’s utility function is state-dependent.

According to the classical Bayesian persuasion framework by Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011), the above problem can be formulated as a game with asymmetric information, where a sender can influence the behavior of the receiver(s) through the strategic provision of payoff-relevant
information. In particular, the sender can strategically reveal information by means of a signaling scheme that determines “who knows what” about the parameters that govern
the payoff functions. Alonso and Câmara (2016), Chan et al.
(2019), and Bardhi and Guo (2018) provide the seminal attempts to apply the Bayesian persuasion framework to voting. More recently, Castiglioni, Celli, and Gatti (2020a) and
Castiglioni, Celli, and Gatti (2020b) investigated its computational issues. All the aforementioned works focus on kvoting or plurality-voting elections. Differently, in this paper, we study for the first time how Bayesian persuasion
can be adopted in more challenging settings such as districtbased elections with two candidates, in which the winner
of the election is the candidate winning in the majority of
the districts. We focus on the setting with no inter-agent externalities where each receiver’s utility depends only on his
action and the realized state of nature, but not on the other receivers’ actions. This assumption is well-motivated, as voting for the most preferred candidate is a weakly dominant
strategy in two-candidate elections.

Introduction
The fairness and efficiency of democratic elections largely
depend on the news provided by the media. Indeed, often,
citizens are called to express opinions on complex choices
they do not know deeply enough to express informed judgments. Therefore, multiple and reliable sources of information providing fair and in-depth coverage of the public debate are crucial to guarantee the democratic process. However, most of the information shaping the voters’ opinions
is not disclosed to inform in a disinterested way but instead
aims to direct voters’ political orientation, thus persuading
them to prefer one specific candidate over another.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
5244

