The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Sharp Leap from Quantified Boolean Formula to
Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability Solving
Pei-Wei Chen,1 Yu-Ching Huang,1 Jie-Hong R. Jiang1,2
1

2

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
perrypeiweichen@gmail.com, nk930439gj94@gmail.com, jhjiang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract

Theorem (Toda 1991), which states that any problem in the
Polynomial Hierarchy (PH) can be reduced in polynomial
time to a counting problem for a single query to a #P-oracle,
and thus PH ⊆ P#P .
To date, there are only a few SSAT solvers publicly available. Among the state-of-the-art solvers, DC-SSAT (Majercik and Boots 2005), a Davis-Putnam-Logemann-Loveland
(DPLL)-based SSAT solver, divides the problem into subproblems and conquers them by exploiting structural characteristics of completely observable probabilistic planning
(COPP) problems. erSSAT (Lee, Wang, and Jiang 2018)
takes advantage of the idea of clause selection (Janota and
Marques-Silva 2015), a QBF solving technique, to effectively prune the search space of exist-random quantified
SSAT formulas, which is known as E-MAJSAT (Littman,
Goldsmith, and Mundhenk 1998). reSSAT (Lee, Wang, and
Jiang 2017) utilizes modern SAT solvers and model counters, and employs the generalization of assignments to efficiently explore the search space of random-exist quantified
SSAT formulas. Among the above, DC-SSAT is the only
solver that can cope with general SSAT formulas, without
restricting the quantification structure. In this work, we are
concerned with solving general SSAT formulas.
Unlike DC-SSAT, a DPLL-based search algorithm implemented from scratch, our algorithm takes an off-theshelf SAT solver and model counter as blackbox subroutines for computation. Inspired by erSSAT and reSSAT,
which incorporate clause selection and model counting into
SSAT solving for two quantification levels, we devise a general algorithm and overcome the level limitation. Devising
the pruning technique and counting method for randomized
quantification levels is the key to general SSAT solving.
Different from erSSAT, which only applies pruning techniques at existential levels, our approach additionally applies pruning at randomized levels. The pruning technique
and counting method at randomized levels are also different
from those of reSSAT. Particularly reSSAT uses minterm
generalization and the return value of a subproblem is restricted to either 0 or 1. In contrast, we calculate the probability based on clause selection and deal with return values
of arbitrary probability constant between 0 and 1. These differences overcome the limitations of erSSAT and reSSAT
on two-level SSAT formulas and allow us to solve general multi-level SSAT formulas. Combined with several en-

Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability (SSAT) is a powerful representation for the concise encoding of quantified decision
problems with uncertainty. While it shares commonalities
with quantified Boolean formula (QBF) satisfiability and
has the same PSPACE-complete complexity, SSAT solving
tends to be more challenging as it involves expensive model
counting, a.k.a. Sharp-SAT. To date, SSAT solvers, especially those imposing no restrictions on quantification levels, remain much lacking. In this paper, we present a new
SSAT solver based on the framework of clause selection and
cube distribution previously proposed for QBF solving. With
model counting integrated and learning techniques strengthened, our solver is general and effective. Experimental results
demonstrate the overall superiority of the proposed algorithm
in both solving performance and memory usage compared to
the state-of-the-art solvers on a number of benchmark formulas.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Boolean Satisfiability (SSAT) is a formulation of
games against nature (Papadimitriou 1985; Majercik 2009).
While it is a generalization of the satisfiability of Quantified Boolean Formula (QBF) with the addition of randomized quantification, its computational complexity remains the same as QBF in the PSPACE-complete class.
On the one hand, the generality of SSAT makes it able to
concisely encode many interesting decision problems with
uncertainty, such as probabilistic planning (Littman, Majercik, and Pitassi 2001), trust management (Freudenthal
and Karamcheti 2003), belief network inference (Littman,
Majercik, and Pitassi 2001), and probabilistic equivalence
checking (Lee and Jiang 2018). On the other hand, the randomized quantification of SSAT imposes computation sophistication due to its counting nature in calculating the satisfying probability of a formula. It involves not just Boolean
Satisfiability (SAT), asking are there solutions, but the Sharp
Satisfiability (Sharp-SAT), a.k.a. Model Counting, asking
how many solutions. As Sharp-SAT is #P-complete, its
computation is considered more challenging than the SAT
problem of NP-completeness. This challenge is due to the
powerfulness of a counting oracle as manifested by Toda’s
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3697

