The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Error-Correcting Output Codes with Ensemble Diversity for Robust Learning in
Neural Networks
Yang Song∗ , Qiyu Kang* , and Wee Peng Tay
Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Ave, Singapore 639798
songy@ntu.edu.sg, kang0080@e.ntu.edu.sg, wptay@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Class

Net 0

Net 1

Net 2

Net 3

Though deep learning has been applied successfully in many
scenarios, malicious inputs with human-imperceptible perturbations can make it vulnerable in real applications. This
paper proposes an error-correcting neural network (ECNN)
that combines a set of binary classifiers to combat adversarial examples in the multi-class classification problem. To
build an ECNN, we propose to design a code matrix so that
the minimum Hamming distance between any two rows (i.e.,
two codewords) and the minimum shared information distance between any two columns (i.e., two partitions of class
labels) are simultaneously maximized. Maximizing row distances can increase the system fault tolerance while maximizing column distances helps increase the diversity between binary classifiers. We propose an end-to-end training
method for our ECNN, which allows further improvement
of the diversity between binary classifiers. The end-to-end
training renders our proposed ECNN different from the traditional error-correcting output code (ECOC) based methods
that train binary classifiers independently. ECNN is complementary to other existing defense approaches such as adversarial training and can be applied in conjunction with them.
We empirically demonstrate that our proposed ECNN is effective against the state-of-the-art white-box and black-box
attacks on several datasets while maintaining good classification accuracy on normal examples.

0
1
2

1
1
0

0
1
0

1
0
0

0
1
1

Table 1: Example of a 3 × 4 code matrix.

2. modifying the DNN or training procedure, e.g., defensive
distillation (Papernot et al. 2016b), and
3. post-training defenses, which attempt to remove the
adversarial noise from the input examples (Hendrycks
and Gimpel 2017; Meng and Chen 2017; Samangouei,
Kabkab, and Chellappa 2018) in the testing phase.
In this paper, we propose an approach for the second category. Most defense approaches of this type focus on robustifying a single network, while a few works have adopted
ensemble methods (Abbasi and Gagné 2017; Xu, Evans, and
Qi 2018; Pang et al. 2019; Sen, Ravindran, and Raghunathan
2020). These ensemble methods build a new classifier consisting of several base classifiers that are assigned with the
same classification task. Promoting the diversity among the
base classifiers during training is essential to prevent adversarial examples from transferring between them, since the
adversarial examples crafted for one classifier may also fool
the others.
The use of error correcting output codes (ECOC) (Dietterich and Bakiri 1994; García-Pedrajas and Fyfe 2008) differs from the above mentioned ensemble methods by assigning each class an unique codeword. This forms a pre-defined
code matrix. For an illustration, see Table 1, which shows an
example of a code matrix for three classes with each class
being represented by four bits. Each column splits the original classes into two meta-classes, meta-class ‘0’ and metaclass ‘1’. A binary classifier is then learned independently
for each column of the code matrix. To classify a new sample, all binary classifiers are evaluated to obtain a binary
string. Finally, the method assigns the class whose codeword
is closest to the obtained binary string to the sample. In the
literature, ECOC is mostly used with decision trees or shallow neural networks.
In this paper, we utilize the concept of ECOC in a deep
neural network, which we call error-correcting neural net-

Introduction
Deep learning has been widely and successfully applied
in many tasks such as image classification (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; LeCun et al. 1998), speech
recognition (Hinton et al. 2012), and natural language
processing (Andor et al. 2016). However, recent works
(Szegedy et al. 2013) showed that the original images can be
modified by an adversary with human-imperceptible perturbations so that the deep neural networks (DNNs) are fooled
into mis-classifying them. To mitigate the effect of adversarial attacks, many defense approaches have been proposed.
Generally speaking, they fall into three categories:
1. adversarial training, which augments the training data
with adversarial examples (Szegedy et al. 2013; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015),
* Two authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9722

