The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Scarce Societal Resource Allocation and the Price of (Local) Justice
Quan Nguyen,1 Sanmay Das, 2 Roman Garnett 1
1

Washington University in St. Louis
2
George Mason University
quan@wustl.edu, sanmay@gmu.edu, garnett@wustl.edu

Abstract

any notion of fairness in such domains is implicitly a notion of what the political philosopher Jon Elster terms local
justice: the principles used by institutions to allocate scarce
goods or necessary burdens (Elster 1992). Examples include
the welfare-maximizing allocation or the allocation that prioritizes the most needy or vulnerable individuals. Operationalizing local justice involves explicitly spelling out rules for
prioritization in the allocation of scarce resources, and those
rules of course determine outcomes for different subgroups
as well as individuals. Instead of fairness as an auditing mechanism or a constraint, justice becomes the primary concern
of the allocation mechanism.
Second, specific structures of these allocation problems
allow mechanisms simpler than in most problems of fair division or matching under preferences. All individuals need
the resources, but there is limited supply, and the institution
performing the allocation can be thought of as a benevolent
planner who does not need to incentivize participation and
can dictate allocations. Further, the types of resources available are typically limited in number and often well-ordered in
terms of their added value independent of the individual (e.g.,
a public school with different class sizes: it is reasonable to
assume that every student would do best in the smallest class,
next best in the medium sized one, and worst in the largest).
These features allow one to usefully model many scenarios that arise in the allocation of scarce societal resources
as assignment problems, where a central authority decides
which individuals receive which resources under capacity or
budget constraints. Different algorithmic fairness criteria in
such problems operationalize different notions of local justice. The efficient, or lowest-cost allocation operationalizes
social welfare maximization, whereas the leximin mechanism
operationalizes the “neediest first” criterion. Although the
general “price of fairness” (PoF) of leximin has been studied
in prior work, here we exploit the structure inherent to many
important instantiations of societal scarce resource allocation to provide substantially tighter bounds. Instead of O(n)
where n is the number of agents, we show that the PoF can
be upper bounded by functions of both n and the number of
resource types, which are ultimately sub-linear in n.
We also propose a novel formalization of a fairness criterion, LoINC (for Leximin over Individually Normalized
Costs), motivated by the local justice principle of prioritizing
those who would benefit the most from receiving the scarce

We consider the allocation of scarce societal resources, where
a central authority decides which individuals receive which
resources under capacity or budget constraints. Several algorithmic fairness criteria have been proposed to guide these
procedures, each quantifying a notion of local justice to ensure the allocation is aligned with the principles of the local
institution making the allocation. For example, the efficient
allocation maximizes overall social welfare, whereas the leximin assignment seeks to help the “neediest first.” Although
the “price of fairness” (PoF) of leximin has been studied in
prior work, we expand on these results by exploiting the structure inherent in real-world scenarios to provide tighter bounds.
We further propose a novel criterion – which we term LoINC
(leximin over individually normalized costs) – that maximizes
a different but commonly used notion of local justice: prioritizing those benefiting the most from receiving the resources. We
derive analogous PoF bounds for LoINC, showing that the
price of LoINC is typically much lower than that of leximin.
We provide extensive experimental results using both synthetic
data and in a real-world setting considering the efficacy of different homelessness interventions. These results show that the
empirical PoF tends to be substantially lower than worst-case
bounds would imply and allow us to characterize situations
where the price of LoINC fairness can be high.

Introduction
Algorithmic fairness broadly refers to the impact of automated learning or decision-making methods on different
subpopulations (statistical fairness) and/or on individuals
of different types (individual fairness) (Dwork et al. 2012;
Pleiss et al. 2017; Kearns et al. 2018). If we can measure this
impact, we can audit existing systems for fairness violations
and guarantee fairness by training learning algorithms subject to a fairness constraint. There is also a well-established
literature on algorithmic fair division and, more generally,
mechanisms for fair allocation of both divisible and indivisible goods, potentially to agents with different preferences
(Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2004; Kurokawa, Procaccia, and
Shah 2015). The allocation of scarce societal resources is
related to these efforts but also has several unique features,
making it important and interesting to study separately. First,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5628

