The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning a Few-shot Embedding Model with Contrastive Learning
Chen Liu* 1 , Yanwei Fu* 1 , Chengming Xu 1 , Siqian Yang2 ,
Jilin Li 2 , Chengjie Wang 2 , Li Zhang† 1
1

School of Data Science, and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Fudan University
2
YouTu Lab Tencent
{chenliu18, yanweifu, cmxu18, lizhangfd}@fudan.edu.cn,
{seasonyang, jerolinli, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com
Abstract

pairs. The embedding is normally learned with enough training instances on source classes and updated by a few training
instances on target classes. To further address data scarcity
on target classes, meta-learning is utilized to better learn
the deep embedding, and thus improves its generalization
ability. Particularly, the idea of episode (Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017) is utilized for FSL in meta-learning paradigm.
Every episode should imitate each one-shot learning task:
few train and test instances are sampled from several classes
to train/test the embedding model; the sampled training set is
fed to the learner to produce a classifier, and then the loss of
classifiers is computed on the sampled test set. The promising methodology of solving FSL is learning to match queries
with few-shot support examples via a deep convolution network followed by a linear classifier. Typically, such methods
train networks with meta-learners either to learn a deep embedding space that coincides with a fixed metric, such as
MatchingNet (Vinyals et al. 2016) and ProtoNet (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017) or to implicitly learn a metric and
classify the new class data with the binary classifiers, such as
RelationNet (Sung et al. 2018).
Despite previous efforts are made, the key challenge of a
few-shot learning system still lies in eliminating the inductive
bias from source classes to tailor its preference for hypotheses according to the few training instances from new target
classes. Such a few-shot AI system has to deal with the poor
generalisation of learned few-shot embedding model over
target classes. On the other hand, the recent study of (Tian
et al. 2020) suggests that the core of improving FSL also lies
in improving the embedding learned. Particularly, it is very
important for the embedding to map instances of different
categories to different clusters. Furthermore, the embedding
should not, in principle, learn the inductive bias of source
classes by memorizing training data, as this might undermine
the generalization performance of this embedding.
To this end, several new efforts are made in this paper in
order to tackle the FSL on these several challenges. Specifically, we repurpose the contrastive learning to boost the
performance of few-shot learning. As a prevailing and rising
research topic, contrastive learning has been widely studied
and utilized in several AI related research communities. For
example, very impressive performance could be achieved on
several downstream tasks (Chen et al. 2020b,a), if the model
of good embedding is pre-trained on the unlabelled data.

Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to recognize target classes by
adapting the prior knowledge learned from source classes.
Such knowledge usually resides in a deep embedding model
for a general matching purpose of the support and query image pairs. The objective of this paper is to repurpose the contrastive learning for such matching to learn a few-shot embedding model. We make the following contributions: (i) We
investigate the contrastive learning with Noise Contrastive
Estimation (NCE) in a supervised manner for training a fewshot embedding model; (ii) We propose a novel contrastive
training scheme dubbed infoPatch, exploiting the patch-wise
relationship to substantially improve the popular infoNCE;
(iii) We show that the embedding learned by the proposed
infoPatch is more effective; (iv) Our model is thoroughly evaluated on few-shot recognition task; and demonstrates state-ofthe-art results on miniImageNet and appealing performance
on tieredImageNet, Fewshot-CIFAR100 (FC-100).

Introduction
Humans are born with the ability of few-shot recognition, i.e.,
learning from one or a few examples. For example, a child
finds no problem to recognize the “rhinoceros” by only taking
a glance at it from the TV. However, currently most successful
deep learning based vision recognition systems (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016, 2017) still highly
rely on an avalanche of labeled training data and many iterations to train their large portion of parameters. Most importantly, these systems have difficulty adapting the learned
knowledge to target categories. This severely limits their scalability to open-ended learning of the long tail categories in
the real-world.
Inspired by the few-shot learning ability of humans, there
has been a recent resurgence of interest in one/few-shot learning (Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017; Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018; Rusu et al. 2018; Tseng
et al. 2020). It aims to recognize target classes by adapting the prior ‘knowledge’ learned from source classes. Such
knowledge usually resides in a deep embedding model for
a general-purpose matching of the support and query image
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8635

