The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HMS: A Hierarchical Solver with Dependency-Enhanced
Understanding for Math Word Problem
Xin Lin, 1 Zhenya Huang, 1∗ Hongke Zhao, 2 Enhong Chen, 1 Qi Liu, 1 Hao Wang, 1 Shijin Wang 3
1

Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application,
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
College of Management and Economics, Tianjin University
3
iFLYTEK Research & State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence, iFLYTEK Co., Ltd.
{linx, wanghao3}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {huangzhy, cheneh, qiliuql}@ustc.edu.cn, hongke@tju.edu.cn, sjwang3@iflytek.com

Abstract

Problem

A rectangle is 4 cm wide, and its length
is 3 cm longer than its width. What is
the perimeter of the rectangle?
Answer 22
Expression 2× (4+3+4)

Automatically solving math word problems is a crucial task
for exploring the intelligence levels of machines in the general AI domain. It is highly challenging since it requires
not only natural language understanding but also mathematical expression inference. Existing solutions usually explore
sequence-to-sequence models to generate expressions, where
the problems are simply encoded sequentially. However, such
models are generally far from enough for understanding problems as similar to humans and lead to incorrect answers. To
this end, in this paper, we propose a novel Hierarchical Math
Solver (HMS) to make deep understanding and exploitation of problems. In problem understanding, imitating human reading habits, we propose a hierarchical word-clauseproblem encoder. Specifically, we first split each problem into
several clauses and learn problem semantics from the local
clause level to the global problem level. Then, in clause understanding, we propose a dependency-based module to enhance clause semantics with the dependency structure of the
problem. Next, in expression inference, we propose a novel
tree-based decoder to generate the mathematical expression
for the answer. In the decoder, we apply a hierarchical attention mechanism to enhance the problem semantics with context from different levels, and a pointer-generator network to
guide the model to copy existing information and infer extra knowledge. Extensive experimental results on two widely
used datasets demonstrate that HMS achieves not only better
answers but also more reasonable inference.

Figure 1: An example of MWP.
to evaluate problem representations in online education systems, where great progress has been achieved (Huang et al.
2017b; Yin et al. 2018, 2019).
A typical example of math word problems is illustrated
in Figure 1. Generally, the problem is described in natural
language narratives (A rectangle is ...) and then asks a corresponding question (What is the ...?) for the answer (i.e., 22).
To solve this problem, we should first read and translate it
into a mathematical expression composed of numbers (e.g.,
4, 3) and operators (e.g., “+” and “×”). During this process,
the machine mainly requires two key abilities: (1) language
comprehension to understand the meaning of problems describing quantity relations (e.g., length, width and perimeter); (2) mathematical inference to generate the right expression in a fine-grained logic.
There is much effort in solving math word problems
from early rule-based approaches (Fletcher 1985), statistical machine learning (Hosseini et al. 2014), semantic parsing (Koncel-Kedziorski et al. 2015) to recent sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) methods (Wang et al. 2019; Xie and Sun
2019). In the literature, seq2seq methods have shown strong
competitiveness in that they do not need any human intervention. Specifically, existing seq2seq methods mainly focus on the inference ability to generate expressions, where
the problem is often simply encoded as a sequence of words
by one single vector. In such a way, models are far from
enough to understand problems as similar to humans because they only notice the straightforward effect of the word
order (e.g., “longer” being after “cm” and before “than”),
while ignoring the complicated structure among words in the

Introduction
Building machines to automatically solve math word problems (MWP) is a crucial issue in artificial intelligence (AI)
and natural language processing (NLP), which has attracted
much attention for a long history. It is of great significance
to serve as a good testbed to evaluate the intellectual abilities of machines, such as language understanding and logical reasoning. Therefore, successfully solving MWP can be
considered as a milestone towards general AI in the broad
domains (Zhang et al. 2019). Besides, it can also be used
∗

Corresponding Author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4232

