The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Goal Blending for Responsive Shared Autonomy in a Navigating Vehicle
Yu-Sian Jiang,1 Garrett Warnell, 2 Peter Stone 1,3
1

The University of Texas at Austin
2
Army Research Laboratory
3
Sony AI
sharonjiang@utexas.edu, garrett.a.warnell.civ@mail.mil, pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract

the path actually driven by the vehicle; the lower this distance, the greater the responsiveness. Unfortunately, neither
of the two dominant paradigms for shared autonomy in the
literature—task-level shared control and servo-level shared
control (see, e.g., (Wang and Liu 2014))—seem to prioritize
responsiveness. Task-level shared control techniques perform task inference, but otherwise give full control to either
the human or the robot. Such systems lack responsiveness
in that, if the task dictates that the robot has full control, the
system ignores input from the human that might communicate desired changes in behavior. Servo-level shared control
techniques, on the other hand, provide assistance by combining the user’s low-level motion commands with those output
by the local motion planner of the robot. However, current
implementations of servo-level systems employ restrictive
safety policies that conservatively limit the responsiveness
of the system in a cluttered environment.

Human-robot shared autonomy techniques for vehicle navigation hold promise for reducing a human driver’s workload, ensuring safety, and improving navigation efficiency.
However, because typical techniques achieve these improvements by effectively removing human control at critical moments, these approaches often exhibit poor responsiveness to
human commands—especially in cluttered environments. In
this paper, we propose a novel goal-blending shared autonomy (GBSA) system, which aims to improve responsiveness
in shared autonomy systems by blending human and robot input during the selection of local navigation goals as opposed
to low-level motor (servo-level) commands. We validate the
proposed approach by performing a human study involving
an intelligent wheelchair and compare GBSA to a representative servo-level shared control system that uses a policyblending approach. The results of both quantitative performance analysis and a subjective survey show that GBSA exhibits significantly better system responsiveness and induces
higher user satisfaction than the existing approach.

In this work, we explore an alternative approach for
shared autonomy that we refer to as shared goal setting, in
which the human and robot input are blended at the level of
determining a local navigation goal for the vehicle. Shared
goal setting stands in stark contrast to the widely-studied
shared control approach described above: while both represent approaches to shared autonomy, the former blends
inputs to compute goals while the latter blends inputs to
compute controls. In fact, in the existing literature, the terms
“shared control” and “shared autonomy” are often used interchangabily, reflecting that the majority of existing shared
autonomy approaches opt to blend human and robot inputs
at the lowest level of control.

Introduction
Human-robot shared autonomy systems for a navigating vehicle promise to provide all the safety and efficiency of
autonomous systems while retaining the customization and
spontaneity of fine-grained individual control. Examples of
these shared control systems include vehicle “guardian” systems that intervene during safety-critical situations (Maurer et al. 2018), intelligent wheelchairs which seek to assist users during operation (Simpson et al. 1998), and
shared control teleoperation systems for search-and-rescue,
exploration, and hazardous waste clean-up (Crandall and
Goodrich 2002).
While existing techniques for shared autonomy have been
shown to be successful in certain scenarios, in complex (e.g.,
cluttered) environments, many approaches lack the kind of
responsiveness that would truly deliver on the promise of
these systems. We consider responsiveness to be the quality of a shared autonomy system that is present when usersupplied commands induce desired changes in navigation
behavior. In this paper, we operationalize responsiveness as
the Hausdorff distance between a user’s intended path and

We hypothesize that safe and responsive shared autonomy navigation systems can be achieved through a novel
shared goal setting method called goal blending shared autonomy (GBSA). GBSA interprets a user’s command as information that informs the selection of a new nearby goal
for a local motion planner, resulting in re-planning, i.e., a response from the system. To test this hypothesis, we applied
our method to a simulated robot wheelchair in human experiments to analyze the system performance and gathered user
survey results. Our studies suggest that GBSA is more responsive than both servo-level and task-level shared control
alternatives, while retaining most of their advantages in user
workload, safety, and navigation efficiency.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5939

