The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Value-Decomposition Multi-Agent Actor-Critics
Jianyu Su, Stephen Adams, Peter Beling
University of Virginia
151 Engineer’s Way
Charlottesville, Virginia, 22904
{js9wv, sca2c, pb3a}@virginia.edu

Abstract

Breakthroughs in Q-learning have been made using joint
action-value factorization techniques. Value-decomposition
networks (VDN) represent joint action-value as a summation of local action-value conditioned on individual agents’
local observation history (Sunehag et al. 2017). In (Rashid
et al. 2018), a more general case of VDN is proposed using a mixing network that approximates a broader class of
monotonic functions to represent joint action-values called
QMIX. In (Son et al. 2019), a more complex factorization
framework three modules, called QTRAN, is introduced and
shown to have good performance on a range of cooperative
tasks. While QMIX reports the best performance on the StarCraft micromanagement testbed (Samvelyan et al. 2019), we
find that QMIX, in some StarCraft II compositions, has issues learning good policies that can consistently defeat enemies when using the A2C training paradigm (Mnih et al.
2016), which was originally introduced to enable algorithms
to be executed efficiently.
On the other hand, on-policy actor-critic methods, such as
counterfactual multi-agent (COMA) (Foerster et al. 2018),
can leverage the A2C framework to improve training efficiency at the cost of performance. (Samvelyan et al. 2019)
point out that there is a performance gap between the stateof-the-art actor-critic method, COMA, and QMIX on the
StarCraft II micromanagement testbed.
To bridge the gap between multi-agent Q-learning and
multi-agent actor-critic methods, as well as offer a reasonable trade-off between training efficiency and algorithm performance, we propose a novel actor-critic framework called
value-decomposition actor-critic (VDAC). Let V a , ∀a ∈
{1, . . . , n} denote the local state value that is conditioned
on agent a’s local observation, and let Vtot denote the global
state-value that is conditioned on the true state of the environment. VDAC takes an actor-critic approach but adds local critics, which share the same network with the actors and
estimate the local state values V a . The central critic learns
the global state value Vtot . The policy is trained by following a gradient dependent on the central critic. Further, we
examines two approaches for calculating Vtot .
VDAC is based on three main ideas. First, unlike QMIX,
VDAC is compatible with a A2C training framework that enables game experience to be sampled efficiently. This is due
to the fact that multiple games are rolled out independently
during training. Second, similar to QMIX, VDAC enforces

The exploitation of extra state information has been an active
research area in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL).
QMIX represents the joint action-value using a non-negative
function approximator and achieves the best performance
on the StarCraft II micromanagement testbed, a common
MARL benchmark. However, our experiments demonstrate
that, in some cases, QMIX performs sub-optimally with the
A2C framework, a training paradigm that promotes algorithm training efficiency. To obtain a reasonable trade-off
between training efficiency and algorithm performance, we
extend value-decomposition to actor-critic methods that are
compatible with A2C and propose a novel actor-critic framework, value-decomposition actor-critic (VDAC). We evaluate VDAC on the StarCraft II micromanagement task and
demonstrate that the proposed framework improves median
performance over other actor-critic methods. Furthermore,
we use a set of ablation experiments to identify the key factors
that contribute to the performance of VDAC.

Many complex sequential decision making problems that involve multiple agents can be modeled as multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) problems, e.g. the coordination
of semi-autonomous or fully autonomous vehicles (Hu et al.
2019) and the coordination of machines in a product line
(Choo, Adams, and Beling 2017). A fully centralized controller that applies single-agent reinforcement learning will
suffer from the exponential growth of the action space with
the number of agents in the system. Learning decentralized
policies that condition on the local observation history of
individual agents is a viable way to attenuate this problem.
Furthermore, partial observability and communication constraints, two common obstacles in multi-agent settings, also
necessitate the use of decentralized policies.
In a laboratory or simulated setting, decentralized policies
can be learned in a centralized fashion via enabling communication among agents or granting access to additional
global state information. This centralized training and decentralized execution (CTDE) paradigm has attracted the attention of researchers. However, it remains an open research
question how to best exploit centralized training. In particular, it is not obvious how to utilize joint action-value or
global state value to train decentralized policies.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11352

