The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Data-Free Knowledge Distillation with Soft Targeted Transfer Set Synthesis
Zi Wang
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Tennessee
zwang84@vols.utk.edu

Abstract

performance of the student model can be improved compared to training the model solely with the cross-entropy
loss. However, classic KD methods usually rely on the
dataset that contains labeled samples to transfer the knowledge from the teacher to the student, which is a strong constraint because the training set is not always available due to
the following reasons. (1) Most importantly, the dataset used
for training the teacher model is not often publicly shared
because of the concerns of conflict of interest, privacy issues, or business competition (Taigman et al. 2014; Wu et al.
2016). (2) SOTA models are usually trained with extremely
large datasets. For example, the popular object classification dataset ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009) contains more than
one million training samples that needs more than 100 GB
of storage space. Spreading such a large dataset frequently
across devices or on the Internet is a heavy burden and a
waste of resources.
Data-free KD, or zero-shot KD, was first introduced in
(Nayak et al. 2019) to deal with the problem that labeled
training samples are missing. Starting from some targets
(output probabilities) obtained with certain prior knowledge,
noise inputs are optimized to minimize the distances between the softmax outputs obtained by feeding these noise
inputs to the teacher network and the targets. Finally, the optimized samples are used for training the student network
via a standard KD procedure. The key idea for the implementation of data-free KD is to generate informative pseudo
samples that can capture the distribution of the original training samples. For example, (Nayak et al. 2019) models the
softmax space of the teacher network as a Dirichlet distribution and generates images by optimizing the noise input to
mimic the softmax outputs sampled from the distribution.
Generative adversarial networks (Goodfellow et al. 2014)
are used in (Chen et al. 2019) for derivating training samples. By considering the pre-trained teacher network as a
fixed discriminator, the generator aims to generate samples
that cause the maximum response on the discriminator. Although a few studies have been proposed (Nayak et al. 2019;
Chen et al. 2019; Micaelli and Storkey 2019), KD in the absence of prior training data is still not well studied and there
are clear opportunities to improve on the performance of existing approaches.
In this paper, we present a novel data-free KD approach as
an enrichment of this new line of research. Specifically, we

Knowledge distillation (KD) has proved to be an effective approach for deep neural network compression, which learns
a compact network (student) by transferring the knowledge
from a pre-trained, over-parameterized network (teacher). In
traditional KD, the transferred knowledge is usually obtained
by feeding training samples to the teacher network to obtain
the class probabilities. However, the original training dataset
is not always available due to storage costs or privacy issues. In this study, we propose a novel data-free KD approach
by modeling the intermediate feature space of the teacher
with a multivariate normal distribution and leveraging the
soft targeted labels generated by the distribution to synthesize
pseudo samples as the transfer set. Several student networks
trained with these synthesized transfer sets present competitive performance compared to the networks trained with the
original training set and other data-free KD approaches.

Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
widely applied to various applications such as object classification and detection (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; Ren et al. 2015; Huang et al. 2017), image synthesis
(Goodfellow et al. 2014; Gulrajani et al. 2017; Li, Wang, and
Qi 2018), and robotic control (Levine et al. 2018). However,
as state-of-the-art performance is usually acquired by leveraging deeper and wider architectures (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Szegedy et al. 2015; He et al. 2016; Huang
et al. 2017), over-parameterization becomes a critical issue
that prohibits DNN’s usage on resource-efficient platforms
such as mobile phones and drones (Zhang et al. 2018). Experts have been putting great effort into compressing large,
cumbersome DNNs with the approaches such as quantization (Gong et al. 2014; Han, Mao, and Dally 2015), channel pruning (Li et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019a,b; You et al.
2020), and knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton, Vinyals,
and Dean 2015; Liu, Chen, and Liu 2019; Heo et al. 2019;
Jin et al. 2020).
Among all these approaches, KD is a popular scheme
that trains a smaller model (student) to mimic the softmax
outputs of a pre-trained over-parameterized model (teacher)
(Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015). With this approach, the
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10245

