The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Natural Language Inference in Context
— Investigating Contextual Reasoning over Long Texts
Hanmeng Liu,1 Leyang Cui,1 Jian Liu,2 Yue Zhang3
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Fudan University, 3 Westlake University
liuhanmeng@zju.edu.cn, cuileyang@westlake.edu.cn, jianliu17@fudan.edu.cn, yue.zhang@wias.org.cn

Abstract
Natural language inference (NLI) is a fundamental NLP task,
investigating the entailment relationship between two texts.
Popular NLI datasets present the task at sentence-level. While
adequate for testing semantic representations, they fall short
for testing contextual reasoning over long texts, which is a
natural part of the human inference process. We introduce
ConTRoL, a new dataset for ConTextual Reasoning over
Long Texts. Consisting of 8,325 expert-designed “contexthypothesis” pairs with gold labels, ConTRoL is a passagelevel NLI dataset with a focus on complex contextual reasoning types such as logical reasoning. It is derived from competitive selection and recruitment test (verbal reasoning test)
for police recruitment, with expert level quality. Compared
with previous NLI benchmarks, the materials in ConTRoL
are much more challenging, involving a range of reasoning
types. Empirical results show that state-of-the-art language
models perform by far worse than educated humans. Our
dataset can also serve as a testing-set for downstream tasks
like checking the factual correctness of summaries.

Figure 1: An example of the ConTRoL dataset. ( 3 indicates
the correct answer.)
positional semantics. These benchmarks explore rich features of sentence meaning, testing various aspects of semantic representation. With the advance of contextualized
embeddings such as BERT (Devlin et al. 2019), pre-trained
language models achieve competitive results. The state-ofthe-art models can even reach human-level performance.
Contextual reasoning is essential to the process of human
cognition, where inference is made based on contextual information and a collection of facts (Giunchiglia 1992). Inferring hidden facts from context is an indispensable element of
human language understanding. Contextual reasoning is typically performed on the passage level, where multiple steps
may be necessary for inferring facts from given evidences.
It has been investigated by NLP tasks such as machine reading (Lai et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2019a), retrieval-based dialogue (Wu et al. 2017). However, dominant NLI benchmarks
(Bowman et al. 2015; Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018)
investigate the relationship of two sentences, with relatively
less attention being payed to the exploration of grounded
logical inference (Bhagavatula et al. 2020; Clark, Tafjord,
and Richardson 2020).
We investigate contextual reasoning for NLI by making
a dataset that consists of 8,325 instances. One example is
shown in Figure 1. In this example, the premise consists of
several facts concerning a set of shows, which can serve
as a context for evidence integration and reasoning. The
truthfulness of the hypotheses are determined by reasoning
over multiple sentences. Various types of contextual reason-

Introduction
Natural languages are powerful tools for reasoning. In NLP,
natural language inference (NLI) has attracted surging research interests (Bowman et al. 2015; Williams, Nangia, and
Bowman 2018; Bhagavatula et al. 2020). The task is to determine whether a hypothesis h can reasonably be inferred
from a premise p. Thanks to the generalizability of the NLI
framework (i.e., nearly all questions about meaningfulness
in language can be reduced to questions of entailment and
contradiction in context), NLI can serve as a proxy to general tasks such as natural language understanding (NLU).
As a result, the NLI task is constantly employed as a testing
ground for learning sentence representation as well as evaluating language models, with the expectation of benefiting
downstream applications.
Large-scale NLI datasets have been collected via crowdsourcing. Existing benchmarks (Bowman et al. 2015;
Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018; Dagan, Glickman,
and Magnini 2005; Khot, Sabharwal, and Clark 2018a) handle the task at the sentence-level, generating labelled sentence pairs by probing into the essence of lexical and comCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13388

