The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fully-Connected Tensor Network Decomposition and Its Application to
Higher-Order Tensor Completion
Yu-Bang Zheng,1 Ting-Zhu Huang,∗,1 Xi-Le Zhao,∗,1 Qibin Zhao,2,3 Tai-Xiang Jiang4
1

School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Tensor Learning Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan
3
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, China
4
School of Economic Information Engineering, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, China
{zhengyubang, xlzhao122003}@163.com, tingzhuhuang@126.com, qibin.zhao@riken.jp, taixiangjiang@gmail.com
Abstract

decompositions have been proposed and attracted considerable attention. Among them, the Tucker decomposition and
the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) decomposition as two
most classical decompositions have achieved great success
in the past decade (Kolda and Bader 2009; Gandy, Recht,
and Yamada 2011; Liu et al. 2013, 2014; Zhao et al. 2016;
Yokota, Zhao, and Cichocki 2016; Li, Ye, and Xu 2017; Xie
et al. 2018; Yao et al. 2019; He et al. 2019; Phan et al. 2020).
More recently, an increasing number of tensor networkbased tensor decompositions have emerged and shown great
ability to deal with higher-order, especially beyond thirdorder, tensors. One of the most representative among them is
the tensor train (TT) decomposition (Oseledets 2011), which
decomposes an N th-order tensor into N -2 third-order tensors located at intermediate and two matrices located at both
sides (see Figure 1(a)). Besides, from the first TT factor (matrix), each factor needs to conduct a multi-linear operation
with its next factor, until the last one (matrix). Subsequently,
as an extension of the TT decomposition, tensor ring (TR)
decomposition (Zhao et al. 2016) replaced two matrices in
TT factors by third-order tensors and established an additional multi-linear operation between them (see Figure 1(b)).
Since TT and TR decompositions have the outstanding capability in super-compression and computational practicability, they have been employed in many applications, such as
signal restoration, compression and reconstruction, and image/video recovery (Bengua et al. 2017; Imaizumi, Maehara,
and Hayashi 2017; Ding et al. 2019; Zhao et al. 2019; Yuan
et al. 2018; Yuan et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2020). Many of
them can be regarded as a tensor completion (TC) problem,
which aims to complete a tensor from its partial observation.
However, there are two limitations to TT and TR decompositions. First, these two decompositions only establish an
operation/connection between adjacent two factors, rather
than any two factors, which leads to a limited characterization for correlations of tensors. Second, TT decomposition keeps the invariance only when the modes of the target
tensor make a reverse permuting, while TR decomposition
keeps the invariance only when the modes of the target tensor make a circular shifting or a reverse permuting. These
imply that these two decompositions are highly sensitive to
the permutation of tensor modes, leading to the inflexibility
of decompositions and applications.

The popular tensor train (TT) and tensor ring (TR) decompositions have achieved promising results in science and engineering. However, TT and TR decompositions only establish an operation between adjacent two factors and are highly
sensitive to the permutation of tensor modes, leading to an inadequate and inflexible representation. In this paper, we propose a generalized tensor decomposition, which decomposes
an N th-order tensor into a set of N th-order factors and establishes an operation between any two factors. Since it can
be graphically interpreted as a fully-connected network, we
named it fully-connected tensor network (FCTN) decomposition. The superiorities of the FCTN decomposition lie in the
outstanding capability for characterizing adequately the intrinsic correlations between any two modes of tensors and the
essential invariance for transposition. Furthermore, we employ the FCTN decomposition to one representative task, i.e.,
tensor completion, and develop an efficient solving algorithm
based on proximal alternating minimization. Theoretically,
we prove the convergence of the developed algorithm, i.e., the
sequence obtained by it globally converges to a critical point.
Experimental results substantiate that the proposed method
compares favorably to the state-of-the-art methods based on
other tensor decompositions.

Introduction
The rapid advance in science and technology has given
rise to the wide presence of higher-order data, e.g., multitemporal, multi-spectral, and multi-scale data, which are
usually expressed by higher-order tensors. Tensor decompositions focus on decomposing a higher-order tensor to
a set of low-dimensional factors used to represent its latent features, which have powerful capability to capture the
global correlations of tensors and have been widely applied
in a variety of fields, such as signal processing, computer
vision, and medical imaging (Kolda and Bader 2009; Mu
et al. 2014; Anandkumar et al. 2014; Cong et al. 2015;
Zhao, Zhang, and Cichocki 2015; Lu et al. 2016; Yokota
and Hontani 2017; Yokota et al. 2019; Zheng et al. 2020).
By designing different structures of latent factors and different multi-linear operations among them, various tensor
∗

Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11071

