The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Characterizing the Loss Landscape in Non-Negative Matrix Factorization
Johan Bjorck, Anmol Kabra, Kilian Q. Weinberger, Carla P. Gomes
Cornell University
{njb225,ak2426,kqw4,gomes}@cornell.edu

Abstract

the time when NMF was proposed, most analyses of optimization problems in machine learning focused on convex
formulations such as SVMs (Cortes and Vapnik 1995). However, owing to the success of neural networks, non-convex
optimization has experienced a resurgence in interest. While
non-convex problems that can be optimized efficiently via
saddle point characterization have been studied extensively
(Ge et al. 2015), NMF has seen less theoretical progress.
While the NMF problem is NP-hard, its empirical experience
and widespread usage suggests that the problem might be
tractable in the average case, albeit not in the worst case.
In this paper, we prove theoretically and empirically that
a benign convexity property called star-convexity typically
holds in NMF. From a theoretical perspective, we consider
NMF instances with planted randomized solutions, inspired
by the stochastic block model for social networks (Holland,
Laskey, and Leinhardt 1983; Decelle et al. 2011) and the
planted clique problem studied in sum-of-squares literature
(Barak et al. 2016). We prove that between two random points,
the loss is convex with high probability, and conclude that
the loss surface is star-convex in the typical case—even if
the loss is computed over unobserved data. From an empirical perspective, we verify that our theoretical results hold
for an extensive collection of real-world datasets spanning
collaborative filtering (Zhou et al. 2008; Kula 2017; Harper
and Konstan 2016), signal decomposition (Zhu 2016; Li and
Ngom 2013; Li et al. 2001; Erichson et al. 2018), and audio
processing (Flenner and Hunter 2017). Finally, we show that
star-convex behavior becomes more likely with a growing
number of parameters, suggesting that a similar result may
hold in neural networks as they become wider. We provide
supporting empirical evidence for this hypothesis on modern
network architectures. We summarize the contributions of
this paper as follows:

Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is a highly celebrated algorithm for matrix decomposition that guarantees
non-negative factors. The underlying optimization problem is
computationally intractable, yet in practice, gradient-descentbased methods often find good solutions. In this paper, we
revisit the NMF optimization problem and analyze its loss
landscape in non-worst-case settings. We specifically study
star-convexity, which implies that the gradients point towards
the final minimizer. We show that such a property holds with
high probability for NMF, provably in a non-worst case model
with a planted solution, and empirically across an extensive
suite of real-world NMF problems spanning collaborative filtering, scientific analysis, and image analysis. Our analysis
predicts that this property becomes more likely with a growing
number of parameters, and experiments suggest that a similar
trend might also hold for deep neural networks—turning increasing dataset sizes and model sizes into a blessing from an
optimization perspective.

Introduction
Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is a ubiquitous
technique for data analysis, where one attempts to factorize
a measurement matrix X into the product of non-negative
matrices U, V (Lee and Seung 1999). This simple problem
has applications in recommender systems (Luo et al. 2014),
scientific analysis (Berne et al. 2007; Trindade, Abel, and
Watts 2017), computer vision (Gillis 2012), internet distance
prediction (Mao, Saul, and Smith 2006), audio processing
(Schmidt, Larsen, and Hsiao 2007), and many more domains.
The non-negativity is often crucial for interpretability; in the
context of crystallography for example, the light sources—
represented as matrix factors—have non-negative intensity
(Suram et al. 2016).
Like many other non-convex optimization problems, e.g.
optimizing neural networks (Blum and Rivest 1989), finding
the exact solution to NMF is NP-hard (Pardalos and Vavasis
1991; Vavasis 2009). NMF’s tremendous practical success
is at odds with such worst-case analysis, and simple algorithms based on gradient descent are known to find good
solutions in real-world settings (Lee and Seung 2001). At

• We prove that the NMF loss surface has benign convexity
properties in the average case, which might explain why
NMF typically performs well despite being NP-hard in the
worst case.
• We verify that our theoretical predictions hold in an extensive suite of real-world datasets.
• Based on our theoretical results, we hypothesize that increasing width in neural networks should improve convexity. We also provide supporting experimental evidence.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6768

