The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Precise Yet Efficient Semantic Calibration and Refinement in ConvNets
for Real-time Polyp Segmentation from Colonoscopy Videos
Huisi Wu,1∗ Jiafu Zhong,1 Wei Wang,1 Zhenkun Wen,1 Jing Qin2
1

College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
hswu@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel convolutional neural network (ConvNet) equipped with two new semantic calibration and refinement approaches for automatic polyp segmentation from
colonoscopy videos. While ConvNets set state-of-the-are performance for this task, it is still difficult to achieve satisfactory results in a real-time manner, which is a necessity in
clinical practice. The main obstacle is the huge semantic gap
between high-level features and low-level features, making
it difficult to take full advantage of complementary semantic information contained in these hierarchical features. Compared with existing solutions, which either directly aggregate
these features without considering the semantic gap or employ sophisticated non-local modeling techniques to refine
semantic information by introduce many extra computational costs, the proposed ConvNet is able to more precisely yet
efficiently calibrate and refine semantic information for better segmentation performance without increasing model complexity; we call the proposed ConvNet as SCR-Net, which
has two key modules. We first propose a semantic calibration
module (SCM) to effectively transmit the semantic information from high-level layers to low-level layers by learning the
semantic-spatial relations during the training procedure. We
then propose a semantic refinement module (SRM) to, based
on the features calibrated by SCM, enhance the discrimination capability of the features for targeting objects. Extensive
experiments on the Kvasir-SEG dataset demonstrate that the
proposed SCR-Net is capable of achieving better segmentation accuracy than state-of-the-art approaches with a faster
speed. The proposed techniques are general enough to be
applied to similar applications where precise and efficient multi-level feature fusion is critical. The code is available
at https://github.com/jiafuz/SCR-Net.

Figure 1: Illustration of challenges in automatic polyp segmentation: (a)-(b) small polyps, (c)-(d) middle polyps, and
(e)-(f) large polyps, while (b), (d) and (e) show the polyps
with low contrast to the background.
However, according to the study reported in (Leufkens et al.
2012), one out of every four polyps was missed during the
colonoscopy procedures. Therefore, automatic approach to
identifying and segmenting polyps from colonoscopy videos
is highly demanded to improve the outcome of colonoscopy.
Precisely segment polyps from colonoscopy videos is indeed a challenging task. First, the variation of polyps is quite
large; see Fig. 1 (a)-(f). Second, the low intensity contrast
between polyp and background may worsen the discrimination of foreground features and hence increase the probability of incorrect segmentation, see Fig. 1 (b) and (d)-(e).
Third, the segmentation should be carried out in a real-time
manner, as it is anticipated that the results can be presented to doctors immediately for their prompt action during the
colonoscopy procedures.
Early works for this task employ hand-crafted features
to distinguish polyps from background, including intensity distribution, geometric features, and volumetric properties (Jerebko, Franaszek, and Summers 2002; Jerebko et al.
2003; Yao et al. 2004; Gross et al. 2009). However, the representative capability of these hand-crafted features is far
from sufficient to meet above-mentioned challenges. In recent years, with the development of deep learning, more and
more effort has been dedicated to using convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to handle this challenging task. For example, Li et al. (Li et al. 2017) and Brandao et al. (Brandao et al.
2017) propose to use fully convolutional networks (FCNs) to
segment the polyps. However, the detailed boundary information is always missing in FCN architecture due to a series
of down-sampling operations. Sun et al. (Sun et al. 2019)
propose to improve the feature representation ability by in-

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common malignant tumor in
the gastrointestinal tract. Fortunately, we can effectively prevent the CRC if the colon polyps, the masses bulging on the
surface of colon, are removed in time before developing to
the CRC (Kolligs 2016). Colonoscopy is the primary method
for prevention of colon cancer, in which a tiny camera is navigated into the colon in order to locate and remove polyps.
∗

Corresponding author. Email: hswu@szu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2916

