The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tailoring Embedding Function to Heterogeneous Few-Shot Tasks
by Global and Local Feature Adaptors*
Su Lu, Han-Jia Ye, De-Chuan Zhan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
Nanjing, 210023, China
{lus, yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhandc@nju.edu.cn

Class 1:
Lion

Abstract

Class 2:
Bee

0
Global
𝑑𝑑 = 1.175

Few-Shot Learning (FSL) is essential for visual recognition.
Many methods tackle this challenging problem via learning
an embedding function from seen classes and transfer it to
unseen classes with a few labeled instances. Researchers recently found it beneficial to incorporate task-specific feature
adaptation into FSL models, which produces the most representative features for each task. However, these methods ignore the diversity of classes and apply a global transformation to the task. In this paper, we propose Global and Local
Feature Adaptor (GLoFA), a unifying framework that tailors
the instance representation to specific tasks by global and local feature adaptors. We claim that class-specific local transformation helps to improve the representation ability of feature adaptor. Global masks tend to capture sketchy patterns,
while local masks focus on detailed characteristics. A strategy to measure the relationship between instances adaptively
based on the characteristics of both tasks and classes endow
GLoFA with the ability to handle mix-grained tasks. GLoFA
outperforms other methods on a heterogeneous task distribution and achieves competitive results on benchmark datasets.

Task 1: Coarse-Grained Task
Class 1:
Husky

Class 2:
Dalmatian

Local

1

𝑑𝑑 = 0.928

0
Global
𝑑𝑑 = 0.974

Task 2: Fine-Grained Task

Local

1

𝑑𝑑 = 1.208

Figure 1: Different effects of global and local masks on
a coarse-grained task and a fine-grained task. In this experiment, we train our model on the meta-training set of
miniImageNet. We sample two tasks from the meta-testing
set. One task is differing a lion from a bee, and another is differing a husky from a dalmatian. We apply global masks and
local masks generated by GLoFA to the instances. Masks
are normalized to [0, 1], and highlight warm-colored regions.
We can see that global masks tend to focus on sketchy patterns, e.g., the whole body of lion and bee. These patterns are
enough to discriminate two classes when there is a large semantic gap between them. Local masks catch detailed characteristics, e.g., ear of the husky and leg of the dalmatian. For
a fine-grained task, local masks separate two similar concepts. For each task, we calculate the euclidean distance between two masked instances. Global masks push the bee far
from the lion, while local masks work better to distinguish
two dogs. Since global and local masks have different effects, we combine them in GLoFA and fuse them adaptively
based on the target task so that GLoFA emphasizes appropriate masks for different tasks.

Introduction
Modern deep learning systems have achieved unprecedented
success in various fields. Their requirements for a large
amount of labeled data impedes deep models’ applications when limited examples are available. Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to endow a learner with the ability to generalize well from a small number of training examples. In FSL,
we often assume that a sizeable related dataset which contains SEEN classes is available. After extracting some transferable knowledge from this dataset, the model can identify
UNSEEN classes with only a few labeled instances.
Many FSL methods try to learn a generalizable embedding function from SEEN classes (Koch, Zemel, and
Salakhutdinov 2015; Vinyals et al. 2016; Snell, Swersky, and
Zemel 2017; Ye, Lu, and Zhan 2020). The main limitation
of these methods is that a single embedding space shared by
all tasks may not work well when target tasks differ a lot
from each other. We should emphasize different feature dimensions when solving different tasks, which is the reason

that many recent methods, including our proposed GLoFA,
focus on task-specific features. Given tasks sampled from
a latent distribution p(T ), we can learn a feature adaptor
p(M|T ), which captures the characteristics of T and outputs the most relevant features M to this task. Researchers
implement the feature adaptor in different ways, such as category traversal module (Li et al. 2019), task encoding network (Oreshkin, López, and Lacoste 2018), set-to-set func-

* Han-Jia Ye is the corresponding author. This work is supported
by NSFC (61773198, 6163000043, 61921006, 62006112).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8776

