The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

IA-GM: A Deep Bidirectional Learning Method for Graph Matching
Kaixuan Zhao, Shikui Tu, Lei Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Centre for Cognitive Machines and Computational Health (CMaCH), Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhaokx3, tushikui, leixu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

and deformation in practical applications, there is rarely exactly the same two graphs. People consider the more loose
case, i.e., finding the correspondence between vertex sets of
given two graphs, so that the nodes and edges error of the
two graphs is minimized, which is called the inexact graph
matching (Livi and Rizzi 2013) or subisomorphism.
When taking the 2nd-order or edge features into consideration, and suppose |VA | = n1 ≤ |VB | = n2 , the pair-wise
graph matching problem can be formulated as the following Lawler’s quadratic assignment problem (QAP) (Lawler
1963):

Existing deep learning methods for graph matching
(GM) problems usually considered affinity learning
to assist combinatorial optimization in a feedforward
pipeline, and parameter learning is executed by backpropagating the gradients of the matching loss. Such a
pipeline pays little attention to the possible complementary benefit from the optimization layer to the learning
component. In this paper, we overcome the above limitation under a deep bidirectional learning framework.
Our method circulates the output of the GM optimization layer to fuse with the input for affinity learning.
Such direct feedback enhances the input by a feature
enrichment and fusion technique, which exploits and
integrates the global matching patterns from the deviation of the similarity permuted by the current matching
estimate. As a result, the circulation enables the learning component to benefit from the optimization process,
taking advantage of both global feature and the embedding result which is calculated by local propagation
through node-neighbors. Moreover, circulation consistency induces an unsupervised loss that can be implemented individually or jointly to regularize the supervised loss. Experiments on challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods for both supervised learning and unsupervised learning.

J(X) = xT Kx, x = vec(X),
X ∈ {0, 1}

n1 ×n2

(1)

T

, X1n2 = 1n1 , X 1n1  1n2 .

where x denotes a column-wise vectorized replica of X,
K ∈ Rn1 n2 ×n1 n2 is the so-called affinity matrix, which is
constructed as a square symmetric positive matrix. Specifically, Kia;jb measures the similarity of attributes between
the pairs of candidate correspondences (i, j) ∈ EA and
(a, b) ∈ EB , where a diagonal element means node-tonode affinity, and a non-diagonal element contains edgeto-edge affinity. X is called assignment matrix indicating
the node correspondence, and it is a permutation matrix.
x ∈ {0, 1}n1 n2 ×1 denotes a column-wise vectorized replica
of X. The general GM by QAP is known to be NP-hard, and
it is intractable to acquire a global optimum in the case of
large graphs. Therefore, researchers study approximate algorithms to seek inexact solutions.
Traditional GM methods are mostly investigated on predefined affinity models, e.g., the elements of K is given by
a Gaussian kernel with Euclidean distance between the features of nodes and edges. Then, the assignment matrix X is
solved by either a combinatorial optimisation algorithm (Xu
and Oja 1990; Conte et al. 2004; Livi and Rizzi 2013) or a
learning algorithm (Xu 1994, 1995; Dang and Xu 2000; Xu
and King 2001; Liu, Qiao, and Xu 2012). However, predefined hand-crafted structures and affinity functions are limited to capture the inherent structure of a real-world matching problem. A better GM approximation algorithm does not
necessarily lead to higher matching accuracy, if the affinity model is inappropriate for the practical GM task with
noise and uncertainty. Early methods tackled this issue by
learning a set of parameters in the affinity function (Caetano et al. 2009; Leordeanu, Sukthankar, and Hebert 2012).

Introduction
Many correspondence and similarity learning problems can
be naturally represented as graph matching (GM) problems
in real world applications such as shape matching (Belongie,
Malik, and Puzicha 2002), multimedia retrieval (Chu and
Chang 2015), object tracking and categorization (Duchenne,
Joulin, and Ponce 2011), etc. GM refers to establishing
correspondences between two graphs or among multiple
graphs, which are encoded by 1st-order node information
and 2nd-order structural information, even higher-order features (Lee, Cho, and Lee 2011). In other words, GM is
to find a one-to-one mapping f : VB → VA between the
nodes of the two separate graphs such that (u, v) ∈ EB iff
(f (u), f (v)) ∈ EA , where GA = (VA , EA ) and GB =
(VB , EB ), with |VA | = |VB | = n, which is said to be exact
GM or isomorphism. However, due to the inevitable noise
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3474

