The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Verifiable Machine Ethics in Changing Contexts
Louise A. Dennis1 , Martin Mose Bentzen2 , Felix Lindner3 , Michael Fisher1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester,
Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark,
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Ulm University
{louise.dennis, michael.fisher}@manchester.ac.uk, mmbe@dtu.dk, felix.lindner@uni-ulm.de
2

Abstract

1. Is it possible to provide a general account for how to include context in an ethical encoding even though these encodings themselves vary widely from system to system?

Many systems proposed for the implementation of ethical
reasoning involve an encoding of user values as a set of rules
or a model. We consider the question of how changes of context affect these encodings. We propose the use of a reasoning cycle, in which information about the ethical reasoner’s
context is imported in a logical form, and we propose that
context-specific aspects of an ethical encoding be prefaced
by a guard formula. This guard formula should evaluate to
true when the reasoner is in the appropriate context and the
relevant parts of the reasoner’s rule set or model should be
updated accordingly. This architecture allows techniques for
the model-checking of agent-based autonomous systems to
be used to verify that all contexts respect key stakeholder
values. We implement this framework using the hybrid ethical reasoning agents system (H ERA) and the model-checking
agent programming languages (MCAPL) framework.

2. Similarly, is it possible to provide a generic architecture
which allows a machine ethics system to reason with context specific ethical encodings?
3. Assuming users are, at least in part, responsible for creating context-specific ethical encodings and may do so at
runtime, are there techniques which can assist in checking
that an encoding is consistent with their values and those
of other stakeholders?
We propose that a context is represented as a logical formula which acts as a guard on an update function for ethical encodings. An ethical reasoner can then be embedded in
a reasoning cycle that gathers contextual information via a
combination of perception and reasoning, updates its ethical
encoding using the update function, reasons and then acts.
Concepts and tools from the cognitive agent community provide a natural architecture for such a system and provide a
framework for verification.
We have implemented our proposal using the Hybrid Ethical Reasoning Agents system (H ERA) (Lindner, Bentzen,
and Nebel 2017) and the model-checking agent programming languages (MCAPL) framework (Dennis 2018).
H ERA has developed an approach to machine ethics that is
rich enough to support reasoning in a variety of ethical systems. This allows us to evaluate our framework for context
specific ethical reasoning using different ethical encodings.
Our implementation forms J UNO – a cognitive agent based
system that contains a H ERA ethical reasoner which can be
instantiated to reason using different ethical systems and so
use different ethical encodings. We show how a J UNO agent
can be formally verified to ensure that each context preserves
key user values. All the code and examples in this paper are
available in the MCAPL distribution 1 .

Introduction
Moor (2006) defines an explicitly ethical agent as one which
reasons using some explicit representation of ethical concepts. Several such systems have been produced (for examples see (Tolmeijer et al. 2020; Nallur 2020)). Explicit representations of ethical concepts require some encoding of values and/or ethics in order to perform their reasoning. We will
refer to this as the ethical encoding. This encoding may be,
for example, utilities for outcomes or obligations and prohibitions. We are concerned with how this information can be
transferred from one context to another.
A practical reality is that current reasoning systems are
limited in the extent to which they can fully analyse context.
This makes it difficult to provide an ethical encoding that
does not refer explicitly to contexts. As a simple example,
people in general need to be able to see during the evening
but do not need to see at night. A utilitarian reasoning system calculates utilities for the consequences of an action so
we can imagine providing different utilities for “lights on”
depending upon whether it is evening or night time. Such
considerations mean that machine ethics systems need some
account for how their reasoning adapts to changing contexts.
We here identify three key questions relating to this issue:

Background
Automated reasoning systems represent information to be
reasoned about in a pure logical format. For such systems the
problem of context-specificity is minor. Logical implication
(φ =⇒ ψ) can be used to express naturally that some ψ

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

11470

https://autonomy-and-verification.github.io/tools/mcapl

