The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

OT-Flow: Fast and Accurate Continuous Normalizing Flows
via Optimal Transport
Derek Onken,1 Samy Wu Fung,2 Xingjian Li,3 Lars Ruthotto,3,1
1

Department of Computer Science, Emory University
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Department of Mathematics, Emory University
donken@emory.edu, swufung@math.ucla.edu, xingjian.li@emory.edu, lruthotto@emory.edu
2

Abstract
A normalizing flow is an invertible mapping between an arbitrary probability distribution and a standard normal distribution; it can be used for density estimation and statistical
inference. Computing the flow follows the change of variables
formula and thus requires invertibility of the mapping and an
efficient way to compute the determinant of its Jacobian. To
satisfy these requirements, normalizing flows typically consist of carefully chosen components. Continuous normalizing
flows (CNFs) are mappings obtained by solving a neural ordinary differential equation (ODE). The neural ODE’s dynamics
can be chosen almost arbitrarily while ensuring invertibility.
Moreover, the log-determinant of the flow’s Jacobian can be
obtained by integrating the trace of the dynamics’ Jacobian
along the flow. Our proposed OT-Flow approach tackles two
critical computational challenges that limit a more widespread
use of CNFs. First, OT-Flow leverages optimal transport (OT)
theory to regularize the CNF and enforce straight trajectories
that are easier to integrate. Second, OT-Flow features exact
trace computation with time complexity equal to trace estimators used in existing CNFs. On five high-dimensional density
estimation and generative modeling tasks, OT-Flow performs
competitively to state-of-the-art CNFs while on average requiring one-fourth of the number of weights with an 8x speedup
in training time and 24x speedup in inference.

Figure 1: Two flows with approximately equal loss (modification of Fig. 1 in Grathwohl et al. 2019; Finlay et al. 2020).
While OT-Flow enforces straight trajectories, a generic CNF
can have curved trajectories.

Introduction
A normalizing flow (Rezende and Mohamed 2015) is an
invertible mapping f : Rd → Rd between an arbitrary probability distribution and a standard normal distribution whose
densities we denote by ρ0 and ρ1 , respectively. By the change
of variables formula, for all x ∈ Rd , the flow must satisfy (Rezende and Mohamed 2015; Papamakarios et al. 2019)
log ρ0 (x) = log ρ1 (f (x)) + log | det ∇f (x) | .

Alternatively, in continuous normalizing flows (CNFs), f
is obtained by solving the neural ordinary differential equation (ODE) (Chen et al. 2018b; Grathwohl et al. 2019)

 


v z(x, t), t; θ 
z(x, t)
∂t
=
,
`(x, t)
tr ∇v(z(x, t), t; θ)

 

(2)
z(x, 0)
x
=
,
`(x, 0)
0

(1)

Given ρ0 , a normalizing flow is constructed by composing
invertible layers to form a neural network and training their
weights. Since computing the log-determinant in general
requires O(d3 ) floating point operations (FLOPS), effective
normalizing flows consist of layers whose Jacobians have
exploitable structure (e.g., diagonal, triangular, low-rank).

for artificial time t ∈ [0, T ] and x ∈ Rd . The first component
maps a point x to f (x) = z(x, T ) by following the trajectory
z : Rd × [0, T ] → Rd (Fig. 1). This mapping is invertible
and orientation-preserving under mild assumptions on the
dynamics v : Rd × [0, T ] → Rd . The final state of the second

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9223

