The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Semantic Context from Normal Samples
for Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
Xudong Yan,1∗ Huaidong Zhang,1∗ Xuemiao Xu,1,2,3,4† Xiaowei Hu,5 Pheng-Ann Heng5,6
1

South China University of Technology
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
4
State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
5
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
6
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{csyanxd, z.huaidong}@mail.scut.edu.cn, xuemx@scut.edu.cn, {xwhu, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
2

Output images

Abstract
Unsupervised anomaly detection aims to identify data samples that have low probability density from a set of input samples, and only the normal samples are provided
for model training. The inference of abnormal regions on
the input image requires an understanding of the surrounding semantic context.This work presents a Semantic Context based Anomaly Detection Network, SCADN, for unsupervised anomaly detection by learning the semantic context
from the normal samples. To achieve this, we first generate
multi-scale striped masks to remove a part of regions from the
normal samples, and then train a generative adversarial network to reconstruct the unseen regions. Note that the masks
are designed in multiple scales and stripe directions, and various training examples are generated to obtain the rich semantic context. In testing, we obtain an error map by computing
the difference between the reconstructed image and the input image for all samples, and infer the abnormal samples
based on the error maps. Finally, we perform various experiments on three public benchmark datasets and a new dataset
LaceAD collected by us, and show that our method clearly
outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods.

Input image
Error maps

Normal image

(a) DAE

(b) MemAE

(c) Ours

Figure 1: The visual comparison results among DAE (Zhou
and Paffenroth 2017), MemAE (Gong et al. 2019), and our
method. The error map of DAE fails to highlight the abnormal region in (a) while the error map of MemAE tends to
include noises and artifacts in (b). In contrast, our method in
(c) is able to recover the anomaly region with normal patterns by exploring the semantic context in surroundings.

these problems, the research works explore the unsupervised learning strategy, which only learns the characteristics
of the normal samples and infer the anomaly samples directly. Among them, early works adopt one-class classification (Wang and Cherian 2019; Ruff et al. 2018) or probability estimation (Zong et al. 2018; Golan and El-Yaniv 2018;
Pidhorskyi, Almohsen, and Doretto 2018; Abati et al. 2019)
to build a model that represents the normal distribution, and
detects the abnormal samples that have different distributions with the model.
Recently, methods based on the deep autoencoder
(DAE) (Sabokrou et al. 2018; Zhou and Paffenroth
2017) show remarkable performance on the benchmark
datasets (Krizhevsky and Hinton 2009). The key factor for
the successes is that the encoder first learns to map the data
samples into a latent space and then transfer them back to
the original images by the decoder. Hence, after training the
autoencoder on normal samples, they are able to well reconstruct the normal images but fail to obtain the reconstructed

Introduction
Anomaly samples are the data, which are residing in low
probability density from a set of input samples. Knowing the anomaly samples helps lots of applications, e.g.,
defect detection (Bergmann et al. 2019, 2020), security
check (Akcay, Atapour-Abarghouei, and Breckon 2018), intruder detection (Oza and Patel 2019), medical image inspection (Schlegl et al. 2017), and outlier removal (Xia et al.
2015). Thus, anomaly detection has long been a fundamental research problem.
However, there are various types of anomalies in the
real world, and it is difficult to obtain the training samples of the anomaly, which rarely appeared. To address
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
∗
Both authors contributed equally.
†
Corresponding author: Xuemiao Xu.

3110

