The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Initiative Defense against Facial Manipulation
Qidong Huang† , Jie Zhang† , Wenbo Zhou∗ , Weiming Zhang∗ , Nenghai Yu
University of Science and Technology in China
{hqd0037@mail., welbeckz@, zjzac@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

be misused for malicious purposes such as violating individual privacy or even misleading political opinions. In details,
the malicious users may edit the portrait image of any person
without his/her permission. Moreover, the attacker is able
to forge the expression (e.g. lip shape) of political figure’s
speech video, which might seriously mislead the public.
To alleviate the risks brought by malicious usage of face
manipulation, various impressive countermeasures (Matern,
Riess, and Stamminger 2019; Han et al. 2017; Afchar et al.
2018; Nguyen, Yamagishi, and Echizen 2019; Rössler et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020) have been proposed, most of which
are ex-post detection-based methods used for forensics.
Notwithstanding the considerably high accuracy in distinguishing forged facial images or video from the real ones,
these methods are too passive and hard to eliminate the damages caused by malicious face manipulation, because the
generation and wide spread of such forgeries have already
become a fait accompli. How to proactively prevent such
threats before its happening is a significant but seriously
under-researched problem. Very recently, Ruiz et al.(Ruiz,
Bargal, and Sclaroff 2020) propose a gradient-based method
to attack facial manipulation models, which is regarded as
the baseline method of this paper. However, its white-box
assumption is not practical. The baseline method needs the
inner information about the target models. Besides, it is invalid to some other types of manipulation tasks, like the realtime face reenactment.
In this work, we propose the concept of initiative defense
against face manipulation, which is a totally fresh angle of
defense. Specifically, we leverage a poison perturbation generator PG to generate invisible perturbation, and then superpose it onto the original face data before releasing the data to
the public. The forger can only have access to the infected
face data, and due to the existence of poison perturbation,
the performance of face forgery models will be significantly
degraded, whether infected data is used in inference stage
or in training process. In other words, the infected face data
must satisfy two ultimate objectives: (1) is visually consistent to the clean one and (2) can degrade the performance of
the target model greatly.
To achieve these goals, we devise a two-stage training
framework of initiative defense, which is generally appli-

Benefiting from the development of generative adversarial
networks (GAN), facial manipulation has achieved significant progress in both academia and industry recently. It inspires an increasing number of entertainment applications but
also incurs severe threats to individual privacy and even political security meanwhile. To mitigate such risks, many countermeasures have been proposed. However, the great majority
methods are designed in a passive manner, which is to detect
whether the facial images or videos are tampered after their
wide propagation. These detection-based methods have a fatal limitation, that is, they only work for ex-post forensics but
can not prevent the engendering of malicious behavior.
To address the limitation, in this paper, we propose a novel
framework of initiative defense to degrade the performance
of facial manipulation models controlled by malicious users.
The basic idea is to actively inject imperceptible venom into
target facial data before manipulation. To this end, we first
imitate the target manipulation model with a surrogate model,
and then devise a poison perturbation generator to obtain the
desired venom. An alternating training strategy are further
leveraged to train both the surrogate model and the perturbation generator. Two typical facial manipulation tasks: face
attribute editing and face reenactment, are considered in our
initiative defense framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our framework in
different settings. Finally, we hope this work can shed some
light on initiative countermeasures against more adversarial
scenarios.

Introduction
With the tremendous success of deep generative models (e.g.
conditional-GAN), face manipulation has been an emerging
topic in very recent years and a variety of methods (Thies
et al. 2016; Korshunova et al. 2017; Nirkin, Keller, and Hassner 2019; Natsume, Yatagawa, and Morishima 2018; Wu
et al. 2018) have been proposed. The face manipulation systems can change the target face with a different attribute,
such as hairstyle or expression. As the manipulated results
become more and more realistic, these techniques can easily
∗

Corresponding authors, † Equal contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1619

