The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Optimal Decision Trees for Nonlinear Metrics
Emir Demirović,1 Peter J. Stuckey 2
1

Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands
2
Monash University and Data61, Australia
e.demirovic@tudelft.nl, peter.stuckey@monash.edu

Abstract

class. For example, a trivial classifier that classifies all individuals as healthy may result in high accuracy since most
data points correspond to healthy individuals, but bears no
significance in detecting early signs of an illness. In these
cases, a nonlinear metric may be more appropriate.
The challenge with nonlinear metrics is that foundational
principles of previous works, which were important for
the success of the methods, no longer hold. Dedicated approaches rely on the independence of the left and right subtree, which is not the case for nonlinear metrics. Integer programming cannot be employed as the objective is nonlinear.
Therefore, new techniques are required.
We propose a novel approach to address the problem of
nonlinear metrics by viewing the problem as a bi-objective
problem, where the misclassifications of each binary class
corresponds to one objective. We show that, for most machine learning metrics, the optimal classifiers lie on the
Pareto frontier, i.e., the set of nondominated trade-offs between the two objectives. After computing all Pareto optimal trees, the optimal tree may be selected according to the
desired metric. Our bi-objective algorithm is able to take advantage of the unique structure of decision trees by generalising previous dedicated decision tree approaches to the
bi-optimisation setting, using techniques based on dynamic
programming and search. The bi-objective view allows us
to optimise for a wide range of metrics at the expense of
runtime and provides a trade-off: linear metrics are easier to
optimise but may be less appropriate for a given application,
whereas our approach provides the provably optimal tree for
any desired metric albeit a higher runtime.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In the next
section, we discuss preliminary notions and give details on
previous decision tree algorithms. Afterwards, we describe
our approach, which consists of showing that Pareto optimal trees lie on the frontier, generalising decision tree concepts to the bi-objective case, and generalising algorithmic
enhancement that improve the efficiency of the algorithm.
The value of our method is given in a dedicated experimental section, where we consider 75 publicly available datasets.
We end by discussing related work and give a conclusion.

Nonlinear metrics, such as the F1-score, Matthews correlation coefficient, and Fowlkes–Mallows index, are often used
to evaluate the performance of machine learning models, in
particular, when facing imbalanced datasets that contain more
samples of one class than the other. Recent optimal decision tree algorithms have shown remarkable progress in producing trees that are optimal with respect to linear criteria,
such as accuracy, but unfortunately nonlinear metrics remain
a challenge. To address this gap, we propose a novel algorithm based on bi-objective optimisation, which treats misclassifications of each binary class as a separate objective. We
show that, for a large class of metrics, the optimal tree lies on
the Pareto frontier. Consequently, we obtain the optimal tree
by using our method to generate the set of all nondominated
trees. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method to
compute provably optimal decision trees for nonlinear metrics. Our approach leads to a trade-off when compared to optimising linear metrics: the resulting trees may be more desirable according to the given nonlinear metric at the expense of
higher runtimes. Nevertheless, the experiments illustrate that
runtimes are reasonable for majority of the tested datasets.

Introduction
Decision trees are amongst the most explainable machine
learning models. There has been recent interest in building
trees that, given a dataset, are optimal with respect to some
metric, e.g., trees that minimise misclassifications (Nijssen
and Fromont 2007) or sparse trees that trades off misclassifications for size (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017). In the following, we focus on binary classification using decision trees.
Metrics considered in previous works are linear, i.e., the
objective is a linear sum over the misclassifications of each
class. This allows solving the problem by separately optimising the left and right subtree and joining the results. Such
a decomposable structure is key in efficient algorithm design
and is one of the main advantages of dedicated decision tree
approaches over general-purpose optimisation methods.
Nonlinear metrics, such as the F1-score, establish a nonlinear relationship between the misclassifications of each
class. This is preferred over linear metrics in many applications, especially if the dataset is heavily skewed towards one

Preliminaries
An instance is a pair I = (fv, class), where fv ∈ R is a
feature vector and class ∈ N. We consider binary classifi-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3733

