The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Gap on G AP: Tackling the Problem of Differing Data Distributions
in Bias-Measuring Datasets
Vid Kocijan,1 Oana-Maria Camburu,1,2 Thomas Lukasiewicz1,2
1

University of Oxford, UK
Alan Turing Institute, UK
vid.kocijan,oana-maria.camburu,thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk
2

Abstract

baseline does not achieve a balanced bias score, despite being unbiased by design. They note that feminine sentences
in the dataset contain more personal names and therefore
more distractor mentions. If a coreference model is negatively affected by a larger number of potential candidates, it
could appear more biased against female examples than it
actually is. In this work, we introduce a method for coping
with imbalances in such bias-detection datasets. We tailor
the demonstration around gender bias, however, the method
can be applied to any other type of bias as well.
A possible solution to the problem of imbalances caused
by different data distributions could be the augmentation of
the data by introducing examples with swapped genders.
While this method has been applied to training data (Zhao
et al. 2018), for test data, it could have an unforeseen impact
on different NLP systems. For example, such data augmentation may introduce instances that contain biologically or
historically inaccurate facts, such as “men giving birth” or
“historical figures being of the opposite gender”. Since G AP
was collected from Wikipedia, a large number of examples
with swapped gender could suffer from this problem.
Alternatively, examples can be constructed from manually
crafted templates where genders can be swapped without
risking to introduce inaccurate facts (Rudinger et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2018; Kiritchenko and Mohammad 2018). While
such tests of bias are important due to their controlled environment, they are synthetic and hence may not give a full
picture of the underlying biases that can emerge when the
model is used in practice.
The method introduced in this work assigns weights to
test samples to cope with undesired imbalances in bias-measuring datasets. Given a list of properties that should not
correlate with the gender of data examples, we derive a set
of linear equations that should hold for weights of the test
samples. At the same time, we minimize the likelihood of
introducing noise into the measured bias of the models, by
deriving an optimization objective that minimizes the upper
bound of such noise. The search for optimal weights under
given constraints is then implemented as a linear program.
We demonstrate the use of this approach on the G AP
dataset for coreference resolution (Webster et al. 2018), the
currently largest dataset for gender-bias-measuring. We annotate the G AP test set with all mentions of personal names.
The annotations will be publicly released and may poten-

Diagnostic datasets that can detect biased models are an important prerequisite for bias reduction within natural language processing. However, undesired patterns in the collected data can make such tests incorrect. For example, if the feminine subset of a gender-bias-measuring coreference resolution dataset contains sentences with a longer average distance
between the pronoun and the correct candidate, an RNNbased model may perform worse on this subset due to longterm dependencies. In this work, we introduce a theoretically
grounded method for weighting test samples to cope with
such patterns in the test data. We demonstrate the method
on the G AP dataset for coreference resolution. We annotate
G AP with spans of all personal names and show that examples in the female subset contain more personal names and a
longer distance between pronouns and their referents, potentially affecting the bias score in an undesired way. Using our
weighting method, we find the set of weights on the test instances that should be used for coping with these correlations,
and we re-evaluate 16 recently released coreference models.1

1

Introduction

AI systems trained on biased or imbalanced data can propagate and amplify observed patterns and make biased decisions at the time of evaluation and deployment (Mehrabi
et al. 2019). To detect the underlying bias in released natural language processing (NLP) systems and to increase their
fairness, several diagnostic datasets have been introduced,
commonly focusing on gender bias (Rudinger et al. 2018;
Zhao et al. 2018; Webster et al. 2018; Kiritchenko and Mohammad 2018). In addition to overall performance, these
works also define the bias score of the evaluated model, usually the difference or ratio between the performance of the
model on the groups of interest, e.g., female and male subsets of the data. However, when the subsets corresponding
to the groups of interest consist of data coming from different distributions, undesired imbalances may appear, leading
to inaccurate bias scores. For example, Webster et al. (2018)
constructed the G AP coreference dataset by collecting examples from English Wikipedia and observe that a random
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The annotations, the weights, and the code can be found at
https://github.com/vid-koci/weightingGAP.

13180

