The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Contextual Clinical Prediction with Reverse Distillation
Rohan Kodialam,1 Rebecca Boiarsky,1 Justin Lim,1
Aditya Sai,2 Neil Dixit,2 David Sontag1
1
MIT CSAIL & IMES
Independence Blue Cross
kodialam@alum.mit.edu, rboiar@mit.edu, justinl@mit.edu,
Aditya.Sai@ibx.com, Neil.Dixit@ibx.com, dsontag@csail.mit.edu
2

Abstract

by long gaps. Variable timescales must be simultaneously
accounted for, since the time between visits made by a single patient can vary from years to days.
Deep learning suggests a path to improving predictive
performance by learning representations of longitudinal
health records that capture a patient’s medical status and potential future risks. State-of-the-art models in the literature
have largely focused on shorter-term prediction over horizons of days or weeks, most notably during a single hospital
visit or in the immediate aftermath of a visit (Choi et al.
2017). Approaches to longer-term prediction often rely on
manually feature-engineering longitudinal health data into
patient state vectors (Razavian et al. 2015; Ahmad et al.
2018; Avati et al. 2018; Miotto et al. 2016), as opposed to
training end-to-end from raw longitudinal EHR data. Due to
this heuristic approach, these methods cannot fully exploit
the temporal nature of EHR data, nor the relationships between clinical concepts.
We introduce Self Attention with Reverse Distillation, or
SARD, a self-attention based architecture for longitudinal
health data, which uses a self-attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al. 2017) to extract meaning from the temporal structure of medical claims and the relationships between clinical
concepts. Our architecture is inspired by BEHRT (Li et al.
2020), which recently outperformed previous deep learning algorithms for medical records including RETAIN (Choi
et al. 2016b) and Deepr (Nguyen et al. 2016). Building off
of BEHRT, our major contribution is our novel pre-training
procedure, reverse distillation (RD); our architecture also
differs in several other key aspects.
In reverse distillation, we first initialize our model to
mimic a performant linear model, and subsequently finetune. We find empirical evidence that reverse distillation
acts as an effective way to perform soft feature selection
over complex feature spaces, such as multidimensional timeseries data. We further establish statistically significant gains
against strong baselines in terms of predictive performance
for three long-term tasks – predicting the likelihood of a
patient dying, requiring surgery, and requiring hospitalization – with clear applications to preventative and palliative
healthcare. Our experiments also establish that reverse distillation is a key driver behind these wins, and pave the way
for the use of this method in future research.
In summary, we present the following contributions:

Healthcare providers are increasingly using machine learning to predict patient outcomes to make meaningful interventions. However, despite innovations in this area, deep learning models often struggle to match performance of shallow
linear models in predicting these outcomes, making it difficult to leverage such techniques in practice. In this work,
motivated by the task of clinical prediction from insurance
claims, we present a new technique called reverse distillation which pretrains deep models by using high-performing
linear models for initialization. We make use of the longitudinal structure of insurance claims datasets to develop Self
Attention with Reverse Distillation, or SARD, an architecture
that utilizes a combination of contextual embedding, temporal embedding and self-attention mechanisms and most critically is trained via reverse distillation. SARD outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on multiple clinical prediction outcomes, with ablation studies revealing that reverse distillation
is a primary driver of these improvements. Code is available
at https://github.com/clinicalml/omop-learn.

Introduction
Machine learning of predictive models on health data is
widely used to guide preventative, prophylactic and palliative care. We focus on a subset of electronic medical records
that are frequently found as part of health insurance claims
or as administrative data in large hospital systems. For each
patient, we receive a time series of visits – single continuous interactions of a patient with the healthcare system –
and codes – the medical events occurring during each visit.
These codes detail the specialties of visited doctors, diagnoses, procedures, the administration of drugs, and other
medical concepts.
Several aspects of these claims data make the machine
learning challenge unique from other settings where sequential data is observed (e.g., natural language processing).
First, the data is extremely sparse. Second, multiple observations are recorded during a single visit (e.g., diagnoses, procedures, medications) and the vocabulary of medical concepts is often in the tens of thousands. Third, visits correspond to highly irregularly-spaced time series of events,
since care is often administered in short bursts punctuated
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

249

