The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Linearly Replaceable Filters for Deep Network Channel Pruning
Donggyu Joo, Eojindl Yi, Sunghyun Baek, Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
{jdg105, djwld93, baeksh, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Pruning Target Filter
(K x K convolution layer)

Input Feature Map

X

F2

…

+
⋮
+

F𝑖𝑖−1

F1

F1

× 𝜆𝜆1

…

F𝑖𝑖

F𝑖𝑖+1

+
⋮
+

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable results; however, despite the development of deep
learning, practical user applications are fairly limited because heavy networks can be used solely with the latest hardware and software supports. Therefore, network pruning is
gaining attention for general applications in various fields.
This paper proposes a novel channel pruning method, Linearly Replaceable Filter (LRF), which suggests that a filter that can be approximated by the linear combination of
other filters is replaceable. Moreover, an additional method
called Weights Compensation is proposed to support the LRF
method. This is a technique that effectively reduces the output difference caused by removing filters via direct weight
modification. Through various experiments, we have confirmed that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
in several benchmarks. In particular, on ImageNet, LRF-60
reduces approximately 56% of FLOPs on ResNet-50 without
top-5 accuracy drop. Further, through extensive analyses, we
proved the effectiveness of our approaches.

≈

Abstract

× 𝜆𝜆𝑖𝑖−1 × 𝜆𝜆𝑖𝑖+1

F𝑛𝑛

Fn

Output Feature Map

Y

Linear Combination
of Other Filters

× 𝜆𝜆𝑛𝑛

Figure 1: Basic idea of proposed linearly replaceable filters
(LRF). At every layer, each filter can be approximated by
the linear combination of other n − 1 filters. If Fi is the most
replaceable one which has the lowest approximation error,
the network can be recovered even if it is removed.

each channel of the CNNs is connected with a large number
of weights, removing individual weights does not necessarily lead to the actual speedup of the CNNs. Thus, channel
pruning that removes a specific channel and all its connected
weights together is being researched more actively (He et al.
2019; You et al. 2019; Zhuang et al. 2018).
In this paper, we propose a novel channel pruning method
called Linearly Replaceable Filter (LRF), that considers the
linear replaceability of each filter. For a specific layer, there
are n different filters. As shown in Figure 1, we can approximate each filter as a linear combination of the other n − 1
filters. If this approximation for a certain filter is accurate
enough with a low approximation error, this filter is considered to be replaceable, and the network can be easily restored when this filter is pruned. These replaceable filters
have the advantage that other remaining filters can easily replace their role in the later fine-tuning process.
The proposed method does not end with simply identifying and removing the filters that are expected to be replaceable. In addition to LRF, we propose an output difference compensation technique called Weights Compensation
to support LRF. Using the property of 1 × 1 convolution, we
can effectively reduce the difference in output feature maps
caused by removing filters. When removing each channel,

Introduction
Computer vision has been revolutionized with the advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) such
as AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012),
VGG (Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), and ResNet (He
et al. 2016a). Subsequently, even heavier networks (Huang
et al. 2017; Xie et al. 2017) were designed to achieve
higher performance. Advances in technology have enabled
the enormous computation these networks require. However,
in some environments like mobile devices, the computational resources are limited, and high speed is often required.
Therefore, the practical scope and everyday usage of deep
learning are extremely limited. For the widespread use of
artificial intelligence, we need method that makes networks
more compact while preserving most of their accuracies.
Recently, the network pruning field has been gaining attention. Given a pre-trained network, the goal of network
pruning is to make this network more compact by reducing
redundant parameters and operations. Network pruning began with removing unnecessary weights (Han et al. 2015)
from the deep neural networks (DNNs). However, because
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8021

