The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Stylized Dialogue Response Generation Using Stylized Unpaired Texts
Yinhe Zheng1,2∗ , Zikai Chen1∗ , Rongsheng Zhang3 , Shilei Huang3 , Xiaoxi Mao3 , Minlie Huang1†
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artifical Intelligence, State Key Lab of Intelligent
Technology and Systems, Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
2
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B), Beijing, China.
3
Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., Hangzhou, China.
yh.zheng@samsung.com, natnstart@gmail.com, {zhangrongsheng, huangshilei, maoxiaoxi}@corp.netease.com,
aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Generating stylized responses is essential to build intelligent
and engaging dialogue systems. However, this task is far from
well-explored due to the difficulties of rendering a particular
style in coherent responses, especially when the target style
is embedded only in unpaired texts that cannot be directly
used to train the dialogue model. This paper proposes a stylized dialogue generation method that can capture stylistic features embedded in unpaired texts. Specifically, our method
can produce dialogue responses that are both coherent to the
given context and conform to the target style. In this study,
an inverse dialogue model is first introduced to predict possible posts for the input responses. Then this inverse model
is used to generate stylized pseudo dialogue pairs based on
these stylized unpaired texts. Further, these pseudo pairs are
employed to train the stylized dialogue model with a joint
training process. A style routing approach is proposed to intensify stylistic features in the decoder. Automatic and manual evaluations on two datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms competitive baselines in producing coherent and
style-intensive dialogue responses.

Figure 1: A pipelined approach to produce formal dialogue
responses. For a post x, a response y is first produced using a dialogue model and then it is transferred to a formal
response ye using a text style transfer model. This approach
may introduce incoherent contents in ye.
features we want to capture are embedded in unpaired texts
that can not be directly utilized by these supervised models (Gao et al. 2019).
Few studies for dialogue modeling have been proposed
to capture the stylistic features embedded in unpaired texts.
Specifically, Niu and Bansal (2018) and Su et al. (2019)
employs a style-aware reinforce loss, and Gao et al. (2019)
resorts to a joint continuous latent space. However, despite
the reported feasibility, we argue that due to the discrete nature of texts and subtle definition of text styles, it is hard to
produce coherent and style-specific responses by relying on
sparse reinforce signals or controlling continuous representations.
Note that we can also implement a straightforward stylized dialogue generation pipeline with the help of an unsupervised text style transfer model (Hu et al. 2017), which
can be trained using stylized unpaired texts. Specifically, for
a post x, a non-stylized dialogue response y is first generated using a regular dialogue model. Then y is transferred to
a stylized response ye using a text style transfer model. However, this approach may hurt the coherence between x and ye
since the style transferring process is unaware of x and may
introduce inappropriate content. As shown in Figure 1, the
style transfer model generates a strong stylistic word “sir” to
emphasize the formality of ye. However, this makes ye incoherent with x since x is most likely to be issued by a female.
In this paper, we propose to build a stylized dialogue gen-

Introduction
Building a dialogue agent that can produce stylized and coherent responses has been one of the major challenges in dialogue systems (Dinan et al. 2019). Such an agent can yield
more vivacious dialogues and deliver more engaging conversations by taking advantage of the linguistic style matching
phenomenon (Niederhoffer and Pennebaker 2002), which
suggests that people tend to adjust their linguistic style during communication to pursue higher engagement.
Generating stylized dialogue responses has been investigated in various studies, where the definition of styles covers
a variety of subtle concepts, such as sentiment (Shen et al.
2017b), emotion (Zhou et al. 2018), or persona (Li et al.
2016b). Despite the success, previous studies are generally
conducted in a fully supervised setting requiring dialogue
pairs in the target style. However, in most cases, the stylistic
∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding Author: aihuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

14558

