The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Synchronous Dynamical Systems on Directed Acyclic Graphs:
Complexity and Algorithms
Daniel J. Rosenkrantz,1,2 Madhav V. Marathe,1,3 S. S. Ravi,1,2 Richard E. Stearns1,2
1

Biocomplexity Institute and Initiative, University Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904. 2 Computer Science Dept., University
at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY 12222. 3 Computer Science Dept., University Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904.
drosenkrantz@gmail.com, marathe@virginia.edu, ssravi0@gmail.com, thestearns2@gmail.com
Abstract

2003; Ogihara and Uchizawa 2020; Akutsu et al. 2007)).
Throughout this paper, we will use the term SyDS to denote such a system. In general, the local functions may be
deterministic (e.g., threshold models used in social systems
(Granovetter 1978)) or stochastic (e.g., the SIR model of disease propagation (Easley and Kleinberg 2010)). We consider
deterministic local functions throughout this paper.
The configuration of a SyDS with n nodes at at time τ
is a vector (sτ1 , sτ2 , . . . , sτn ), where sτi is the state value of
node vi at time τ , 1 ≤ i ≤ n. As the nodes evaluate and
update their local functions, the configuration of the system
evolves over time. If a SyDS transitions from a configuration
C to a configuration C 0 in one time step, we say that C 0 is the
successor of C. A configuration C which is its own successor
is called a fixed point. Thus, once a SyDS reaches a fixed
point, no further state changes occur at any node.
When using SyDSs as models of social or biological phenomena, it is of interest to study whether a given SyDS
starting from a specified initial configuration may reach certain (desirable or undesirable) configurations. For example,
in the context of information propagation, where the state
value 1 indicates that a node has received the information
propagating through the network, one may be interested in
configurations where many nodes are in state 1. On the other
hand, in contexts such as disease propagation where the state
of 1 indicates that a node has been infected, configurations
where many nodes are in state 1 are undesirable. One can
study such configuration reachability problems by considering another directed graph, called the phase space, of the
dynamical system (Mortveit and Reidys 2007). Each node
in the phase space is a configuration and there is an edge
from a node X to node Y if the SyDS can transition from
the configuration represented by X to that represented by Y
in one step. Thus, the configuration reachability problem becomes a directed path problem in phase space. For a SyDS
with n nodes where the state of each node from {0, 1}, the
number of possible configurations is 2n ; thus, the size of
the phase space of a SyDS is exponential in the size of the
SyDS. There has been a considerable amount of research
whose goal is to understand when such reachability problems are efficiently solvable and when they are computationally intractable. Specifically, several papers (e.g., (Ogihara and Uchizawa 2017; Akutsu et al. 2007)) have presented computational intractability results for reachability

Discrete dynamical systems serve as useful formal models
to study diffusion phenomena in social networks. Motivated
by applications in systems biology, several recent papers have
studied algorithmic and complexity aspects of diffusion problems for dynamical systems whose underlying graphs are directed, and may contain directed cycles. Such problems can
be regarded as reachability problems in the phase space of
the corresponding dynamical system. We show that computational intractability results for reachability problems hold
even for dynamical systems on directed acyclic graphs (dags).
We also show that for dynamical systems on dags where each
local function is monotone, the reachability problem can be
solved efficiently.

1

Introduction

Background and Motivation: Discrete dynamical systems
are formal models for the study of diffusion phenomena
in networks. Application areas in which these models have
been used include the study of social contagions (e.g., information, opinions, fads, epidemics) and energy demand modeling (e.g., adaptation of solar energy) (Adiga et al. 2019;
Chistikov et al. 2020; Ogihara and Uchizawa 2020; Gupta
et al. 2018). Informally, such a dynamical system4 consists
of an underlying (social or biological) network, with each
node having a state value from a domain B. In this paper, we
assume that the underlying graph is directed and that the domain is binary (i.e., B = {0,1}). The propagation of the contagion is modeled by a collection of Boolean local functions,
one per node. For any node v, the inputs to the local function
fv at v are the current states of v and those of its in-neighbors
(i.e., the nodes from which v has an incoming edges) and the
output of fv is the state of v at the next time instant. We consider the synchronous update model, where all nodes evaluate their local functions and update their states in parallel.
These dynamical systems are referred to as synchronous
dynamical systems (SyDSs) in the literature (e.g., (Adiga
et al. 2019; Rosenkrantz et al. 2018)). In applications involving systems biology, such systems are also referred to
as synchronous Boolean networks (e.g., (Kauffman et al.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
4
A formal definition is provided in Section 2.

11334

