The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Opponent Hand Estimation in Gin Rummy Using Deep Neural Networks and
Heuristic Strategies
Bhaskar Mishra,1 Ashish Aggarwal2
1

Computer & Information Science & Engineering, 2 Department of Engineering Education
University of Florida, USA
{bmishra1, ashishjuit}@ufl.edu

Abstract

As of now, the common benchmark that has been used
to test these techniques is the game of Poker, specifically
heads-up Texas hold’em (HTH). Though the specific variants of HTH have changed – older techniques used headsup limit Texas hold’em, but after that was solved in 2015
(Bowling et al. 2015), newer techniques like DeepStack and
Libratus used the much more complex game of heads-up
no-limit Texas hold’em (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and
Sandholm 2018) – the general structure of the game has not
changed. Relative to a game like Gin Rummy, HTH has a
very small number of unique starting hands, and even when
including the 5 community cards, the number of unique card
combinations is still less than the number of unique starting
hands in Gin Rummy (For an explanation of the primary
rules and terminology of Gin Rummy, please see Appendix
A).

• HTH Starting Hands = 52
2 = 1326


50
9
• HTH Card Combinations = 52
2 × 5 ≈ 2.8 × 10

10
• Gin Rummy Starting Hands = 52
10 ≈ 1.5 × 10

A vital part of any good strategy for most imperfectinformation games is making predictions about the information that is unavailable. For example, in card games like Poker
and Gin Rummy, predicting the kinds of cards the opponent is
holding is necessary for playing well. Specifically, it is useful
for agents to be able to map the partial game states that are
made available to them to the probabilities of each of the possible complete game states, given that they are playing against
other rational player(s). Finding this relationship, however, is
difficult, as it requires knowledge of how a rational player
would play, which is the problem this relationship is being
used to solve. In this paper, we attempt to find this relationship in the context of the card game Gin Rummy, though instead of predicting the complete game state, we focus on what
is most useful to a player: the opponent’s hand. We do this by
using heuristic utility functions to create an agent that approximates how a rational player would play, and then using the
resulting game data to train a Deep Neural Network mapping
known information to predictions about the opponent’s hand.
This model is used to improve the existing agent and, in turn,
to produce more data to create better models.

Additionally, in HTH, there are many card combinations that
require very similar strategies and as a result can be bucketed
together without significantly affecting the resulting strategy. This bucketing can reduce the number of information
sets in the abstracted game by several orders of magnitude
(Zinkevich et al. 2008). In Gin Rummy, the strategy seems
very dependent on the specific set of cards a player has, and
there does not seem to be room for such significant state abstraction.
The game tree of Gin Rummy also has much greater
depth. Whereas each player makes a maximum of 4 decisions in each of the 4 rounds in each hand of HTH (in each
round, a player chooses either to fold, call, or bet, chooses
what amount to bet if they chose to bet, chooses whether to
reraise, if applicable, and chooses what amount to reraise to
if they chose to reraise), in a single hand of Gin Rummy,
players make 2-3 decisions per turn – where to draw from,
which card to discard, and whether or not to knock, if able
– and there can theoretically be an infinite number of turns
per hand.
These differences make it so that the techniques used to
solve variants of HTH can not be used in an obvious way
to approach a game like Gin Rummy. There would either

Introduction
Imperfect-information games model decision-making situations involving two or more agents, where agents do not
have access to complete information. Considerable work has
gone into finding solutions for such games. Techniques like
counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) have been used
to find Nash equilibrium strategies for players (Zinkevich
et al. 2008), and various kinds of abstractions have been
used to find approximate solutions to increasingly complex games (Sandholm 2015). In 2016, DeepStack achieved
super-human performance in the game of heads-up no-limit
Texas hold’em, using deep neural networks to approximate the value of game states and efficiently find approximate Nash equilibria without using the entire game tree
(Moravčı́k et al. 2017). At around the same time, Libratus
achieved super-human performance in the same game, using
an approach called “nested solving” where the agent repeatedly solves an increasingly detailed strategy of the portion of
the game that is relevant in real time (Brown and Sandholm
2018).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15607

