The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Any-Precision Deep Neural Networks*
Haichao Yu1 , Haoxiang Li2 , Humphrey Shi1,3 , Thomas S. Huang1 , Gang Hua2
1

UIUC, 2 Wormpex AI Research, 3 University of Oregon
{haichao3, hshi10, t-huang1}@illinois.edu, haoxiang.li@bianlifeng.com, ganghua@gmail.com

...

𝑛"-bit

𝑛!-bit

b) Low-Precision

c) Mixed-Precision

k-bit quantization, k in {1,2,…,8,32}

...

k-bit

...

k-bit

k-bit

Image

...

32-bit

32-bit

32-bit

...

Image

Pre-trained Weights

...

1-bit

a) Full-Precision

1-bit

...

Image

We present any-precision deep neural networks (DNNs),
which are trained with a new method that allows the learned
DNNs to be flexible in numerical precision during inference. The same model in runtime can be flexibly and directly set to different bit-widths, by truncating the least significant bits, to support dynamic speed and accuracy trade-off.
When all layers are set to low-bits, we show that the model
achieved accuracy comparable to dedicated models trained
at the same precision. This nice property facilitates flexible
deployment of deep learning models in real-world applications, where in practice trade-offs between model accuracy
and runtime efficiency are often sought. Previous literature
presents solutions to train models at each individual fixed efficiency/accuracy trade-off point. But how to produce a model
flexible in runtime precision is largely unexplored. When the
demand of efficiency/accuracy trade-off varies from time to
time or even dynamically changes in runtime, it is infeasible to re-train models accordingly, and the storage budget
may forbid keeping multiple models. Our proposed framework achieves this flexibility without performance degradation. More importantly, we demonstrate that this achievement
is agnostic to model architectures and applicable to multiple
vision tasks. Our code is released at https://github.com/SHILabs/Any-Precision-DNNs.

32-bit

32-bit

Image

Abstract

d) Any-Precision

Figure 1: Illustrations of deep neural networks (DNN) in
different numerical precisions: a) weights and activations
of typical full-precision DNN are in 32-bit floating values;
b) binary DNN with 1-bit weights and activations as an
example low-precision DNN; c) different layers in mixedprecision DNN can be in arbitrary bit-width and ni is fixed
after training; d) the proposed any-precision DNN can have
pre-trained weights in full-precision while in runtime the
weights and activations can be quantized into arbitrary bitwidth k.
deep neural network architectures to support practical usage (Howard et al. 2019; Yu and Huang 2019; Tan and Le
2019). People also consider to adaptively modify general
deep learning model inference to dynamically determine the
execution during the feed-forward pass to save some computation at the cost of potential accuracy drop (Figurnov et al.
2017; Teerapittayanon, McDanel, and Kung 2016; Wu et al.
2018; Veit and Belongie 2018).
Besides these explorations, another important line of research proposes a low-level solution to use less bits to represent deep learning model and its runtime data to achieve
largely reduced runtime cost. It has been shown in various
literatures that full-precision is over-abundant in many applications that we can use 8-bit or even 4-bit models without
obvious performance degradation.
Some previous works went further in this direction. For
example, BNN, XNOR-Net, and others (Courbariaux et al.
2016; Rastegari et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2016) are proposed to use as low as 1-bit for both the weights and acti-

Introduction
While state-of-the-art deep learning models can achieve very
high accuracy on various benchmarks, runtime cost is another crucial factor to consider in practice. In general, the
capacity of a deep learning model is positively correlated
with its complexity. As a result, accurate models mostly run
slower, consume more power, and have larger memory footprint as well as model size. In practice, it is inevitable to
balance efficiency and accuracy to get a good trade-off when
deploying any deep learning models.
To alleviate this issue, a number of approaches have been
proposed to address it from different perspectives. We observe active researches (Liu et al. 2018a; Cai, Zhu, and
Han 2018; Chen et al. 2019) in looking for more efficient
* Correspondence to H. Shi and G. Hua. This work was done
during Yu’s internship at Wormpex AI Research.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10763

