The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Efficient Algorithm for Deep Stochastic Contextual Bandits
Tan Zhu, Guannan Liang, Chunjiang Zhu, Haining Li, Jinbo Bi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
tan.zhu@uconn.edu, guannan.liang@uconn.edu, chunjiang.zhu@uconn.edu, haining.li@uconn.edu, jinbo.bi@uconn.edu

Note that the context d can be continuous but there are discrete and a finite number (K) of actions. The agent’s goal is
to minimize the cumulative regret
PT
∗
∗
(2)
t=1 Erd,a [rdt ,ad |dt , adt ] − rdt ,at ,

Abstract
In stochastic contextual bandit (SCB) problems, an agent selects an action based on certain observed context to maximize the cumulative reward over iterations. Recently there
have been a few studies using a deep neural network (DNN)
to predict the expected reward for an action, and the DNN
is trained by a stochastic gradient based method. However,
convergence analysis has been greatly ignored to examine
whether and where these methods converge. In this work,
we formulate the SCB that uses a DNN reward function as
a non-convex stochastic optimization problem, and design a
stage-wise stochastic gradient descent algorithm to optimize
the problem and determine the action policy. We prove that
with high probability, the action sequence chosen by this algorithm converges to a greedy action policy respecting a local
optimal reward function. Extensive experiments have been
performed to demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of
the proposed algorithm on multiple real-world datasets.

t

where T is the total number of rounds, and a∗dt is the optimal
action that maximizes the expected reward Erd,a [rd,a |d, a].
To minimize the cumulative regret, the agent needs to balance between selecting potentially optimal action to learn
its reward distribution (Exploration) and choosing the action
with the highest estimated expected reward (Exploitation),
a.k.a. the Exploration vs. Exploitation. Earlier studies on
SCB problems focus on SCB with a linear reward function,
which has been well understood both theoretically and empirically (Auer 2002; Dani, Hayes, and Kakade 2008; Foster
et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018). However, the assumption of a
linear reward function may not be satisfied for many real-life
problems. Later, many research efforts have been devoted to
SCB with a more relaxed assumption on the reward function.
In particular, SCB with a deep neural network (DNN) modeled reward function or called deep SCB have attracted great
interest, because of the DNN’s powerful expressiveness for
complicated real-world problems (Allesiardo, Féraud, and
Bouneffouf 2014; Collier and Llorens 2018; Zhou, Li, and
Gu 2020; Kveton et al. 2020).
For deep SCB, one may naturally adopt adaptive action
policies, which have been successfully employed in SCB
with a simple reward function, e.g., a linear or generalized linear reward function. In such policies, the exploration
schedule can be dynamically updated based on the observed
contexts, selected actions and received rewards in previous
rounds. Then the computational complexity generally depends on the dimensionality of the learnable parameters and
the contexts, which, however, are often very high for DNNs
(because of its power in modeling high-dimensional data).
Therefore, it is still not clear how to use adaptive action policies for DNN based on SCB in an efficient way to enable its
scalability to large DNNs. For example, recently (Zhou, Li,
and Gu 2020) designed a powerful adaptive action policy for
deep SCB, but the complicated matrix calculations to update
the action policy still make it applicable to small DNNs.
Moreover, although almost all deep SCB algorithms train
the DNN-realized reward function with stochastic gradient
based methods, rigorous analysis has seldom been given to

Introduction
The multi-armed bandit is an interactive machine learning
problem and has received tremendous research interest for
decades, e.g., (Auer, Cesabianchi, and Fischer 2002; Filippi et al. 2010; Gopalan, Mannor, and Mansour 2014). The
stochastic contextual bandit (SCB) problems contain a sequence of rounds t, where the agent observes a context
dt ∈ Rnd (for nd ∈ I) which consists of features about all
actions and can be regarded as a sample from an unknown
distribution that is fixed when shifted in time, e.g., user information in news recommendation system (Li et al. 2010).
Then the agent selects an action at from K choices (e.g., Karms) to get the reward rdt ,at ∈ [0, 1], which is i.i.d. drawn
from an unknown but fixed distribution with the expectation
modeled by the reward function defined below.
Definition 1 (Reward Function) There exists a realvalued vector x∗ ∈ Rnx and a reward function f (d; x∗ ) s.t.
for all actions at ∈ {1, 2, ..., K} and context dt ∼ D,
Erdt ,at [rdt ,at | dt , at ] = fat (dt ; x∗ ),

(1)

∗
where fat (dt ; x∗ ) ∈ [0, 1] is the ath
t output of f (dt ; x ).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11193

