The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Spatio-Temporal Purchase Prediction via Deep Meta Learning
Huiling Qin1,2,3 , Songyu Ke2,3,4 , Xiaodu Yang2,3,5 , Haoran Xu1,2,3 , Xianyuan Zhan2,3∗ , Yu Zheng1,2,3∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
JD Intelligent Cities Research, Beijing, China
3
JD iCity, JD Technology, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
5
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Southwest Jiaotong University, China
{orekinana,ryanxhr}@gmail.com,{songyu-ke,msyuzheng}@outlook.com,zhanxianyuan@jd.com,xiaodu.yang@foxmail.com
Abstract

high

Office

Purchase prediction is an essential task in both online and
offline retail industry, especially during major shopping festivals, when strong promotion boosts consumption dramatically.
It is important for merchants to forecast such surge of sales
and have better preparation. This is a challenging problem,
as the purchase patterns during shopping festivals are significantly different from usual cases and also rare in historical
data. Most existing methods fail at this problem due to the extremely scarce data samples as well as the inability to capture
the complex macroscopic spatio-temporal dependencies in a
city. To address this problem, we propose the Spatio-Temporal
Meta-learning Prediction (STMP) model for purchase prediction during shopping festivals. STMP is a meta-learning based
spatio-temporal multi-task deep generative model. It adopts
a meta-learning framework with few-shot learning capability
to capture both spatial and temporal data representations. A
generative component then uses the extracted spatio-temporal
representation and input data to infer the prediction results.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the meta-learning generalization ability of STMP. STMP outperforms baselines in all
cases, which shows the effectiveness of our model.

Campus

Residence

Office

Campus
Suburbs

Suburbs

Residence

low

(a) Weekday

(b) Shopping festival

Figure 1: Purchase distribution in different space and time.
of products in different regions, while improving the prediction accuracy of the burst purchase behavior during major
shopping festivals. This is a particularly challenging problem,
the difficulties mainly arise from two aspects:
Limited reference samples. The spatial distribution of
shopping malls and stores, demographic properties of regions
as well as day types (e.g. weekdays, weekends, or shopping
carnivals) often leads to diverse shopping behavior, as shown
in Figure 1. Conventional solution for purchase prediction is
to training an exclusive model for each region or day type (Yi
et al. 2018). However, the data from a single region or a specific day type are too sparse to support training a good model.
The becomes even worse for prediction on shopping festivals,
as these festivals only occur few times a year, leading to extremely limited data samples. How to transfer information
from different regions and day types to train a model while
remaining their own specific characteristics is a challenge.
Complex spatio-temporal purchase patterns. The population density and demographic characteristics are highly
heterogeneous in different regions of a city, which could lead
to distinct consumption behaviors. Moreover, the economic
development, population growth and movement across regions will also shape-changing consumption behaviors in the
long-term. Modeling such complex spatio-temporal purchase
patterns can be very difficult. To accurately capture the spatial
properties of regions, it requires considering a comprehensive set of spatial features, such as point-of-interest (POI)
distribution, demographic features of regions, etc. Furthermore, the temporal information gathered from historical data
may be biased towards normal purchase patterns, which can
not provide sufficient information to support predicting the
burst of sales during shopping festivals. How to capture the

Introduction
Reliable purchase prediction is essential for both the online
and offline retail industry to optimize the supply chain, reduce
operational costs, and improve revenue. This becomes even
vital during major shopping “festivals” (e.g., Black Friday
in the US, 11.11 shopping carnivals in China), the sudden
burst of sales boosted by big promotions poses a great challenge for retailers, causing problems such as stockouts or
even system crash, leading to a bad shopping experience for
consumers. However, accurate purchase forecasts on different categories of products can enable better preparation for
their inventories and design appropriate promotion strategies
for products. More importantly, knowing the spatial distribution of product purchases in different categories also helps to
design effective temporary shipping strategies to ensure more
efficient dispatching of products among warehouses across
different regions during such a special period of time. In this
work, we aim to predict the purchase of multiple categories
∗

Yu Zheng and Xianyuan Zhan is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4312

