The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Abusive Language Detection in Heterogeneous Contexts:
Dataset Collection and the Role of Supervised Attention
Hongyu Gong,1 Alberto Valido,2 Katherine M. Ingram,2
Giulia Fanti,3 Suma Bhat,1 Dorothy L. Espelage2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 3 Carnegie Mellon University
hgong6@illinois.edu, avalia@unc.edu, ingramkm@live.unc.edu,
gfanti@andrew.cmu.edu, spbhat2@illinois.edu, espelage@unc.edu

Abstract
Sentencelevel
heterogeneity

Abusive language is a massive problem in online social platforms. Existing abusive language detection techniques are
particularly ill-suited to comments containing heterogeneous
abusive language patterns, i.e., both abusive and non-abusive
parts. This is due in part to the lack of datasets that explicitly
annotate heterogeneity in abusive language. We tackle this
challenge by providing an annotated dataset of abusive language in over 11,000 comments from YouTube. We account
for heterogeneity in this dataset by separately annotating both
the comment as a whole and the individual sentences that
comprise each comment. We then propose an algorithm that
uses a supervised attention mechanism to detect and categorize abusive content using multi-task learning. We empirically
demonstrate the challenges of using traditional techniques on
heterogeneous content and the comparative gains in performance of the proposed approach over state-of-the-art methods.

1

2
Phrase-level
heterogeneity

3

Both

4

This case really exposes Sheehy as a total fraud.
Not to mention a total man hating cunt. You have
done a masterful (mistressful?) job of exposing
this lying fraudster. Love the ending when George
is cited as a MGTOW Hero! He is indeed.
+Username I understand. Personally, I rarely do
jokes involving violence of any sort. (Unless it
involves Muslims!) :)
+Username I always hated him, cause he makes
his opinion sound like its all facts plus that and
he sounds like a fuckin’ faggot
+Username Shut the fuck up, cunt. I’m a man,
and I respect her a lot, because she speaks truth.
She is very eloquent and a pleasure to look at. You
fucking idiot, all you do is make fun of peoples
looks, did you miss the points she was making?

Table 1: Examples of YouTube comments with heterogeneous
abusive language. Abusive parts are underlined in bold text.

Introduction
Abusive language refers to strongly impolite and harmful language used to hurt and control a person or a group by way of
harassment, insults, threats, bullying and/or trolling (Waseem
et al. 2017). Because of the nature of digital technology, abusive language can be generated anonymously and can spread
to many victims in a short time, making it a serious societal
concern (Price, Dalgleish et al. 2010). Due to the profound
negative impact of abusive language, many online platforms
today dedicate significant resources to its detection and categorization (Nobata et al. 2016). As the problem grows in
scope and scale, so does the need for automated detection
and categorization tools.
Despite significant prior work on the automated detection
of abusive language, it remains a difficult task (Vidgen et al.
2019). One important reason for this difficulty is heterogeneity of abuse: abusive comments often contain a combination
of abusive and non-abusive language, and it can be difficult for algorithmic approaches to understand this distinction. Table 1 illustrates examples of heterogeneous abusive
comments from YouTube. By sentence-level heterogeneity,
we mean multi-sentence comments where some sentences
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14804

are abusive, and others are not. Comment 1 shows an instance where removing the abusive sentence does not affect
the meaning of the comment. Comment 2 is more subtle;
removing the underlined sentence completely changes the
comment’s meaning. By phrase-level heterogeneity, we mean
comments where only a few words are abusive, but there are
no abusive full sentences.1 Comment 4 illustrates a combination of both types of heterogeneity. Notably, even though
the comment is abusive, it is also pro-social, in that it is defending the victim of another abusive comment. Hence, there
are substantial subtleties associated with detecting and understanding heterogeneous abusive language—both for humans
and for automated detectors.
Heterogeneity does not necessarily lessen the effects of
abusive language on victims. Both cyber- and traditional bullies are known to sometimes engage in a combination of
friendly and bullying behaviors, while still negatively affecting victims (Kowalski and Limber 2007; James et al. 2011).
Similarly, workers who receive a combination of positive
and negative feedback tend to experience stronger overall
negative emotional reactions (Choi et al. 2018). Hence, it is
1
Considering a comment with more than one independent clause,
we define it as being “phrase-level heterogeneous” if it contains at
least one independent clause that is non-abusive even though the
comment as a whole is labelled as abusive, or vice versa.

