The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

f -Aware Conflict Prioritization & Improved Heuristics For Conflict-Based Search
Eli Boyarski1 , Ariel Felner1 , Pierre Le Bodic2 , Daniel Harabor2 , Peter J. Stuckey2 , Sven Koenig3
1

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
2
Monash University
3
University of Southern California
boyarske@post.bgu.ac.il, felner@bgu.ac.il, {pierre.lebodic, peter.stuckey, daniel.harabor}@monash.edu, skoenig@usc.edu

action, imposes constraints on the agents to avoid the collision, thus resolving the conflict. The search space of CBS
is therefore a binary Constraint Tree (CT), which the algorithm explores in best-first order. CBS is complete, optimal
and often highly performant; e.g., recent variants (Li et al.
2019a,b,c) can solve MAPF problems with more than 100
agents.
CBS is very sensitive to the order in which conflicts are
chosen to be resolved. Boyarski et al. (2015b) introduced a
scheme for prioritizing conflicts. Highest in the suggested
priority ordering are cardinal conflicts, as resolving them
raises the cost for both child nodes. Next are semi-cardinal
conflicts, which raise the cost for only one child node, and
last are non-cardinal conflicts, which do not raise the cost
for either child node. This prioritization greatly speeds up
the search by decreasing the size of the CT, because child
nodes of higher costs are less likely to be expanded.
Later, Felner et al. (2018) and Li et al. (2019a) added
heuristics to CBS, which provided further performance improvements. Nodes of the CT are now prioritized based on
the sum of their cost and their heuristic value (f = g + h).
In this paper, we first propose an enhanced prioritization
function that allows CBS to distinguish between conflicts
that appeared equivalent when branching. We identify a set
of conflicts, called f -cardinal, which produce child nodes
with increased f -costs. We refer to conflicts that produce
child nodes with increased g-costs as g-cardinal. Next, we
propose a method for identifying f -cardinal conflicts and
a new conflict prioritization scheme where f -cardinal conflicts are resolved first, followed by other types of conflicts.
Then, we enhance all known heuristics for CBS by using information about the cost of resolving certain conflicts with
only a small computational overhead. Finally, we evaluate
both contributions experimentally. Our results indicate that
this new strategy and the new heuristics increase the efficiency of current versions of CBS.

Abstract
Conflict-Based Search (CBS) is a leading two-level algorithm
for optimal Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF). The main
step of CBS is to expand nodes by resolving conflicts (where
two agents collide). Choosing the ‘right’ conflict to resolve
can greatly speed up the search. CBS first resolves conflicts
where the costs (g-values) of the resulting child nodes are
larger than the cost of the node to be split. However, the recent addition of high-level heuristics to CBS and expanding
nodes according to f = g + h reduces the relevance of this
conflict prioritization method. Therefore, we introduce an expanded categorization of conflicts, which first resolves conflicts where the f -values of the child nodes are larger than the
f -value of the node to be split, and present a method for identifying such conflicts. We also enhance all known heuristics
for CBS by using information about the cost of resolving certain conflicts with only a small computational overhead. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate that both the expanded
categorization of conflicts and the improved heuristics contribute to making CBS even more efficient.

Introduction and Overview
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is a coordination problem where the aim is to find a set of collision-free paths for
a team of mobile agents, each from its start location to its
designated target location. MAPF is a well-known and wellstudied topic with numerous real-world applications. For example, MAPF is a core challenge automated warehouse logistics (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008), automated
parcel sortation (Kou et al. 2020), automated valet parking (Okoso, Otaki, and Nishi 2019), computer games (Silver 2006) and a variety of other contexts (Ma et al. 2016).
Many optimal and suboptimal approaches for MAPF have
been proposed; a recent summary is given in (Felner et al.
2017).
In this work, we focus on optimal MAPF, where the goal
is to minimize the sum of path costs, and consider improvement strategies for Conflict-Based Search (CBS) (Sharon
et al. 2015), a popular and successful MAPF solver. CBS can
be described as a two-level algorithm. The low level finds
optimal paths for the individual agents. If the paths of two
agents collide (i.e., are in conflict), the high level, via a split

Background
In classical MAPF, the environment is a graph (usually a
grid), and time is discretized to time steps. In each time step,
an agent may traverse an edge to move from its vertex to an
adjacent vertex, or it may wait at its current vertex. Agents
have a vertex conflict if they are planned to occupy the same
vertex at the same time, and have an edge conflict if they

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12241

