The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Paragraph-level Commonsense Transformers with Recurrent Memory
Saadia Gabriel12 , Chandra Bhagavatula2 , Vered Shwartz12 , Ronan Le Bras2 ,
Maxwell Forbes12 , and Yejin Choi12
1

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
2
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Seattle, USA
{skgabrie, mbforbes, yejin}@cs.washington.edu , {chandrab, vereds, ronanlb}@allenai.org

Abstract
Human understanding of narrative texts requires making
commonsense inferences beyond what is stated explicitly in
the text. A recent model, COMET, can generate such implicit commonsense inferences along several dimensions such
as pre- and post-conditions, motivations, and mental states of
the participants. However, COMET was trained on commonsense inferences of short phrases, and is therefore discourseagnostic. When presented with each sentence of a multisentence narrative, it might generate inferences that are inconsistent with the rest of the narrative.
We present the task of discourse-aware commonsense inference. Given a sentence within a narrative, the goal is to generate commonsense inferences along predefined dimensions,
while maintaining coherence with the rest of the narrative.
Such large-scale paragraph-level annotation is hard to get and
costly, so we use available sentence-level annotations to efficiently and automatically construct a distantly supervised
corpus.
Using this corpus, we train PARA-COMET, a discourseaware model that incorporates paragraph-level information to
generate coherent commonsense inferences from narratives.
PARA-COMET captures both semantic knowledge pertaining to prior world knowledge, and episodic knowledge involving how current events relate to prior and future events
in a narrative. Our results show that PARA-COMET outperforms the sentence-level baselines, particularly in generating
inferences that are both coherent and novel.

Reasons for
going around
property

find a leak.
more
likely

High water bill.

less
likely

get exercise
What would someone
with a high water bill do?

Figure 1: Discourse-agnostic models generate inferences
relevant to the local context, but these generations can often be generic or incorrect at the narrative-level. Discourseaware models take the rest of the context into account to
make globally coherent inferences.

Introduction
Narrative understanding is a long-standing challenge in the
field of natural language processing (NLP) (Charniak 1972;
Winograd 1972). Arguably, the most crucial aspect of narrative understanding is the ability to make implicit commonsense inferences about entities and events in a story and
refining them as the story unfolds (Pettijohn and Radvansky 2016; Williams, Lieberman, and Winston 2017; Rashkin
et al. 2018; Qin et al. 2019). This ability in humans is seamless, yet essential for coherent understanding of narrative
text. Can NLP systems explicitly generate commonsense inferences, that a human might implicitly make while reading
a narrative?

Being able to generate commonsense inferences has important practical implications. Commonsense Transformer
(COMET, Bosselut et al. 2019), proposed recently, generates commonsense inferences for a given phrase or sentence,
capturing pre- and post-conditions along nine inferential dimensions found in the ATOMIC (Sap et al. 2019) knowledge
base.1 The commonsense inferences generated by COMET
have been effectively applied to downstream applications
such as sarcastic comment generation (Chakrabarty et al.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12857

See Table 2 for a full list of inferential dimensions in ATOMIC.

