The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Approximate Multiplication of Sparse Matrices with Limited Space
Yuanyu Wan, Lijun Zhang∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{wanyy, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

approximation of the matrix product, has been a substitute
and received ever-increasing attention (Ye, Luo, and Zhang
2016; Wan and Zhang 2018; Wan, Wei, and Zhang 2018;
Kuzborskij, Cella, and Cesa-Bianchi 2019).
Given two large matrices X ∈ Rmx ×n and Y ∈ Rmy ×n ,
the goal of AMM with limited space is to find two small sketches BX ∈ Rmx ×` and BY ∈ Rmy ×` such that BX BYT
approximates XY T well, where `  min(mx , my , n) is
the sketch size. Traditionally, randomized techniques such as
column selection (Drineas, Kannan, and Mahoney 2006) and
random projection (Sarlos 2006; Magen and Zouzias 2011;
Cohen, Nelson, and Woodruff 2015) have been utilized to
develop lightweight algorithms with the O(n(mx + my )`)
time complexity and O((mx + my )`) space complexity for
AMM, and yielded theoretical guarantees for the approximation error. Specifically, early studies (Drineas, Kannan,
and Mahoney 2006; Sarlos 2006) focused on the Frobenius
error, and achieved the following bound

Approximate matrix multiplication with limited space has
received ever-increasing attention due to the emergence of
large-scale applications. Recently, based on a popular matrix
sketching algorithm—frequent directions, previous work has
introduced co-occuring directions (COD) to reduce the approximation error for this problem. Although it enjoys the
space complexity of O((mx + my )`) for two input matrices X ∈ Rmx ×n and Y ∈ Rmy ×n where ` is the sketch
size, its time complexity is O (n(mx + my + `)`), which is
still very high for large input matrices. In this paper, we propose to reduce the time complexity by exploiting the sparsity
of the input matrices. The key idea is to employ an approximate singular value decomposition (SVD) method which can
utilize the sparsity, to reduce the number of QR decompositions required by COD. In this way, we develop sparse cooccuring directions, which reduces
 the time complexity to
e (nnz(X) + nnz(Y ))` + n`2 in expectation while keepO
s the same space complexity as O((mx + my )`), where
nnz(X) denotes the number of non-zero entries in X and the
e notation hides constant factors as well as polylogarithmic
O
factors. Theoretical analysis reveals that the approximation
error of our algorithm is almost the same as that of COD.
Furthermore, we empirically verify the efficiency and effectiveness of our algorithm.

kXY T − BX BYT kF ≤ kXkF kY kF

(1)

2
e
with ` = O(1/
). Later, two improvements (Magen and
Zouzias 2011; Cohen, Nelson, and Woodruff 2015) established the following error bound measured by the spectral
norm
kXY T − BX BYT k ≤ kXkkY k
(2)
2

e (sr(X) + sr(Y )) /2 where sr(X) = kXkF2 is
with ` = O
kXk
the stable rank of X.
However, their sketch size ` has a quadratic dependence
on 1/, which means that a large sketch size is required to
ensure a small approximation error. To improve the dependence on 1/, recent studies (Ye, Luo, and Zhang 2016; Mroueh, Marcheret, and Goel 2017) have extended a deterministic matrix sketching technique called frequent directions
(FD) (Liberty 2013; Ghashami and Phillips 2014; Ghashami et al. 2016) to AMM. Specifically, Ye, Luo, and Zhang
(2016) concatenated X, Y vertically as [X; Y ], and applied
FD to [X; Y ] ∈ R(mx +my )×n to generate BX and BY such
that

kXY T − BX BYT k ≤ kXk2F + kY k2F /`
(3)

Introduction
Matrix multiplication refers to computing the product XY T
of two matrices X ∈ Rmx ×n and Y ∈ Rmy ×n , which is
a fundamental task in many machine learning applications
such as regression (Naseem, Togneri, and Bennamoun 2010;
Cohen, Nelson, and Woodruff 2015), online learning (Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale 2007; Chu et al. 2011; Zhang et al.
2016, 2017), information retrieval (Eriksson-Bique et al.
2011) and canonical correlation analysis (Hotelling 1936;
Chen, Liu, and Carbonell 2015). Recently, the scales of data and models in these applications have increased dramatically, which results in very large data matrices. As a result, it requires unacceptable time and space to directly compute XY T in the main memory. To reduce both time and space complexities, approximate matrix multiplication (AMM) with limited space, which can efficiently compute a good
∗

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

which also requires the O(n(mx + my )`) time complexity and O((mx + my )`) space complexity. Furthermore,
10058

