The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sparsity Aware Normalization for GANs
Idan Kligvasser, Tomer Michaeli
Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{kligvasser@campus, tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract

the set of Lipschitz-1 functions. Precisely enforcing this constraint is impractical (Virmaux and Scaman 2018), yet simple approximations, like weight clipping (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) and gradient norm penalty (Gulrajani
et al. 2017), are already quite effective.
Perhaps the most effective approximation strategy is spectral normalization (Miyato et al. 2018). This method normalizes the weights of the critic network after every update
step, in an attempt to make each layer Lipschitz-1 individually (which would guarantee that the end-to-end function
is Lipschitz-1 as well). Due to its simplicity and its significantly improved results, this approach has become the
method of choice in numerous GAN based algorithms (e.g.
(Miyato and Koyama 2018; Park et al. 2019; Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018; Armanious et al. 2020)).
In this paper, we present a new weight normalization strategy that outperforms spectral normalization, as well as all
other methods, by a significant margin on many tasks and
with various network architectures (see e.g., Fig. 1). We start
by showing, both theoretically and empirically, that normalizing each layer to be Lipschitz-1 is overly restrictive. In
fact, as we illustrate, such a normalization leads to very poor
GAN training if done correctly. We identify that the real reason for the success of (Miyato et al. 2018) is actually its
systematic bias in the estimation of the Lipschitz constant
for convolution layers, which is typically off by roughly a
factor of 4. Following our analysis, we show that a better
way to control the end-to-end smoothness of the critic, is
to normalize each layer by its amplification of the typical
signals that enter it (rather than the worst-case ones). As
we demonstrate, in convolutional networks with ReLU activations, these signals are typically channel-sparse (namely
many of their channels are identically zero). This motivates
us to suggest sparsity aware normalization (SAN).
Our normalization has several advantages over spectral
normalization. First, it leads to better visual results, as also
supported by quantitative evaluations with the Inception
score (IS) (Salimans et al. 2016) and the Fréchet Inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al. 2017). This is true in both
unconditional image generation and conditional tasks, such
as label-to-image translation, super-resolution, and attribute
transfer. Second, our approach better stabilizes the training,
and it does so at practically no computational overhead. In
particular, even if we apply only a single update step of

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are known to benefit from regularization or normalization of their critic (discriminator) network during training. In this paper, we analyze the popular spectral normalization scheme, find a significant drawback and introduce sparsity aware normalization (SAN), a new alternative approach for stabilizing GAN
training. As opposed to other normalization methods, our approach explicitly accounts for the sparse nature of the feature maps in convolutional networks with ReLU activations.
We illustrate the effectiveness of our method through extensive experiments with a variety of network architectures.
As we show, sparsity is particularly dominant in critics used
for image-to-image translation settings. In these cases our
approach improves upon existing methods, in less training
epochs and with smaller capacity networks, while requiring
practically no computational overhead.

Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have made a dramatic impact on low-level vision and
graphics, particularly in tasks relating to image generation
(Radford, Metz, and Chintala 2015; Karras et al. 2017),
image-to-image translation (Isola et al. 2017; Zhu et al.
2017; Choi et al. 2018), and single image super resolution
(Ledig et al. 2017; Wang et al. 2018; Bahat and Michaeli
2019). GANs can generate photo-realistic samples of fantastic quality (Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Brock, Donahue,
and Simonyan 2018; Shaham, Dekel, and Michaeli 2019;
Ledig et al. 2017), however they are often hard to train and
require careful use of regularization and/or normalization
methods for making the training stable and effective.
A factor of key importance in GAN training, is the
way by which the critic (discriminator) network is optimized. An overly-sharp discrimination function can lead to
gradient vanishing when updating the generator, while an
overly-smooth function can lead to poor discrimination between real and fake samples and thus to insufficient supervision for the generator. One of the most successful training approaches, is that arising from the Wasserstein GAN
(WGAN) (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) formulation, which asserts that the critic should be chosen among
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8181

