The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Base Degrees of Inconsistency: Complexity and Counting
Johannes K. Fichte1 Markus Hecher2 Arne Meier3
1

TU Dresden
TU Wien
3
Leibniz Universität Hannover
johannes.fichte@tu-dresden.de, markus.hecher@tuwien.ac.at, meier@thi.uni-hannover.de
2

Abstract

a set of so-called inclusion-axioms that have to be obeyed
in every world of the model, and an RBox (role box) is a
set of relation constraints. Reasoning in DLs often involves
querying knowledge-bases which, when asking for closedworld, can be achieved by Boolean Datalog programs. While
constructing those queries seem straight-forward, huge real
world databases often contain data entries that are inconsistent with respect to a considered query. In other words,
given a knowledge-base and a Datalog query, a model of
a knowledge-base cannot consistently be extended to the
query and is seen to be inconsistent with respect to it. We
want to estimate a degree of inconsistency by counting inconsistencies. This can be particularly interesting in a setting
where we need a quantitative measure on the models that
cannot be entailed. This is a stronger notion of reasoning
than classical skeptical reasoning (asking for containment
in all models). Let us consider the following example from
the propositional setting to illustrate this approach. Note that
stable models are defined in terms of subset-minimality. We
give a more elaborate example in the sequel of the paper.
Example 1. Consider the following entailment question:
{p(a) ∨ p(b)} |= {p(c) ←; ← p(a), p(b)}? The models of
{p(a) ∨ p(b)} are {p(a)}, {p(b)}, and {p(a), p(b)}. However, only {p(a), p(c)} and {p(b), p(c)} are stable models of
the program {p(c) ←; ← p(a), p(b)} extending {p(a)} and
{p(b)}, respectively. As a result, the last of the three models
cannot be extended to a stable model.
a
In this paper, we investigate the complexity of fixeddomain non-entailment (NE) on Datalog programs for
SROIQ or DLmin knowledge-bases, which may serve
as a quantitative measure for inconsistency. The DL
SROIQ is quite expressive: it allows to express transitivity,
(ir)reflexivity, antisymmetry, subrole-relation, inverse, disjointness of roles, as well as negated role assertions, complex role inclusions, the universal role, and local reflexivity (Horrocks, Kutz, and Sattler 2006). The DL DLmin is,
as already stated by its name, quite restricted: only TBoxaxioms of the form A w ¬B as well as atomic assertions
A(a), r(a, b) are allowed, with A, B are concept names, r
a role name and a, b individual names. In our setting, we
also incorporate a more fine-grained analysis by considering the treewidth, which is a popular parameter that makes
various NP-hard problems tractable and is widely used in
the field of artificial intelligence (Gottlob and Szeider 2007;

Description logics (DLs) are knowledge representation languages that are used in the field of artificial intelligence (AI).
A common technique is to query DL knowledge-bases, e.g.,
by Boolean Datalog queries, and ask for entailment. But real
world knowledge-bases often have a certain inconsistency
(with respect to a given query) or we are required to estimate a
degree of inconsistency when using a knowledge-base. In this
paper, we provide a complexity analysis of fixed-domain nonentailment (NE) on Datalog programs for well-established
families of knowledge-bases (KBs). We exhibit a detailed
complexity map for the decision cases, counting and projected counting, which may serve as a quantitative measure
for inconsistency of a KB with respect to a query. Our results
show that NE is natural for the second, third, and fourth level
of the polynomial (counting) hierarchy depending on the type
of the studied query (stratified, tight, normal, disjunctive) and
one level higher for the projected versions. Further, we show
fixed-parameter tractability by bounding the treewidth, provide a constructive algorithm, and show its theoretical limitation in terms of conditional lower bounds.

1

Introduction

Description logics (DL) have proven itself as a central framework in the field of artificial intelligence
(AI) (Krötzsch, Simancik, and Horrocks 2012; Baader
et al. 2017). Since DL was introduced by Brachman and
Levesques in 1984, the formalism has become a host for
expressing knowledge representation problems and reasoning about the relevant concepts of an application domain
(ontologies). As the application domain is quite vast (Hitzler et al. 2012; Knublauch, Musen, and Rector 2004; Eiter
et al. 2015; Klinov 2008), a plethora of different extensions
as well as restrictions have emerged (Calvanese 2006; Horrocks, Kutz, and Sattler 2006; Horrocks and Sattler 2007).
The versatility of DL is one of its strength and, as a result,
new extensions or combinations with other concepts or formalisms are common (Baader, Küsters, and Wolter 2003;
Baader et al. 2005; Motik 2006). In general, a knowledgebase consists of different components: an ABox, a TBox,
and a RBox. An ABox (assertion box) can be seen as a
prescribed part of the model, a TBox (terminology box) is
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
6349

