The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Leveraging Table Content for Zero-shot Text-to-SQL with Meta-Learning
Yongrui Chen,1 Xinnan Guo,1 Chaojie Wang,2 Jian Qiu,2 Guilin Qi,1 Meng Wang,1 Huiying Li1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Alibaba Group
220171664@seu.edu.cn, guoxinnan0727@163.com, {chaojie.wcj, qiujian.qj}@alibaba-inc.com,
{gqi, meng.wang, huiyingli}@seu.edu.cn
How many reasons did the son
and heir Kale Kyetaungnyo has
when he ceased to be heir?

Abstract
Single-table text-to-SQL aims to transform a natural language
question into a SQL query according to one single table. Recent work has made promising progress on this task by pretrained language models and a multi-submodule framework.
However, zero-shot table, that is, the invisible table in the
training set, is currently the most critical bottleneck restricting the application of existing approaches to real-world scenarios. Although some work has utilized auxiliary tasks to
help handle zero-shot tables, expensive extra manual annotation limits their practicality. In this paper, we propose a new
approach for the zero-shot text-to-SQL task which does not
rely on any additional manual annotations. Our approach consists of two parts. First, we propose a new model that leverages the abundant information of table content to help establish the mapping between questions and zero-shot tables. Further, we propose a simple but efficient meta-learning strategy
to train our model. The strategy utilizes the two-step gradient update to force the model to learn a generalization ability
towards zero-shot tables. We conduct extensive experiments
on a public open-domain text-to-SQL dataset WikiSQL and
a domain-specific dataset ESQL. Compared to existing approaches using the same pre-trained model, our approach
achieves significant improvements on both datasets. Compared to the larger pre-trained model and the tabular-specific
pre-trained model, our approach is still competitive. More importantly, on the zero-shot subsets of both the datasets, our
approach further increases the improvements.

Monarch

Heir

SELECT COUNT(Ceased to be heir; reason)
WHERE Relationship to Monarch = “son”
AND Heir = “Kale Kyetaungnyo ”
Relationship to
Monarch

Ceased to be heir;
reason

…

…

…

…

…

…

Minkhang I

Kale
Kyetaungnyo

son

May 1400 father
succeeded

…

…

…

…

…

…

Figure 1: An example of table content to help predict headers. Red indicates the matching.

approaches (He et al. 2019; Hwang et al. 2019; Lyu et al.
2020) have made considerable progress on the single-table
text-to-SQL task. However, few of them pay attention to the
challenge of zero-shot tables whose schema are not visible
in the training set. Typically, in comparison with the visible
tables, zero-shot tables are more challenging because they
are not directly involved in training. Their schema cannot be
perceived by the model, so that they may be noisy in the test.
In fact, with the rapid expansion of business, zero-shot tables
are becoming more and more common in realistic scenarios.
Therefore, in order to make text-to-SQL land from laboratory to application, it is necessary to make the model learn
to handle zero-shot tables.
(Chang et al. 2020) explicitly deals with zero-shot tables
for the first time. The core idea of their approach is to design
an auxiliary task to model the mapping from the question
to the headers (similar to entity linking). However, this approach requires training data to provide the gold mappings
that are annotated manually. Undoubtedly, it is a strong limitation in realistic scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a new approach called MetaContent text-to-SQL (MC-SQL) to handle zero-shot tables.
The motivation comes from the following two intuitions:
1) The first one is that table content can provide abundant
information for predicting headers. Figure 1 shows an example. The cell son in the table is relevant to the question
word “son”, thus reveals the potential header Relationship to
Monarch. 2) The second one is that meta-learning can help
the model learn the generalization ability between different
tables from the training data. It is because meta-learning

Introduction
Since the release of WikiSQL (Zhong, Xiong, and Socher
2017), a large-scale text-to-SQL benchmark, single-table
text-to-SQL task has become an active research area in recent years. The goal of the task is to transform natural language questions into Structured Query Language (SQL) to
query a single table. Although the search space is limited
to one table, the task still has a considerable number of application scenarios (e.g., query regional electricity prices or
flight schedules). More importantly, it is the basis for more
complex text-to-SQL tasks on multi-tables (Yu et al. 2018c).
Therefore, the research on this area is of great significance.
Relying on large-scale pre-trained language models (Devlin et al. 2019) and a multi-submodule framework, existing
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3992

