The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Robust Model Compression Using Deep Hypotheses
Omri Armstrong, Ran Gilad-Bachrach
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv 699780, Tel Aviv
armstrong@mail.tau.ac.il, rgb@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract

compressing a large model often outperform models that
were trained small from the get-go (Buciluǎ, Caruana, and
Niculescu-Mizil 2006).
In model compression (Buciluǎ, Caruana, and NiculescuMizil 2006), a large model M is first trained and then compressed into a smaller model m. Most compression schemes
are designed for specific classes of functions (Cheng et al.
2017). DNN compression schemes include parameter pruning and quantization (Gong et al. 2014; Srinivas and
Babu 2015), low rank factorization and sparsity (Rigamonti
et al. 2013; Denil et al. 2013), and Knowledge Distillation
(KD) (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) where temperature
is used on M ’s predictions to create ’soft’ predictions on
which m is trained on. There are also schemes that convert
one class of functions to another class, for example, DNNs
to Soft Decision Trees (SDT) (Frosst and Hinton 2017) or
to gradient boosted trees (Che et al. 2016), and trees to
DNNs (Banerjee 1997).
In this work, we present a new compression scheme that
can compress almost any type of Machine Learning (ML)
model to almost any type of smaller model. To be able to
work with diverse learning models, we use the large model
M as an oracle to train a small model m. However, in the
compression step we avoid using common training techniques that minimize a loss function over the training data
generated by the oracle (Buciluǎ, Caruana, and NiculescuMizil 2006) since such processes are sensitive to perturbations (Gilad-Bachrach and Burges 2013) and thus are not
robust. Instead, we use M to generate a belief, which is the
conditional probability p(Y = y|X = x) and use methods
based on maximizing predicate depth (Gilad-Bachrach and
Burges 2013).
In our context a belief is a distribution p(Y = y|X = x)
where y is one of the possible classes and x is a record.1
Intuitively, a model m has a predicate depth d if for every
(or most) points x it holds that p (m(x)|x) ≥ d. When d
is large, the model is robust to slight changes in the prior
belief p (Gilad-Bachrach and Burges 2013). Therefore, in
our method, we extract a belief from large model M and
train a small model m by finding a model with a large predicate depth from a class of small models. Following (Gilad-

Machine Learning models should ideally be compact and robust. Compactness provides efficiency and comprehensibility whereas robustness provides resilience. Both topics have
been studied in recent years but in isolation. Here we present
a robust model compression scheme which is independent
of model types: it can compress ensembles, neural networks
and other types of models into diverse types of small models. The main building block is the notion of depth derived
from robust statistics. Originally, depth was introduced as a
measure of the centrality of a point in a sample such that
the median is the deepest point. This concept was extended
to classification functions which makes it possible to define
the depth of a hypothesis and the median hypothesis. Algorithms have been suggested to approximate the median but
they have been limited to binary classification. In this study,
we present a new algorithm, the Multiclass Empirical Median Optimization (MEMO) algorithm that finds a deep hypothesis in multi-class tasks, and prove its correctness. This
leads to our Compact Robust Estimated Median Belief Optimization (CREMBO) algorithm for robust model compression. We demonstrate the success of this algorithm empirically by compressing neural networks and random forests
into small decision trees, which are interpretable models, and
show that they are more accurate and robust than other comparable methods. In addition, our empirical study shows that
our method outperforms Knowledge Distillation on DNN to
DNN compression.

1

Introduction

Large models, such as Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
and ensembles achieve high accuracy on diverse problems (Caruana, Karampatziakis, and Yessenalina 2008; Usmanim 2018). However, their size presents a challenge in
many cases because of their resource requirements and their
incomprehensibility (Lage et al. 2019). The lack of interpretability of large machine learning models is a limitation especially for applications that require critical decision making such as medical diagnostics (Kononenko 2001;
Caruana et al. 2015) and hiring decisions (Hamilton 2018).
Small models are efficient in terms of computational cost
and memory footprint while also being more interpretable.
When small models are required, it has been shown that

1
We sometimes use the shorthand notation p(y|x) to denote
p(Y = y|X = x).

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6688

