The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Fair Division under Heterogeneous Matroid Constraints *
Amitay Dror,1 Michal Feldman,2 Erel Segal-Halevi 3
1

Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv University, Microsoft Research
3
Ariel University
amitaydr@gmail.com, mfeldman@tau.ac.il, erelsgl@gmail.com
2

Abstract

in the way shifts are assigned among medical doctors, where
every doctor has her own schedule limitations.
Our goal is to devise algorithms that find fair allocations
of indivisible items among agents with different preferences
and different feasibility constraints. Let us first explain what
we mean by “constraints” and what we mean by “fair”.
We focus on constraints that are represented by matroids
(see Section 2.1), mainly partition matroids. In a partition
matroid, the set of items is partitioned into a set of categories, and every category is associated with a cap on the
number of items from that category that can be allocated to
each agent.
A classic notion of fairness is envy freeness (EF), which
means that every agent (weakly) prefers his or her bundle to
that of any other agent. Since an EF allocation may not exist
when items are indivisible, recent studies focus on its relaxation known as EF1 — envy free up to one item (Budish
2011) — which means that every agent i (weakly) prefers
her bundle to any other agent j’s bundle, up to the removal
of the best good (in i’s eyes) from agent j’s bundle (see Section 2.2).
Without feasibility constraints, an EF1 allocation always
exists and can be computed efficiently (Lipton et al. 2004).
However, this result does not consider feasibility constraints.
There are two ways to address such constraints.
The first approach is to directly construct allocations that
satisfy the constraints, i.e., guarantee that each agent receives a feasible bundle. This approach was taken recently
by Biswas and Barman (2018, 2019), who study settings
with additive valuations, where every agent values each bundle at the sum of the values of its items. They present efficient algorithms for computing EF1 allocations when agents
have: (i) identical matroid constraints and identical valuations; or (ii) identical partition matroid constraints, even under heterogeneous valuations (see Section 2.3). However,
their algorithms do not handle different partition constraints,
or identical matroid constraints with different valuations.
A second approach is to capture the constraints within the
valuation function. That is, the value of an agent for a bundle
equals the value of the best feasible subset of that bundle.
This approach seamlessly addresses heterogeneity in both
constraints and valuations. The valuation functions constructed this way are no longer additive, but are submodular
(Oxley 2006). Recently, Babaioff, Ezra, and Feige (2020)

We study fair allocation of indivisible goods among additive
agents with feasibility constraints. In these settings, every
agent is restricted to get a bundle among a specified set of
feasible bundles. Such scenarios have been of great interest
to the AI community due to their applicability to real-world
problems. Following some impossibility results, we restrict
attention to matroid feasibility constraints that capture natural
scenarios, such as the allocation of shifts to medical doctors,
and the allocation of conference papers to referees.
We focus on the common fairness notion of envy-freeness up
to one good (EF1). Previous algorithms for finding EF1 allocations are either restricted to agents with identical feasibility
constraints, or allow free disposal of items. An open problem
is the existence of EF1 complete allocations among heterogeneous agents, where the heterogeneity is both in the agents’
feasibility constraints and in their valuations. In this work, we
make progress on this problem by providing positive and negative results for different matroid and valuation types. Among
other results, we devise poly-time algorithms for finding EF1
allocations in the following settings: (i) n agents with heterogeneous partition matroids and heterogeneous binary valuations, (ii) 2 agents with heterogeneous partition matroids
and heterogeneous valuations, and (iii) at most 3 agents with
heterogeneous binary valuations and identical base-orderable
matroids.

1

Introduction

Many real-life problems involve the fair allocation of indivisible items among agents with different preferences, and
with constraints on the bundle that each agent may receive.
Examples include the allocation of course seats among students (Budish et al. 2017) and the allocation of conference
papers among referees (Garg et al. 2010).
In general, different agents may have different constraints.
For example, consider the allocation of employees among
departments of a company: one department has room for
four project managers and two backend engineers, while another department may have room for three backend engineers and five data scientists. Another example can be found
* For the full version, see https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07280
(Dror, Feldman, and Segal-Halevi 2020). Due to space limitation,
all missing statements and proofs are deferred to the full version.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5312

