The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semantic Grouping Network for Video Captioning
Hobin Ryu, Sunghun Kang, Haeyong Kang, and Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{hobincar, sunghun.kang, haeyong.kang, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper considers a video caption generating network referred to as Semantic Grouping Network1 (SGN) that attempts (1) to group video frames with discriminating word
phrases of partially decoded caption and then (2) to decode those semantically aligned groups in predicting the next
word. As consecutive frames are not likely to provide unique
information, prior methods have focused on discarding or
merging repetitive information based only on the input video.
The SGN learns an algorithm to capture the most discriminating word phrases of the partially decoded caption and a mapping that associates each phrase to the relevant video frames establishing this mapping allows semantically related frames
to be clustered, which reduces redundancy. In contrast to the
prior methods, the continuous feedback from decoded words
enables the SGN to dynamically update the video representation that adapts to the partially decoded caption. Furthermore, a contrastive attention loss is proposed to facilitate accurate alignment between a word phrase and video frames
without manual annotations. The SGN achieves state-of-theart performances by outperforming runner-up methods by a
margin of 2.1%p and 2.4%p in a CIDEr-D score on MSVD
and MSR-VTT datasets, respectively. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and interpretability of the SGN.

Figure 1: Phrases (e.g., “a girl” and “talking with”) can
gather their relevant frames in the video, forming groups
that share common semantics within them. A decoder then
exploits the necessary semantic group in predicting the next
word (“boy”).

requires a model to understand the comprehensive context
of a video. A video frame is similar to the previous frame,
and consecutive frames usually do not provide unique information (Chen et al. 2018). Therefore, considering every
frame as an independent unit of information is not an efficient way to understand the video. It is quite natural for
humans to understand a video by partitioning it into information units based on semantics. We understand a video by
grouping information based on meanings such as people, objects, or actions, rather than frame by frame.
There are a considerable number of works that try to imitate the human behavior of understanding video - collect the
semantically related information into units and then decode
the collected information units into a caption. The type of
information units varies; there are methods that partition a
video into a fixed or adaptive number of segments that consist of successive frames (Pan et al. 2016; Baraldi, Grana,
and Cucchiara 2017), collect the frames that are informative
enough (Chen et al. 2018), or gather all the features of video
frames at the object-level (Zhang and Peng 2019a; Zhang
et al. 2020; Zheng, Wang, and Tao 2020).
It is important for a captioning method to model visual
and textual modalities respectively and complementarily.
However, prior methods mainly focus on the visual aspect
(i.e., video frames) and do not pay much attention to the
textual aspect (i.e., partially decoded caption) when encod-

Introduction
Video captioning is the task of understanding the scenes in
a video and describing it in words. It is one of the most
challenging computer vision tasks as it requires a model capable of associating video to text. Most video captioning
methods have been suggested based on the encoder-decoder
framework constructed using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). The CNNbased encoder takes a set of consecutive frames of the input
video and produces visual representations to generate the
accurate caption that describes the video. Then, the RNNbased decoder takes the visually encoded features and the
previously predicted word as input and generates the caption one word at a time.
Unlike image captioning, which requires a model to understand static content in a single image, video captioning
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/hobincar/SGN

2514

