The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Sentence Ordering Based on Constraint Graphs
Yutao Zhu1 , Kun Zhou2 , Jian-Yun Nie1 , Shengchao Liu1,3 , Zhicheng Dou4
1

Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada
School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3
Mila - Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal, Canada
4
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
yutao.zhu@umontreal.ca, francis kun zhou@163.com, nie@iro.umontreal.ca,
liusheng@mila.quebec, dou@ruc.edu.cn
2

Abstract

Order

Unordered Sentences

Sentence ordering aims at arranging a list of sentences in the
correct order. Based on the observation that sentence order
at different distances may rely on different types of information, we devise a new approach based on multi-granular
orders between sentences. These orders form multiple constraint graphs, which are then encoded by Graph Isomorphism Networks and fused into sentence representations. Finally, sentence order is determined using the order-enhanced
sentence representations. Our experiments on five benchmark
datasets show that our method outperforms all existing baselines significantly, achieving a new state-of-the-art performance. The results demonstrate the advantage of considering
multiple types of order information and using graph neural
networks to integrate sentence content and order information
for the task. Our code is available at https://github.com/DaoD/
ConstraintGraph4NSO.

(2)

When they arrived they saw some airplanes in the
back of a truck.
The kids had a hard time deciding what to ride first.
The family got together to go to the fair.
Finally they played the dart game.
Then they played some games to win prizes.

(3)
(1)
(5)
(4)

Table 1: An example of unordered sentences in a paragraph
and their correct order is on the left.

posed recently, which can be roughly categorized into two
groups: The first group tends to solve this problem by predicting the pairwise sentence order with a classifier and then
inferring the global order (Chen, Qiu, and Huang 2016; Li
and Jurafsky 2017; Prabhumoye, Salakhutdinov, and Black
2020). An obvious missing part in these approaches is the
global context information, which is complementary to the
local order information. Another group predicts the sentence
order sequentially based on contextual sentence representations. For example, typical methods are based on pointer
networks (Gong et al. 2016; Logeswaran, Lee, and Radev
2018; Cui et al. 2018; Yin et al. 2020; Kumar et al. 2020), in
which sentences and paragraphs are represented by encoders
and the order is predicted by a decoder sequentially. However, local coherence information is not taken into account.
Indeed, both local order information and global context information are useful in this task. For the example in Table 1,
it is preferable to put sentence s4 after s3 as the pronoun
“they” in s4 may refer to the noun “kids” in s3 . However,
the word “they” also appears in s2 . Without the contextual
information in s1 , it would be hard to decide the order between s2 and s3 . On the other hand, given the information in
s1 and s2 , both s3 and s4 can be contextually coherent candidates for the next sentence. It is still hard to decide which
should come first after s2 without knowing the relative order
s3 ≺ s4 .
Therefore, we argue that both local information and
global context are crucial to sentence ordering. This raises
two problems: 1) how to capture both the local information
and the global context; 2) how to utilize them effectively for
sentence ordering.
For the first problem, we observe that the order preference

Introduction
Text coherence is an essential problem in natural language
processing (NLP). Coherent texts with well-organized logical structures are much easier for people to read and understand. As one subtask of coherence modeling, sentence
ordering (Barzilay and Lapata 2008) aims at learning to reconstruct a coherent paragraph from an unordered set of sentences. This task underlies many downstream applications
such as determining the ordering of: concepts in conceptto-text generation (Konstas and Lapata 2012, 2013), answer
spans in retrieval-based question answering (Yu et al. 2018),
information from various document in extractive multidocument summarization (Barzilay, Elhadad, and McKeown
2002; Nallapati, Zhai, and Zhou 2017), and events in story
generation (Fan, Lewis, and Dauphin 2019; Zhu et al. 2020).
An example of this task is shown in Table 1.
Early studies on sentence ordering generally use handcrafted linguistic features to model the document structure (Lapata 2003; Barzilay and Lee 2004; Barzilay and
Lapata 2008). However, these manual features are strongly
domain-dependent and their definition requires heavy domain expertise. Therefore, it is difficult to apply these methods to different domains. To avoid the burden of handcrafted features, numerous neural approaches have been proCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14656

