The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Counting and Sampling
Markov Equivalent DAGs
Marcel Wienöbst, Max Bannach, Maciej Liśkiewicz
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, University of Lübeck, Germany
{wienoebst,bannach,liskiewi}@tcs.uni-luebeck.de

Abstract

they have contributed to the progress of computational methods in this area. Important advantages of the modeling with
CPDAGs are demonstrated by algorithms that learn causal
structures from observational data (Verma and Pearl 1992;
Meek 1995, 1997; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000;
Chickering 2002a,b); and that analyze causality based on a
given MEC, rather than a single DAG (Maathuis, Kalisch,
and Bühlmann 2009; van der Zander and Liśkiewicz 2016;
Perkovic et al. 2017). Algorithms that ignore Markov equivalence may lead to incorrect solutions.
A key characteristic of a MEC is its size, i. e., the number
of DAGs in the class. It indicates uncertainty of the causal
model inferred from observational data and it serves as an
indicator for the performance of recovering true causal effects. Moreover, the feasibility of causal inference methods
is often highly dependent on the size of the MEC; e. g., to
estimate the average causal effects from observational data
for a given CPDAG, as proposed by Maathuis, Kalisch, and
Bühlmann (2009), one has to consider all DAGs in the class.
Furthermore, computing the size of a Markov equivalence
class is commonly used as a subroutine in practical algorithms. For example, when actively designing interventions,
in order to identify the underlying true DAG in a given MEC,
the size of the Markov equivalence subclass is an important
metric to select the best intervention target (He and Geng
2008; Hauser and Bühlmann 2012; Shanmugam et al. 2015;
Ghassami et al. 2018, 2019).
The first algorithmic approaches for counting the number of Markov equivalent DAGs relied on exhaustive search
(Meek 1995; Madigan et al. 1996) based on the graphical
characterization of Verma and Pearl (1990). The methods are
computationally expensive as the size of a MEC represented
by a CPDAG may be superexponential in the number of vertices of the graph. More recently, He, Jia, and Yu (2015) proposed a strategy, in which the main idea was to partition the
MEC by fixing root variables in any undirected component
of the CPDAG. This yields a recursive strategy for counting
Markov equivalent DAGs, which forms the basis of several
“root-picking” algorithms (He, Jia, and Yu 2015; Ghassami
et al. 2019; Ganian, Hamm, and Talvitie 2020). As an alternative approach, recent methods utilize dynamic programming on the clique tree representation of chordal graphs and
techniques from intervention design (Talvitie and Koivisto
2019; AhmadiTeshnizi, Salehkaleybar, and Kiyavash 2020).

Counting and sampling directed acyclic graphs from a
Markov equivalence class are fundamental tasks in graphical
causal analysis. In this paper, we show that these tasks can be
performed in polynomial time, solving a long-standing open
problem in this area. Our algorithms are effective and easily implementable. Experimental results show that the algorithms significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Graphical modeling plays a key role in causal theory, allowing to express complex causal phenomena in an elegant,
mathematically sound way. One of the most popular graphical models are directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), which represent direct causal influences between random variables by
directed edges (Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines 2000; Pearl
2009; Koller and Friedman 2009). They are commonly used
in empirical sciences to discover and understand causal effects. However, in practice, the underlying DAG is usually
unknown, since, typically, no single DAG explains the observational data. Instead, the statistical properties of the data
are maintained by a number of different DAGs, which constitute a Markov equivalence class (MEC, for short). Therefore, these DAGs are indistinguishable on the basis of observations alone (Verma and Pearl 1990, 1992; Heckerman,
Geiger, and Chickering 1995).
It is of great importance to investigate model learning and
to analyze causal phenomena using MECs directly rather
than the DAGs themselves. Consequently, this has led to
intensive studies on Markov equivalence classes of DAGs
and resulted in a long and successful track record. Our work
contributes to this line of research by providing the first
polynomial-time algorithms for counting and for uniform
sampling Markov equivalent DAGs – two important primitives in both theoretical and experimental studies.
Finding the graphical criterion for two DAGs to be
Markov equivalent (Verma and Pearl 1990) and providing
the graph-theoretic characterization of MECs as so-called
CPDAGs (Andersson, Madigan, and Perlman 1997) mark
key turning points in this research direction. In particular,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12198

