The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Achieving Envy-freeness and Equitability with
Monetary Transfers
Haris Aziz
UNSW Sydney and Data61 CSIRO
haris.aziz@unsw.edu.au

Abstract

balance conditions with the condition that agents get subsidies.
For the domain of additive valuations, we provide a complete characterization of allocations that can lead to equitability and envy-freeness by monetary transfers. We also
show that if valuations are not superadditive, simultaneously
achieving envy-freeness, equitability, and maximum welfare
can be impossible.
For superadditive valuations, we use our insights to design a polynomial-time distributed algorithm that takes as
input a given an allocation and computes an allocation and
payment such that the new allocation achieves as much social welfare as the given allocation and the outcome satisfies
envy-freeness, equitability, and payment balance. If the valuations need not be superadditive, we propose an alternative
distributed algorithm that computes an approximately envyfree outcome. Finally, we discuss issues around computation
and bounds for minimal payments to achieve fairness.

When allocating indivisible resources or tasks, an envy-free
allocation or equitable allocation may not exist. We present
a sufficient condition and an algorithm to achieve envyfreeness and equitability when monetary transfers are allowed. The approach works for any agent valuation functions
as long as they satisfy superadditivity. For the case of additive
valuations, we present a characterization of allocations that
can simultaneously be made equitable and envy-free via payments. We then present a distributed algorithm to compute an
approximately envy-free outcome for any class of valuations.

Introduction
A fundamental problem that often arises in several settings is
that of allocating items, resources, or tasks in a fair manner.
We consider scenarios where agents have valuations over
bundles of indivisible items. The goal is to compute allocations of items that are fair. Multi-agent fair allocation has
received considerable interest in diverse research communities including computer science, economics, and mathematics. There are several notions of fairness that have been considered in the literature. Among them, two of the strongest
ones are envy-freeess (no agent should envy another agent’s
outcome) and equitability (every agent should get the same
utility). When monetary transfers are not allowed, there may
not exist any outcome that is envy-free or equitable. We consider outcomes in which each agent gets a bundle of items
as well as a payment. Agents have quasi-linear utilities: their
utility for an outcome is the sum of the value they have for
their bundle of items, and the payment they get. The central
question we study is the following one: under what conditions fairness can be achieved via monetary transfers?

Related Work
In the fair division literature (see, e.g. Aziz (2020); Bouveret, Chevaleyre, and Lang (2016); Brams and Taylor
(1996)), envy-freeness (Foley 1967) and equitability (Dubins and Spanier 1961; Freeman et al. 2019; Robertson and
Webb 1997) are well-known fairness properties. When the
items are divisible goods, an equitable and envy-free allocation is guaranteed to exist (Alon 1987). On the other hand,
when considering indivisible goods, neither of the two properties are guaranteed to be achievable.
In this paper, we consider achieving these properties with
the help of monetary transfers. Fair allocation with money
is well-established, especially in the context of room-rent
division. A feature of most of the work in the area is
that each agent has demand for exactly one item or room
(Aragones 1995; Gal et al. 2017; Klijn 2000; Maskin 1987;
Su 1999; Svensson 1983). More general models where envyfreeness is achieved via side-payments have been considered
by Haake, Raith, and Su (2002), Meertens, Potters, and Reijnierse (2002), and Pápai (2003). Chevaleyre, Endriss, and
Maudet (2010, 2017) consider the distributed allocation of
goods and focussed on convergence to envy-free and efficient outcomes via trades among agents.

Contributions We first present a sufficient condition
called transfer-stability for allocations that can lead to equitability and envy-freeness by monetary transfers. In contrast to most of the related results that focus on additive or
positive valuations, the statement holds for any superadditive valuations. The result holds if we replace the payment
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5102

