The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How Robust are Model Rankings : A Leaderboard Customization Approach for
Equitable Evaluation
Swaroop Mishra, Anjana Arunkumar
School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{srmishr1, aarunku5}@asu.edu

Abstract

on all ‘hard’ questions, while Y solves some ‘hard’ questions
but a lesser number of questions overall. Should Y be ranked
higher than X then? The ranking depends on the application
scenario– does the user want a model to compulsorily answer the hardest questions or answer more ‘easy’ questions?
Question ‘difficulty’ demarcation is application dependent. For example, in sentiment analysis for movie reviews,
if a model learns to associate ‘not’ with negative sentiment, a
review containing the phrase ‘not bad’ might be incorrectly
labeled. Such spurious bias– unintended correlation between
model input and output (Torralba and Efros 2011; Bras et al.
2020)– makes samples ‘easier’ for models to solve. Similarly, in conversational AI, models are often trained on clear
questions (‘where is the nearest restaurant’), but user queries
are seen to often diverge from this training set (Kamath,
Jia, and Liang 2020) (‘I’m hungry’). Such atypical queries
have higher out-of-distribution (OOD) characteristics, and
are consequently ‘harder’ for models to solve.
How do we quantify and acknowledge ‘difficulty’ in
model evaluation? Recently, semantic-textual-similarity
(STS) with respect to the training set has been identified as
an indicator of OOD characteristics (Mishra et al. 2020a).
Similarly, we propose 2 algorithms to quantify spurious bias
in a sample. We also propose WSBias (Weighted Spurious Bias), an equitable evaluation metric that assigns higher
weights to ‘harder’ samples, extending the design of WOOD
(Weighted OOD) Score (Mishra et al. 2020a).
A model’s perception of sample ‘difficulty’ however, is
based on the confidence it associates with its answer for
each question. Models’ tendency to silently answer incorrectly, with high confidence, hinders their deployment. For
example, if Model X incorrectly answers questions with high
confidence, but has higher accuracy than Model Y which
has low confidence for incorrect answers, then Model Y is
preferable, especially in safety critical domains. We quantify a model’s view of difficulty using maximum softmax
probability– a strong baseline which has been used as a
threshold in selective answering (Hendrycks and Gimpel
2016a)– to construct WMProb (Weighted Maximum Probability), a metric that assigns higher weights to samples
solved with higher confidence.
Based on these considerations, we make the following
novel contributions to enable better model selection for deployment in real life applications:

Models that top leaderboards often perform unsatisfactorily
when deployed in real world applications; this has necessitated rigorous and expensive pre-deployment model testing.
A hitherto unexplored facet of model performance is: Are our
leaderboards doing equitable evaluation? In this paper, we
introduce a task-agnostic method to probe leaderboards by
weighting samples based on their ‘difficulty’ level. We find
that leaderboards can be adversarially attacked and top performing models may not always be the best models. We subsequently propose alternate evaluation metrics. Our experiments on 10 models show changes in model ranking and an
overall reduction in previously reported performance– thus
rectifying the overestimation of AI systems’ capabilities. Inspired by behavioral testing principles, we further develop a
prototype of a visual analytics tool that enables leaderboard
revamping through customization, based on an end user’s
focus area. This helps users analyze models’ strengths and
weaknesses, and guides them in the selection of a model best
suited for their application scenario. In a user study, members
of various commercial product development teams, covering
5 focus areas, find that our prototype reduces pre-deployment
development and testing effort by 41 % on average.

Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models have achieved super-human
performance on several popular benchmarks such as Imagenet (Russakovsky et al. 2015), SNLI (Bowman et al.
2015) and SQUAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016). Models selected
based on their success in leaderboards of existing benchmarks however, often fail when deployed in real life applications. A hitherto unexplored question that might answer
why our ‘optimal’ model selection is sometimes found to
be ‘sub-optimal’ is: Are our leaderboards doing equitable
evaluation? There are two aspects associated with model
evaluation– performance scores and ranking. Existing evaluation metrics have been shown to inflate model performance,
and overestimate the capabilities of AI systems (Recht et al.
2019; Sakaguchi et al. 2019; Bras et al. 2020). Ranking on
the other hand, has remained unexamined.
Consider that Model X is ranked higher than Model Y in a
leaderboard. X could be solving all ‘easy’ questions and fail
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13561

