The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TempLe: Learning Template of Transitions for Sample Efficient Multi-task RL
Yanchao Sun, 1 Xiangyu Yin, 2 Furong Huang 1
1

University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
ycs@umd.edu, yinxiangyu@bupt.edu.cn, furongh@umd.edu

2

Abstract

both. (3) Varying state/action space across tasks. In practice,
transferring knowledge learned from smaller environments
to learning in larger environments is extremely useful. However, most existing works on MTRL assume the state/action
space is shared across tasks.
In an effort to provide guaranteed sample efficiency for
MTRL, Brunskill and Li (2013) propose an algorithm that
clusters the underlying Markov Decision Processes (MDPs)
of tasks into groups and identifies new tasks as learned
groups. However, transferring knowledge from the clustered
MDP models could be an “inefficient transfer” if the underlying models are too different to be clustered into a small
number of groups. Similarly, most existing model-based approaches (Liu, Guo, and Brunskill 2016; Modi et al. 2018)
only exploit model-level similarities, which also makes it
difficult to transfer knowledge among different-sized tasks.
We remedy the aforementioned three issues by extraction
of more commonalities in tasks without suffering from “negative transfer”. A motivating example is the navigation problem in mazes with slippery floors which result in stochastic
transitions. For instance, the agent taking an action of going
up on ice could slip to the left, right or down (instead of up)
with a certain probability determined by the slipperiness of
ice. The slipperiness of the floor depends on the landform
of the location, such as sand, marble and ice. We show some
examples of different combinations/distributions of the landforms in the maze in Figure 1; the MDP models are drastically different across different mazes, therefore transferring
knowledge using similarity of models is inefficient.

Transferring knowledge among various environments is important for efficiently learning multiple tasks online. Most
existing methods directly use the previously learned models or previously learned optimal policies to learn new tasks.
However, these methods may be inefficient when the underlying models or optimal policies are substantially different across tasks. In this paper, we propose Template Learning (TempLe), a PAC-MDP method for multi-task reinforcement learning that could be applied to tasks with varying
state/action space without prior knowledge of inter-task mappings. TempLe gains sample efficiency by extracting similarities of the transition dynamics across tasks even when
their underlying models or optimal policies have limited commonalities. We present two algorithms for an “online” and
a “finite-model” setting respectively. We prove that our proposed TempLe algorithms achieve much lower sample complexity than single-task learners or state-of-the-art multi-task
methods. We show via systematically designed experiments
that our TempLe method universally outperforms the stateof-the-art multi-task methods (PAC-MDP or not) in various
settings and regimes.

1

Introduction

Multi-task reinforcement learning (MTRL) (Wilson et al.
2007; Brunskill and Li 2013; Modi et al. 2018) requires
the agent to efficiently tackle a series of tasks. A key goal
of MTRL is to improve per-task learning efficiency compared against single-task learners, by using the knowledge
obtained from previous tasks to learn new tasks. Despite
the recent rapid progress in MTRL, some issues remain unsettled. (1) Guaranteed sample efficiency. Only a few existing methods have guarantees on sample efficiency, the
most common bottleneck of RL algorithms. (2) Correctness
v.s. efficiency. An overly aggressive application of previous
knowledge may transfer incorrect knowledge and deteriorate the performance on new tasks, resulting in a “negative
transfer” (Taylor and Stone 2009). However, if an agent is
overly conservative in applying previously learned knowledge, much of the similarities between tasks will be ignored, resulting in an “inefficient transfer”. It is nontrivial
to balance between the correctness and efficiency or achieve

Figure 1: Examples of landform combinations in Maze,
where stands for sand, stands for marble and stands
for ice. Different landforms have different slippery√probabil√
ity, thus different transition dynamics. Consider a S × S
maze with G types of landforms. There could be up to GS
different MDP models, making it prohibitive to extract similarities from the models. However, the types of underlying
transition dynamics associated with each state/location are
governed by the number of distinct landforms G.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9765

