The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Teaching the Old Dog New Tricks:
Supervised Learning with Constraints
Fabrizio Detassis,1 Michele Lombardi, 1 Michela Milano 1, 2
1

2

DISI, University of Bologna
Alma Mater Research Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
{fabrizio.detassis2, michele.lombardi2, michela.milano}@unibo.it

Abstract

step trains a supervised ML model. Master and learner are
isolated and communicate only via the vector of targets, so
that: 1) any ML method can be used for the learner, with no
modifications; 2) the master can rely on techniques such as
Mathematical or Constraint Programming, which natively
support complex constraints (including discrete and nondifferentiable ones). Our method is also well suited to deal
with relational constraints over large populations (e.g. fairness indicators).
When constraints conflict with the data, the present approach prioritizes constraint satisfaction over accuracy: for
this reason, it is not well suited for exploiting fuzzy symbolic knowledge, unlike many approaches in the literature.
Due to our open setting it is hard to determine convergence
properties; despite this, we found that even a naı̈ve setup
of the approach performs well (compared to state-of-the-art
methods) on classification and regression tasks with fairness
constraints, and on classification problems with balance constraints.
Due to its combination of simplicity, generality, and the observed empirical performance, Moving Targets can represent
a valuable addition to the arsenal of techniques for dealing
with constraints in Machine Learning. The paper is organized
as follows: in the following section we briefly survey related
works on the integration of constraints in ML; afterwards we
present our method and its empirical evaluation. Finally we
will draw some concluding remarks.

Adding constraint support in Machine Learning has the potential to address outstanding issues in data-driven AI systems,
such as safety and fairness. Existing approaches typically apply constrained optimization techniques to ML training, enforce constraint satisfaction by adjusting the model design, or
use constraints to correct the output. Here, we investigate a different, complementary, strategy based on “teaching” constraint
satisfaction to a supervised ML method via the direct use of a
state-of-the-art constraint solver: this enables taking advantage
of decades of research on constrained optimization with limited effort. In practice, we use a decomposition scheme alternating master steps (in charge of enforcing the constraints) and
learner steps (where any supervised ML model and training
algorithm can be employed). The process leads to approximate
constraint satisfaction in general, and convergence properties
are difficult to establish; despite this fact, we found empirically
that even a naı̈ve setup of our approach performs well on ML
tasks with fairness constraints, and on classical datasets with
synthetic constraints.

Introduction
Techniques to deal with constraints in Machine Learning
(ML) have the potential to address outstanding issues in datadriven AI methods: they can boost generalization (e.g. if
they represent physical laws), encode negative patterns (e.g.
excluded classes) and relational information (e.g. involving
multiple examples); they can ensure the satisfaction of desired properties, such as fairness, safety, or lawfulness.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, existing approaches
for taking into account constraints in ML typically work
by adapting ideas from constrained optimization to training algorithms/loss functions, or adjusting the model design,
or by correcting the model output. Here we propose a different, complementary, strategy that enforces constraints in
supervised ML by making direct use of any state-of-the-art
constraint solver: this enables taking advantage of decades
of research on constraint optimization with limited effort.
Our method, referred to as Moving Targets, is
decomposition-based and alternates master and learner steps.
The master step (addressed with the constraint solver) handles
constraint satisfaction by adjusting the targets; the learner

Related Works
Most approaches in the literature build on just a few key ideas.
One of them is using the constraints to adjust the output of a
trained ML model. This is done in DeepProbLog (Manhaeve
et al. 2018), where Neural Networks with probabilistic output
(mostly classifiers) are treated as predicates. (Rocktäschel
and Riedel 2017) presents a Neural Theorem Prover using
differentiable predicates and the Prolog backward chaining
algorithm. The original Markov Logic Networks (Richardson
and Domingos 2006) rely instead on Markov Fields defined
over First Order Logic formulas. As a drawback, with these
approaches the constraints have no effect on the model parameters, which complicates the analysis of feature importance.
Moreover, dealing with relational constraints (e.g. fairness)
requires access at prediction time either to a representative
population or to its distribution (Hardt, Price, and Srebro

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3742

