The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Gaining Insight into SARS-CoV-2 Infection and COVID-19 Severity Using
Self-supervised Edge Features and Graph Neural Networks
Arijit Sehanobish,* Neal Ravindra,* David van Dijk
Internal Medicine (Cardiology) and Computer Science, Yale University
{arijit.sehanobish, neal.ravindra, david.vandijk}@yale.edu

Abstract

SARS-CoV-2 over a time-course and one dataset of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples from patients with varying
degrees of COVID-19 severity (Ravindra et al. 2020b; Liao
et al. 2020). Applying machine learning to these datasets allows us to identify the molecular and cellular patterns associated with susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection or severe COVID-19, highlight potential biomarkers, and suggest
therapeutic targets.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a technology
that counts the number of mRNA transcripts for each gene
within a single cell (Zheng et al. 2017; Hwang, Lee, and
Bang 2018; Stuart and Satija 2019). Different tissue samples or cell culture experiments can be assayed with scRNAseq technology, allowing one to collect information spanning a variety of disease states or perturbations, with thousands of cells’ gene expression measured in each experiment. Since transcript counts are correlated with gene expression, scRNA-seq yields large datasets comprising many
thousands of cells’ gene expression (Zheng et al. 2017).
However, identifying the genes that determine an individual
cell’s pathophysiological trajectory or response to viral insult remains a challenge as single-cell data is noisy, sparse,
and high-dimensional (Chen, Ning, and Shi 2019; Kiselev,
Andrews, and Hemberg 2019). As such, we require cuttingedge DL methods to learn how to discriminate cells’ controlled experimental perturbation given their transcriptome.
Here, we build on previous work that uses graph neural networks (GNNs) to predict an individual cell’s disease-state
label (Ravindra et al. 2020a). To reduce bias and improve
performance, we developed a novel DL architecture, which,
to the best of our knowledge, achieves the highest, singlecell resolved prediction of disease state. Using these models, we then identify the genes and cells important for these
predictions.
GNNs have been widely used and developed for predictive tasks such as node classification and link prediction (Wu
et al. 2020). GNNs learn from discrete relational structure
in data but the use of similarity metrics to construct graphs
from feature matrices can expand the scope of GNN applications to domains where graph structured data is not readily
available (Franceschi et al. 2019; Tenenbaum 2000). GNNs
typically use message passing, or recursive neighborhood
aggregation, to construct a new feature vector for a particular
node after aggregating information from its neighbor’s fea-

A molecular and cellular understanding of how SARS-CoV2 variably infects and causes severe COVID-19 remains a
bottleneck in developing interventions to end the pandemic.
We sought to use deep learning (DL) to study the biology
of SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 severity by identifying transcriptomic patterns and cell types associated with
SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 severity. To do this,
we developed a new approach to generating self-supervised
edge features. We propose a model that builds on Graph Attention Networks (GAT), creates edge features using selfsupervised learning, and ingests these edge features via a Set
Transformer. This model achieves significant improvements
in predicting the disease state of individual cells, given their
transcriptome. We apply our model to single-cell RNA sequencing datasets of SARS-CoV-2 infected lung organoids
and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples of patients with
COVID-19, achieving state-of-the-art performance on both
datasets with our model. We then borrow from the field of
explainable AI (XAI) to identify the features (genes) and
cell types that discriminate bystander vs. infected cells across
time and moderate vs. severe COVID-19 disease. To the best
of our knowledge, this represents the first application of DL to
identifying the molecular and cellular determinants of SARSCoV-2 infection and COVID-19 severity using single-cell
omics data.

Introduction
To address the devastating impact of the Coronavirus Disease of 2019 (COVID-19), caused by infection of SARSCoV-2, and the gap in our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of severe disease and variable susceptibility to
infection, we developed a DL framework around two singlecell transcriptomic datasets that allowed us to generate hypotheses related to these biological knowledge gaps (Yan
et al. 2020; Zhong et al. 2020). We rely on single-cell transcriptomic data because single-cell datasets contain rich,
molecular and cellular information across a variety of cell
types and conditions. We work with two publicly available
single-cell datasets: one in which upper airway bronchial epithelium (airway of the lung) organoids were infected with
* Equal Contribution
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4864

