The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Applied Machine Learning for Games: A Graduate School Course
Yilei Zeng, Aayush Shah, Jameson Thai, Michael Zyda
University of Southern California
{yilei.zeng, aayushsh, jamesont, zyda}@usc.edu

Abstract

research-oriented, industry-oriented or patent-oriented directions. The projects’ difficulties are also dynamically adjustable towards different students’ learning curve or prior
experiences in machine learning. In this class, we intend
to encourage further research into different gaming areas
by requiring students to work on a semester-long research
project in groups of up to 8. Students work on incorporating deep learning and reinforcement learning techniques in
different aspects of game-play creation, simulation, or spectating. These projects are completely driven by the student
along any direction they wish to explore. Giving the students
an intrinsic motivation to engage on their favorite ideas will
not only make teaching more time efficient but also bestow
a long-term meaning to the course project which will open
doors for them. By having a semester-long project, students
can dive deep into different algorithms. They also receive
hands-on experience incorporating various machine learning algorithms for their use case.
Writing, presenting and teamwork proficiency is a critical
component of a higher education, and this courses involve
writing assignments, extensive team collaboration and oral
presentation to a public audience. Student performance on
formal writing assignments, project actualization and public presentation provides benchmarks for examining student
progress, both within and across semesters.
This experience report describes a three semester-long effort in an applied machine learning course with advanced
research orientations in gaming. This course has withstood
the test through in-person, hybrid learning, and completely
online modalities separately. We contribute a new course design inline with the most recent advancements in the gaming research community. This course attracts and caters to
mutual interests across engineering graduate programs. Of
the 292 students enrolled in this course over 3 semesters;
1.3% major in Environmental Engineering, Physics , Chemistry or Computer Networks, 1.3% are Software Engineering or High-Performance Computing, 2% are Game Development, 3.2% are Electrical Engineering, 4% are Intelligent
Robotics, 7% are Computer Engineering, 9% are Applied
Data Science, 9.2% are Data Science and the majority of
students, 63%, are majored in General Computer Science.
Students are expected to gain both creative and fun handson experience through a semester-long applied deep learning and reinforcement learning project. This course demon-

The game industry is moving into an era where old-style
game engines are being replaced by re-engineered systems
with embedded machine learning technologies for the operation, analysis and understanding of game play. In this paper,
we describe our machine learning course designed for graduate students interested in applying recent advances of deep
learning and reinforcement learning towards gaming. This
course serves as a bridge to foster interdisciplinary collaboration among graduate schools and does not require prior
experience designing or building games. Graduate students
enrolled in this course apply different fields of machine learning techniques such as computer vision, natural language
processing, computer graphics, human computer interaction,
robotics and data analysis to solve open challenges in gaming. Student projects cover use-cases such as training AI-bots
in gaming benchmark environments and competitions, understanding human decision patterns in gaming, and creating intelligent non-playable characters or environments to foster
engaging gameplay. Projects demos can help students open
doors for an industry career, aim for publications, or lay the
foundations of a future product. Our students gained handson experience in applying state of the art machine learning
techniques to solve real-life problems in gaming.

Introduction
Applied machine learning in games is now a vividly expanding research field that provides a platform for novel vision,
language, robotics, and online social interaction algorithms.
Exposure to state-of-the-art research literature is an integral
part of the course plan, in part because research community
is moving forward at an ever-increasing speed and understanding several backbone papers will clarify the research
question and enhance an understanding of the iterations and
improvements made. Moreover, an emphasis on the state-ofthe-art research methods fosters an appreciation of research
design and methodology, and more generally, of the importance of critical evaluation. Therefore, new ideas can be generated based on critical thinking.
As this course does not require prerequisites on machine
learning, we encourage learning by doing. A self-proposed
project will enable the students to tailor themselves into
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15695

