The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Co-mining: Self-Supervised Learning for Sparsely Annotated Object Detection
Tiancai Wang1 , Tong Yang1 , Jiale Cao2 , Xiangyu Zhang1
1

MEGVII Technology
Tianjin University
{wangtiancai, yangtong, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com, connor@tju.edu.cn
2

Abstract

D detector

Object detectors usually achieve promising results with the
supervision of complete instance annotations. However, their
performance is far from satisfactory with sparse instance annotations. Most existing methods for sparsely annotated object detection either re-weight the loss of hard negative samples or convert the unlabeled instances into ignored regions
to reduce the interference of false negatives. We argue that
these strategies are insufficient since they can at most alleviate the negative effect caused by missing annotations. In
this paper, we propose a simple but effective mechanism,
called Co-mining, for sparsely annotated object detection. In
our Co-mining, two branches of a Siamese network predict
the pseudo-label sets for each other. To enhance multi-view
learning and better mine unlabeled instances, the original image and corresponding augmented image are used as the inputs of two branches of the Siamese network, respectively.
Co-mining can serve as a general training mechanism applied to most of modern object detectors. Experiments are
performed on MS COCO dataset with three different sparsely
annotated settings using two typical frameworks: anchorbased detector RetinaNet and anchor-free detector FCOS. Experimental results show that our Co-mining with RetinaNet
achieves 1.4 % ∼ 2.1% improvements compared with different baselines and surpasses existing methods under the same
sparsely annotated setting.

forward

- negative supervision
𝐱

𝐱

D

+

R -

hard negatives (unlabeled)

+ positive supervision

𝐱

D

-

backward

𝐱

D

+

positives

D

+

+

sharing

𝐱𝒂

D

+

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1: Comparison of different pipelines for sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD). For simplicity, we only
show positives and hard negatives. Here, hard negatives
mainly represent unlabeled instances. (a) The standard object detector directly used for SAOD. (b) Soft sampling strategy and background recalibration loss that re-weights hard
negatives. (c) Part-aware sampling strategy that ignores the
loss of part categories for some hard negatives. (d) Instead
of reweighting and ignoring the loss of hard negatives, our
Co-mining exploits to convert the hard negatives for positive
supervision by using a Siamese network with two inputs.

(Jeong et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2019), a small
part of training images are fully annotated and the rest of
training images are totally unlabeled. Compared to SSOD
that annotates a part of images, SAOD annotates a part of
instances in each image.
One of major challenges in SAOD is that the unlabelled
instances will interference the training of a detector. During
training, the unlabelled instances provide an incorrect supervision signal, where those unlabeled instances and their
surrounding proposals are mistakenly regarded as hard negatives in Fig. 1(a). As a result, the weight updated in the gradient back-propagation will be misguided. Inspired by the
practice in semi-supervised object detection, one straightforward solution for SAOD (Niitani et al. 2019) is to first train
a detector with sparse annotations and then use the pseudo
labels generated by the learned model to retrain a new detector. However, since the first learned model is deeply confused by the unlabeled instances, the generated pseudo labels for the second detector learning are still of low credibil-

Introduction
Object detection has achieved significant improvements in
accuracy thanks to the development of deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) (He et al. 2016; Huang et al. 2017;
Simonyan and Zisserman 2014; Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and
Hinton 2012). Most of object detectors are trained in the
completely annotated object datasets (Lin et al. 2014; Everingham et al. 2010; Shao et al. 2019). However, when the object dataset is large in images and categories, it is pretty hard,
even impossible, to annotate all existing object instances, especially in the crowded scenery. To deal with this problem,
the task of Sparsely Annotated Object Detection (SAOD) is
proposed recently, which has drew great attention (Wu et al.
2019; Niitani et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2020; Abbasi, Laurendeau, and Gagne 2020). SAOD is different from conventional Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SSOD). In SSOD
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2800

