The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ordered Counterfactual Explanation by Mixed-Integer Linear Optimization
Kentaro Kanamori,1 Takuya Takagi, 2 Ken Kobayashi, 2,3
Yuichi Ike, 2 Kento Uemura, 2 Hiroki Arimura 1
1
Hokkaido University,
Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.,
3
Tokyo Institute of Technology,
{kanamori, arim}@ist.hokudai.ac.jp, {takagi.takuya, ken-kobayashi, ike.yuichi, uemura.kento}@fujitsu.com
2

user receives an undesired prediction H(x̂) 6= y ? for a target label y ? from a trained model H, which means denial of
credit loan, on an instance x̂ related to one’s current livelihood. We want to provide the user with advice a on changes
of features such as “Income” and “JobSkill” so that the user
can change one’s current status x̂ to obtain the desired outcome H(x̂ + a) = y ? (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019).
To achieve this goal, most of the existing CE methods find
a perturbation vector a? ∈ A, called an action, as an optimal
solution of the following optimization problem:

Abstract
Post-hoc explanation methods for machine learning models
have been widely used to support decision-making. One of
the popular methods is Counterfactual Explanation (CE),
also known as Actionable Recourse, which provides a user
with a perturbation vector of features that alters the prediction result. Given a perturbation vector, a user can interpret it
as an “action” for obtaining one’s desired decision result. In
practice, however, showing only a perturbation vector is often
insufficient for users to execute the action. The reason is that
if there is an asymmetric interaction among features, such as
causality, the total cost of the action is expected to depend on
the order of changing features. Therefore, practical CE methods are required to provide an appropriate order of changing
features in addition to a perturbation vector. For this purpose,
we propose a new framework called Ordered Counterfactual
Explanation (OrdCE). We introduce a new objective function
that evaluates a pair of an action and an order based on feature
interaction. To extract an optimal pair, we propose a mixedinteger linear optimization approach with our objective function. Numerical experiments on real datasets demonstrated
the effectiveness of our OrdCE in comparison with unordered
CE methods.

a? := arg min Cdist (a | x̂)
a∈A

subject to H(x̂ + a) = y ? ,
where A is a set of feasible perturbation vectors, and Cdist
is a cost function that measures the required efforts of
a, such as TLPS (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu 2019) and
DACE (Kanamori et al. 2020). Table 1 presents examples of
actions extracted from a logistic regression classifier trained
on our credit approval dataset in Figure 1. A user can obtain
one’s desired outcome by changing each feature according
to the suggested perturbation vectors in Table 1.
In practice, however, showing only a perturbation vector
a? is often insufficient for users to execute the action due to
interaction among features (Poyiadzi et al. 2020). In the previous example, as shown in the causal DAG in Figure 1(b),
we have an asymmetric interaction “JobSkill” → “Income”,
which means that increasing one’s “JobSkill” has a positive
effect on increasing “Income” while the opposite does not.
From these observations, we see that it is more reasonable to
increase first “JobSkill” and then “Income” than the reverse
order. Thus, practical CE methods are required to provide
an appropriate order of changing features in addition to a
perturbation vector a? .
To achieve this requirement, we propose a novel CE
framework that returns a pair (a? , σ ? ), called an ordered action, of a perturbation vector a? and a permutation σ ? of
features that advises a user to change features in that order.
We assume that the feature interaction is represented by an
interaction matrix M , whose element indicates the linear interaction between two features, such as correlations, causal
effects, or given by some prior knowledge. Roughly speak-

Introduction
Complex machine learning models such as neural networks
and tree ensembles are widely used in critical decisionmaking tasks (e.g., medical diagnosis and loan approval).
Thus, post-hoc methods for extracting explanations from
an individual prediction of these models have been attracting much attention for the last few years (Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016; Lundberg and Lee 2017; Koh and Liang
2017; Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2018). To provide a user
with a better insight into future improvement, a post-hoc
method needs to show not only why undesirable predictions
are given, but also how to act to obtain a desired prediction
result (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017; Miller 2019).
One of the post-hoc methods that show an action
to obtain a desired outcome is Counterfactual Explanation (CE) (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018), also
known as Actionable Recourse (Ustun, Spangher, and Liu
2019). Consider an example of a synthetic credit loan approval dataset shown in Figure 1. Imagine a situation that a
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11564

