The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

What’s the Best Place for an AI Conference, Vancouver or
Why Completing Comparative Questions is Difficult

:

Avishai Zagoury1 * , Einat Minkov2 * , Idan Szpektor3 , William W. Cohen3
1

Bar-Ilan University
University of Haifa
3
Google Research
avishaiz,szpektor,wcohen@google.com, einatm@is.haifa.ac.il
2

Abstract

support knowledge-based semantic reasoning with the factual knowledge that they encode within them (Talmor et al.
2020; Richardson et al. 2020; Kassner and Schütze 2020).
In this work, we introduce and explore a new task which
requires world knowledge, language understanding and semantic reasoning, namely, learning to generate meaningful
comparative questions. Consider, for example, the question,
“is the area of Montana larger than Arizona?” this question
is sensible and non-obvious, as Montana and Arizona are
both large states. Likewise, comparing between the weights
of rhinos and hippopotamuses seems natural, as both are
large animals. In contrast, asking about the relative height
of a lion and a mouse is perceived as nonsensical.
There are several motivations for studying the task of
automatically generating sensible comparative questions.
In the context of human-machine interaction, comparative
questions serve as interest-invoking elements in conversational search and exploration dialogues (Tsurel et al. 2017;
Szpektor et al. 2020). They call for active participation of
the user, and can serve as a rhetorical method for shifting
the focus of the conversation, thus keeping it dynamic and
evolving. From a linguistic perspective, generating meaningful comparisons combines high-level reasoning with factual knowledge as well as modeling the likely knowledge
of others. The probing of state-of-the-art language model on
this task can indicate how far these models go in terms of
“understanding language” versus “memorizing facts”.
In this paper, we evaluate state-of-the-art neural language
models for automatically generating meaningful comparisons. To make evaluation less subjective we frame this
task as as a fill-the-blank task, where we mask a single entity mention in an actual comparative question, and ask the
model to complete the question. Unlike many prior studies,
we evaluate the generality and robustness of what is learned
by partitioning the task by subdomain. In particular, we consider comparative questions posted by human users on question answering websites about animals, cities and countries,
and NBA players. As illustrated in Table 1, these questions
compare entities along various domain-related properties
that are both factual (e.g., “bigger”) and subjective (“more
loyal”). Automatically completing such questions requires a
combination of linguistic understanding, world knowledge,
and common-sense reasoning. We make our test-sets publicly available, to be used as a benchmark and to encourage

Although large neural language models (LMs) like BERT can
be finetuned to yield state-of-the-art results on many NLP
tasks, it is often unclear what these models actually learn.
Here we study using such LMs to fill in entities in humanauthored comparative questions, like “Which country is older,
India or
?”—i.e., we study the ability of neural LMs to
ask (not answer) reasonable questions. We show that accuracy in this fill-in-the-blank task is well-correlated with human judgements of whether a question is reasonable, and that
these models can be trained to achieve nearly human-level
performance in completing comparative questions in three
different subdomains. However, analysis shows that what
they learn fails to model any sort of broad notion of which
entities are semantically comparable or similar—instead the
trained models are very domain-specific, and performance is
highly correlated with co-occurrences between specific entities observed in the training set. This is true both for models
that are pretrained on general text corpora, as well as models trained on a large corpus of comparison questions. Our
study thus reinforces recent results on the difficulty of making claims about a deep model’s world knowledge or linguistic competence based on performance on specific benchmark
problems. We make our evaluation datasets publicly available
to foster future research on complex understanding and reasoning in such models at standards of human interaction.

Introduction
Neural language models like BERT (Devlin et al. 2019)
that are pretrained on very large amounts of unlabeled texts
produce highly informative contextual word representations
which have been proven to capture various linguistic phenomena, such as syntax and coreference (Tenney, Das, and
Pavlick 2019; Belinkov et al. 2020). Recently, it has been
argued that these models also encode some factual and
common-sense knowledge, presenting a potential alternative
to curated knowledge bases for question answering tasks
(Petroni et al. 2019; Roberts, Raffel, and Shazeer 2020;
Jiang et al. 2020). Yet, it is an open question to what extent
neural LMs accurately represent the meaning encapsulated
in a natural language utterance, and whether they can truly
* Work done at Google Research.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14292

