The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Joint Training Dual-MRC Framework for Aspect Based Sentiment Analysis
Yue Mao, Yi Shen, Chao Yu, Longjun Cai
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
{maoyue.my, sy133447, aiqi.yc, longjun.clj}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Aspect based sentiment analysis (ABSA) involves three
fundamental subtasks: aspect term extraction, opinion term
extraction, and aspect-level sentiment classification. Early
works only focused on solving one of these subtasks individually. Some recent work focused on solving a combination
of two subtasks, e.g., extracting aspect terms along with sentiment polarities or extracting the aspect and opinion terms
pair-wisely. More recently, the triple extraction task has been
proposed, i.e., extracting the (aspect term, opinion term, sentiment polarity) triples from a sentence. However, previous
approaches fail to solve all subtasks in a unified end-to-end
framework. In this paper, we propose a complete solution for
ABSA. We construct two machine reading comprehension
(MRC) problems and solve all subtasks by joint training two
BERT-MRC models with parameters sharing. We conduct experiments on these subtasks, and results on several benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
framework, which significantly outperforms existing state-ofthe-art methods.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of ABSA substasks.

• SC: aspect-level sentiment classification

Introduction

• AESC2 : AT extraction and sentiment classification

Aspect based sentiment analysis (ABSA)1 is an important
research area in natural language processing. Consider the
example in Figure 1, in the sentence “The ambience was
nice, but the service was not so great.”, the aspect terms
(AT) are “ambience/service” and the opinion terms (OT) are
“nice/not so great”. Traditionally, there exist three fundamental subtasks: aspect term extraction, opinion term extraction, and aspect-level sentiment classification. Recent research works aim to do a combination of two subtasks and
have achieved great progress. For example, they extract (AT,
OT) pairs, or extract ATs with corresponding sentiment polarities (SP). More recently, some work that aims to do all related subtasks in ABSA with a unified framework has raised
increasing interests.
For convenience, we assume the following abbreviations
of ABSA subtasks as illustrated in Figure 1:

• AOE3 : aspect-oriented OT extraction
• Pair: (AT, OT) pair extraction
• Triple: (AT, OT, SP) triple extraction.
We mainly focus on the task of extracting (a, o, s) triples
since it is the hardest among all ABSA substasks. Peng et al.
(2020) proposed a unified framework to extract (AT, OT,
SP) triples. However, it is computationally inefficient as its
framework has two stages and has to train three separate
models.
In this paper, we propose a joint training framework
to handle all ABSA subtasks (described in Figure 1) in
one single model. We use BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) as
our backbone network and use a span based model to detect the start/end positions of ATs/OTs from a sentence.
Span based methods outperform traditional sequence tagging based methods for extraction tasks (Hu et al. 2019).

• AE: AT extraction
• OE: OT extraction

2

It is also referred as aspect based sentiment analysis (ABSA).
It is also referred as target oriented opinion word extraction
(TOWE).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
It is also referred as target based sentiment analysis (TBSA).

3

13543

