The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Planning with Learned Object Importance in Large Problem Instances
using Graph Neural Networks
Tom Silver∗ , Rohan Chitnis∗ , Aidan Curtis,
Joshua Tenenbaum, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{tslvr, ronuchit, curtisa, jbt, tlp, lpk}@mit.edu

Abstract
Real-world planning problems often involve hundreds or even
thousands of objects, straining the limits of modern planners.
In this work, we address this challenge by learning to predict
a small set of objects that, taken together, would be sufficient
for finding a plan. We propose a graph neural network architecture for predicting object importance in a single inference
pass, thus incurring little overhead while greatly reducing the
number of objects that must be considered by the planner.
Our approach treats the planner and transition model as black
boxes, and can be used with any off-the-shelf planner. Empirically, across classical planning, probabilistic planning, and
robotic task and motion planning, we find that our method results in planning that is significantly faster than several baselines, including other partial grounding strategies and lifted
planners. We conclude that learning to predict a sufficient set
of objects for a planning problem is a simple, powerful, and
general mechanism for planning in large instances. Video:
https://youtu.be/FWsVJc2fvCE Code: https://git.io/JIsqX

1

Figure 1: Time taken by Fast Downward (Helmert 2006) in
the LAMA-first mode on various IPC domains, as a function of the number of extraneous objects in the problem. The
x-axis is the number of objects added to a small sufficient set
(Definition 2). Curves show a median across 10 problems;
shaded regions show the 25th to 75th percentiles. We can
see that planning time gets substantially worse as the number of extraneous objects increases; real-world applications
of planning will often contain large numbers of such objects
for a particular goal. In this work, we learn to predict a small
subset of objects that is sufficient for planning, leading to
significantly faster planning than both Fast Downward on its
own and other learning-based grounding methods.

Introduction

A key research agenda in classical planning is to extend the
core framework to large-scale real-world applications. Such
applications will often involve many objects, only some of
which are important for any particular goal. For example, a
household robot’s internal state must include all objects relevant to any of its functions, but once it receives a specific
goal, such as boiling potatoes, it should restrict its attention
to only a small object set, such as the potatoes, pots, and
forks, ignoring the hundreds or even thousands of other objects. If its goal were instead to clean the sink, the set of
objects to consider would vary drastically.
More generally, we consider planning problems with large
(but finite) universes of objects, where only a small subset
need to be considered for any particular goal. Popular heuristic search planners (Hoffmann 2001; Helmert 2006; Geffner
and Lipovetzky 2012) scale poorly in this regime (Figure 1),
as they ground actions over the objects during preprocessing. Lifted planners (Ridder 2014; Corrêa et al. 2020) avoid
explicit grounding, but struggle during search; we find that
a state-of-the-art lifted planner (Corrêa et al. 2020) fails to

solve any test problem in our experiments within the timeout (but it can usually solve the much smaller training problems). In this many-object setting, one would instead like to
identify a small sufficient set of objects before planning, but
finding this set is nontrivial and highly problem-dependent.
In this work, we propose to learn to predict subsets of objects that are sufficient for solving planning problems. This
requires reasoning about discrete and continuous properties
of the objects and their relations. Generalizing to problems
with more objects requires learning lifted models that are
agnostic to object identity and count. We therefore propose
a convolutional graph neural network architecture (Scarselli

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.

11962

