The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

G LISTER: Generalization based Data Subset Selection for Efficient and Robust
Learning
Krishnateja Killamsetty1 , Durga Sivasubramanian 2 , Ganesh Ramakrishnan 2 , Rishabh Iyer1,2
1

University of Texas at Dallas
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay
krishnateja.killamsetty@utdallas.edu, durgas@cse.iitb.ac.in, ganesh@cse.iitb.ac.in, rishabh.iyer@utdallas.edu
2

costs and running times1 .
As a result, efficient and robust machine learning is a very
relevant and substantial research problem. In this paper, we
shall focus on three goals: Goal 1: Train machine learning
and deep learning models on effective subsets of data, thereby
significantly reducing training time and compute while not
sacrificing accuracy. Goal 2: To (iteratively) select effective
subsets of labeled data to reduce the labeling cost. Goal 3:
Select data subsets to remove noisy labels and class imbalance, which is increasingly common in operational machine
learning settings.

Abstract
Large scale machine learning and deep models are extremely
data-hungry. Unfortunately, obtaining large amounts of labeled data is expensive, and training state-of-the-art models
(with hyperparameter tuning) requires significant computing
resources and time. Secondly, real-world data is noisy and
imbalanced. As a result, several recent papers try to make the
training process more efficient and robust. However, most existing work either focuses on robustness or efficiency, but not
both. In this work, we introduce G LISTER, a GeneraLIzation
based data Subset selecTion for Efficient and Robust learning framework. We formulate G LISTER as a mixed discretecontinuous bi-level optimization problem to select a subset
of the training data, which maximizes the log-likelihood on
a held-out validation set. We then analyze G LISTER for simple classifiers such as gaussian and multinomial naive-bayes,
k-nearest neighbor classifier, and linear regression and show
connections to submodularity. Next, we propose an iterative
online algorithm G LISTER -O NLINE, which performs data selection iteratively along with the parameter updates and can
be applied to any loss-based learning algorithm. We then show
that for a rich class of loss functions including cross-entropy,
hinge-loss, squared-loss, and logistic-loss, the inner discrete
data selection is an instance of (weakly) submodular optimization, and we analyze conditions for which G LISTER -O NLINE
reduces the validation loss and converges. Finally, we propose
G LISTER -ACTIVE, an extension to batch active learning, and
we empirically demonstrate the performance of G LISTER on
a wide range of tasks including, (a) data selection to reduce
training time, (b) robust learning under label noise and imbalance settings, and (c) batch-active learning with several deep
and shallow models. We show that our framework improves
upon state of the art both in efficiency and accuracy (in cases
(a) and (c)) and is more efficient compared to other state-ofthe-art robust learning algorithms in case (b). The code for
G LISTERis at:https://github.com/dssresearch/GLISTER.

Background and Related Work

With the quest to achieve human-like performance for machine learning and deep learning systems, the cost of training
and deploying machine learning models has been significantly increasing. The wasted computational and engineering
energy becomes evident in deep learning algorithms, wherein
extensive hyper-parameter tuning and network architecture
search need to be done. This results in staggering compute

A number of papers have studied data efficient training and
robust training of machine learning and deep learning models. However, the area of data efficient training of models
that are also robust is relatively under-explored. Below, we
summarize papers based on efficiency and robustness.
Reducing Training Time and Compute (Data Selection):
A number of recent papers have used submodular functions
as proxy functions (Wei, Iyer, and Bilmes 2014; Wei et al.
2014b; Kirchhoff and Bilmes 2014; Kaushal et al. 2019).
These approaches have been used in several domains including speech recognition (Wei et al. 2014a,b; Liu et al. 2015),
machine translation (Kirchhoff and Bilmes 2014), computer
vision (Kaushal et al. 2019), and NLP (Bairi et al. 2015). Another common approach uses coresets. Coresets are weighted
subsets of the data, which approximate certain desirable characteristics of the full data (e.g., the loss function) (Feldman
2020). Coreset algorithms have been used for several problems including k-means clustering (Har-Peled and Mazumdar 2004), SVMs (Clarkson 2010) and Bayesian inference
(Campbell and Broderick 2018). Coreset algorithms require
specialized (and often very different algorithms) depending
on the model and problem at hand and have had limited
success in deep learning. A very recent coreset algorithm
called C RAIG (Mirzasoleiman, Bilmes, and Leskovec 2020),
which tries to select representative subsets of the training
data that closely approximate the full gradient, has shown
promise for several machine learning models. The resulting
subset selection problem becomes an instance of the facility
location problem (which is submodular). Another data selection framework, which is very relevant to this work, poses
the data selection problem as that of selecting a subset of

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
https://medium.com/syncedreview/the-staggering-cost-oftraining-sota-ai-models-e329e80fa82

Introduction

8110

