The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generating Natural Language Attacks in a Hard Label Black Box Setting
Rishabh Maheshwary, Saket Maheshwary and Vikram Pudi
Data Sciences and Analytics Center, Kohli Center on Intelligent Systems
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
{rishabh.maheshwary, saket.maheshwary}@research.iiit.ac.in, vikram@iiit.ac.in

Abstract

which are rarely available in real world applications. Black
box attacks are further classified into score-based, transferbased and decision-based attacks. Score-based attacks generate adversarial examples using the class probabilities or
confidence score of the target models. Although score-based
attacks do not require detailed model knowledge, the assumption of availability of confidence scores is not realistic. Transfer-based attacks rely on training substitute models
with synthetic training data, which is inefficient and computationally expensive. Decision-based attacks generate adversarial examples by observing the top label predicted by the
target model and are very realistic.
In this work, we focus on the hard-label black box1 setting in
which the adversary crafts adversarial inputs using only the
top label predicted by the target model. Compared to attacks
in prior literature, hard-label black box attacks (1) requires
no information about the target model’s architecture, gradients or even class probability scores, (2) requires no access
to training data or substitute models and (3) are more practical in real-world setting. Due to these constraints, generating adversarial examples under this setting is highly challenging. Besides, none of the attacks proposed in previous
works will work in this setting. We tackle this challenging
and highly realistic setting by utilizing a population-based
optimization procedure that optimizes the objective function
by querying the target model and observing the hard-label
outputs only. We verify the grammatical correctness and fluency of generated examples through automatic and human
evaluation. Our main contributions are as follows:

We study an important and challenging task of attacking
natural language processing models in a hard label black
box setting. We propose a decision-based attack strategy that
crafts high quality adversarial examples on text classification
and entailment tasks. Our proposed attack strategy leverages
population-based optimization algorithm to craft plausible
and semantically similar adversarial examples by observing
only the top label predicted by the target model. At each iteration, the optimization procedure allow word replacements
that maximizes the overall semantic similarity between the
original and the adversarial text. Further, our approach does
not rely on using substitute models or any kind of training
data. We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed approach
through extensive experimentation and ablation studies on
five state-of-the-art target models across seven benchmark
datasets. In comparison to attacks proposed in prior literature,
we are able to achieve a higher success rate with lower word
perturbation percentage that too in a highly restricted setting.

Introduction
The significance of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
been well established through its success in a variety of
tasks (Kim 2014; Maheshwary, Ganguly, and Pudi 2017;
Abdel-Hamid et al. 2014; Maheshwary and Pudi 2016;
Young et al. 2018; Maheshwary and Misra 2018). However,
recent studies (Szegedy et al. 2013; Papernot et al. 2017)
have shown that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples — inputs crafted by adding small perturbations to the
original sample. Such perturbations are almost imperceptible to humans but deceive DNNs thus raising major concerns
about their utility in real world applications. While recent
works related to vision and speech have a variety of methods for generating adversarial attacks, it is still a challenging
task to craft attacks for NLP because of its (1) discrete nature — replacing a single word in a text can completely alter
its semantics and (2) grammatical correctness and fluency.
Adversarial attacks are broadly categorized as white box and
black box attacks. White box attacks require access to the
target model’s architecture, parameters and gradients to craft
adversarial examples. Such attacks are expensive to apply
and requires access to internal details of the target model

1. We propose a novel decision-based attack setting and generate plausible and semantically similar adversarial examples for text classification and entailment tasks.
2. Our mechanism successfully generates adversarial examples in a hard-label setting without relying on any sort of
training data knowledge or substitute models.
3. Our proposed attack makes use of population-based optimization procedure which maximizes the overall semantic
similarity between the original and the adversarial text.
4. In comparison to previous attack strategies, our attack
achieves a higher success rate and lower perturbation rate
that too in a highly restricted setting.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13525

Code: github.com/RishabhMaheshwary/hard-label-attack

