The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Choosing the Initial State for Online Replanning
Maximilian Fickert,∗1 Ivan Gavran,∗2 Ivan Fedotov,2
Jörg Hoffmann,1 Rupak Majumdar,2 Wheeler Ruml3
1

Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, Kaiserslautern, Germany
3
Department of Computer Science, University of New Hampshire, USA
{fickert, hoffmann}@cs.uni-saarland.de, {gavran, ivanan, rupak}@mpi-sws.org, ruml@cs.unh.edu
state that is too far along the old plan risks inefficiency: the
agent’s actions will not reflect the new information until the
state is reached, possibly causing it to miss opportunities.
The most common solution in current systems appears to
be to always choose a transition point that is a fixed time
ahead in the future, either as part of system design (Gregory
et al. 2002; McGann et al. 2007) or through an estimate for
the replanning time (Likhachev, Gordon, and Thrun 2003;
Ruml et al. 2011). But this is at odds with the purpose of
automated planning, which is to enable an agent to handle a
variety of problems and situations with a single algorithm. In
this paper, we introduce a principled approach to the problem of choosing the initial state for online replanning, which
we call the Multiple Initial State Technique (MIST). MIST
integrates this choice into the search itself, as only the search
has the proper information about the necessary trade-offs.
In MIST, the open list is initialized with multiple potential initial states, rather than just one. These states represent
speculations on the state in which the agent might be once
the search is done. Open nodes are prioritized by their estimated goal achievement time, taking into account both the
makespan of the resulting plan and an estimate of when the
planning process itself will finish. In this way, MIST reasons online during search about which initial state is most
promising to explore.
In MIST, once the execution goes past a state, that state is
no longer viable as an initial state. We also present a variant
of MIST that allows the planner to consider initial states that
may have already been passed but that are still reachable. For
both variants, we prove that, under suitable conditions on
the heuristic functions, the first solution MIST finds is better
than any other one it might find by continuing its search.
To assess the effectiveness of MIST in a concrete yet
domain-independent way, we implement it in the Fast
Downward planner (Helmert 2006) and extend a set of
benchmarks from the International Planning Competition
(IPC) to our replanning setting. We find that MIST yields
better agent behavior, in the sense of achieving its goals
more quickly, than either using a fixed constant or trying
to predict replanning time in advance.

Abstract
The need to replan arises in many applications. However, in
the context of planning as heuristic search, it raises an annoying problem: if the previous plan is still executing, what
should the new plan search take as its initial state? If it were
possible to accurately predict how long replanning would
take, it would be easy to find the appropriate state at which
control will transfer from the previous plan to the new one.
But as planning problems can vary enormously in their difficulty, this prediction can be challenging. Many current systems merely use a manually chosen constant duration. In this
paper, we show how such ad hoc solutions can be avoided by
integrating the choice of the appropriate initial state into the
search process itself. The search is initialized with multiple
candidate initial states and a time-aware evaluation function
is used to prefer plans whose total goal achievement time is
minimal. Experimental results show that this approach yields
better behavior than either guessing a constant or trying to
predict replanning time in advance. By making replanning
more effective and easier to implement, this work aids in creating planning systems that can better handle the inevitable
exigencies of real-world execution.

Introduction
After plan execution has begun, the need to replan can arise
for many reasons. Perhaps the agent’s goal has changed
(Molineaux, Klenk, and Aha 2010) or additional goals have
become known (Benton, Do, and Ruml 2007). Perhaps the
environment, or the agent’s perception of it, has changed,
possibly giving rise to better ways of achieving the agent’s
goals (Cashmore et al. 2016). Or perhaps the original plan
was constructed in haste, and now that execution is underway, the agent has the leisure to try to find a better plan to
switch to (Likhachev, Gordon, and Thrun 2003). Regardless
of cause, if the agent is using a planning technique such as
forward state-space search, replanning necessitates choosing an initial state for the search. This small detail, often
glossed over in previous work on replanning, raises a vexing
problem: with execution underway, this initial state must be
one far enough along the current plan that the agent will not
encounter it until the replanning process has finished, to allow transitioning to the new plan. But choosing an initial

Previous Work

∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

One example of the need for replanning in an industrial context is on-line goal arrival in manufacturing. (Ruml et al.
12311

