The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Information Passing Based Noise-Tolerant Hybrid Learning for
Semi-Supervised Human Parsing
Yunan Liu1 , Shanshan Zhang1∗ , Jian Yang1 , PongChi Yuen2
1

PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education,
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
{liuyunan, shanshan.zhang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, pcyuen@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Generation

Abstract

Model

Deep learning based human parsing methods usually require
a large amount of training data to reach high performance.
However, it is costly and time-consuming to obtain manually
annotated high quality labels for a large scale dataset. To alleviate annotation efforts, we propose a new semi-supervised
human parsing method for which we only need a small number of labels for training. First, we generate high quality pseudo labels on unlabeled images using a hierarchical information passing network (HIPN), which reasons human part segmentation in a coarse to fine manner. Furthermore, we develop a noise-tolerant hybrid learning method, which takes
advantage of positive and negative learning to better handle noisy pseudo labels. When evaluated on standard human
parsing benchmarks, our HIPN achieves a new state-of-theart performance. Moreover, our noise-tolerant hybrid learning
method further improves the performance and outperforms the state-of-the-art semi-supervised method (i.e. GRN) by
4.47 points w.r.t mIoU on the LIP dataset.

Pseudo
labels

Training

Labeled
Images

Retraining

Noise-blind learning
PL: positve learning

(a)

NL: negative learning

Clean
pseudo labels
Pseudo
Model
labels
Noisy
Generation
Identification
pseudo labels
Noise-blind learning
Training

Model

PL

Model
NL

(b)

Figure 1: Comparison of different semi-supervised methods
for human parsing. (a) Previous methods directly use generated pseudo labels to retrain the model. In contrast, (b) we
identify noisy and clean labels, and further develop a noisytolerant hybrid learning strategy to make full use of correct
information from clean pseudo labels while eliminate incorrect information from noisy pseudo labels.
.

Introduction
costs, a promising solution is to take advantage of semisupervised learning. Most existing methods first use a human parsing model trained on annotated data to generate
pseudo labels for unlabeled images and then retrain the model using the augmented training samples, following the standard pipeline shown in Fig 1(a). Some of them (Fang
et al. 2018; Lin et al. 2019) adopt the skeleton key points as
auxiliary information to generate pseudo labels. However,
these algorithms require extra computing resources of human pose, which are usually unavailable in real cases and
inevitably introduce new errors. Some other works (Li et al.
2019a, 2020) adopt rectification strategy to correct some
structure error and consistency error of pseudo labels. All
of these works aim to design a powerful and robust model to
generate high-quality pseudo labels. Nevertheless, the primary model trained on a small amount of data is somehow
weak, and thus the generated pseudo labels are inevitably
noisy. Therefore, it is necessary to take care of the noise during the second round of training, which has not been considered by previous works in this filed so far.
In this paper, we make the first attempt to train a ro-

Humans exist commonly and are the most interesting objects in daily visual data, e.g. public surveillance videos,
private photographs, etc. Therefore, it is of great interests
for the computer vision community to analyze humans in
visual data. Human parsing (i.e. partitioning human body
to multiple semantically consistent regions), is a crucial yet
challenging task for fine-grained human body understanding, which is helpful for many other high-level computer vision tasks such as pedestrian attribute recognition (Li et al.
2019b), human pose estimation (Liu et al. 2021), and person
re-identification (Guo et al. 2019), etc.
With the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), human parsing has witnessed dramatic progress.
Typically, CNN-based approaches require a large number
of labeled training samples to boost performance. But it
is rather expensive to collect high-quality and fine-grained
annotations for human body. In order to reduce annotation
∗

The corresponding author is Shanshan Zhang.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2207

