The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Count via Unbalanced Optimal Transport
Zhiheng Ma1 , Xing Wei2 , Xiaopeng Hong3,4 * , Hui Lin3 , Yunfeng Qiu2 , Yihong Gong2
1

College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
mazhiheng@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {weixing,hongxiaopeng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {waitandwait,yfqiu2015}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,
ygong@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

the counting performance (Zhang et al. 2016; Ma et al. 2019;
Liu et al. 2019b). For example, the performance of densityregression-based methods is highly influenced by the Gaussian kernel size (Wan and Chan 2019; Zhang et al. 2016).
Moreover, generating pseudo ground truth also has side effects. For example, an oversized Gaussian kernel will reduce
the location precision of points and result in poor quality
density maps (Idrees et al. 2018).
In this paper, for the first time, we consider the counting problem from the perspective of measure theory. Specifically, we formulate the collection of scattered annotated
PM
points by a discrete measure v =
j=1 vj δyj , where
vj = 1, yj is the 2D position of the point, and Y =
{y1 , y2 , . . . , yM } is the support set of this discrete measure.
Similarly, a density map can also be formulated by a discrete
measure supported on the pixel space X . It is worth noticing
that since only a small portion of pixels are annotated with
points, the supports of these two measures, X and Y, only
sparsely overlap. Therefore, an essential question about the
measure-theory-based optimization method is how to quantify differences between the measure for scattered points and
the measure for dense density maps.
The key to answering this question is to define the distance between two measures with different supports. As it
is ambiguous to annotate a person occupying an area with a
single point, the desired distance should be robust to the ambiguity in annotations and remain stable under spatial perturbations of point annotations. This requirement is described
mathematically as weak convergence (Genevay 2019; Sriperumbudur et al. 2012). According to this understanding,
`2 distance, widely used in density-regression methods, is
proved not to metrize weak convergence and is sensitive to
spatial perturbations (further discussed in Sec. 3.2). As a result, it can only be applied to discrete measures with the
same supports. One alternative is to use optimal transport
(OT) distance, which has been proved to capture the underlying geometry of measures with different supports and
metrize weak convergence (Santambrogio 2015). Nonetheless, The prerequisite of using OT is that the total mass of
two input measures should be equal. Thus OT can not handle mass variations, which are common in practice.
To address these limitations, we propose to use unbalanced optimal transport (UOT) distance to quantify discrepancy between two measures. Compared to OT, UOT ‘re-

Counting dense crowds through computer vision technology has attracted widespread attention. Most crowd counting datasets use point annotations. In this paper, we formulate crowd counting as a measure regression problem to minimize the distance between two measures with different supports and unequal total mass. Specifically, we adopt the unbalanced optimal transport distance, which remains stable
under spatial perturbations, to quantify the discrepancy between predicted density maps and point annotations. An efficient optimization algorithm based on the regularized semidual formulation of UOT is introduced, which alternatively
learns the optimal transportation and optimizes the density regressor. The quantitative and qualitative results illustrate that
our method achieves state-of-the-art counting and localization performance.

1

Introduction

Crowd counting has particularly important practical application value in public security. It can also be applied to count
vehicles (Onoro Rubio and López-Sastre 2016), cells (Lempitsky and Zisserman 2010), and animals (Marsden et al.
2018). It is challenging to count targets in complex scenarios
with thousands of targets, severe occlusions, and huge scale
variations. As a result, in modern crowd counting datasets, it
is more feasible and labor-saving to provide coarse annotations, e.g., points, than detailed annotations such as bounding boxes or even contours.
Most previous methods adopt detection (Liu et al. 2019b,
2018a) or density regression (Zhang et al. 2016; Sindagi and
Patel 2017) to predict the total count. They encounter an obstacle that the required ground truth is unavailable, such as
the bounding boxes for detection and the pixel-wise density map for density regression. To ease this problem, some
detection-based methods introduce additional bounding-box
annotations (Liu et al. 2018a) or generate pseudo bounding
boxes (Liu et al. 2019b; Sam et al. 2020), and most densityregression based methods generate pseudo density maps by
smoothing the sparse annotated points with Gaussian kernels. Nevertheless, previous literature has shown that the
‘quality’ of the generated supervisory signals greatly affects
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2319

