The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Regret Bounds for Online Kernel Selection in Continuous Kernel Space
Xiao Zhang,1,2 Shizhong Liao,3 Jun Xu,1,2∗ Ji-Rong Wen1,2
1

2

Gaoling School of Articial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
{zhangx89, junxu, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, szliao@tju.edu.cn

Abstract

Regret bounds of online kernel selection have been extensively studied for a finite kernel set containing a finite
number of candidate kernels. Online kernel selection can be
reduced to a problem of prediction with expert advice (CesaBianchi and Lugosi 2006), where the finite kernel set corresponds to the set of experts, and predictions are obtained
according to the weights and advice of experts at each
round. Yang et al. (2012) presented an online approach to offline kernel selection with online-to-batch conversion, which
has generalization guarantees. This online approach can be
transformed into a randomized approach of online kernel selection with expert advice, which updates the weights using
the exponential weighted average, trains hypotheses using
the modified kernel perceptron. This randomized online kernel selection approach is in a linear time complexity at each
round with respect to the current number of rounds and a linear space complexity with respect to the number of rounds.
Foster et al. (2017) formulated an algorithm framework for
online model selection with multi-scale expert advice, which
enjoys tight regret bounds when the losses of the optimal
hypotheses lie in different ranges. This framework can be
applied to online kernel selection, where a min-max optimization problem needs to be solved. Another alternative
strategy under the expert advice framework is online multiple kernel learning (Jin, Hoi, and Yang 2010; Nguyen 2017),
which assigns weights to multiple hypothesis sequences corresponding to each candidate kernel, and predicts by combining the outputs of all the hypotheses at each round. But
existing regret analyses for online kernel selection with expert advice are not suitable for online kernel selection in
a continuous kernel space. More specifically, given a finite
kernel set containing N candidate kernels, after T rounds,
existing regret
√ bounds of online kernel selection are at least
of order O( N T ) against the best-in-hindsight hypothesis,
which cannot be applied to a continuous kernel space due to
the unbounded regrets when N = ∞.
Recently, Zhang and Liao (2018) presented a novel online
kernel selection approach using incremental sketched kernel
alignment, which enjoys an optimal regret bound independently of the number of candidate kernels. However, given
N candidate kernels, this online kernel selection approach
needs to maintain N kernel alignments at each round, having
a linear time complexity with respect to N at each updating
round, which is unfeasible when N = ∞. Adaptive kernel

Regret bounds of online kernel selection in a finite kernel
√ set
have been well studied, having at least an order O( N T )
of magnitude after T rounds, where N is the number of candidate kernels. But it is still an unsolved problem to achieve
sublinear regret bounds of online kernel selection in a continuous kernel space under different learning frameworks. In
this paper, to represent different learning frameworks of online kernel selection, we divide online kernel selection approaches in a continuous kernel space into two categories according to the order of selection and training at each round.
Then we construct a surrogate hypothesis space that contains
all the candidate kernels with bounded norms and inner products, representing the continuously varying hypothesis space.
Finally, we decompose the regrets of the proposed online kernel selection categories into different types of instantaneous
regrets in the surrogate √
hypothesis space, and derive optimal
regret bounds of order O( T ) of magnitude under mild assumptions, independent of the cardinality of the continuous
kernel space. Empirical studies verified the correctness of the
theoretical regret analyses.

Introduction
In contrast to offline kernel selection (Ding et al. 2019; Liu
et al. 2020), online kernel selection aims to select the optimal kernel for online kernel learning at each round, which
conducts kernel selection and hypothesis training with regret guarantees in a single-pass over the data. Online kernel
selection is one of the fundamental and critical problems of
online kernel learning, for the kernels used determine the
performance of online kernel learning. Existing offline kernel selection approaches cannot be directly applied to online
kernel selection for the following two reasons: (1) there is
no delineation among training, validation and testing phases
in online learning (Diethe and Girolami 2013; Zhang, Liao,
and Liao 2019; Muthukumar et al. 2019); (2) offline setting
typically assumes that the data is generated independently
and identically distributed, but the assumption is relaxed or
eliminated in online settings (Rakhlin, Shamir, and Sridharan 2012).
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10931

