The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploring Transfer Learning For End-to-End Spoken Language Understanding
Subendhu Rongali1, 2 * , Beiye Liu1 , Liwei Cai1 , Konstantine Arkoudas1 ,
Chengwei Su1 , Wael Hamza1
1
Amazon Alexa AI, New York
University of Massachusetts Amherst
srongali@cs.umass.edu, {beiyeliu, cliwei, arkoudk, chengwes, waelhamz}@amazon.com
2

Abstract

and fueled the push for tiny AI and edge processing, where
the user requests are processed on the device itself.
Traditional SLU systems consist of a two-stage pipeline,
an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) component that
processes customer speech and generates a text transcription
(ex. play the song watermelon sugar), followed by a Natural Language Understanding (NLU) component that maps
the transcription to an actionable hypothesis consisting of
intents and slots (ex. Intent: PlaySong, Slots: SongName watermelon sugar). An end-to-end (E2E) system that goes
directly from speech to the hypothesis would help make the
SLU system smaller and faster, allowing it to be stored on
an edge device. It could potentially also be better optimized
than a pipeline since it eliminates cascading errors.
However, E2E systems are not used in practice because
they have some key issues. These systems are hard to build
since they consist of large neural components such as transformers and require massive amounts of E2E training data.
They also don’t make use of the vastly available training data
for the ASR and NLU components that could be used to
enhance their performance, because the examples in these
datasets may not be aligned to create an E2E training sample. Another issue is feature expansion, a scenario where a
new domain, with new intents and slots, is added to the voice
assistant’s capabilities. Here, developers typically only have
access to some synthetically generated text-hypothesis examples. Speech data isn’t readily available and it is very expensive to collect. E2E models thus fail as they require lots
of new audio and hypothesis data to learn this new domain.
In this work, we build an E2E model that mitigates these
issues using transfer learning. We call it the Audio-Text
All-Task (AT-AT) Model. AT-AT is an E2E transformerbased model that is jointly trained on multiple audio-totext and text-to-text tasks. Examples of these tasks include speech recognition (ASR), hypothesis prediction from
speech (SLU), masked LM prediction (MLM), and hypothesis prediction from text (NLU). Our model achieves this by
converting data from all these tasks into a single audio-totext or text-to-text format. Figure 1 shows this joint training
phase in detail. Our findings indicate that there is significant knowledge transfer taking place from multiple tasks,
which in turn helps in downstream model performance. We
see that the AT-AT pretrained model shows improved performance on SLU hypothesis prediction on internal data col-

Voice Assistants such as Alexa, Siri, and Google Assistant
typically use a two-stage Spoken Language Understanding
pipeline; first, an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) component to process customer speech and generate text transcriptions, followed by a Natural Language Understanding
(NLU) component to map transcriptions to an actionable hypothesis. An end-to-end (E2E) system that goes directly from
speech to a hypothesis is a more attractive option. These systems were shown to be smaller, faster, and better optimized.
However, they require massive amounts of end-to-end training data and in addition, don’t take advantage of the already
available ASR and NLU training data.
In this work, we propose an E2E system that is designed
to jointly train on multiple speech-to-text tasks, such as
ASR (speech-transcription) and SLU (speech-hypothesis),
and text-to-text tasks, such as NLU (text-hypothesis). We call
this the Audio-Text All-Task (AT-AT) Model and we show
that it beats the performance of E2E models trained on individual tasks, especially ones trained on limited data. We
show this result on an internal music dataset and two public
datasets, FluentSpeech and SNIPS Audio, where we achieve
state-of-the-art results. Since our model can process both
speech and text input sequences and learn to predict a target
sequence, it also allows us to do zero-shot E2E SLU by training on only text-hypothesis data (without any speech) from
a new domain. We evaluate this ability of our model on the
Facebook TOP dataset and set a new benchmark for zeroshot
E2E performance. We release the audio data collected for the
TOP dataset for future research.

Introduction
In recent years, there has been a dramatic surge in the adoption of voice assistants such as Amazon Alexa, Apple Siri,
and Google Assistant. Customers use them for a variety of
tasks such as playing music and online shopping.
These voice assistants are built on complex Spoken Language Understanding (SLU) systems that are typically too
large to store on an edge device such as a mobile phone or a
smart speaker. Hence, user traffic is routed through a cloud
server to process requests. This has led to privacy concerns
* Work done during the author’s summer internship.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13754

