The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online DR-Submodular Maximization: Minimizing Regret and Constraint
Violation
Prasanna Raut∗ 1 , Omid Sadeghi∗ 2 , Maryam Fazel 2
1

2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Washington
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington
{raut, omids, mfazel}@uw.edu
Abstract

that need to be satisfied on average (Agrawal and Devanur
2015; Badanidiyuru, Kleinberg, and Slivkins 2018; Agrawal
and Devanur 2014; Rivera, Wang, and Xu 2018). Therefore, it may be beneficial to sacrifice some of the reward to
meet other desired goals or restrictions over the time horizon. Such long-term constraints arise naturally in applications with limited budget (resource) availability (Balseiro
and Gur 2019; Besbes and Zeevi 2012; Ferreira, SimchiLevi, and Wang 2018).
As an illustrative example, consider the online ad allocation
problem for an advertiser. At each round t ∈ [T ], the advertiser should choose her investment on ads to be placed on
n different websites. Beyond the immediate goal of maximizing the overall impressions of the ads, the advertiser
needs to balance her total investment against an allotted budget on a daily, monthly or yearly basis (Balseiro and Gur
2019). However, the cost of ad placement in each round depends on the number of clicks the ads receive, so they are
not known ahead of time. Therefore, the advertiser needs to
strike the right balance between the total reward and budget
used. See Appendix B for a number of other motivating applications that can be naturally cast in our framework (see
Raut, Sadeghi, and Fazel (2021) for the full version of the
paper including all the appendices).
In this paper, we study a new class of online allocation problems with long-term resource constraints where the utility
functions are DR-submodular (and not necessarily concave)
and the constraint functions are linear with coefficient vectors drawn i.i.d. from some unknown underlying distribution. The problem has been extensively studied in the convex setting (Yuan and Lamperski 2018; Wei, Yu, and Neely
2020; Neely and Yu 2017; Liakopoulos et al. 2019); furthermore, Sadeghi and Fazel (2020) considered a similar
framework under the assumption that the linear constraint
functions are chosen adversarially. However, Sadeghi and
Fazel (2020) do not provide any high probability bounds for
the regret and constraint violation with random i.i.d. linear
constraints, and their expected constraint violation bound is
worse than ours as well (see Section 3.2 and the Appendix
for an overview of related work and comparison of our results with the existing bounds respectively). In this paper,
we provide the first sub-linear bounds for the regret and total
budget violation that hold in expectation as well as with high
probability. Specifically, our contributions are as follows:

In this paper, we consider online continuous DR-submodular
maximization with linear stochastic long-term constraints.
Compared to the prior work on online submodular maximization, our setting introduces the extra complication of stochastic linear constraint functions that are i.i.d. generated at each
round. In particular, at each time step a DR-submodular utility function and a constraint vector, i.i.d. generated from an
unknown distribution, are revealed after committing to an action and we aim to maximize the overall utility while the
expected cumulative resource consumption is below a fixed
budget. Stochastic long-term constraints arise naturally in applications where there is a limited budget or resource available and resource consumption at each step is governed by
stochastically time-varying environments. We propose the
Online Lagrangian Frank-Wolfe (OLFW) algorithm to solve
this class of online problems. We analyze the performance of
the OLFW algorithm and we obtain sub-linear regret bounds
as well as sub-linear cumulative constraint violation bounds,
both in expectation and with high probability.

1

Introduction

The Online Convex Optimization (OCO) problem has been
extensively studied in the literature (Hazan 2016; ShalevShwartz 2012; Zinkevich 2003; Orabona 2019). In this
problem, a sequence of arbitrary convex cost functions
{ft (·)}Tt=1 are revealed one by one by “nature” and at each
round t ∈ [T ], the decision maker chooses an action xt ∈ X ,
where X is the fixed domain set, before the corresponding
function ft (·) is revealed. The goal is to minimize the regret
defined as (Zinkevich 2003)
T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x).

t=1

In other words, regret characterizes the difference between
the overall cost incurred by the decision maker and that of
a fixed benchmark action which has access to all the cost
functions {ft }Tt=1 .
In many applications, however, in addition to maximizing
the total reward (minimizing the overall cost), there are restrictions on the sequence of decisions made by the learner
∗

Equal contribution
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9395

