The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

‘Less Than One’-Shot Learning:
Learning N Classes From M<N Samples
Ilia Sucholutsky, Matthias Schonlau
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
isucholu@uwaterloo.ca
Abstract
Deep neural networks require large training sets but suffer
from high computational cost and long training times. Training on much smaller training sets while maintaining nearly
the same accuracy would be very beneficial. In the few-shot
learning setting, a model must learn a new class given only
a small number of samples from that class. One-shot learning is an extreme form of few-shot learning where the model
must learn a new class from a single example. We propose the
‘less than one’-shot learning task where models must learn
N new classes given only M < N examples and we show
that this is achievable with the help of soft labels. We use a
soft-label generalization of the k-Nearest Neighbors classifier
to explore the intricate decision landscapes that can be created in the ‘less than one’-shot learning setting. We analyze
these decision landscapes to derive theoretical lower bounds
for separating N classes using M < N soft-label samples
and investigate the robustness of the resulting systems. Our
code, the appendix, and a live web demo can be found at
https://github.com/ilia10000/SLkNN

Figure 1: A SLaPkNN classifier is fitted on 2 soft-label prototypes and partitions the space into 3 classes. The soft label
distribution of each prototype is illustrated by the pie charts.

Introduction
demonstrate feasibility. As an analogy, consider an alien zoologist who arrived on Earth and is being tasked with catching a unicorn. It has no familiarity with local fauna and there
are no photos of unicorns, so humans show it a photo of a
horse and a photo of a rhinoceros, and say that a unicorn is
something in between. With just two examples, the alien has
now learned to recognize three different animals. The type of
information sharing that allows us to describe a unicorn by
its common features with horses and rhinoceroses is the key
to enabling LO-shot learning. In particular, this unintuitive
setting relies on soft labels to encode and decode more information from each example than is otherwise possible. An
example can be seen in Figure 1 where two samples with soft
labels are used to separate a space into three classes. There
is already some existing evidence that LO-shot learning is
feasible. Sucholutsky and Schonlau (2019) showed that it is
possible to design a set of five soft-labelled synthetic images, sometimes called ‘prototypes’, that train neural networks to over 90% accuracy on the ten-class MNIST task.
We discuss the algorithm used to achieve this result in more
detail in the next section. In this paper, we aim to investigate the theoretical foundations of LO-shot learning so we
choose to work with a simpler model that is easier to ana-

Deep supervised learning models are extremely data-hungry,
generally requiring a very large number of samples to train
on. Meanwhile, it appears that humans can quickly generalize from a tiny number of examples (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015). Getting machines to learn from
‘small’ data is an important aspect of trying to bridge this
gap in abilities. Few-shot learning (FSL) is one approach to
making models more sample efficient. In this setting, models must learn to discern new classes given only a few examples per class (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015;
Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Wang et al. 2020). Further
progress in this area has enabled a more extreme form of
FSL called one-shot learning (OSL); a difficult task where
models must learn to discern a new class given only a single example of it (Fei-Fei, Fergus, and Perona 2006; Vinyals
et al. 2016). In this paper, we propose ‘less than one’-shot
learning (LO-shot learning), a setting where a model must
learn N new classes given only M < N examples, less than
one example per class. At first glance, this appears to be an
impossible task, but we both theoretically and empirically
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9739

