The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Importance of Word Order Information in Cross-lingual
Sequence Labeling
Zihan Liu, Genta I Winata, Samuel Cahyawijaya,
Andrea Madotto, Zhaojiang Lin, Pascale Fung
Center for Artificial Intelligence Research (CAiRE)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
zihan.liu@connect.ust.hk, pascale@ece.ust.hk
Abstract

Since different languages have different word orders, models that fit into the word order of the source language could
hurt the performance in the target languages.
In this paper, we hypothesize that making models less sensitive to word orders can boost cross-lingual performance,
and then we introduce four methods to construct orderreduced models to verify this hypothesis. First, we propose an Order-Reduced Transformer (ORT), which removes
the positional embeddings from Transformer and utilizes
one-dimensional convolutional networks to replace the linear layer as the feed-forward layer to encode partial order information; thus, the model becomes less dependent
on the word order. Second, we permutate the word order
of the training samples, and order-sensitive models trained
with them become insensitive to the word order. Third, we
hypothesize that the positional embeddings in multilingual
BERT (M-BERT) (Devlin et al. 2019) are order-agnostic
given the surprising cross-lingual ability that it has (Wu
and Dredze 2019). Hence, we take the positional embeddings from M-BERT to initialize the positional embeddings
in Transformer, and we freeze them in the training phase
to make the model order-agnostic. Additionally, based on
the third method, we propose to freeze the positional embeddings when we fine-tune M-BERT to downstream crosslingual tasks, which makes the model avoid fitting into the
word order of the source language.
We conduct experiments on zero-shot cross-lingual sequence labeling tasks, namely, part-of-speech tagging
(POS), named entity recognition (NER), and slot filling
(SF),1 , and we compare our models with order-sensitive sequence encoders, such as LSTM and Transformer. We summarize our insights as follows:

Cross-lingual models trained on source language tasks possess the capability to transfer to target languages directly.
However, since word order variances generally exist in different languages, cross-lingual models that overfit into the
word order of the source language could have sub-optimal
performance in target languages. In this paper, we hypothesize that reducing the word order information fitted into the
models can improve the adaptation performance in target languages. To verify this hypothesis, we introduce several methods to make models encode less word order information of the
source language and test them based on cross-lingual word
embeddings and the pre-trained multilingual model. Experimental results on three sequence labeling tasks (i.e., partof-speech tagging, named entity recognition, and slot filling
tasks) show that reducing word order information injected
into the model can achieve better zero-shot cross-lingual performance. Further analysis illustrates that fitting excessive or
insufficient word order information into the model results in
inferior cross-lingual performance. Moreover, our proposed
methods can also be applied to strong cross-lingual models
and further improve their performance.

Introduction
Neural-based data-driven supervised approaches have
achieved remarkable performance in sequence labeling tasks
(e.g., named entity recognition) (Lample et al. 2016; Devlin
et al. 2019). However, these methods are not applicable to
low-resource languages, where extensive training data are
absent. Recently, numerous cross-lingual adaptation methods have been applied to this data-scarcity scenario, where
zero or very few target language training samples are utilized (Wisniewski et al. 2014; Schuster et al. 2019b; Artetxe
and Schwenk 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Chen et al. 2019).
Despite the focus on cross-lingual methods, the word
order differences across languages is a less studied problem of the cross-lingual task. For cross-lingual models, sequence encoders that are based on LSTM (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) or Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017)
inevitably model the word order information in the source
language (Xie et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019), which we characterize the order-sensitive property (Ahmad et al. 2018).

• Order-reduced models are robust to word order shuffled
sequences and consistently outperform order-sensitive
models, including the state-of-the-art model.
• Retaining the order-agnostic property of M-BERT positional embeddings gives a better capability to generalize
to target languages.
• Encoding excessive or insufficient word order information leads to sub-optimal cross-lingual performance, and
1
SF is a critical task in natural language understanding (NLU)
for dialog systems.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13461

