The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Driven Distractor Generation for Cloze-Style Multiple Choice
Questions
Siyu Ren, Kenny Q. Zhu *
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Shanghai, China
roy0702@sjtu.edu.cn, kzhu@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

question stem, is a critical part of cloze-style MCQ construction. However, it is not only time-consuming but also nontrivial to produce appropriate distractors without rich experience in language education.
Literature in language pedagogy (Haladyna, Downing,
and Rodriguez 2002; Pho et al. 2014) generally recommends
two criteria for designing distractors: plausibility and reliability. By plausibility, it means distractors should be semantically related to the key and grammatically consistent with
the context given by stem to adequately discriminate learners’ proficiency. By reliability, it means the distractor, when
filled into the blank of the stem, results in a logically incorrect or inconsistent statement.
Automatically generating distractors has been previously
explored as part of cloze-style MCQ construction in a few
studies. However, those methods generally assume prior
knowledge of a specific domain (e.g., science) of the given
question and then use corresponding domain-specific vocabulary as candidate distractor set, ranked by various unsupervised similarity heuristics (Sumita, Sugaya, and Yamamoto
2005; Kumar, Banchs, and D’Haro 2015; Jiang and Lee
2017; Ha and Yaneva 2018) or supervised machine learning
model (Sakaguchi, Arase, and Komachi 2013; Welbl, Liu,
and Gardner 2017; Liang et al. 2018). Since identifying the
concrete domain of each question and preparing large-scale
domain-specific vocabulary require substantial human labor,
such corpus-based methods cannot be easily applied in realworld scenarios.
Another issue is that previous approaches mainly focus on selecting plausible distractors while rarely adopt
reliability checks to ensure that the generated distractors
are logically incorrect. Despite some attempts in early approaches (Sumita, Sugaya, and Yamamoto 2005; Jiang and
Lee 2017), they both used it in the post-processing step to
filter out candidate distractors rejected by diverse predefined
filters such as syntactic feature (e.g., role in the dependency
parse tree), which may exclude useful distractors like DNA
in Figure 1.
In this paper, we propose a configurable distractor generation framework for English cloze-style MCQ in the open domain, whose design is motivated by the shortcomings identified above. It mainly consists of two components: (1) a

In this paper, we propose a novel configurable framework to
automatically generate distractive choices for open-domain
cloze-style multiple-choice questions. The framework incorporates a general-purpose knowledge base to effectively
create a small distractor candidate set, and a feature-rich
learning-to-rank model to select distractors that are both plausible and reliable. Experimental results on a new dataset
across four domains show that our framework yields distractors outperforming previous methods both by automatic and
human evaluation. The dataset can also be used as a benchmark for distractor generation research in the future.

Introduction
Cloze-style multiple choice question (MCQ) is a common
form of exercise used to evaluate the proficiency of language learners, frequently showing up in homework and online testings. Figure 1 shows a cloze-style MCQ, which typically consists of: a question stem with a blank to be filled
in, the correct answer and multiple wrong answers used to
distract testees. Despite the high demand, manual crafting of
such MCQs is highly time-consuming for educators, which
calls for the automatic generation of as much practice material as possible from readily available plain texts so that
formally usable quizzes can be generated after light-weight
human calibration.

Figure 1: A cloze-style MCQ
Distractor generation, which aims to generate distractive
alternatives (i.e., distractors) of the correct answer given the
* Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4339

