The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Detection and Prediction of Nutrient Deficiency Stress using Longitudinal Aerial
Imagery
Saba Dadsetan1,2∗ , Gisele Rose1 , Naira Hovakimyan1,3 , Jennifer Hobbs1
1

Intelinair, Inc., Champaign, IL 61820
University of Pittsburgh, School of Computing and Information, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
3
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Urbana, IL 61801
sabadad@cs.pitt.edu, gisele@intelinair.com, naira@intelinair.com, jennifer@intelinair.com
2

Abstract

and clean water scarcity, and climate change (Rolnick et al.
2019). The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of
the United Nations estimates that to feed the world’s evergrowing population 50% more food needs to be produced
by 2050 (FAO et al. 2017). This demand for an increase in
production comes amidst challenges brought about by environmental changes as agriculture is both impacted by and
contributes to climate change and other environmental issues.
Central to these challenges is the task of identifying Nutrient Deficiency Stress (NDS) (Figure 1). Once significant
NDS has set in, the ability for the crop to recover and produce full yield is minimal. As a result, early detection of
regions experiencing NDS is paramount to ensuring an optimal yield; better still is the ability to predict which regions
may begin showing stress in the near future so they may be
preemptively treated. On the other hand, overuse and blanket applications of fertilizer and other chemical nutrients can
cause harm to the plants and additionally, runoff into the water table or other bodies of water, harming the environment.
Therefore, early, precise and accurate identification of these
regions is crucial for addressing both economic and environmental issues. We choose to focus on this task for the present
work although the methods could easily be applied to other
agronomic patterns such as weeds or low emergence.
Figure 2 shows the impact of NDS on a field’s production
and thus a farmer’s yield. On June 2, a farmer sowed over
4.5million corn seeds across his 152 acre farm in the corn
belt. Roughly a month later on July 3, he applied a combination of weed killer and fertilizer uniformly across the
entire field (far left). By collecting high-resolution imagery
(10cm/pixel) over the entire season, we are able to observe
the changes in the field as it develops (middle plots). We see
that many of the areas which experienced NDS during the
season correspond to regions of lower yield (red) at harvest
time in late November (far right); these red areas produced
>195 bushels/acre (orange: 195-230 bu/ac) whereas the best
areas (dark green) produced over 275 bushels/acre. Had the
grower applied additional nutrient mid-season, some of this
yield could have been recovered. However, as these areas are
only a small portion of the field, blanket application would
be costly as wasteful. Through targeted applications based
on our models, the grower could instead apply fertilizers in
a precise manner, minimizing cost, maximizing yield, and

Early, precise detection of nutrient deficiency stress (NDS)
has key economic as well as environmental impact; precision application of chemicals in place of blanket application reduces operational costs for the growers while reducing the amount of chemicals which may enter the environment unnecessarily. Furthermore, earlier treatment reduces
the amount of yield loss and therefore boosts crop production during a given season. With this in mind, we collect sequences of high-resolution aerial imagery and construct semantic segmentation models to detect and predict NDS across
the field; our work sits at the intersection of agriculture, remote sensing, and deep learning. First, we establish a baseline for full-field detection of NDS and quantify the impact of
pretraining, backbone architecture, input representation, and
sampling strategy. We then quantify the amount of information available at different points in the season by building
a single-timestamp model based on a U-Net. Next, we construct our proposed spatiotemporal architecture, which combines a U-Net with a convolutional LSTM to accurately detect
regions of the field showing NDS; this approach has an impressive IOU score of 0.53. Finally, we show that this architecture can be trained to predict regions of the field which are
expected to show NDS in a later flight- potentially more than
three weeks in the future- maintaining an IOU score of 0.470.51 depending on how far in advance the prediction is made.
We will also release a dataset which we believe will benefit
the computer vision, remote sensing, and agriculture fields.
This work contributes to the recent developments in deep
learning for remote sensing and agriculture while addressing
a key social challenge with implications for economics and
sustainability.

Introduction
Precision agriculture is a key rising area of interest for the
application of deep learning approaches. Computer vision
approaches and applications in agriculture simultaneously
address key social needs while furthering our understanding
of the machine learning field by addressing unique theoretical and computational challenges.
Precision agriculture and sustainable practices are central
to addressing challenges around economic hardship, food
∗

work done while at Intelinair, Inc.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14729

