The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dividing a Graphical Cake
Xiaohui Bei,1 Warut Suksompong2
1

School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore

Abstract

the cake from left to right. Whenever the left part has value
1/n of the entire cake for one of the agents, the agent takes
that part of the cake and leaves; the procedure is then repeated among the remaining agents. In addition to ensuring
proportionality, the Dubins-Spanier protocol has the important property that it always allocates to every agent a connected piece of the cake. Without this property, it may well
be that an agent is presented with—in the famous words of
Stromquist (1980)—a “union of crumbs”.
The proportionality guarantee of the Dubins-Spanier protocol holds for a variety of resources that one may wish to
divide, since a resource of any shape or form can be “projected” onto a line, which we can then run the protocol
on. However, the connectivity property does not necessarily translate from the line back to the original shape. A simple illustrating example is when the resource has the shape
of a ring (e.g., a donut or a ring road): projecting the ring
onto a line and applying Dubins-Spanier may result in an
agent receiving disconnected pieces of the ring. For this example, the difficulty can be circumvented by cutting the ring
at an arbitrary point, stretching it into a line, and running the
protocol to achieve proportionality. Nevertheless, one may
already begin to suspect that this type of fix no longer works
when the shapes get more complex.
In this paper, we consider a natural setting where the cake
is represented by the set of edges of an arbitrary undirected
graph. The graph corresponds to a resource in the form of a
network, such as a road network to be divided among construction companies. Each company has its own preference
on different parts of the network, and it is desirable for every company to receive a single connected component, or
not too many such components. The canonical cake-cutting
setting—where the cake is assumed to be an interval—is a
special case of our setting, with the graph consisting of a
single edge. We show that proportionality cannot always be
attained in our generalized setting if connectivity is required.
Therefore, our goal in this work is to provide the best possible approximation of proportionality that can be achieved
for arbitrary graphs and agents’ preferences. Furthermore,
we study a number of variants and extensions, including
when each agent can get more than one connected piece—
we show that better guarantees can indeed be obtained as the
number of permitted pieces increases—or when the item to
be divided is undesirable (often referred to as a chore).

We consider the classical cake-cutting problem where we
wish to fairly divide a heterogeneous resource, often modeled as a cake, among interested agents. Work on the subject
typically assumes that the cake is represented by an interval.
In this paper, we introduce a generalized setting where the
cake can be in the form of the set of edges of an undirected
graph, allowing us to model the division of road networks.
Unlike in the canonical setting, common fairness criteria such
as proportionality cannot always be satisfied in our setting if
each agent must receive a connected subgraph. We determine
the optimal approximation of proportionality that can be obtained for any number of agents with arbitrary valuations,
and exhibit a tight guarantee for each graph in the case of
two agents. In addition, when more than one connected piece
per agent is allowed, we establish the best egalitarian welfare
guarantee for each total number of connected pieces. We also
study a number of variants and extensions, including when
approximate equitability is considered, or when the item to
be divided is undesirable (also known as chore division).

1

Introduction

Cake cutting refers to the problem of fairly allocating a divisible resource, often modeled as a cake, among agents with
varying preferences. The problem dates back to shortly after the end of World War II (Steinhaus 1948) and, not surprisingly given its wide range of applications, still enjoys
significant attention in mathematics, computer science, economics, and political science to this day (Brams and Taylor
1996; Robertson and Webb 1998; Procaccia 2016).
What does it mean for an allocation to be fair? Steinhaus
(1948) proposed the following definition of fairness: if the
cake is divided between n agents, each agent should receive
a part that she values at least 1/n of the entire cake. This definition became known as proportionality, and is one of the
most fundamental notions in the literature of fair division.
In his seminal article, Steinhaus showed that a proportional
allocation can be found for any number of agents with arbitrary preferences over the cake—Steinhaus’ method, which
he attributed to Knaster and Banach, was later formulated
as a moving-knife procedure by Dubins and Spanier (1961).
The procedure works by having a referee move a knife over
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5159

