The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

K-N -MOMDPs: Towards Interpretable Solutions for Adaptive Management
Jonathan Ferrer-Mestres,1 Thomas G. Dietterich,2 Olivier Buffet,3 Iadine Chadès1
1

CSIRO
Oregon State University
3
INRIA
{jonathan.ferrermestres,iadine.chades}@csiro.au, tgd@cs.orst.edu, olivier.buffet@loria.fr
2

Abstract

a population is unknown under management. We can cast
this unknown information on dynamics as a hidden state
variable. These potential dynamics are often derived from
ecological theory and expert opinions (Williams 2011). In
an MOMDP designed to solve an AM problem, the state
space is expanded to account for the hidden model state variable. Chadès et al. (2012) have shown that existing MOMDP
solvers can benefit by modelling an AM problem as a restricted Mixed Observability problem called a hidden model
MDP (hmMDP). Péron et al. (2017) demonstrated that further computational gain could be achieved by initializing
any α-vector MOMDP solver to a lower bound of the value
function.
Being able to understand and explain optimal policies is
a critical step in ensuring uptake of decision models in human operated systems such as conservation, environmental
management and health. Explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI) is an emerging research area that focuses on both
interpretability and explainability to assist humans in their
decision-making process (Petrik and Luss 2016; Chakraborti
et al. 2019). Building XAI is a challenging and open problem (Miller 2019). XAI application domains have included
robotics (Miller, Pearce, and Sonenberg 2018), health (Payrovnaziri et al. 2020; Ahmad, Eckert, and Teredesai 2018),
marketing (Rai 2020) and criminal justice (Rudin and Ustun 2018; Lakkaraju and Rudin 2017). Some work has addressed interpretability through data visualization (Walsh
et al. 2020; Chung et al. 2020) to better understand models and solutions. Other authors emphasize the importance
of building interpretable models instead of explaining black
box models (Rudin 2019). Here, we contribute to the emerging XAI research by increasing interpretability of MOMDPs
motivated by our computational sustainability domains. One
way to improve interpretability for decision-making is to
simplify models and solutions. To date, algorithms have
simplified the solution of POMDPs to policy graph with at
most N α-vectors (N -POMDPs) (Dujardin, Dietterich, and
Chadès 2015, 2017). More recently, Ferrer-Mestres et al.
(2020) propose to solve K-MDPs providing algorithms to
abstract the state space for MDPs to at most K states.
However, none of these approaches can be directly applied
to MOMDPs because MOMDPs are defined over both the
completely and partially observable state variables.
Our challenge is two-fold: increase the interpretability

In biodiversity conservation, adaptive management (AM) is
the principal tool for decision making under uncertainty. AM
problems are planning problems that can be modelled using
Mixed Observability MDPs (MOMDPs). MOMDPs tackle
decision problems where state variables are completely or
partially observable. Unfortunately, MOMDP solutions (policy graphs) are too complex to be interpreted by human
decision-makers. Here, we provide algorithms to solve KN -MOMDPs, where K represents the maximum number of
fully observable states and N represents the maximum number of α-vectors. Our algorithms calculate compact and more
interpretable policy graphs from existing MOMDP models
and solutions. We apply these algorithms to two computational sustainability applications: optimal release of biocontrol agents to prevent dengue epidemics and conservation of the threatened bird species Gouldian finch. The methods dramatically reduce the number of states and α-vectors
in MOMDP problems without significantly reducing their
quality. The resulting policies have small policy graphs (46 nodes) that can be easily interpreted by human decisionmakers.

Introduction
Determining the best management actions is challenging
when critical information is missing. However, urgency and
limited access to data require that decisions must be made
despite this uncertainty. In conservation and natural resource
management, the “best practice” method for managing uncertain systems is adaptive management (AM) or learning
by doing (Walters and Hilborn 1976; Keith et al. 2011). Applications of AM include translocation of threatened species
(McDonald-Madden et al. 2011), management of migratory
shorebirds under climate change (Nicol et al. 2015) or response to epidemics (Shea et al. 2014). AM requires thinking ahead and calculating the consequences of all possible
values of the unknown information before deciding the optimal action. AM problems can be modeled and solved as a
planning problem using Mixed Observable MDP (MOMDP)
(Chadès et al. 2012; Nicol et al. 2013) as it is usually assumed that the state of the system (e.g. abundance of a
population) is completely observable but the dynamics of
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14775

