The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Multivariate Complexity Analysis
of the Material Consumption Scheduling Problem
Matthias Bentert,1 Robert Bredereck,1, 2 Péter Györgyi,3
Andrzej Kaczmarczyk,1 and Rolf Niedermeier1
1

Technische Universität Berlin, Faculty IV, Algorithmics and Computational Complexity, Berlin, Germany
2
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Informatik, Algorithm Engineering, Berlin, Germany
3
Institute for Computer Science and Control, Budapest, Hungary
{matthias.bentert, a.kaczmarczyk, rolf.niedermeier}@tu-berlin.de, robert.bredereck@hu-berlin.de, gyorgyi.peter@sztaki.hu
Abstract

source. More specifically, we study the single-machine variant of the NP-hard M ATERIAL C ONSUMPTION S CHEDUL ING P ROBLEM . Formally, we have a set R of resources and
a set J = {J1 , . . . , Jn } of jobs to be scheduled on a single machine without preemption. The machine can process
at most one job at a time. Each job has a processing time
pj ∈ Z+ and a resource requirement aij ∈ Z+ from resource i ∈ R. We have resource supplies at q different
points of time 0 = u1 < u2 < · · · < uq , where the vec|R|
tor b̃` = (b̃i,` )i∈R ∈ Z+ represents the quantities supplied
at time u` . The starting time Sj for each job Jj is specified
by a schedule σ, which is feasible if (i) the jobs do not overlap in time, and (ii) at any point of time t the total supply
from each resource is at least the total request of the jobs
starting until t, that is,

The NP-hard M ATERIAL C ONSUMPTION S CHEDULING
P ROBLEM and related problems have been thoroughly studied since the 1980’s. Roughly speaking, the problem deals
with minimizing the makespan when scheduling jobs that
consume non-renewable resources. We focus on the singlemachine case without preemption: from time to time, the resources of the machine are (partially) replenished, thus allowing for meeting a necessary pre-condition for processing
further jobs, each of which having individual resource demands. We initiate a systematic exploration of the parameterized computational complexity landscape of the problem,
providing parameterized tractability as well as intractability
results. Doing so, we mainly investigate how parameters related to the resource supplies influence the computational
complexity. Thereby, we get a deepened understanding of this
fundamental scheduling problem.

X

Introduction

`:u` ≤t

Consider the following motivating example. Every day, an
agent works for a number of clients, all of equal importance.
The clients, one-to-one corresponding to jobs, each time request a service having individual processing time and individual consumption of a non-renewable resource; examples
for such resources include raw material, energy, and money.
The goal is to finish all jobs as early as possible, known as
minimizing the makespan in the scheduling literature. Unfortunately, the agent only has a limited initial supply of the
resource which is to be renewed (with potentially different
amounts) at known points of time during the day. Since the
job characteristics (resource consumption, job length) and
the resource delivery characteristics (delivery amount, point
of time) are known in advance, the objective thus is to find
a feasible job schedule minimizing the makespan. Notably,
jobs cannot be preempted and only one at a time can be executed. Figure 1 provides a concrete numerical example with
six jobs with varying job lengths and resource requirements.
The described problem setting is known as minimizing
the makespan on a single machine with non-renewable resources. Notably, in our example we considered the special but perhaps most prominent case of just one type of re-

b̃i,` ≥

X

aij , ∀i ∈ R.

j:Sj ≤t

Note that in case of just one resource type (as in our
starting example in Figure 1), we simply drop the indices
corresponding to the single resource. The objective is to
minimize the maximum job completion time (makespan)
Cmax := maxj∈J Cj , where Cj is the completion time of
job Jj . In the remainder of the paper, we make the following simplifying assumptions (which can be easily achieved)
guaranteeing sanity of the instances and filtering out trivial
cases.
Assumption 1. Without loss of generality, we assume that
1. there
Pq are enough
P resources supplied to process all jobs:
b̃
≥
`
`=1
j∈J aj ;
2. each job
P has at least one non-zero resource requirement:
∀j∈J i∈R ai,j > 0; and
3. at
P least one resource unit is supplied at time 0:
i∈R b̃i,0 > 0.
The M ATERIAL C ONSUMPTION S CHEDULING P ROB LEM is NP-hard even in case of one machine, only two
supply dates (q = 2), and if the processing time of
each job is the same as its resource requirement, that is,
pj = aj , ∀j ∈ J (Carlier 1984). While many variants of
the M ATERIAL C ONSUMPTION S CHEDULING P ROBLEM

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11755

