The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Universal Physical Attacks on Single Object Tracking
Li Ding1,2 * , Yongwei Wang2 * , Kaiwen Yuan2 , Minyang Jiang2 ,
Ping Wang1† , Hua Huang3† , Z. Jane Wang2
1

School of Information and Communications Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia,
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
{dinglijay,yongweiw,kaiwen, minyang, zjanew}@ece.ubc.ca, ping.fu@xjtu.edu.cn, huahuang@bnu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

DNNs are shown vulnerable to adversarial perturbations,
termed as adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al. 2014). Such
attacks exist for different vision tasks implemented with
DNNs, e.g., image classification (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and
Bengio 2016), object detection (Xie et al. 2017) and visual tracking (Yan et al. 2020a). Generally, adversarial attacks can be categorized into digital attacks and physical
attacks, depending on which domain to inject the perturbations (Huang et al. 2020). Specifically for single object
tracking, recent studies primarily target at digital attacks
(Yan et al. 2020a; Guo et al. 2019), leaving physical visual
attacks rarely explored. Indeed, physical attacks are much
more challenging than digital attacks due to practical constraints and feasibility.
In digital attacks, adversarial perturbations can be injected
into any pixel of an image, and they can be different from
image to image. In physical attacks, however, it requires
the perturbation region to be small enough to be physically
feasible, universal to diverse instances and robust to physical conditions (e.g., preprocessing, luminance factor). Also,
physical attacks are more challenging to be detected and defended against, making them more threatening to trackers
than digital attacks.
Despite certain pioneering explorations in physical attacks, existing works mainly focus on attacking image classifiers (Eykholt et al. 2018; Athalye et al. 2018) or object
detectors (Chen et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2020). Probably
against our intuition, though the task of visual tracking appears related with object detection (i.e., providing object
bounding-box), their working mechanisms differ considerably. Object detection has one input and it estimates all locations of interested objects (instance-agnostic and categorydependent) while the single object tracking has two inputs
and only localizes the user-specified target dynamically yet
with no prior information of its category. In essence, visual
tracking extracts and matches features between the template
and search frames.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, it is challenging to attack the
feature matching module. First, the dimensionality of feature maps are different between template and search frames.
Therefore it is infeasible to employ the feature space adversarial loss proposed for classifiers (Inkawhich et al. 2019).
Second, the coordinates of the tracking object are not spatially aligned in the feature space, which makes pixel-wise

Recent studies show that small perturbations in video frames
could misguide single object trackers. However, such attacks
have been mainly designed for digital-domain videos (i.e.,
perturbation on full images), which makes them practically
infeasible to evaluate the adversarial vulnerability of trackers in real-world scenarios. Here we made the first step towards physically feasible adversarial attacks against visual
tracking in real scenes with a universal patch to camouflage
single object trackers. Fundamentally different from physical object detection, the essence of single object tracking
lies in the feature matching between the search image and
templates, and we therefore specially design the maximum
textural discrepancy (MTD), a resolution-invariant and target location-independent feature de-matching loss. The MTD
distills global textural information of the template and search
images at hierarchical feature scales prior to performing feature attacks. Moreover, we evaluate two shape attacks, the regression dilation and shrinking, to generate stronger and more
controllable attacks. Further, we employ a set of transformations to simulate diverse visual tracking scenes in the wild.
Experimental results show the effectiveness of the physically
feasible attacks on SiamMask and SiamRPN++ visual trackers both in digital and physical scenes.

Introduction
Single object tracking has attracted increasing attention in
security related applications, such as autonomous driving,
intelligent surveillance and human-machine interaction. The
visual tracking task resorts to creating the dynamic correspondence (e.g., position) between a moving object in a
given template frame and that in subsequent search frames
without prior knowledge of object categories. Recently,
there have been significant improvements in tracking performance with the adoption of deep convolutional neural
networks (DNNs). Providing a good tradeoff between realtime tracking and accuracy, the Siamese-based trackers, e.g.,
SiamRPN (Li et al. 2018), SiamRPN++(Li et al. 2019),
SiamMask(Wang et al. 2019), have become the mainstream
approaches in visual tracking.
* Equal contribution, alphabetical order.
†

Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1236

