The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

MeInGame: Create a Game Character Face from a Single Portrait
Jiangke Lin, 1 Yi Yuan, 1 * Zhengxia Zou 2
1

Netease Fuxi AI Lab
University of Michigan
linjiangke@corp.netease.com, yuanyi@corp.netease.com, zzhengxi@umich.edu
2

Abstract
Many deep learning based 3D face reconstruction methods
have been proposed recently, however, few of them have applications in games. Current game character customization
systems either require players to manually adjust considerable face attributes to obtain the desired face, or have limited
freedom of facial shape and texture. In this paper, we propose an automatic character face creation method that predicts both facial shape and texture from a single portrait,
and it can be integrated into most existing 3D games. Although 3D Morphable Face Model (3DMM) based methods can restore accurate 3D faces from single images, the
topology of 3DMM mesh is different from the meshes used
in most games. To acquire fidelity texture, existing methods require a large amount of face texture data for training,
while building such datasets is time-consuming and laborious. Besides, such a dataset collected under laboratory conditions may not generalized well to in-the-wild situations. To
tackle these problems, we propose 1) a low-cost facial texture acquisition method, 2) a shape transfer algorithm that
can transform the shape of a 3DMM mesh to games, and 3)
a new pipeline for training 3D game face reconstruction networks. The proposed method not only can produce detailed
and vivid game characters similar to the input portrait, but
can also eliminate the influence of lighting and occlusions.
Experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-theart methods used in games. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/FuxiCV/MeInGame.

Figure 1: First row: input portraits. Second row: in-game
characters generated by our method. Our method is robust
to lighting changes, shadows, and occlusions, and can faithfully restore personalized details like skin tone, makeup, and
wrinkles.

avatars in the virtual game environment by simply upload a
single portrait.
Many video games feature character creation systems,
which allow players to create personalized characters. However, creating characters that look similar to the users themselves or their favorite celebrities is not an easy task and can
be time-consuming even after considerable practices. For
example, a player usually needs several hours of patience
manually adjusting hundreds of parameters (e.g. face shape,
eyes) to create a character similar to a specified portrait.
To improve a player’s gaming experience, several approaches for game character auto-creation have emerged recently. Shi et al.proposed a character auto-creation method
that allows users to upload single face images and automatically generate the corresponding face parameters (Shi et al.
2019). However, such a method and its latest variant (Shi
et al. 2020) have limited freedom of the facial parameters
and thus can not deal with buxom or slim faces very well.
Besides, these methods do not take textures into account,
which further limits their adaptability to different skin colors. Using a mobile device to scan a human face from multiple views to generate a 3D face model is another possible
solution. The game NBA 2K5 adopts this type of method.

Introduction
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, people have to keep social
distancing. Most conferences this year have been switched
to online/virtual meetings. Recently, Dr. Joshua D. Eisenberg organized a special conference, Animal Crossing Artificial Intelligence Workshop (ACAI)1 in the Nintendo game
Animal Crossing New Horizons2 , and has received great attention. Also, it is reported that this year’s International Conference on Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI)3 will also
be held in the game Justice4 via cloud gaming techniques.
As more and more social activities come to online instead
of face-to-face, in this paper, we focus on game character
auto-creation, which allows users to automatically create 3D

1

https://acaiworkshop.com/
https://www.animal-crossing.com/new-horizons/
3
http://www.adai.ai/dai/2020/2020.html
4
https://n.163.com/
5
https://www.nba2k.com/
2

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

311

