The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Consistency Regularization with High-dimensional Non-adversarial
Source-guided Perturbation for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in
Segmentation
Kaihong Wang, Chenhongyi Yang, Margrit Betke
Boston University
{kaiwkh, hongyi, betke}@bu.edu
Abstract

used to segment real-world images, their performance is typically limited due to the domain gap between the training
and testing data. Domain adaptation methods seek to bridge
the gap between the source domain training data and the target domain testing data. We here focus on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), the problem of adapting a model
that was trained with a labeled source domain dataset, by
using an unlabeled target domain dataset and optimizing its
performance on the target domain.
To perform domain alignment on a pixel-level or featurelevel basis, existing methods (Tsai et al. 2018; Hoffman et al.
2018; Vu et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2019; Li, Yuan, and Vasconcelos 2019; Choi, Kim, and Kim 2019) typically use adversarial training (Goodfellow et al. 2014), and training with the
aligned data is then supervised by a loss computed with the
annotation of the source domain dataset. However, the use
of adversarial training typically comes with extra complexity and instability in training. Alternative approaches (Zou
et al. 2018; Vu et al. 2019; Li, Yuan, and Vasconcelos 2019;
Choi, Kim, and Kim 2019) seek to exploit information about
the unlabeled target dataset by performing semi-supervised
learning including entropy minimization (Grandvalet and
Bengio 2004), pseudo-labeling (Lee 2013) and consistency
regularization. However, these approaches either just play
an auxiliary role in the training process besides supervised
learning, or fail to take full advantage of the target dataset.
In this paper, we propose Bidirectional Style-induced Domain Adaptation (BiSIDA) that takes better advantage of the
unlabeled dataset and optimizes the performance of a segmentation model on the target dataset. Our pipeline includes
a supervised learning branch that provides supervision using annotations in the source dataset and an unsupervised
branch for learning from the unlabeled target dataset without requiring its annotation. The two branches are executed
in parallel. To perform domain adaptation, we constructed
a non-adversarial yet effective pre-trained style-induced image generator that performs style transfer. In the supervised
learning branch, the style-induced image generator transfers the style of a source domain images to become the
style of a target style image. In the unsupervised branch,
the image generator performs high-dimensional perturbations on target domain images with consistency regularization by transferring the target input image into a set of images that each match one of the source image styles through

Unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic segmentation
has been intensively studied due to the low cost of the pixellevel annotation for synthetic data. The most common approaches try to generate images or features mimicking the
distribution in the target domain while preserving the semantic contents in the source domain so that a model can
be trained with annotations from the latter. However, such
methods highly rely on an image translator or feature extractor trained in an elaborated mechanism including adversarial
training, which brings in extra complexity and instability in
the adaptation process. Furthermore, these methods mainly
focus on taking advantage of the labeled source dataset, leaving the unlabeled target dataset not fully utilized. In this paper, we propose a bidirectional style-induced domain adaptation method, called BiSIDA, that employs consistency regularization to efficiently exploit information from the unlabeled target domain dataset, requiring only a simple neural
style transfer model. BiSIDA aligns domains by not only
transferring source images into the style of target images but
also transferring target images into the style of source images
to perform high-dimensional perturbation on the unlabeled
target images, which is crucial to the success in applying consistency regularization in segmentation tasks. Extensive experiments show that our BiSIDA achieves new state-of-theart on two commonly-used synthetic-to-real domain adaptation benchmarks: GTA5-to-CityScapes and SYNTHIA-toCityScapes. Code and pretrained style transfer model are
available at: https://github.com/wangkaihong/BiSIDA.

Introduction
Deep learning methods for semantic segmentation (Long,
Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015), the problem of dividing the
pixels in an image into mutually exclusive and collectively
exhaustive sets of class-labeled regions, have gained increasing attention. Research progress is hindered by the difficulty
of creating large training datasets with accurate pixel-level
annotations of these regions.
As a consequence, the use of synthetic datasets has become popular because pixel-level ground truth annotations
can be generated along with the images. Unfortunately,
when deep models that were trained on synthetic data are
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10138

