The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PULNS: Positive-Unlabeled Learning with Effective Negative Sample Selector
Chuan Luo,1, * Pu Zhao,1, * Chen Chen,1,2 Bo Qiao,1 Chao Du,1 Hongyu Zhang,3 Wei Wu,4
Shaowei Cai,5,6 Bing He,5,6 Saravanakumar Rajmohan,2 Qingwei Lin1,†
3

1
2
Microsoft Research, China
Microsoft 365, United States
4
The University of Newcastle, Australia
L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany
5
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{chuan.luo, puzhao, v-chch22, boqiao, chaodu, saravar, qlin}@microsoft.com,
hongyu.zhang@newcastle.edu.au, william.third.wu@gmail.com, {caisw, hebing}@ios.ac.cn

Abstract

system, medical diagnosis, text classification and outlier detection (Blanchard, Lee, and Scott 2010; Nguyen, Li, and Ng
2012; Fei and Liu 2015; Schnabel et al. 2016). Classification
using such dataset is called positive-unlabeled (PU) learning, which has attracted huge attention from both academia
and industry in recent years.
Lacking of labeled negative samples (N), information essential for constructing the classifier must be learnt from the
unlabeled samples. Depending on how the unlabeled samples are treated, most of the recent works on PU learning
can be grouped into two categories, which we term as the
cost-sensitive approach and the sample-selection approach.
Pioneered by (Elkan and Noto 2008), the cost-sensitive
approach has emerged as the state-of-the-art method in PU
learning during recent years (du Plessis, Niu, and Sugiyama
2014, 2015; Kiryo et al. 2017; Kato, Teshima, and Honda
2019; Hsieh, Niu, and Sugiyama 2019; Li et al. 2019).
Following a cost-sensitive classification framework, this
approach essentially treats each unlabeled sample as the
weighted combination of positive and negative sample, and
relies on unbiased risk estimator to correct the bias introduced by unlabeled data. Still, to apply cost-sensitive methods, one often needs to estimate the class prior first. This is
not a simple task and is the focus of many studies (du Plessis
and Sugiyama 2014; Jain, White, and Radivojac 2016; Ramaswamy, Scott, and Tewari 2016; Bekker and Davis 2018;
Li et al. 2019; Perini, Vercruyssen, and Davis 2020; Zeiberg,
Jain, and Radivojac 2020; Jain et al. 2020). Moreover, label
noise caused by treating unlabeled positive samples as negative ones may still degrade the performance of cost-sensitive
approach in practice.
In contrast, the sample-selection approach uses heuristic
methods to select likely negative samples from the unlabeled
data. The chosen negative samples are then merged with the
positive data to train a supervised classifier. Methods for
selecting negative samples include Naı̈ve Bayes (Liu et al.
2002), Rocchio method (Li and Liu 2003), 1-DNF method
(Yu, Han, and Chang 2004), k-NN (Zhang and Zuo 2009),
and k-means (Chaudhari and Shevade 2012). While mitigating the issues faced by the cost-sensitive approach, the
sample-selection approach lacks the mechanisms for opti-

Positive-unlabeled learning (PU learning) is an important
case of binary classification where the training data only
contains positive and unlabeled samples. The current stateof-the-art approach for PU learning is the cost-sensitive approach, which casts PU learning as a cost-sensitive classification problem and relies on unbiased risk estimator for correcting the bias introduced by the unlabeled samples. However, this approach requires the knowledge of class prior and
is subject to the potential label noise. In this paper, we propose a novel PU learning approach dubbed PULNS, equipped
with an effective negative sample selector, which is optimized
by reinforcement learning. Our PULNS approach employs an
effective negative sample selector as the agent responsible for
selecting negative samples from the unlabeled data. While the
selected, likely negative samples can be used to improve the
classifier, the performance of classifier is also used as the reward to improve the selector through the REINFORCE algorithm. By alternating the updates of the selector and the
classifier, the performance of both is improved. Extensive experimental studies on 7 real-world application benchmarks
demonstrate that PULNS consistently outperforms the current
state-of-the-art methods in PU learning, and our experimental
results also confirm the effectiveness of the negative sample
selector underlying PULNS.

Introduction
In a binary classification problem, the classifier is trained on
a dataset with both positive and negative samples. In practice, the training data may only contain positive samples (P)
and unlabeled samples (U). For instance, while we can label
subscribers who had watched at least one Star Wars movie
as being interested in this genre, we cannot be sure about
the interests of a subscriber who never watched a Star Wars
movie before. Similar examples can be found in many applications, including information retrieval, recommendation
* Chuan Luo and Pu Zhao contributed equally to this work and

share the first authorship of this work.
†
Qingwei Lin is the corresponding author of this work.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8784

