The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Bayesian Distributional Policy Gradients
Luchen Li, 1 A. Aldo Faisal 1,2,3
1

2

Brain & Behaviour Lab,Dept. of Computing, Imperial College London
Brain & Behaviour Lab,Dept. of Bioengineering, Imperial College London
3
UKRI Centre in AI for Healthcare, Imperial College London
{l.li17, aldo.faisal}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

The critical hurdle in distributional RL is to minimise
a Wasserstein distance between the distributions of a return and its Bellman target, under which the Bellman operation is a contraction mapping (Bellemare, Dabney, and
Munos 2017). A differentiable Wasserstein distance estimator can be obtained in its dual form with constrained Kantorovich potentials (Gulrajani et al. 2017; Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017), or approximated by restricting the
search for couplings to a set of smoothed joint probabilities with entropic regularisations (Cuturi 2013; Montavon,
Müller, and Cuturi 2016; Genevay et al. 2016; Luise et al.
2018). Alternatively, a Bayesian inference perspective redirects the search space to a set of probabilistic encoders that
map data in the input space to codes in a latent space (Bousquet et al. 2017; Tolstikhin et al. 2018; Ambrogioni et al.
2018). Bayesian approaches rely on inference to bypass rigid
and sub-optimal distributions that are usually entailed otherwise, while retaining differentiability and tractability. Moreover, predictions based on inference, the expectation across
a latent space, are more robust to unseen data (Blundell et al.
2015) and thus able to generalise better.

Distributional Reinforcement Learning (RL) maintains the
entire probability distribution of the reward-to-go, i.e. the return, providing more learning signals that account for the
uncertainty associated with policy performance, which may
be beneficial for trading off exploration and exploitation and
policy learning in general. Previous works in distributional
RL focused mainly on computing the state-action-return distributions, here we model the state-return distributions. This
enables us to translate successful conventional RL algorithms
that are based on state values into distributional RL. We formulate the distributional Bellman operation as an inferencebased auto-encoding process that minimises Wasserstein metrics between target/model return distributions. The proposed
algorithm, BDPG (Bayesian Distributional Policy Gradients),
uses adversarial training in joint-contrastive learning to estimate a variational posterior from the returns. Moreover, we
can now interpret the return prediction uncertainty as an information gain, which allows to obtain a new curiosity measure that helps BDPG steer exploration actively and efficiently. We demonstrate in a suite of Atari 2600 games and
MuJoCo tasks, including well known hard-exploration challenges, how BDPG learns generally faster and with higher
asymptotic performance than reference distributional RL algorithms.

In reinforcement learning (RL), the performance of a policy
is evaluated by the (discounted) accumulated future rewards,
a random variable known as the reward-to-go or the return.
Instead of maintaining the expectations of returns as scalar
value functions, distributional RL estimates return distributions. Keeping track of the uncertainties around returns has
initially been leveraged as a means to raise risk awareness in
RL (Morimura et al. 2010; Lattimore and Hutter 2012). Recently, a line of research pioneered by (Bellemare, Dabney,
and Munos 2017) applied the distributional Bellman operator for control purposes. Distributional RL is shown to outperform previous successful deep RL methods in Atari-57
when combined with other avant-garde developments in RL
(Hessel et al. 2018; Dabney et al. 2018a).

In contrast to previous distributional RL work that focuses on state-action-return distributions, here we investigate state-return distributions and prove that its Bellman
operator is also a contraction in Wasserstein metrics. This
opens up the possibility of converting state-value algorithms
into distributional RL settings. We then formulate the distributional Bellman operation as an inference-based autoencoding process that minimises Wasserstein metrics between continuous distributions of the Bellman target and estimated return. A second benefit of our inference model is
that the learned posterior enables a curiosity bonus in the
form of information gain (IG), which is leveraged as internal
reward to boost exploration efficiency. We explicitly calculate the entropy reduction in a latent space corresponding to
return probability estimation as a KL divergence. In contrast
to previous work (Bellemare et al. 2016; Sekar et al. 2020;
Ball et al. 2020) in which IG was approximated with ensemble entropy or prediction gains, we obtain analytical results
from our variational inference scheme.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

To test our fully Bayesian approach and curiosity-driven
exploration mechanism against a distributional RL back-

Introduction

8429

