The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fairness in Influence Maximization through Randomization
Ruben Becker1 , Gianlorenzo D’Angelo1 , Sajjad Ghobadi1 , Hugo Gilbert2
1

Gran Sasso Science Institute, L’Aquila, Italy
Université Paris-Dauphine, Université PSL, CNRS, LAMSADE, 75016 Paris, France
ruben.becker@gssi.it, gianlorenzo.dangelo@gssi.it, sajjad.ghobadi@gssi.it, hugo.gilbert@dauphine.psl.eu
2

Abstract

problem formalizes this objective (Kempe, Kleinberg, and
Tardos 2015): given a network and a probabilistic diffusion
model, the task is to find a set of k seed nodes from which the
campaign will start to spread, in order to maximize the expected number of reached nodes. The problem has received a
tremendous amount of attention (Becker et al. 2020a; Borgs
et al. 2014; Borodin et al. 2017; Budak, Agrawal, and El Abbadi 2011; Chen and Teng 2017; Cohen et al. 2014; Tang,
Shi, and Xiao 2015; Tang, Xiao, and Shi 2014). However, as
the objective function in the influence maximization problem is only concerned with the efficiency of the diffusion
process, it does not take into account any fairness criteria. More recently, fairness issues in influence maximization
have become a focus of attention for many researchers.
A first sequence of papers has investigated a setting in
which several competing players are paying the network’s
host to influence users in their favor. The goal in these works
is to ensure that the host picks seed nodes in a fair way w.r.t.
the different players (Chen et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2013; Yu
et al. 2017). Another line of research has investigated the
fairness of the diffusion process with respect to the vertices,
i.e., the users in the network. Indeed when only efficiency is
being optimized, some users, or communities, i.e., groups of
users, might get an unfairly low coverage (Ali et al. 2019;
Fish et al. 2019; Farnad, Babaki, and Gendreau 2020; Khajehnejad et al. 2020; Rahmattalabi et al. 2020; Stoica, Han,
and Chaintreau 2020; Tsang et al. 2019). A intuitive criterion to consider here is the maximin criterion. Here, the
goal is to choose at most k seed nodes to maximize the minimum probability of a user being reached. When generalized to groups of users or communities, the goal becomes to
maximize the minimum expected number of users reached
per community. The first problem has been considered by
Fish et al. (2019), who showed that the problem is hard
to approximate to any constant approximation factor, unless P = N P . The second problem has been considered by
Tsang et al. (2019). Building on previous work by (Chekuri,
Vondrák, and Zenklusen 2010) and (Udwani 2018), the authors designed an algorithm with an asymptotic approximation ratio of 1 − 1/e provided that the number of communities is not much larger than k.
In the present paper, we extend these works by studying
the impact of randomization on fairness. Our approach is
to allow for randomized strategies for choosing seeds rather

The influence maximization paradigm has been used by researchers in various fields in order to study how information spreads in social networks. While previously the attention was mostly on efficiency, more recently fairness issues
have been taken into account in this scope. In the present paper, we propose to use randomization as a mean for achieving
fairness. While this general idea is not new, it has not been
applied in the area of information spread in networks.
Similar to previous works like Fish et al. (WWW ’19) and
Tsang et al. (IJCAI ’19), we study the maximin criterion for
(group) fairness. By allowing randomized solutions, we introduce two different variants of this problem. While the original deterministic maximin problem has been shown to be
inapproximable, interestingly, we show that both probabilistic variants permit approximation algorithms with a constant
multiplicative factor of 1 − 1/e plus an additive arbitrarily
small error due to the simulation of the information spread.
For an experimental study, we provide implementations of
our methods and compare the achieved fairness values to
existing methods. Non-surprisingly, the ex-ante values, i.e.,
minimum expected value of an individual (or group) to obtain
the information, of the computed probabilistic strategies are
significantly larger than the (ex-post) fairness values of previous methods. This confirms that studying fairness via randomization is a worthwhile direction. More surprisingly, we
observe that even the ex-post fairness values, i.e., fairness values of sets sampled according to the probabilistic strategies,
computed by our routines dominate over the fairness achieved
by previous methods on most of the instances tested.

Introduction
The internet has revolutionized the way information spreads
through the population. One positive consequence is that important and valuable campaigns can be spread at little cost
quite efficiently thanks to news platforms and social media.
Such campaigns may be related to HIV prevention (Wilder
et al. 2018a; Yadav et al. 2018), public health awareness (Valente and Pumpuang 2007) or financial inclusion (Banerjee
et al. 2013). The information spreading process is notably
optimized by algorithms that identify key people in the network to act as seed users to initiate the spread of the campaign efficiently. The well known influence maximization
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14684

