The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SSPC-Net: Semi-supervised Semantic 3D Point Cloud Segmentation Network
Mingmei Cheng, Le Hui, Jin Xie∗ , Jian Yang
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education
Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{chengmm, le.hui, csjxie, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract

difficult to obtain the accurate labels of these million points
for full-supervised segmentation.
Different from full-supervised point cloud segmentation,
semi-supervised segmentation aims to learn a good label
prediction for point clouds with partially annotated points.
Recent works have been dedicated to the semi-supervised
point cloud segmentation task. Guinard et al. (Guinard and
Landrieu 2017) propose a weakly supervised conditional
random field classifier for 3D LiDAR point cloud segmentation. However, it converts the segmentation task into an optimization problem, and the contextual information in point
clouds is ignored. Mei et al. propose a semi-supervised 3D
LiDAR point cloud segmentation method (Mei et al. 2019),
where the 3D data is projected to range images for feature embedding, and the inter-frame constraints are combined with some labeled samples to encourage feature consistency. Nonetheless, the constraints along the LiDAR sequential frames are not available in general 3D segmentation datasets. Lately, (Xu and Lee 2020) proposes a semisupervised point cloud segmentation method, which employs three constraints to enhance the feature learning of unlabeled points, including block-level label penalization, data
augmentation with rotation and flipping for prediction consistency, and a spatial and color smoothness constraint in
local regions. Although it can obtain effective segmentation
results, the long-range relations are ignored in this method.
Although some efforts have been made on semisupervised point cloud segmentation, how to accurately predict the labels of unannotated points for segmentation is still
a challenging problem. Particularly, since point clouds are
irregular, it is difficult to exploit the geometry structures of
point clouds to accurately infer pseudo labels of unannotated
points for label propagation. In addition, the uncertainty of
inferred pseudo labels of unannotated points hinders the network from learning discriminative features of point clouds,
leading to inaccurate label prediction.
Aiming at the aforementioned two problems, in this paper,
we propose a novel semi-supervised semantic point cloud
segmentation network, named SSPC-Net. We first divide the
point clouds into superpoints and build the superpoint graph,
where the superpoint is a set of points with isotropically geometric features. Thus, we can convert the point-level label
prediction problem in the point cloud segmentation task into
the superpoint-level label prediction problem. Following the

Point cloud semantic segmentation is a crucial task in 3D
scene understanding. Existing methods mainly focus on employing a large number of annotated labels for supervised
semantic segmentation. Nonetheless, manually labeling such
large point clouds for the supervised segmentation task is
time-consuming. In order to reduce the number of annotated
labels, we propose a semi-supervised semantic point cloud
segmentation network, named SSPC-Net, where we train the
semantic segmentation network by inferring the labels of
unlabeled points from the few annotated 3D points. In our
method, we first partition the whole point cloud into superpoints and build superpoint graphs to mine the long-range
dependencies in point clouds. Based on the constructed superpoint graph, we then develop a dynamic label propagation method to generate the pseudo labels for the unsupervised superpoints. Particularly, we adopt a superpoint dropout
strategy to dynamically select the generated pseudo labels.
In order to fully exploit the generated pseudo labels of the
unsupervised superpoints, we furthermore propose a coupled
attention mechanism for superpoint feature embedding. Finally, we employ the cross-entropy loss to train the semantic
segmentation network with the labels of the supervised superpoints and the pseudo labels of the unsupervised superpoints.
Experiments on various datasets demonstrate that our semisupervised segmentation method can achieve better performance than the current semi-supervised segmentation method
with fewer annotated 3D points.

Introduction
Due to the increasing growth of 3D point cloud data, point
cloud semantic segmentation has been receiving more and
more attention in the 3D computer vision community. Most
of these segmentation methods focus on fully supervised
segmentation with manually annotated points (Hu et al.
2020; Thomas et al. 2019; Lei, Akhtar, and Mian 2020; Zhao
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019a). However, annotating largescale 3D point clouds is a cumbersome process, which is
costly in labor and time. Particularly, the number of point
clouds in some real scenes such as the indoor scene can often reach the order of magnitude to millions. Therefore, it is
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1140

