The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

*-CFQ: Analyzing the Scalability of Machine Learning on a Compositional Task
Dmitry Tsarkov†‡ , Tibor Tihon† , Nathan Scales, Nikola Momchev,
Danila Sinopalnikov, Nathanael Schärli
Google Research, Brain Team
{tsar,ttihon,nkscales,nikola,sinopalnikov,schaerli}@google.com

Abstract

2020; Brown et al. 2020). Recent results in an i.i.d. setting
show this pattern to persist across many orders of magnitude,
with no established upper limit (Kaplan et al. 2020).
At the same time, it has been shown that current ML
systems continue to struggle to achieve robust performance
in classes of tasks that require compositional generalization
(Keysers et al. 2020) – an ability that has been argued to be
crucial to robust language understanding (Fodor, Pylyshyn
et al. 1988; Lake and Baroni 2018; Battaglia et al. 2018;
Hupkes et al. 2019).
In this paper, we combine these two lines of research by
investigating the effect of training size on error rates in the
context of a compositional task. Specifically, we derive a
suite of extended datasets based on the Compositional Freebase Questions (CFQ) semantic parsing benchmark (Keysers et al. 2020). We then use the compositional structure of
each example to construct controlled experiments that measure the error rates when increasing training size in settings
requiring compositional generalization and in settings simulating scaling to a broader scope of natural language. We apply these experiments to analysis of Transformers (Vaswani
et al. 2017) in a setting of fixed computational cost – that
is, of fixed model size and fixed training steps – and demonstrate key limits to their scalability in this setting.
Our contributions are the following:

We present *-CFQ (“star-CFQ”): a suite of large-scale datasets of varying scope based on the CFQ semantic parsing
benchmark, designed for principled investigation of the scalability of machine learning systems in a realistic compositional task setting. Using this suite, we conduct a series of experiments investigating the ability of Transformers to benefit
from increased training size under conditions of fixed computational cost. We show that compositional generalization
remains a challenge at all training sizes, and we show that
increasing the scope of natural language leads to consistently
higher error rates, which are only partially offset by increased
training data. We further show that while additional training
data from a related domain improves the accuracy in datastarved situations, this improvement is limited and diminishes
as the distance from the related domain to the target domain
increases.

1

Introduction

Intuitively, if you see a lot of examples of natural language
questions about TV shows, it ought to also help understand similar syntax in questions about movies, or in questions that refer to both movies and TV shows together. Ideally, the training examples from the related domain should
strictly improve performance, not hurt it. If you can satisfy
that property, then you have at least a chance at eventually
achieving arbitrarily robust performance across a range of
domains, given sufficient training data in aggregate.
How and to what extent current machine learning (ML)
approaches can be made to robustly solve natural language
understanding (NLU) at the scale of arbitrary natural language across domain – with or without access to large quantities of training data – remains, however, an open question.
On one hand, research into the scaling behavior of deep
learning systems has found generalization loss to decrease
reliably with training size and model size in a power law
or related logarithmic relationship across a range of architectures and tasks, from image classification with convolutional neural networks (Cho et al. 2015) to language modeling with Transformers (Rosenfeld et al. 2019; Kaplan et al.

• We present *-CFQ (“star-CFQ”): a suite of large-scale
datasets and corresponding canonical splits, designed to
enable principled investigation of the scalability of ML
systems in a realistic compositional task setting. The datasets and splits follow the same setup as the original CFQ,
but span a range of data sizes, rule scopes, and compound
divergences with the largest consisting of 76% more rules,
41x as many examples, 14x as many question patterns,
53x as many SPARQL patterns, and covering a 32x larger
domain than CFQ (Section 3).
• We confirm that under conditions of fixed computational
cost, error rates for Transformers plateau at large training
sizes. Moreover, targeting larger scopes of natural language leads to consistently higher error rates which are
only partially offset by increased training data (Section 4).

†

Equal contribution. For author contributions, see Appendix A.
Version with appendices: http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.08266
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• We demonstrate that compositional generalization remains a challenge at all training sizes, but that increases in
training size continue to reap benefits in situations requir-

‡

9949

