The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On the Softmax Bottleneck of Recurrent Language Models
Dwarak Govind Parthiban, Yongyi Mao, Diana Inkpen
University of Ottawa
yottabytt@gmail.com, ymao@uottawa.ca, diana.inkpen@uottawa.ca

Metrics

Abstract
Recent research has pointed to a limitation of word-level neural language models with softmax outputs. This limitation,
known as the “softmax bottleneck” refers to the inability of
these models to produce high-rank log probability (log P )
matrices. Various solutions have been proposed to break this
bottleneck, including Mixture of Softmaxes, SigSoftmax, and
Linear Monotonic Softmax with Piecewise Linear Increasing
Functions. They were reported to offer better performance in
terms of perplexity on test data. A natural perception from
these results is a strong positive correlation between the rank
of the log P matrix and the model’s performance. In this
work, we show via an extensive empirical study that such a
correlation is fairly weak and that the high-rank of the log P
matrix is neither necessary nor sufficient for better test perplexity. Although our results are empirical, they are established in part via the construction of a rich family of models,
which we call Generalized SigSoftmax. They are able to create diverse ranks for the log P matrices. We also present an
investigation as to why the proposed solutions achieve better
performance.

rank
(reported)
rank
(ours)
perplexity difference
(reported)
perplexity difference
(ours)

SS

Model
LMS-PLIF

MoS

4640

N/A

9980

4979

580

9979

0.40

1.11

2.88

−0.06

0.43

1.28

Table 1: Perplexity difference (subtracted from the baseline
AWD-LSTM’s perplexity; positive means better than the
baseline and negative means worse) for SS, LMS-PLIF and
MoS models and their respective ranks of the log probability matrix log P on the test set of PTB. The reported results
in their respective original papers is compared with our reproduced results. The rank of the log P matrix produced by
the baseline model that uses the softmax function is 402, as
the embedding dimension d is 400. SS and LMS-PLIF use
d = 400. But MoS uses d = 280.

Introduction
This paper is concerned with language models constructed
with recurrent neural networks. Suppose that such a language model involves a vocabulary V and a dictionary of
contexts C. The model in effect computes a probability estimate PV|C (v|c) of any token v ∈ V conditioned on a context
c ∈ C, using a softmax function in its output layer. When
such an estimated conditional distribution PV|C (v|c) is represented as a |C| × |V| matrix P , Yang et al. (2018) proved
that the rank of the log P cannot be larger than d+1 where d
is the word embedding dimension. They also hypothesized
that the log P matrix has to be high-rank as a natural language is generally believed to be highly diverse and contextdependent (Mikolov and Zweig 2012). They called the inability of the softmax function to produce high-rank log P
matrices as the “softmax bottleneck”. They introduced the
“Mixture of Softmaxes” (MoS) layer as a replacement to the
output softmax layer that is generally used in language models, to break the softmax bottleneck. They also introduced a
variant to MoS called the Mixture of Contexts (MoC) as a

baseline, which does not break the softmax bottleneck but
has the same parameterization as in MoS. In MoC, the mixing is done for the context vectors rather than the probabilities as in MoS.
Inspired by the work of Yang et al. (2018), there are several works in the recent literature (Kanai et al. 2018; Takase,
Suzuki, and Nagata 2018; Yang et al. 2019; Ganea et al.
2019) that propose other approaches to overcome the limitation imposed by the softmax bottleneck, including, for example, “SigSoftmax” (SS) (Kanai et al. 2018) and “Linear
Monotonic Softmax with Piecewise Linear Increasing Functions” (LMS-PLIF). Specifically, the SS function is used as
a replacement for the softmax function, and the LMS-PLIF
is a learnable piecewise linear increasing function that is applied on the logits before they are sent to the softmax function. The successes of SS, LMS-PLIF and MoS seem to have
implied that there is a strong correlation between the performance of a language model and the rank of its log P matrix and that the performance improvements demonstrated
in these models are largely attributed to their high ranks.
As all the approaches in existing works were patched

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13640

