The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predicting Mining Industry Accidents with a Multi-Task Learning Approach
Rodolfo Palma, Luis Martı́, Nayat Sánchez-Pi
Inria Research Center in Chile
Av. Apoquindo 2827, Las Condes, Santiago de Chile, Chile.
{rodolfo.palma,luis.marti,nayat.sanchez-pi}@inria.cl

Abstract

Consequently, health, safety, and environment (HSE) issues are priority matters for the mining industry. This industry is frequently in the news. Much of the time it is because of changes in prices of minerals. Other —less frequent
but, perhaps, more important— subject of media attention
is when disasters strike, as is the case of toxic spills, mining tailing overflows, and underground accidents. These incidents have a high impact on lives, the environment, and
public opinion regarding this sector. That is why the correct
handling of HSE is a determining factor in this industry’s
long-term success.
The Chilean mining industry is not an exception. Mining was responsible for 14.2% of Chile’s GDP in 2012 and
nearly 57% of exports were concentrated in this industry.
The country is the largest producer of copper in the world,
satisfying the 36% of the world’s needs and having 28% of
the world’s reserves of that mineral (de Solminihac, Gonzales, and Cerda 2018). It is also the world’s largest producer
of lithium and iodine. However, this intensive and extensive
growth has not come without negative ramifications.
Because of this, companies, governments, and communities have been working together to draw policies and methods to make the mining activities as viable and sustainable as
possible. The Chilean National Geology and Mining Service
(Sernageomin, after its name in Spanish) is the country’s national authority regarding mining and geology.
One of its primary objectives is the reduction of accidents
and incidents in the mining facilities, as it has a direct impact on the quality of life of workers and the environment. To
achieve this, it essential to have near-optimal programming
of the inspections of a mining worksite. It can be hypothesized that by optimizing the inspection visits to the facilities
some early signs of problems in the riskier areas could be
detected and reported and, hopefully, corrected. This programming is particularly complex because of the extreme
oblongness of the Chilean geography (as can be perceived
in Figure 1), the frequent natural hazards like earthquakes,
tsunamis, and flash floods, and the difficulty of accessing
sites that are located in the aridest desert of the planet.
The current method for doing the programming of the visits is currently defined as a two-step process. First, for each
mining facility, it must be determined a perceived risk based
on a given set of human experience and intuition factors and,
second, given that perceived risk organize a ranking so that

The mining sector is a very relevant part of the Chilean economy, representing more than 14% of the country’s GDP and
more than 50% of its exports. However, mining is also a highrisk activity where health, safety, and environmental aspects
are fundamental concerns to take into account to render it viable in the longer term. The Chilean National Geology and
Mining Service (Sernageomin, after its name in Spanish) is
in charge of ensuring the safe operation of mines. On-site inspections are their main tool in order to detect issues, propose corrective measures, and track the compliance of those
measures. Consequently, it is necessary to create inspection
programs relying on a data-based decision-making strategy.
This paper reports the work carried out in one of the most
relevant dimensions of said strategy: predicting the mining
worksites accident risk. That is, how likely it is a mining
worksite to have accidents in the future. This risk is then used
to create a priority ranking that is used to devise the inspection program. Estimating this risk at the government regulator
level is particularly challenging as there is a very limited and
biased data. Our main contribution is to apply a multi-task
learning approach to train the risk prediction model in such
a way that is able to overcome the constraints of the limited
availability of data by fusing different sources. As part of this
work, we also implemented a human-experience-based model
that captures the procedures currently used by the current experts in charge of elaborating the inspection priority ranking.
The mining worksites risk rankings built by model achieve a
121.2% NDCG performance improvement over the rankings
based on the currently used experts’ model and outperforms
the non-multi-task learning alternatives.

Introduction
Mining is an essential activity for humankind since prehistoric times. As humanity has grown and developed the need
for minerals has expanded. This has lead to an increase in exploration, extraction, and processing. However, modern and,
in particular, extensive mining is also a high-impact activity. Mining has a long-established track of negative implications, ranging from the degradation of the natural environment, the production of highly toxic waste and its impact on
communities, etc.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15370

