The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EECBS: A Bounded-Suboptimal Search for Multi-Agent Path Finding
Jiaoyang Li,1∗ Wheeler Ruml,2 Sven Koenig1
1

University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
University of New Hampshire, Durham, New Hampshire, USA
jiaoyanl@usc.edu, ruml@cs.unh.edu, skoenig@usc.edu

2

Abstract

Gange, Harabor, and Stuckey 2019; Li et al. 2019b,c, 2020a;
Zhang et al. 2020) and designing compilation-based algorithms that use ideas similar to CBS (Surynek 2019; Lam
et al. 2019; Lam and Le Bodic 2020). However, for many
applications, we need to coordinate hundreds of agents with
limited computational resources. The fact that MAPF is NPhard to solve optimally (Yu and LaValle 2013) motivates
finding bounded-suboptimal solutions in order to reduce the
runtime of the search.
Enhanced CBS (ECBS) (Barer et al. 2014) is a boundedsuboptimal variant of CBS that is guaranteed to find solutions whose costs are no more than a user-specified factor
away from optimal. Its bounded suboptimality is achieved
by replacing the best-first search in the high and low levels
of CBS with focal search (Pearl and Kim 1982). Focal search
uses an admissible heuristic for bounding the solution cost
and another heuristic for determining the distance of nodes
to the goal nodes. We will demonstrate that ECBS becomes
inefficient if these heuristics are negatively correlated.
In this paper, we propose a new bounded-suboptimal
variant of CBS, called Explicit Estimation CBS (EECBS).
EECBS replaces focal search with Explicit Estimation
Search (Thayer and Ruml 2011) on the high level and uses
online learning (Thayer, Dionne, and Ruml 2011) to learn
an informed but potentially inadmissible heuristic to guide
the high-level search. ECBS and EECBS differ from CBS
only in the node selection rules used in their high- and lowlevel searches. Hence, the ideas behind many improvements
of CBS, such as bypassing conflicts (Boyarski et al. 2015a),
prioritizing conflicts (Boyarski et al. 2015b), symmetry reasoning (Li et al. 2019c, 2020a), and focusing the high-level
search with admissible heuristics (Li et al. 2019a), might improve ECBS and EECBS as well, and we show how they
can be adapted to them. We empirically evaluate how each
improvement affects performance, finding that their combination is best. EECBS with the improvements runs significantly faster than ECBS and BCP-7 (Lam and Le Bodic
2020) and eMDD-SAT (Surynek et al. 2018), two other
state-of-the-art bounded-suboptimal MAPF algorithms.

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF), i.e., finding collision-free
paths for multiple robots, is important for many applications
where small runtimes are necessary, including the kind of
automated warehouses operated by Amazon. CBS is a leading two-level search algorithm for solving MAPF optimally.
ECBS is a bounded-suboptimal variant of CBS that uses focal
search to speed up CBS by sacrificing optimality and instead
guaranteeing that the costs of its solutions are within a given
factor of optimal. In this paper, we study how to decrease
its runtime even further using inadmissible heuristics. Motivated by Explicit Estimation Search (EES), we propose Explicit Estimation CBS (EECBS), a new bounded-suboptimal
variant of CBS, that uses online learning to obtain inadmissible estimates of the cost of the solution of each high-level
node and uses EES to choose which high-level node to expand next. We also investigate recent improvements of CBS
and adapt them to EECBS. We find that EECBS with the improvements runs significantly faster than the state-of-the-art
bounded-suboptimal MAPF algorithms ECBS, BCP-7, and
eMDD-SAT on a variety of MAPF instances. We hope that
the scalability of EECBS enables additional applications for
bounded-suboptimal MAPF algorithms.

1

Introduction

Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of finding collision-free paths for a team of agents in a known environment while minimizing the sum of their travel times.
It is inspired by real-world applications such as warehouse
logistics (Ma et al. 2017), airport operations (Li et al.
2019d), UAV traffic management (Ho et al. 2019), automated valet parking (Okoso, Otaki, and Nishi 2019), and
video games (Li et al. 2020b).
CBS (Sharon et al. 2015) is a leading two-level search algorithm for solving MAPF optimally. Its central idea is to
plan a path for each agent independently and then resolve
collisions between two agents by branching. Each branch
is a new candidate plan wherein one agent or the other is
forced to find a new path that avoids the chosen collision.
Researchers have made significant progress on speeding up
CBS (Boyarski et al. 2015a,b, 2020a,b; Felner et al. 2018;

2

∗
Jiaoyang Li performed the research during her visit to Monash
University.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Preliminaries

In this section, we formalize the definition of MAPF and
introduce the baseline algorithms CBS and ECBS.
12353

