The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knocking in the Game of Gin Rummy
Ryzeson C. Maravich, Taylor C. Neller, Todd W. Neller
Gettysburg College
{marary01, nellta01, tneller}@gettysburg.edu

Abstract

cards being 10 points, and other number cards having points
according to their number. Deadwood points are the sum of
card points from all deadwood cards. Players play so as to
reduce their deadwood points.
For each hand of a game, the dealer1 deals 10 cards to
each player. After the deal, the remaining 32 cards are placed
face-down to form a draw pile, and the top card is turned
face-up next to the draw pile to start the face-up discard pile.
The top of the discard pile is called the upcard.
In a normal turn, a player draws a card, either the upcard
or the top of the draw pile, and then discards a card. The
player may not discard a drawn upcard but may discard a
card drawn face-down. For the first turn, play starts with the
non-dealer having the option to take the first turn by drawing
the upcard. If the non-dealer declines this option, the dealer
is given the option. If both decline, the non-dealer must take
the first turn drawing from the draw pile.
In the event that the hand has not ended after a turn with
only 2 cards remaining in the draw pile, nothing is scored,
all cards are shuffled, and the hand is replayed with the same
dealer.
After a player has discarded, if that player’s hand has 10
or fewer deadwood points, that player may knock, i.e. end
the hand. (Often this is indicated by discarding face-down.)
The hand is then scored as follows: The knocking player
displays melds and any deadwood. Next, if any deadwood
was displayed, the non-knocking player may lay off cards,
adding to the knocking player’s melds so as to reduce the
non-knocking player’s deadwood. Then, the non-knocking
player displays melds and any remaining deadwood.
If the knocking player had no deadwood, they score a
25-point gin bonus plus any opponent deadwood points. If
the knocking player had less deadwood than their opponent,
they score the difference between the two deadwood totals.
Otherwise, if the knocking player had greater than or equal
to their opponent’s deadwood points, the opponent scores a
25-point undercut bonus plus the difference between the two
deadwood totals.
A player scoring a total of 100 or more points wins the
game.

We perform an empirical study of Gin Rummy knocking strategies, drawing insight from a population of AI
players that vary in both discarding and knocking strategies. For our best performing player, simple linear regression yielded a knocking strategy that both affirmed
the features expert players give attention to in making
knock decisions, and yet called into question the way
such features are conventionally used.

Introduction
In this paper, we will perform an empirical study focusing
on knocking strategies for the game of Gin Rummy. We
begin with the rules and terminology of Gin Rummy and
survey the conventional wisdom for knocking decisions in
Gin Rummy literature. Next, we discuss the two dimensions
along which we vary our AI players, discard strategy and
knocking strategy, overviewing the features we considered
in applying linear regression for predicting the relative quality of knock decisions. After describing our experimental design, we share and discuss our experimental results, giving
special attention to what those results suggest about the quality of conventional wisdom. Finally, we conclude by noting limitations of our study, suggesting directions for future
work, and summarizing our contributions.

Gin Rummy
Gin Rummy is one of the most popular 2-player card games
played with a standard (a.k.a. French) 52-card deck. Ranks
run from aces low to kings high. The object of the game is to
be the first player to score 100 or more points accumulated
through the scoring of individual hands.
The play of Gin Rummy, as with other games in the
Rummy family, is to collect sets of cards called melds. There
are two types of melds: “sets” and “runs”. A set is 3 or 4
cards of the same rank, e.g. 3C-3H-3S, or KC-KH-KS-KD.
A run is 3 or more cards of the same suit in sequence, e.g.
5C-6C-7C, or 9H-TH-JH-QH-KH. Melds are disjoint, i.e. do
not share cards.
Cards not in melds are referred to as deadwood. Cards
have associated point values with aces being 1 point, face

1

There are different systems for deciding the next dealer; we
will simply start with a random dealer and alternate players as
dealer across the entire game.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15600

