The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Visual Context for Group Activity Recognition
Hangjie Yuan,1 Dong Ni1,2 *
1

2

College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
{hj.yuan, dni}@zju.edu.cn

Y

Abstract
Group activity recognition aims to recognize an overall activity in a multi-person scene. Previous methods strive to reason on individual features. However, they under-explore the
person-specific contextual information, which is significant
and informative in computer vision tasks. In this paper, we
propose a new reasoning paradigm to incorporate global contextual information. Specifically, we propose two modules to
bridge the gap between group activity and visual context. The
first is Transformer based Context Encoding (TCE) module,
which enhances individual representation by encoding global
contextual information to individual features and refining the
aggregated information. The second is Spatial-Temporal Bilinear Pooling (STBiP) module. It firstly further explores
pairwise relationships for the context encoded individual representation, then generates semantic representations via gated
message passing on a constructed spatial-temporal graph. On
their basis, we further design a two-branch model that integrates the designed modules into a pipeline. Systematic experiments demonstrate each module’s effectiveness on either
branch. Visualizations indicate that visual contextual cues
can be aggregated globally by TCE. Moreover, our method
achieves state-of-the-art results on two widely used benchmarks using only RGB images as input and 2D backbones.

C

X
I

(a)

Z

C

X

Z

I

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Causal graph of existing models. (b) Causal
graph of our proposed model. I : input images. C : global feature map. X : individual features. Y : context encoded individual features. Z : activity prediction.

given image, C → X : extract individual features from feature maps (usually by RoIAlign (He et al. 2017)), and X
→ Z : reason on individual features to generate a scenelevel representation and then classify it. However, step I
→ C only crops features aligned with the bounding box,
which implies that features are limited to local receptive
fields. Therefore global contextual information that benefits recognition is omitted indeliberately. However, previous
works (Wang et al. 2018; Cao et al. 2019) have demonstrated
the significance of global-range dependency in computer vision tasks, which lacks careful exploration in our problem.
For example, when you try to recognize an activity in volleyball games, you need to consider players, referees, line
judges and spectators. Like spectators’ cheer for the winning team, body orientation of judges, actions and positions
of line judges also provide informative cues to the result.
In an effort to solve the aforementioned drawback, we
propose a new method aligned with a new causal graph illustrated in Figure 1(b). The major difference between the two
methods is that instead of reasoning on X directly, we firstly
generate context encoded features Y by the combination of
individual features X and global feature map C, then reason
on Y to get a semantic representation Z.
In practice, we resort to the well-known concept of transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017), which adopts the self-attention
mechanism to aggregate information from the global input
sequence. We design a Transformer based Context Encoding
module (TCE) to incorporate the person-specific contextual
information. Specifically, we align the individual features X
with the global feature map C, aggregate and refine informative contextual features to get context encoded features Y.

Introduction
Group activity recognition (Ibrahim et al. 2016) or collective activity recognition (Choi, Shahid, and Savarese 2009)
has attracted more research attention recently due to its significance in video understanding. Group activity recognition
is a task aiming to recognize the overall activity of a group
of people, which has a promising future for various applications, e.g. sports/surveillance video analysis, social activity understanding, video search and retrieval. Given a video
clip, the difficulties of this problem lie not only in the recognition of individual actions, but also in the exploration of the
scene information and collaborative relation among people.
Recently proposed methods are mostly based on deep
learning techniques. We revisit them in the view of a causal
graph (Pearl, Glymour, and Jewell 2016) illustrated in Figure 1(a), in which I → C : generate feature maps from a
* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3261

