The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Resilient Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning with
Adversarial Value Decomposition
Thomy Phan,1 Lenz Belzner,2 Thomas Gabor,1
Andreas Sedlmeier,1 Fabian Ritz,1 Claudia Linnhoff-Popien1
1

LMU Munich,
MaibornWolff
thomy.phan@ifi.lmu.de
2

Abstract

narios, where an agent only faces the same or similar agents
as during training (Foerster et al. 2018; Gupta, Egorov, and
Kochenderfer 2017; Rashid et al. 2018). This bears the risk
of overfitting, where a MAS can entirely fail when some
agents significantly change their behavior, which could be
fatal in safety critical environments, where such failures may
have catastrophic consquences (Uesato et al. 2019).
Some work on resilient MARL based on adversarial learning (Littman 1994; Li et al. 2019; Phan et al. 2020) has focused on specialized settings with a fixed number of adversary agents, e.g., where a single productive agent remains.
These approaches lack flexibility, which is required, when
arbitrary portions of the MAS can change. Furthermore, they
introduce new tunable hyperparameters like the fraction of
adversaries or the degree of adversarial behavior, which further increase sensitivity w.r.t. unexpected scenarios.
In this paper, we propose Resilient Adversarial value Decomposition with Antagonist-Ratios (RADAR). RADAR offers a value decomposition scheme to train competing teams
of varying size for improved resilience against arbitrary
agent changes. Our main contributions are:
• A simple mechanism to train adversarial agents with variable team sizes during training, which is necessary to create MAS that can potentially cope with arbitrary agent
changes. Unlike prior work on resilient MARL, RADAR
does not introduce any new hyperparameters, thus can be
easily integrated into existing RL frameworks.
• An agent test scheme to consistently evaluate performance and resilience against changing agents in cooperative MAS in a fair way, which is inspired by prior work
on single-agent RL (Badia et al. 2020; Jordan et al. 2020).
• An empirical evaluation of RADAR in two cooperative
multi-agent domains and a comparison with state-of-theart MARL w.r.t. the proposed test scheme. While being
competitive against state-of-the-art MARL in cooperative
settings, RADAR achieves better worst case performance
when facing a variable number of previously unknown adversary agents at test time.

We focus on resilience in cooperative multi-agent systems,
where agents can change their behavior due to udpates or
failures of hardware and software components. Current stateof-the-art approaches to cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) have either focused on idealized settings without any changes or on very specialized scenarios, where the number of changing agents is fixed, e.g., in
extreme cases with only one productive agent. Therefore,
we propose Resilient Adversarial value Decomposition with
Antagonist-Ratios (RADAR). RADAR offers a value decomposition scheme to train competing teams of varying size for
improved resilience against arbitrary agent changes. We evaluate RADAR in two cooperative multi-agent domains and
show that RADAR achieves better worst case performance
w.r.t. arbitrary agent changes than state-of-the-art MARL.

Introduction
Distributed systems consist of multiple separated components that collaborate to accomplish a common task (Tanenbaum and Van Steen 2007). Distributed autonomous systems
can be formulated as cooperative multi-agent system (MAS),
which can be realized with methods of reinforcement learning (RL) (Foerster et al. 2018; Rashid et al. 2018).
Multi-agent RL (MARL) potentially offers better scalability and resilience against changing agents compared to
single-agent RL. We define an agent change either as update or failure. E.g., some agents may be updated with new
software or temporarily be replaced by other versions due to
maintainance. In both cases, we would expect the remaining MAS to collaborate with these novel agents. On the
other hand, agents might behave erroneously due to hardware or software failures. In this case, we would expect the
remaining MAS to degrade gracefully without failing entirely (Stone and Veloso 2000). Intuitively, resilience should
improve with more agents due to more available resources
for compensation (Tanenbaum and Van Steen 2007).
Although resilience has been long recognized as a
main motivation for realizing cooperative MAS (Stone and
Veloso 2000; Panait and Luke 2005; Buşoniu, Babuška, and
De Schutter 2010), most state-of-the-art approaches to cooperative MARL have focused on optimizing idealized sce-

Background
Problem Formulation
MAS can be formulated as partially observable Markov
game M = hD, S, A, P, R, Z, Ωi, where D = {1, ..., N } is

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11308

