The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Permutation-Equivariant Neural Network Architecture For Auction Design
Jad Rahme1 , Samy Jelassi 1,2 , Joan Bruna 2,3 , S. Matthew Weinberg 1
1

2

Princeton University, USA
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University, USA
3
Center for Data Science, New York University, USA
jrahme@princeton.edu

Abstract

there is a single item for sale (Myerson 1981). However, the
problem is not completely understood even in the extremely
simple setting with just a single bidder and two items. While
there have been some partial characterizations (Manelli and
Vincent 2006, 2010; Pavlov 2011; Wang and Tang 2014;
Daskalakis, Deckelbaum, and Tzamos 2017), and algorithmic solutions with provable guarantees (Alaei 2011; Alaei
et al. 2012, 2013; Cai, Daskalakis, and Weinberg 2012a,b),
neither the analytic nor algorithmic approach currently appears tractable for seemingly small instances.
Another line of work to confront this theoretical hurdle
consists in building automated methods to find the optimal
auction. Early works (Conitzer and Sandholm 2002, 2004)
framed the problem as a linear program. However, this approach suffers from severe scalablility issues as the number of constraints and variables is exponential in the number
of bidders and items (Guo and Conitzer 2010). Later, Sandholm and Likhodedov (2015) designed algorithms to find the
optimal auction. While scalable, they are however limited to
specific classes of auctions known to be incentive compatible. A more recent research direction consists in building
deep learning architectures that design auctions from samples of bidder valuations. Duetting et al. (2019) proposed
RegretNet, a feed-forward architecture to find near-optimal
results in several known multi-item settings and obtain new
mechanisms in unknown cases. This architecture however is
not data efficient and can require a large number of valuation samples to learn an optimal auction in some cases. This
inefficiency is not specific to RegretNet but is characteristic
of neural network architectures that do not incorporate any
inductive bias.
In this paper, we build a deep learning architecture for
multi-bidder symmetric auctions. These are auctions which
are invariant to relabeling the items or bidders. More specifically, such auctions are anonymous (in that they can be executed without any information about the bidders, or labeling
them) and item-symmetric (in that it only matters what bids
are made for an item, and not its a priori label).
It is now well-known that when bidders come from the
same population that the optimal auction itself is anonymous. Similarly, if items are a priori indistinguishable (e.g.
different colors of the same car — individuals certainly
value a red vs. blue car differently, but there is nothing objectively more/less valuable about a red vs. blue car), the op-

Designing an incentive compatible auction that maximizes
expected revenue is a central problem in Auction Design.
Theoretical approaches to the problem have hit some limits
in the past decades and analytical solutions are known for
only a few simple settings. Building on the success of deep
learning, a new approach was recently proposed by Duetting et al. (2019) in which the auction is modeled by a feedforward neural network and the design problem as a learning problem. However, the architectures used in that work
are general purpose and do not take advantage of any structure the solution might possess. For example, symmetric auctions are known to be optimal in many settings of interest,
and near-optimal quite generally (Daskalakis and Weinberg
2012; Kothari et al. 2019a), yet previous architectures do not
recover this structure (even in settings where it is known to
exist). In this work, we construct a neural architecture that is
capable of perfectly recovering the optimal symmetric mechanism. We further demonstrate that permutation-equivariant
architectures are not only capable of recovering previous results, they also have better generalization properties.

1

Introduction

Designing truthful auctions is one of the core problems that
arise in economics. Concrete examples of auctions include
sales of treasury bills, art sales by Christie’s or Google Ads.
Following seminal work of Vickrey (Vickrey 1961) and Myerson (Myerson 1981), auctions are typically studied in the
independent private valuations model: each bidder has a valuation function over items, and their payoff depends only on
the items they receive. Moreover, the auctioneer knows aggregate information about the population that each bidder
comes from, modeled as a distribution over valuation functions, but does not know precisely each bidder’s valuation.
Auction design is challenging since the valuations are private and bidders need to be encouraged to report their valuations truthfully. The auctioneer aims at designing an incentive compatible auction that maximizes revenue.
While auction design has existed as a subfield of economic theory for several decades, complete characterizations of the optimal auction only exist for a few settings.
Myerson resolved the optimal auction design problem when
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5664

