The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Model of Winners Allocation
Yongjie Yang
Chair of Economic Theory, Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
yyongjiecs@gmail.com

Abstract

which results in two sets of candidates. However, for some
kind of fairness, every applicant is only allowed to receive
at most one award, corresponding to that the two selected
winning committees are disjoint in our model. As each
type of awards has its own feature, the organizer may invite two committees to valuate the applicants.

We propose a model of winners allocation. In this model, we
are given are two elections where the sets of candidates may
intersect. The goal is to find two disjoint winning committees from respectively the two elections that are subjected to
certain reasonable restrictions. For our model, we first propose several desirable properties. Then, we investigate the
implication relationships among these properties. Finally, we
study the complexity of computing winners allocations providing these properties. For hardness results, we also study
some fixed-parameter algorithms.

Sister conferences organization. Suppose two sister conferences are going to be held soon and they have the same
submission deadlines. As the program committees of the
conferences share many common scholars, they want to
organize a cooperative review procedure to reduce their
workload. In this case, a meaningful review procedure
would be as follows. When submitting a paper, the authors are free to decide whether they are only interested
in one particular conference or they are indifferent of the
two conferences. Therefore, submitted papers are classified into two sets C1 and C2 which may intersect. However, the copyright policy allows each paper to be published in at most one of the conference proceedings.

Introduction
Multiwinner voting has attracted a considerable amount of
attention of AI community very recently, due to its significant and wide applications in many areas. Standard multiwinner voting aims to select exactly k winning candidates
based on the preferences of voters over candidates, where k
is a given integer. In this paper, we propose a model of winners allocation. In particular, in our model there are two
elections (C1 , V1 ) and (C2 , V2 ), where C1 and C2 are two
sets of candidates, and V1 and V2 are two multisets of votes
over C1 and C2 respectively. Given two nonnegative integers k1 and k2 , our model aims to select (allocate) two disjoint subsets w1 ⊆ C1 and w2 ⊆ C2 of cardinalities k1
and k2 respectively and of high quality, based on the votes
in V1 and V2 . The quality of the allocated candidates are
measured via certain utility functions. For simplicity, we
study only approval-based elections.
To see the applicability of our model, let us first consider
two special cases. When C1 ∩ C2 = ∅, our model is equivalent to performing two independent standard multiwinner
voting. Additionally, when one of k1 and k2 is 0, our model
is equivalent to performing one standard multiwinner voting. Besides these two special cases, in general our model is
relevant for several real-world applications.

Committee evaluations. Criticisms over the peer review
processes of many AI conferences have been posted a
number of times recently (see, e.g., (Brezis and Birukou
2020)), mainly triggered by the existence of high-quality
papers being rejected. It is speculated that a paper may receive different results when evaluated by two independent
committee members. To test this speculation, NIPS 2014
organizers select two independent program committees to
handle 10 percent of the submissions. The result more or
less confirms the speculation. Such a review procedure is
related to a special case of our model where C1 = C2
(each Ci , i ∈ [2], consists of the 10% of the submissions).
For our model, we study winners allocations that provide the maximum utilitarian/egalitarian/Nash social welfare (USW/ESW/NSW) or some envy-freeness properties,
and investigate their implication relationships. In addition,
we study the complexity of calculating a winners allocation belonging to these properties. Some of our results
are quite interesting. For instance, we prove that computing a (k1 , k2 )-winners allocation of maximum USW is
polynomial-time solvable as long as the utility functions
adopted by the two voting communities V1 and V2 are
(weakly) additive. The complexity is consistent with the
polynomial-time solvability of computing winning com-

Awards (grants) assignment. Assume that a community is
going to allocate two types of awards/grants to a number
of applicants (nominees), where each type of awards is
given to a respectively fixed number of applicants. Each
applicant may be eligible for one or two types of awards,
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5760

