The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visualizing NLP in Undergraduate Students’ Learning about Natural Language
Cecilia O. Alm, Alex Hedges
Rochester Institute of Technology
One Lomb Memorial Drive
Rochester, NY 14623
coagla@rit.edu, aph3032@rit.edu

Abstract

Litman (2016) noted the benefits for evaluating
education-oriented NLP systems extrinsically in class
settings, as opposed to intrinsic examination of the performance of a system component, or in a hypothetical
user lab experiment. Our application use case includes
language science undergraduate coursework, with the goal
to understand whether the extended Linguine system1 is
perceived as an effective learning mechanism when used
with new and originally designed case study assignments.
This study expanded on prior work, which provided a
detailed system description and introduced the use of case
studies (Alm, Meyers, and Prud’hommeaux 2017).
The system’s analyses apply open technologies, allowing
students to access automated natural language processing resources. Students put them to use creatively with corpus data
provided along with assignments. They used the resulting
summaries about language features in their data or visual
outputs with interpretable annotations to reflect on assigned
problems, alongside the AI models, including their benefits,
possible applications, and limits. Automated and machine
learning-based analyses of corpus input data are at the heart
of the system, whose outputs are displayed to the user as
archivable visuals. The summaries and visuals intend to facilitate students’ own creative reasoning over the outputs and
are created to be intuitively interpretable with brief clarifying text, e.g. when hovering over elements. Users may also
download output for continued self-exploration.
This work makes two main contributions: (1) We describe
our system, substantially extended for processing languageindependent input and meaning-oriented natural language
tasks. (2) We evaluate the learning experience by studying the robustness of the system innovations from the student perspective using novel learning materials in an IRBapproved study. In addition to reporting on the results from
evaluation with pilot assignments, we further discuss and
illustrate how students can explore critical issues, such as
models’ prejudice and unfairness, when using this framework in their learning.

We report on the use of open-source natural language processing capabilities in a web-based interface to allow undergraduate students to apply what they have learned about formal natural language structures. The learning activities encourage students to interpret data in new ways, think originally about natural language, and critique the back-end NLP
models and algorithms visualized on the user front end. This
work is of relevance to AI resources developed for education by focusing on inclusivity of students from many disciplinary backgrounds. Specifically, we comprehensively extended a web-based system with new resources. To test the
students’ reactions to NLP analyses that offer insights into
both the strengths and limitations of AI systems, we incorporated a range of automated analyses focused on languageindependent processing or meaning representations which
still represent challenges for NLP. We conducted a surveybased evaluation with students in open-ended case-based assignments in undergraduate coursework. Responses indicated
that the students reinforced their knowledge, applied critical
thinking about language and NLP applications, and used the
application not to solve the assignment for them, but as a
tool in their own effort to address the task. We further discuss how using interpretable visualizations of system decisions is an opportunity to learn about ethical issues in NLP,
and how making AI systems interpretable may broaden multidisciplinary interest in AI in early educational experiences.

Introduction
It is of growing importance in AI fields to ensure broad access to deployed models, libraries, and other resources for
users who can leverage their capabilities or explore their
limitations. By enabling users to apply an automated system to analyze language data, without requiring technical
knowledge in natural language processing, machine learning, or even computer programming experience, these resources can be scrutinized and used creatively in new areas
for problem solving. One domain of use that promises impact is education in the cognitive sciences, where language
is a primary data source, yet where students must face a shift
in thinking about language and learn about the complexities
of the underlying structures of natural language that are not
overtly apparent to us as language speakers and users.

Relevant Prior Work
Few examples of prior work have tried to make computational tools that process language more widely ac-

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15480

tinyurl.com/linguinedemo2020, github.com/ritlinguine

