The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Predicting Parking Availability from Mobile Payment Transactions with Positive
Unlabeled Learning
Jonas Sonntag,1,2∗ Michael Engel2 , Lars Schmidt-Thieme1
1

Information Systems and Machine Learning Lab, University of Hildesheim
2
Volkswagen Financial Services AG
jonas.sonntag@vwfs.io, michael.engel@vwfs.io, schmidt-thieme@ismll.uni-hildesheim.de
Abstract
Cruising for parking in city centers is a problem for many
motorists and for communities that need to reduce emissions.
A widespread provision of parking assistance to address this
problem requires a scalable system to generate availability
information. Existing approaches to estimate the availability of parking spaces use supervised learning and depend on
ground-truth labeling processes involving sensors or manual
data collection. This dependency constraints the widespread
roll-out and operation of such systems as the ground-truth
data collection for model training, monitoring and retraining is prohibitively expensive. We describe a parking availability prediction system for paid on-street parking zones that
does not depend on costly ground-truth labeling. The new approach uses solely data from parking ticket bookings via a
mobile phone app. Every parking transaction serves as an implicit signal for the availability of one parking spot shortly
before the booking. The system leverages this weak supervision signal by applying algorithms and metrics for positiveunlabeled learning (PU-learning). This approach enables the
deployment in diverse regions, as well as the scalable monitoring and retraining of models. We evaluate our framework
on a public dataset from Seattle.

Figure 1: Parking zones in Seattle. Each line corresponds to
one parking zone for which we aim to predict the availability
status.

parking zones and little published data on how large these
parking zones are or how many parking spaces they contain.
Most high-demand on-street parking spaces in city centers
and areas close to other points of interest are paid parking
zones and hence they represent a highly relevant scope for
availability prediction. An example for this parking zones
in Seattle is shown in Figure 1. In Seattle one parking zone
usually covers one street segment from one intersection to
the next.
Various supervised learning approaches have been proposed
that use data from sensors and cameras or parking meter
transactions as a central data source, respectively. The dependency of the supervised methods on costly labeled data
is a prohibitive factor to the widespread and sustainable deployment. Parking patterns are likely to vary between cites
and regions. Hence, any supervised parking availability prediction method would require an economical ground-truth
sampling scheme to validate the prediction quality when
a model is deployed in a different region than the one it
was trained on. Second, urban parking is arguably a nonstationary environment and data shifts are very likely to occur over time. The sustainable operation of a parking availability prediction system requires a scalable way to monitor
the quality of the parking-availability information and to retrain the models if the prediction quality decreases.
Our objective is to enable the widespread, economical,

Introduction
Cruising for parking is a major problem in urban areas.
Drivers waste time and energy when searching for parking.
The additional traffic causes congestion and the emissions
pollute the environment. To address these problems, cities
and companies alike work on smart parking systems, that
optimize the parking process. The critical input for smart
parking systems is accurate availability information, hence
prediction of parking availability is an active research field
in the transportation and applied machine learning domains.
We focus on the problem of determining the availability
of parking spaces in paid on-street parking zones which are
sometimes also called paid curb side parking areas. These
parking zones represent a set of parking spaces often covered by the same parking ticket machine. There is no standard for how city administrations divide streets into paid
∗
As part of the Volkswagen Financial Services AG researchers
program
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15408

