The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Domain General Face Forgery Detection by Learning to Weight
Ke Sun1 , Hong Liu2 , Qixiang Ye3 , Yue Gao4 ,
Jianzhuang Liu5 , Ling Shao6 , †Rongrong Ji1,7∗
1

Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China
2
National Institute of Informatics, Japan 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
Tsinghua University, China 5 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
6
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE 7 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
Training

Abstract

Testing
Training-Set Meta-test Set

Face2Face

In this paper, we propose a domain-general model, termed
learning-to-weight (LTW), that guarantees face detection performance across multiple domains, particularly the target
domains that are never seen before. However, various face
forgery methods cause complex and biased data distributions, making it challenging to detect fake faces in unseen
domains. We argue that different faces contribute differently
to a detection model trained on multiple domains, making
the model likely to fit domain-specific biases. As such, we
propose the LTW approach based on the meta-weight learning algorithm, which configures different weights for face
images from different domains. The LTW network can balance the model’s generalizability across multiple domains.
Then, the meta-optimization calibrates the source domain’s
gradient enabling more discriminative features to be learned.
The detection ability of the network is further improved
by introducing an intra-class compact loss. Extensive experiments on several commonly used deepfake datasets to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in detecting synthetic faces. Code and supplemental material are available at
https://github.com/skJack/LTW.

Training
-Set

DeepFake

FaceForensics++
DeepFake

Real

MetaSplit
Strategy

Random
Shuffle

FaceSwap

NeuralTexure

𝑓(𝜃)

Face2Face

Real

Real

FaceSwap

Metatest Set

DFDC

Celeb-DF

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed method for the general face forgery problem. The left part shows the training process, which is based on a meta-learning framework.
This framework randomly splits and shuffles a multi-source
domain dataset. During training, the meta-test set is generated based on the meta-split strategy. Then, the metaoptimization tries to learn a domain-invariant model, which
can be used in detecting unseen domains.

attribute manipulation, and expression swapping (Tolosana
et al. 2020; Mirsky and Lee 2020). Among these, identity swapping (also known as deepfake) is currently most
focused on by forgery methods. As such, several relevant
public benchmarks, such as FaceForensics++ (Rossler et al.
2019), Celeb-DF (Li et al. 2019), and DFDC (Dolhansky
et al. 2020), have been released to help develop and verify
reliable fake face detection algorithms.
However, the fake faces in the above mentioned datasets
were crafted in a relatively homogeneous manner. Thus, the
data distributions and face identities are roughly the same
for the training and test sets. In contrast, in real-world applications, a model trained on a given training set (source
domain) is always used on a very different test set (target
domain), which is often previously unseen.
While domain adaptation may be a solution, adapting the
knowledge learned from a source domain to target ones, it is
still unable to handle unseen target domains due to lack of
unseen training data. Therefore, generalized face forgery detection is less studied and more challenging because attackers can use unseen face manipulations to attack the existing
face recognition system. In this paper, we argue that domain

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant advances in face
recognition. In particular, technologies such as deep learning
have greatly improved the performance of this task. However, through sophisticated manipulation of face images, existing facial recognition systems are at risk of being crippled.
For instance, using recent GAN methods (Karras, Laine,
and Aila 2019; Goodfellow et al. 2014; Brock, Donahue,
and Simonyan 2018), it is possible to generate fake faces
that can fool the existing face recognition systems. Therefore, it is crucial to develop approaches that can distinguish
between real and fake faces, which has received a lot of attention from the research community.
The current research on face forgery detection mainly
consists of face manipulation and detection. The face manipulation focuses on generating fake faces for attacking the
face detection system. There are four main facial manipulations including entire face synthesis, identity swapping,
∗

Corresponding author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2638

