The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Unsupervised Opinion Summarization with Content Planning
Reinald Kim Amplayo, Stefanos Angelidis, Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
reinald.kim@ed.ac.uk, s.angelidis@ed.ac.uk, mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk

Input Reviews
1. Local dive bar experience! Authentic phoenix experience
squished behind the starbucks. Pros: Decent prices, $2 mystery
shots, clean bathroom ...
2. Cheap drinks, awesome bar staff, stiff pours ...
3. Cheap drinks, great happy hour (that’s ridiculously long and
cheap) ... I’ve only found great bartenders and patrons at this little
bar ...
4. It’s a local bar with no frills except pool table, bar, and friendly
people ... The sliding glass door with the little beach is what
makes this place awesome!!! ...
5. Bartender was friendly and made great shots, but the place
was full of regulars who made it impossible to have fun ...
6. Their Christmas decorations rival that of coach house but
without the Scottsdale crowd. You can find every type of person
hanging out here. The staff is friendly ...
7. ... reminds me of back home in the Mid West. Good times and
great spot to mingle and meet new people!
8. Lynn is the reason I continue to come back!! She is personable,
fun, and dedicated.

Abstract
The recent success of deep learning techniques for abstractive summarization is predicated on the availability of largescale datasets. When summarizing reviews (e.g., for products
or movies), such training data is neither available nor can be
easily sourced, motivating the development of methods which
rely on synthetic datasets for supervised training. We show
that explicitly incorporating content planning in a summarization model not only yields output of higher quality, but
also allows the creation of synthetic datasets which are more
natural, resembling real world document-summary pairs. Our
content plans take the form of aspect and sentiment distributions which we induce from data without access to expensive annotations. Synthetic datasets are created by sampling
pseudo-reviews from a Dirichlet distribution parametrized by
our content planner, while our model generates summaries
based on input reviews and induced content plans. Experimental results on three domains show that our approach outperforms competitive models in generating informative, coherent, and fluent summaries that capture opinion consensus.

Opinion Summary
The drinks here are well priced, especially during happy hour.
There is a large variety of regulars from various backgrounds and
ages. Great place to meet new people. The staff are great they
provide a nice judgement free environment and they aren’t stingy
on the pours.

Introduction
The large volume of online product reviews has led to the
proliferation of automatic methods for digesting their content in order to facilitate decision making. The fields of opinion mining and sentiment analysis (Pang and Lee 2008) have
offered various solutions, ranging from sentiment classification (Pang, Lee, and Vaithyanathan 2002), to aspect extraction (Mukherjee and Liu 2012), and aspect-based sentiment analysis (Pontiki et al. 2016). Beyond extracting
surface-level information (e.g., sentiment labels from reviews), effective summarization systems (Hu and Liu 2006)
are needed to succinctly convey opinions to users, e.g., to
condense multiple reviews for a given product and identify
which weaknesses and features to pay attention to.
Due to the absence of opinion summaries in review websites and the difficulty of annotating them on a large scale,
most previous work has relied on extractive approaches (Ku,
Liang, and Chen 2006; Paul, Zhai, and Girju 2010; Carenini,
Cheung, and Pauls 2013; Angelidis and Lapata 2018), where
parts of the input reviews are copied and arranged onto a

Figure 1: Yelp reviews about a local bar and corresponding
summary. Aspect-specific opinions are in color (e.g., drinks,
guests, staff), while less salient opinions are shown in italics.

summary. More recent methods (Chu and Liu 2019; Amplayo and Lapata 2020; Bražinskas, Lapata, and Titov 2019)
focus on generating abstractive summaries which can be
more informative and less redundant compared to cut-andpaste extracts. They consider an unsupervised learning setting where there are only documents (product or business
reviews) available without corresponding summaries. An intuitive solution to the lack of training data is to create synthetic summary-review pairs (Amplayo and Lapata 2020;
Bražinskas, Lapata, and Titov 2019) by sampling a review
from a corpus of product reviews, and pretending it is a summary.
Although synthetic datasets enable the use of supervised
training and have been found to produce higher quality
summaries than autoencoder-based methods (Chu and Liu

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12489

