The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Artificial Intelligence: Insights into How Youth Encounter and
Build Understanding of AI Concepts
Eric Greenwald,1 Maxyn Leitner,2 Ning Wang3
University of California, Berkeley, Lawrence Hall of Science1
University of Southern California, Institute for Creative Technologies2,3

eric.greenwald@berkeley.edu,1 mjohnson@ict.usc.edu,2 nwang@ict.usc.edu3

automating a wide range of intellectual processes (NRC,
2010). Rapid advances in the design and implementation of
AI systems to accomplish these kinds of automation have
led to the ever-expanding role for AI in society (Makridakis,
2017; Nadikattu, 2016). AI, it seems, is all around us.
Accordingly, AI is redefining the future of work within
the human-machine alliance (Guszcza, Lewis, & EvansGreenwood, 2017). Thus, proficiency in the language of AI
is key to a data-capable workforce that will continue to
innovate and support the AI-powered technology
infrastructure. All of today’s students will go on to live a life
heavily influenced by AI, and many will work in fields that
involve or are influenced by AI. It is no longer sufficient to
wait until students are in college to introduce AI concepts.
Rather, they must begin to work with AI algorithmic
problem solving and computational methods and tools in K12.
At the same time, while AI’s impact on society is
increasingly pervasive, and innovative educational
opportunities are being rapidly developed, there has been
preciously little research into how students, especially precollege aged students, construct an understanding of and
gain practice with core ideas in the field. As a result, there
is little possibility of grounding the design of learning
experiences in evidence-based accounts of how youth learn
AI concepts, how understanding progresses across concepts,
or what concepts are most appropriate for what age-levels.
In this paper, we discuss a cognitive interview study to
better understand how students learn AI concepts. The study
is part of a project that aims to develop game-based learning
environments to help students build AI competency, apply

Abstract
Artificial Intelligence’s impact on society is increasingly
pervasive. While innovative educational programs are being
developed, there has been little understanding of how
students, especially pre-college aged students, construct an
understanding of and gain practice with core ideas about AI
or what concepts are most appropriate for what age-levels. In
this paper, we discuss a cognitive interview study with
middle school and high school students to better understand
how students learn AI concepts. We aim to shed light on
questions including: what is the range of background
knowledge and experiences students are able to apply in
encountering AI concepts; what concepts are most readily
accessible and which are more challenging; what
misconceptions do students bring to bear on AI problems;
and how to help students approach AI concepts by leveraging
related concepts (such as mathematical and computational
thinking). Results from the exploratory study have the
potential to provide important insights into AI learning for
pre-college youth. These initial findings can inform further
investigations to ground the design of learning and
assessment in evidence-based learning progressions and
grade-level performance expectations.

Introduction
Math and computational thinking are two important skills
for the nation’s future workforce and are foundational to the
field of artificial intelligence (AI). Mathematics is
foundational to computer science, a field that combines
mathematics, engineering, and science (Denning, 2009).
Computational thinking (CT), encompassing a broad range
of mental tools and concepts from computer science, helps
people solve problems (e.g., diagnosing disease), design
systems (e.g., self-driving cars), understand human behavior
(e.g., speech recognition), and engage computers in
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15526

