The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Characterizing Deep Gaussian Processes via Nonlinear Recurrence Systems
Anh Tong1 , Jaesik Choi2, 3
1
2

Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
3
INEEJI
anhth@unist.ac.kr, jaesik.choi@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract

et al. 2018) studies the ergodicity of the Markov chain to
explain the pathology.
To explain such phenomena, we study a quantity which
measures the distance of any two layer outputs. We present
a new approach that makes use of the statistical properties of
the quantity passing from one layer to another layer. Therefore, our approach accurately captures the relations of the
distance quantity between layers. By considering kernel hyperparameters, our method recursively computes the relations of two consecutive layers. Interestingly, the recurrence
relations provide a tighter bound than that of (Dunlop et al.
2018) and reveal the rate of convergence to fixed points.
Under this unified approach, we further extend our analysis
to five popular kernels which are not analyzed yet before.
For example, the spectral mixture kernels do not suffer the
pathology. We further provide a case study in DGP, showing
the connection between our recurrence relations and learning DGPs.
Our contributions in this paper are: (1) we provide a new
perspective of the pathology in DGP under the lens of chaos
theory; (2) we show that the recurrence relation between layers gives us the rate of convergence to a fixed point; (3) we
give a unified approach to form the recurrence relation for
several kernel functions including the squared exponential
kernel function, the cosine kernel function, the periodic kernel function, the rational quadratic kernel function and the
spectral mixture kernel; (4) we justify our findings with numerical experiments. We use the recurrence relations in debugging DGPs and explore a new regularization on kernel
hyperparameters to learn zero-mean DGPs. 1

Recent advances in Deep Gaussian Processes (DGPs) show
the potential to have more expressive representation than that
of traditional Gaussian Processes (GPs). However, there exists a pathology of deep Gaussian processes that their learning
capacities reduce significantly when the number of layers increases. In this paper, we present a new analysis in DGPs by
studying its corresponding nonlinear dynamic systems to explain the issue. Existing work reports the pathology for the
squared exponential kernel function. We extend our investigation to four types of common stationary kernel functions.
The recurrence relations between layers are analytically derived, providing a tighter bound and the rate of convergence
of the dynamic systems. We demonstrate our finding with a
number of experimental results.

1

Introduction

Deep Gaussian Process (DGP) (Damianou and Lawrence
2013) is a new promising class of models which are constructed by a hierarchical composition of Gaussian processes. The strength of this model lies in its capacity to
have richer representation power from the hierarchical construction and its robustness to overfitting from the probabilistic modeling. Therefore, there have been extensive studies (Hensman and Lawrence 2014; Dai et al. 2016; Bui et al.
2016; Cutajar et al. 2017; Salimbeni and Deisenroth 2017;
Havasi, Hernández-Lobato, and Murillo-Fuentes 2018; Salimbeni et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2020; Ustyuzhaninov et al.
2020) contributing to this research area.
There exists a pathology, stating that the increase in the
number of layers degrades the learning power of DGP (Duvenaud et al. 2014). That is, the functions produced by DGP
priors become flat and cannot fit data. It is important to develop theoretical understanding of this behavior, and therefore to have proper tactics in designing model architectures
and parameter regularization to prevent the issue. Existing
work (Duvenaud et al. 2014) investigates the Jacobian matrix of a given model which can be analytically interpreted
as the product of those in each layer. Based on the connection between the manifold of a function and the spectrum
of its Jacobian, the authors show the degree of freedom is
reduced significantly at deep layers. Another work (Dunlop

2

Background

Notation Throughout this paper, we use the boldface as
vector or vector-value function. The superscript i.e. f (d) (x)
is the d-th dimension of vector-valued function f (x).

2.1

Deep Gaussian Processes

We study DGPs in composition formulation where GP layers
are stacked hierarchically. An N -layer DGP is defined as
fN ◦ fN −1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (x),

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

9915

See https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.09301 for an extended version

