The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Effective Slot Filling via Weakly-Supervised Dual-Model Learning
Jue Wang1 , Ke Chen1 , Lidan Shou1,2∗ , Sai Wu1 , Gang Chen1,2
1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
{zjuwangjue,chenk,should,wusai,cg}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Utterance: List flights from Atlanta

Slot filling is a challenging task in Spoken Language Understanding (SLU). Supervised methods usually require large
amounts of annotation to maintain desirable performance. A
solution to relieve the heavy dependency on labeled data is to
employ bootstrapping, which leverages unlabeled data. However, bootstrapping is known to suffer from semantic drift.
We argue that semantic drift can be tackled by exploiting the
correlation between slot values (phrases) and their respective
types. By using some particular weakly-labeled data, namely
the plain phrases included in sentences, we propose a weaklysupervised slot filling approach. Our approach trains two models, namely a classifier and a tagger, which can effectively
learn from each other on the weakly-labeled data. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach achieves better
results than standard baselines on multiple datasets, especially
in the low-resource setting.

1

to Toronto Friday

afternoon

Slot Tags: O

O

O

B-dep.loc O B-arr.loc B-dep.time I-dep.time

Phrases:

O

O

B

O

O B

B

I

Table 1: An example of annotation for slot filling.

Introduction

Slot filling is an essential and challenging task in Spoken Language Understanding (SLU). The task is usually interpreted
as a sequence tagging process, during which slot values,
in the form of short phrases (such as named entities), and
their corresponding slot types are annotated. For example, as
shown in Table 1, there are three slot values in the user utterance, namely “Atlanta”, “Toronto”, and “Friday afternoon”,
whose corresponding slot types are departure location, arrival
location, and departure time respectively.
Although some existing supervised approaches (Raymond
and Riccardi 2007; Yao et al. 2014; Mesnil et al. 2015) have
achieved good results on slot filling, they usually require
large amounts of annotated data, which is hardly available in
real-world applications. Actually, acquiring labels is costly,
and probably the biggest obstacle to the application of these
methods. This motivates the need for effective learning techniques that leverage unlabeled data.
Bootstrapping is a popular approach using unlabeled data.
The main idea is to extend new annotations based on existing
annotations. However, this method may quickly introduce
semantic drift (Curran, Murphy, and Scholz 2007): one mistaken label may cause even more wrong predictions in the
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13952

subsequent iterations, causing the semantics of slot types to
deviate from its original definition. For the running example in Table 1, a model could accidentally recognize both
location mentions (“Atlanta” and “Toronto”) as departure
locations. Such results are probably wrong because a person
can only be in one departure location at a time. With this error
undetected, the slot type departure location may gradually
drift from its original meaning. And in an extreme case, the
model may consider all location mentions to be of this type,
yet the loss could still be very small!
To avoid the above problem, we advocate leveraging some
special weakly-labeled data. Our approach relies on a key
observation that, compared to slot type and value annotations,
untyped plain phrases (i.e., text chunks, as shown at the
bottom of Table 1) are much easier to acquire, since almost
all phrases in a sentence (except for auxiliary words) can
be regarded as potential slot values. Given an utterance and
phrases included in it, we can always determine the slot type
for each phrase. For example, if a user wants to book an
airline ticket, the input utterance may contain phrases such
as the departure location, the arrival location, the departure
date and time, etc. With the plethora of off-the-shelf tools for
text chunking, phrases without slot labels can be collected in
large numbers.
In this paper, we assume that the dataset is partially annotated, that is, only a small number of utterances are properly
labeled with both slot values and their respective slot types,
while the rest are all weakly-labeled with phrases. To tackle
semantic drift, which typically appears as wrong slot type in
our task output, we propose a solution comprising two models in their own task formulations: a Classifier that predicts
the slot type given a phrase (slot value), and a Tagger that
predicts the phrase (slot value) given a slot type. We design a
novel training target on which both models can be collaboratively trained using plain phrases without slot labels. The
need for preventing semantic drift justifies our dual-model
approach, since, only if the two models produce consistent

