The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Cascade Network with Guided Loss and Hybrid Attention for Finding Good
Correspondences
Zhi Chen, Fan Yang, Wenbing Tao ∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing
School of Artifical Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{hust zhichen, hust fanyang, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Precisiom\recall

Finding good correspondences is a critical prerequisite in
many feature based tasks. Given a putative correspondence
set of an image pair, we propose a neural network which
finds correct correspondences by a binary-class classifier and
estimates relative pose through classified correspondences.
First, we analyze that due to the imbalance in the number
of correct and wrong correspondences, the loss function has
a great impact on the classification results. Thus, we propose
a new Guided Loss that can directly use evaluation criterion
(Fn-measure) as guidance to dynamically adjust the objective function during training. We theoretically prove that the
perfect negative correlation between the Guided Loss and Fnmeasure, so that the network is always trained towards the direction of increasing Fn-measure to maximize it. We then propose a hybrid attention block to extract feature, which integrates the Bayesian attentive context normalization (BACN)
and channel-wise attention (CA). BACN can mine the prior
information to better exploit global context and CA can capture complex channel context to enhance the channel awareness of the network. Finally, based on our Guided Loss and
hybrid attention block, a cascade network is designed to gradually optimize the result for more superior performance. Experiments have shown that our network achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on benchmark datasets. Our code will be
available in https://github.com/wenbingtao/GLHA.

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

20

40

60

P of CE-loss

R of CE-loss

P of IB-CE-loss

R of IB-CE-loss

80

100 120
iter/k

140 160

180 200

Figure 1: The training curves of different loss functions
with same network on YFCC100M&SUN3D dataset. In this
dataset, the number ratio of positive and negative samples is
about 1 : 10. The imbalance of precision and recall occurs
on the network using the above two loss functions.

and divides them into inliers (positive class) and outliers
(negative class) and estimates relative pose , i.e., essential
matrix (E matrix) (Hartley and Zisserman 2004).
Due to various reasons (e.g., wide-baseline and illumination/scale changes), the number of outliers in the putative
correspondence set is much larger than inliers, which usually results in a class imbalance problem of binary classification. As shown in Fig. 1, we train the same network (CN-Net
(Moo Yi et al. 2018) is used) with two commonly used loss
functions, including cross entropy loss (CE-Loss) and instance balance cross entropy loss (IB-CE-Loss) (Deng et al.
2018) on a class imbalance dataset, and present the training curves of precision and recall. These two loss functions
can alleviate the class imbalance problem to some extent in
some tasks, such as object classification (He et al. 2016) and
segmentation (Chen et al. 2017). However, they lack a direct connection with precision and recall, making the network
unable to dynamically adjust the bias of precision and recall. Fig. 1 has demonstrated that, even though the precision
and recall have been severely unbalanced during training,
the loss functions can not adjust training direction to narrow
the gap between precision and recall. In fact, too low either
precision or recall will lead to inaccurate relative pose estimation (Hartley and Zisserman 2004). Thus, balanced precision and recall are very important.

Introduction
Two view geometry estimation, i.e., establishing reliable
correspondences and estimating relative pose between an
image pair, is the fundamental component of many tasks
in computer vision, such as Structure from Motion (SfM)
(Schonberger and Frahm 2016; Snavely, Seitz, and Szeliski 2006), simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM)
(Benhimane and Malis 2004) and so on. Recently, some
methods (Moo Yi et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2019; Ma et al.
2019) cast the task of finding correct correspondences as a
binary classification problem and solve it by neural network.
Specifically, these methods first obtain a putative correspondence set of an image pair by extracting local features and
matching. Then the network takes the putative set as input
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1123

