The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

EvaLDA: Efficient Evasion Attacks Towards Latent Dirichlet Allocation
Qi Zhou,1∗ Haipeng Chen, 2∗† Yitao Zheng, 1 Zhen Wang 1†
1

School of Cyberspace, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
Center for Research on Computation and Society & Department of Computer Science,
Harvard University, Cambridge 02138, MA, USA
zhouqi@hdu.edu.cn, hpchen@seas.harvard.edu, zhengyitao@hdu.edu.cn, wangzhen@hdu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
As one of the most powerful topic models, Latent Dirichlet
Allocation (LDA) has been used in a vast range of tasks, including document understanding, information retrieval and
peer-reviewer assignment. Despite its tremendous popularity,
the security of LDA has rarely been studied. This poses severe
risks to security-critical tasks such as sentiment analysis and
peer-reviewer assignment that are based on LDA. In this paper, we are interested in knowing whether LDA models are
vulnerable to adversarial perturbations of benign document examples during inference time. We formalize the evasion attack
to LDA models as an optimization problem and prove it to
be NP-hard. We then propose a novel and efficient algorithm,
EvaLDA to solve it. We show the effectiveness of EvaLDA
via extensive empirical evaluations. For instance, in the NIPS
dataset, EvaLDA can averagely promote the rank of a target
topic from 10 to around 7 by only replacing 1% of the words
with similar words in a victim document. Our work provides
significant insights into the power and limitations of evasion
attacks to LDA models.

Introduction
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is one of the most powerful topic models. Due to its superiority in discovering the
latent topics of documents, it has been the underlying technique in a vast range of tasks, including scientific publication understanding (Griffiths and Steyvers 2004; Talley et al.
2011), information retrieval (Harvey, Crestani, and Carman
2013), and peer-reviewer assignment (Charlin and Zemel
2013; Liu, Suel, and Memon 2014). Despite the great successes, the security of LDA-based systems has rarely been
investigated. Security-critical tasks based on LDA, such as
sentiment analysis and peer-reviewer assignment, are therefore at high risk of being manipulated by carefully designed
adversarial attacks. For instance, by promoting the rank of a
target topic for an article, it may end up in hands of colluded
reviewers who are experts in the target topic. Recent studies
show that machine learning (ML) methods are highly vulnerable to adversarial samples with simple and yet evasive
perturbations to the benign input data (Szegedy et al. 2014;
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

14602

Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2015). In this paper, we
are interested in knowing – are LDA models vulnerable to
crafted adversarial samples?
There are in general two types of adversarial attacks to ML
models, namely poisoning attacks and evasion attacks (Barreno et al. 2010). Poisoning attacks aim to mislead a ML
model by manipulating the training data, while evasion attacks craft malicious samples to mislead a trained ML model
during test time. While there has been pioneer work (Mei
and Zhu 2015) studying poisoning attacks to LDA models,
no efforts have been made on investigating evasion attacks to
LDA models. We present the first study of this kind. More
specifically, we study evasion attacks to LDA models that are
trained/inferred using the predominant Monte Carlo simulation based method called Collapsed Gibbs Sampling (CGS).1
Though evasion attacks of general ML models have been
massively studied (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017; Xiao et al. 2018; Ling et al. 2019),
the unique characteristics of LDA models poses several new
challenges on performing evasion attacks to them. First, the
input of an LDA model is a document, and is essentially
textual data. Different from evasion attacks in domains like
images (Nguyen, Yosinski, and Clune 2015; Carlini and Wagner 2017), textual data are intrinsically discrete, thus incurring higher difficulties to find optimal perturbations to benign
samples. Second, because the input of an LDA model is an
entire document, the strategy space of crafting a malicious
document is huge, especially with a large document. Last and
most importantly, unlike general ML models which usually
infer the output via a simple forward pass (e.g., in neural
networks and decision trees) from the input, the inference
procedure of CGS-based LDA models involves a much more
complicated Monte Carlo simulation process. This makes
the gradient-based style attacks infeasible and trial-and-error
style attacks extremely inefficient. 2
In recent years, studies on evasion attacks to ML models for NLP tasks have drawn great attention from both the
1
Another popular training/inference method for LDA models is
the Variational Inference (VI) method. The two methods are distinct
in the training/inference procedure. We focus on CGS based LDA
models and leave VI based LDA models for future work.
2
Note that the inference procedure for VI based LDA models is
essentially an optimization. Therefore evasion attack to VI based
LDA models is equally, if not more challenging.

