The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Local Neighboring Structure for Robust 3D Shape Representation
Zhongpai Gao1 , Junchi Yan1 , Guangtao Zhai1,2∗ , Juyong Zhang3 , Yiyan Yang1 , Xiaokang Yang1
1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China
{gaozhongpai, yanjunchi, zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn, juyong@ustc.edu.cn, {jamson, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract

effective definition of convolutional operation analogous to
that on Euclidean structured data is important for 3D shape
representation learning.
Recently, many graph convolutional networks have been
developed to handle irregular graph data and achieved
promising results. Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
(2016) designed fast localized convolutional filters on
graphs using Chebyshev expansion based on spectral graph
theory, called ChebNet. The spectral filters are isotropic
to overcome the irregularity of graph data. ChebNet is an
efficient generalization of CNNs to graphs. Ranjan et al.
(2018) built convolutional mesh autoencoder (COMA) for
3D meshes with fixed topology upon ChebNet and introduced mesh sampling operations that enable a hierarchical representation to capture non-linear variations of human
faces. However, compared to CNN, isotropic filters used in
ChebNet limit the representation power.
In order to introduce anisotropic filters on graph convolutions, Bouritsas et al. (2019) formulated a spiral convolution operator (SpiralNet) that defines a explicit order of
the neighbors via a spiral scan for each vertex on 3D meshes
with fixed topology. However, serializing the local neighbors
of vertices by following a spiral cannot resolve the inconsistency between different nodes. Furthermore, this method
requires manually assigning a starting point to determine the
order of neighbors, which is difficult to make the local coordinate system consistent across meshes. The selection of the
starting point may affect the performance of the spiral convolution operator. Explicitly defining the order of neighbors
cannot efficiently exploit the irregular structure of graphs.
PointCNN (Li et al. 2018b) proposed to learn an X transformation from the input points to weight and permute
each point’s neighbors into a latent and potentially canonical
order. KPConv (Thomas et al. 2019) presented a convolutional operation that weights each point’s neighbors depending on the Euclidean distances to a set of predefined or deformable kernel points. Subsequently, these methods apply
anisotropic filters on the resampled neighbors to extract features for point clouds. However, different from 3D meshes,
point clouds do not have a fixed topology and the neighbors are obtained through a K-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm. The methods designed for point clouds do not consider the unique characteristics of 3D meshes, which limits
the representation power for 3D meshes.

Mesh is a powerful data structure for 3D shapes. Representation learning for 3D meshes is important in many computer
vision and graphics applications. The recent success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for structured data (e.g.,
images) suggests the value of adapting insight from CNN
for 3D shapes. However, 3D shape data are irregular since
each node’s neighbors are unordered. Various graph neural
networks for 3D shapes have been developed with isotropic
filters or predefined local coordinate systems to overcome
the node inconsistency on graphs. However, isotropic filters
or predefined local coordinate systems limit the representation power. In this paper, we propose a local structure-aware
anisotropic convolutional operation (LSA-Conv) that learns
adaptive weighting matrices for each node according to the
local neighboring structure and performs shared anisotropic
filters. In fact, the learnable weighting matrix is similar to the
attention matrix in the random synthesizer – a new Transformer model for natural language processing (NLP). Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our model produces
significant improvement in 3D shape reconstruction compared to state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Representation learning for 3D meshes is crucial for many
3D tasks, e.g., reconstruction (Genova et al. 2018; Tran and
Liu 2018; Gao et al. 2020), shape correspondence (Groueix
et al. 2018), shape synthesis and modeling (Cao et al. 2014;
Xie et al. 2018), face recognition (Liu et al. 2018) and shape
segmentation (Donlic et al. 2017; Kalogerakis, Hertzmann,
and Singh 2010), and graphics applications such as virtual
avatar (Cao, Hou, and Zhou 2014). Inspired by the great success of convolutional neural networks (CNN) in the fields
of natural language processing (1-D), image classification
(2-D), and radiographic image analysis (3-D) where underlying data are Euclidean structured, deep neural networks
on 3D meshes have recently driven significant interests. Directly applying CNN on 3D meshes is a challenge since they
are non-Euclidean structured and are usually represented as
graphs in which the number and orientation of each node’s
neighbors vary from one to another (node inconsistency). An
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1397

