The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Over-MAP: Structural Attention Mechanism and Automated Semantic
Segmentation Ensembled for Uncertainty Prediction
Charles A. Kantor,1,2,3 Léonard Boussioux,1,3,5 Brice Rauby3,6 and Hugues Talbot3,4
1

KLASS, AI Research (AIR)* , 2 MILA, Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada,
3
Paris-Saclay University, (ECP) CentraleSupélec Paris, Greater Paris, France, 4 INRIA, France,
5
Operations Research Center, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA, 6 Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
ckantor@fas.harvard.edu

leobix@mit.edu

Contribution

Abstract

For deep networks to become truly useful, they need to come
with some metric that tells the user how confident in their
predictions they are (Osband 2016). In this way, if a network
is given as input something that they have never trained on,
they might reply that the input is unknown (Blundell et al.
2015). In short, these networks need to be aware of what
they do not know (Nalisnick et al. 2018). If the input is corrupted, ambiguous or noisy, the network should also reply
that it is hesitant to conclude. This ought to be done without
training the network on every possible contingency, which
is impossible by definition (Kendall and Gal 2017).
Reporting confidence and uncertainty is critical in many
systems. For example, diagnostic systems require knowing
how reliable a reported classification is (De Fauw et al.
2018). This is even more so the case of fine-grained classification since reliable classification must often rely on tiny
details (Soni, Shah, and Moore 2020).
In this work, we advance a new confidence measure called
Over-MAP that utilizes structural attention mechanisms, visual explanations from deep networks and segmentation
methods, of particular interest to accurate fine-grained classification. We apply our methodology for real-world problems starting with large scale crowdsourced and collected
data. Also of practical interest in the field of medical imaging, we specifically applied our uncertainty prediction tool
in the context of wildlife analytics. Our deep learning methods offer opportunities for population monitoring. We developed accurate computer vision algorithms and proposed
fine-grained classification innovations, now in deployment
process on global platforms, to encourage the model to focus on areas of an image that are salient for identification.

Both theoretical and practical problems in deep learning classification require solutions for assessing uncertainty prediction but current state-of-the-art methods in this area are computationally expensive. In this paper, we propose a new confidence measure dubbed Over-MAP that utilizes a measure
of overlap between structural attention mechanisms and segmentation methods, that is of particular interest in accurate
fine-grained contexts. We show that this classification confidence increases with the degree of overlap. The associated
confidence and identification tools are conceptually simple,
efficient, and of high practical interest as they allow for weeding out misleading examples in training data. Our measure is
currently deployed in the real-world on widely used platforms
to annotate large-scale data efficiently.

Introduction
The vast majority of deep-learning systems today operate
mostly as black-boxes (Castelvecchi 2016; Achille, Paolini,
and Soatto 2019), meaning that it is difficult to track how and
why such systems make decisions. Reasons for this unfortunate state of affairs include the large number of parameters
in such networks; the considerable amount of data necessary for training these networks; the practical difficulties of
curating the training data to ensure that all relevant cases are
included; sensitivity to noise, poor annotations and adversarial attacks (Jin, Dundar, and Culurciello 2015); variation in
input; and much more.
Besides, deep-learning and, more generally, AI systems
operate in an uncertain world that is very different from
the policed variability introduced in most benchmarks. As a
trivial example, systems trained on ImageNet can only recognize elements within the thousand of its training classes.
While performance may be excellent within that set, it falls
to zero for any class element missing in the training set.

Related Work
Deep Neural Networks often provide good estimators for
prediction tasks; however, producing a reliable, stable and
trustworthy result is complicated and sometimes elusive. Establishing trust and explainability, the latter being a network’s capacity to explain its results, is a way forward.
In fine-grained classification, the problem is compounded

* KLASS AI Research (AIR), www.klass.global
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15316

