The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Dual-Mandate Patrols: Multi-Armed Bandits for Green Security
Lily Xu,1 Elizabeth Bondi,1 Fei Fang,2 Andrew Perrault,1 Kai Wang,1 Milind Tambe1
1

Harvard University
Carnegie Mellon University
{lily xu, ebondi, aperrault, kaiwang}@g.harvard.edu, feif@cs.cmu.edu, milind tambe@harvard.edu
2

Abstract
Conservation efforts in green security domains to protect
wildlife and forests are constrained by the limited availability
of defenders (i.e., patrollers), who must patrol vast areas to
protect from attackers (e.g., poachers or illegal loggers). Defenders must choose how much time to spend in each region
of the protected area, balancing exploration of infrequently
visited regions and exploitation of known hotspots. We formulate the problem as a stochastic multi-armed bandit, where
each action represents a patrol strategy, enabling us to guarantee the rate of convergence of the patrolling policy. However, a naive bandit approach would compromise short-term
performance for long-term optimality, resulting in animals
poached and forests destroyed. To speed up performance, we
leverage smoothness in the reward function and decomposability of actions. We show a synergy between Lipschitzcontinuity and decomposition as each aids the convergence
of the other. In doing so, we bridge the gap between combinatorial and Lipschitz bandits, presenting a no-regret approach that tightens existing guarantees while optimizing for
short-term performance. We demonstrate that our algorithm,
LIZARD, improves performance on real-world poaching data
from Cambodia.

1

Figure 1: Rangers searching for snares (right) near a waterhole (left) in Srepok Wildlife Sanctuary in Cambodia. The
waterhole is frequented by deer, pig, and bison, which are
targeted by poachers.
However, many protected areas lack adequate and unbiased past patrol data, disabling us from learning a reasonable adversary model in the first place (Moreto and Lemieux
2015). As one of many examples, Bajo Madidi in the Bolivian Amazon was newly designated as a national park in
2019 (Berton 2020). The park is plagued with illegal logging, and patrollers do not have historical data from which
to make predictions. The defenders do not want to spend patrol effort solely on information gathering; they must simultaneously maximize detection of attacks. As green security
efforts get deployed on an ever-larger scale in hundreds of
protected areas around the world (Xu et al. 2020), addressing this information-gathering challenge becomes crucial.
Motivated by these practical needs, we focus on conducting dual-mandate patrols1 , with the goal of simultaneously detecting illegal activities and collecting valuable
data to improve our predictive model, achieving higher longterm reward. The key challenge with dual-mandate patrols is
the exploration–exploitation tradeoff: whether to follow the
best patrol strategy indicated by historical data or conduct
new patrols to get a better understanding of the attackers.
Some recent work proposes using multi-armed bandits to
formulate the problem (Xu, Tran-Thanh, and Jennings 2016;
Gholami et al. 2019). Despite their advances, we show that
these approaches require unrealistically long time horizons
to achieve good performance. In the real world, these initial
losses are less tolerable and can lead to stakeholders aban-

Introduction

Green security efforts to protect wildlife, forests, and fisheries require defenders (patrollers) to conduct patrols across
protected areas to guard against attacks (illegal activities)
(Lober 1992). For example, to prevent poaching, rangers
conduct patrols to remove snares laid out to trap animals
(Fig. 1). Green security games have been proposed to apply
Stackelberg security games, a game-theoretic model of the
repeated interaction between a defender and an attacker, to
domains such as the prevention of illegal logging, poaching,
or overfishing (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015). A growing
body of work develops scalable algorithms for Stackelberg
games (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009; Blum, Haghtalab, and Procaccia 2014). Subsequent work has focused
more on applicability to the real-world, employing machine
learning to predict attack hotspots then using game-theoretic
planning to design patrols (Nguyen et al. 2016; Gholami
et al. 2018).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

14974

Code available at https://github.com/lily-x/dual-mandate.

