The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

LightXML: Transformer with Dynamic Negative Sampling for High-Performance
Extreme Multi-label Text Classification
Ting Jiang1 , Deqing Wang1 , Leilei Sun1,∗ , Huayi Yang1 , Zhengyang Zhao1 , Fuzhen Zhuang2,3
1
SKLSDE and BDBC Lab, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of CAS, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Theory and Technology, Academy for Multidisciplinary Studies, Capital
Normal University, Beijing, China
{royokong, dqwang, leileisun, yanghy, zzy979}@buaa.edu.cn, zhuangfuzhen@ict.ac.cn
2

Abstract

cent years. From the perspective of text representation learning, these methods could be divided into two categories: 1)
Raw feature methods, where texts are represented by sparse
vectors and feed to classifiers directly; 2) Semantic feature
methods, where deep neural networks are usually employed
to transfer the texts into semantic representations before the
classification procedure.

Extreme Multi-label text Classification (XMC) is a task of
finding the most relevant labels from a large label set. Nowadays deep learning-based methods have shown significant
success in XMC. However, the existing methods (e.g., AttentionXML and X-Transformer etc) still suffer from 1) combining several models to train and predict for one dataset,
and 2) sampling negative labels statically during the process of training label ranking model, which reduces both
the efficiency and accuracy of the model. To address the
above problems, we proposed LightXML, which adopts endto-end training and dynamic negative labels sampling. In
LightXML, we use generative cooperative networks to recall and rank labels, in which label recalling part generates
negative and positive labels, and label ranking part distinguishes positive labels from these labels. Through these networks, negative labels are sampled dynamically during label
ranking part training by feeding with the same text representation. Extensive experiments show that LightXML outperforms state-of-the-art methods in five extreme multi-label
datasets with much smaller model size and lower computational complexity. In particular, on the Amazon dataset with
670K labels, LightXML can reduce the model size up to
72% compared to AttentionXML. Our code is available at
http://github.com/kongds/LightXML.

The superiority of XMC methods with semantic features
have been frequently reported recently. For example, AttentionXML (You et al. 2019) and X-Transformer (Chang
et al. 2020) have achieved significant improvements in accuracy comparing to the state-of-the-art methods. However,
the challenge of how to solve the XMC problem with the
constraint computational resources still remains, both AttentionXML and X-Transformer need large computational
resources to train or to implement. AttentionXML needs
to train four seperate models for big XMC datasets like
Amazon-670K. In X-Transformer, it uses a large transformer model for recalling labels, and simple linear classifications are used to rank labels. Both methods split the training process into multiple stages, and each stage needs a separate model to train, which takes a lot of computational resources. Another disadvantage of these methods is the static
negative label sampling. Both methods train label ranking
model with negative labels sampled by fine-tuned label recalling models. This negative sampling strategy makes label
ranking model only focus on a small number of negative labels, and hard to converge due to these negative labels are
very similar to positive labels.

Introduction
Extreme Multi-label text Classification (XMC) is a task of
finding the most relevant labels for each text from an extremely large label set. It is a very practical problem that
has been widely applied in many real-world scenarios, such
as tagging a Wikipedia article with most relevant labels
(Dekel and Shamir 2010), dynamic search advertising in Ecommerce (Prabhu et al. 2018), and suggesting keywords to
advertisers on Amazon (Chang et al. 2020).
Different from the classical multi-label classification
problem, the candidate label set could be very large, which
results in a huge computational complexity. To overcome
this difficulty, many methods (e.g., Parabel (Prabhu et al.
2018), DiSMEC (Babbar and Schölkopf 2017) and AttentionXML (You et al. 2019) etc) have been proposed in re-

To address the above problems, we propose a light
deep learning model, LightXML, which fine-tunes single
transformer model with dynamic negative label sampling.
LightXML consists of three parts: text representing, label
recalling, and label ranking. For text representing, we use
multi-layer features of the transformer model as text representation, which can prove rich text information for the other
two parts. With the advantage of dynamic negative sampling,
we propose generative cooperative networks to recall and
rank labels. For the label recalling part, we use the generator network based on label clusters, which is used to recall
labels. For the label ranking part, we use the discriminator
network to distinguish positive labels from recalled labels.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7987

