The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SAT-based Decision Tree Learning for Large Data Sets
André Schidler and Stefan Szeider
Algorithms and Complexity Group, TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
aschidler@ac.tuwien.ac.at, sz@ac.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract

Morgado 2020). Indeed, in many cases, these exact methods
produce decision trees that are significantly smaller in size
or depth than the decision trees found by standard heuristic
algorithms. However, the exact methods can only be applied
to relatively small data sets. The currently best method is
due to Avellaneda (2020). It is capable of producing decision
trees of a depth up to 12.
Constraint programming has been used to optimize different properties of decision trees. While we search for trees of
low depth that correctly classify the data set, these approaches
try to minimize the number of misclassifications subject to
constraints on the depth (Bertsimas and Dunn 2017; Verwer
and Zhang 2019; Verhaeghe et al. 2020) or with penalties on
trees with a large number of leaves (Hu, Rudin and Seltzer
2019).
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to learning
decision trees of low depth. We combine the scalability of
heuristic methods with the strength of encoding-based exact methods, thus taking the best of the two worlds. Our
approach follows the principle of SAT-based Local Improvement (SLIM) which starts with a solution provided by a fast
heuristic. It then repeatedly applies a SAT-based exact method
locally to improve the solution. SLIM has shown to be effective in graph decomposition problems (Lodha, Ordyniak and
Szeider 2017b; Fichte, Lodha and Szeider 2017; Lodha, Ordyniak and Szeider 2017a; Ganian et al. 2019) and Bayesian
network structure learning (Ramaswamy and Szeider 2021).
SLIM is similar to Large Neighborhood Search (Pisinger and
Ropke 2010), where SLIM distinguishes itself by combining
a structurally constrained notion of neighbourhood with a
complete method (SAT).
Key to our approach is a suitable notion of a local instance I 0 , generated from a subtree T 0 of a given decision
tree T , so that we can utilize a new decision tree T 00 for I 0
of lower depth than T 0 to reduce the depth of T . To make
this work, we introduce new classification categories which
guarantee that certain samples end up in the same leaves
of T 00 . This allows us to insert subtrees copied from T at
these leaves, obtaining a new global decision tree T ∗ (Theorem 1). By adding certain weights to the new classification
categories, we can ensure that by decreasing the depth locally,
we can eventually decrease the depth globally (Theorem 2).
Because of the new classification categories and the
weights, a local instance poses a more complex classification

Decision trees of low depth are beneficial for understanding
and interpreting the data they represent. Unfortunately, finding
a decision tree of lowest depth that correctly represents given
data is NP-hard. Hence known algorithms either (i) utilize
heuristics that do not optimize the depth or (ii) are exact but
scale only to small or medium-sized instances. We propose
a new hybrid approach to decision tree learning, combining
heuristic and exact methods in a novel way. More specifically,
we employ SAT encodings repeatedly to local parts of a decision tree provided by a standard heuristic, leading to a global
depth improvement. This allows us to scale the power of exact
SAT-based methods to almost arbitrarily large data sets. We
evaluate our new approach experimentally on a range of realworld instances that contain up to several thousand samples. In
almost all cases, our method successfully decreases the depth
of the initial decision tree; often, the decrease is significant.

Introduction
Decision trees are among the oldest, and most widely used
tools for the description, classification, and generalization of
data (Murthy 1998). Since decision trees are easy to understand and interpret, they can contribute to the general objective of explainable and interpretable AI (Gilpin et al. 2018).
In this context, one prefers decision trees of low depth as they
are easier to understand and interpret (Molnar 2019). In view
of the parsimony principle, low depth decision trees have a
better chance to generalize over additional samples (Bessiere,
Hebrard and O’Sullivan 2009). Since low depth decision trees
require fewer tests per sample, they are strongly preferred in
applications like in medical diagnosis where tests might be
costly, risky, or intrusive (Podgorelec et al. 2002).
Unfortunately, finding a decision tree of lowest depth that
correctly classifies a given data set is NP-hard (Hyafil and
Rivest 1976). Consequently, the standard heuristic methods
for decision tree learning like C4.5 (Quinlan 1993) or ITI (Utgoff, Berkman and Clouse 1997), which are fast and scale
to large data sets, do not find decision trees of lowest depth.
Therefore, several exact methods have been proposed that encode the problem into SAT or CSP and use SAT/CSP solvers
to find an optimal tree (Bessiere, Hebrard and O’Sullivan
2009; Narodytska et al. 2018; Avellaneda 2020; Janota and
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3904

