The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Diagnose Like A Pathologist: Weakly-Supervised Pathologist-Tree Network for
Slide-Level Immunohistochemical Scoring
Zhen Chen1 * , Jun Zhang2∗ , Shuanlong Che3 , Junzhou Huang2 , Xiao Han2† , Yixuan Yuan1†
1

City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
KingMed Diagnostics, Guangzhou, China
zchen.ee@my.cityu.edu.hk, junejzhang@tencent.com,shuanlong2008@sina.com, joehhuang@tencent.com,
haroldhan@tencent.com, yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
The immunohistochemistry (IHC) test of biopsy tissue is
crucial to develop targeted treatment and evaluate prognosis
for cancer patients. The IHC staining slide is usually
digitized into the whole-slide image (WSI) with gigapixels
for quantitative image analysis. To perform a whole image
prediction (e.g., IHC scoring, survival prediction, and
cancer grading) from this kind of high-dimensional image,
algorithms are often developed based on multi-instance
learning (MIL) framework. However, the multi-scale information of WSI and the associations among instances are
not well explored in existing MIL based studies. Inspired
by the fact that pathologists jointly analyze visual fields
at multiple powers of objective for diagnostic predictions,
we propose a Pathologist-Tree Network (PTree-Net) to
sparsely model the WSI efficiently in multi-scale manner.
Specifically, we propose a Focal-Aware Module (FAM) that
can approximately estimate diagnosis-related regions with
an extractor trained using the thumbnail of WSI. With the
initial diagnosis-related regions, we hierarchically model
the multi-scale patches in a tree structure, where both the
global and local information can be captured. To explore
this tree structure in an end-to-end network, we propose a
patch Relevance-enhanced Graph Convolutional Network
(RGCN) to explicitly model the correlations of adjacent
parent-child nodes, accompanied by patch relevance to
exploit the implicit contextual information among distant
nodes. In addition, tree-based self-supervision is devised
to improve representation learning and suppress irrelevant
instances adaptively. Extensive experiments are performed
on a large-scale IHC HER2 dataset. The ablation study
confirms the effectiveness of our design, and our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art by a large margin.

Figure 1: Typical patterns cropped from IHC stained WSIs
with 0 to 3+ HER2 scores. The intensity and completeness of
cell membrane staining are key evidence for HER2 scoring.

teins amplification in the cells and on cell surfaces, the immunohistochemistry (IHC) test of biopsy tissue is recommended to measure the severity of BC, which is decisive
for the further treatment and prognosis of patients. Particularly, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is
a typical IHC diagnostic marker, which is widely used as
a therapeutic target. However, the diagnosis of BC requires
pathologists to perform visual inspection under the microscope, which is tedious and time-consuming. Moreover, the
diagnostic accuracy and both inter-/intra-observer reliability
are affected by the pathologists’ experience.
Recently, several deep learning based approaches (Zhu
et al. 2017; Tokunaga et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2020) have
been developed to assess the whole-slide images (WSIs).
WSI is created from glass slides using specialized scanning machines (Farahani, Parwani, and Pantanowitz 2015),
which can preserve the IHC slides for reproducible diagnosis. A typical WSI usually contains gigapixels, which
makes it difficult to be processed by convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) directly. To overcome this challenge, existing works adopted multi-instance learning (MIL), where
each WSI is divided into a bag of image patches to estimate the target of the whole slide. In fact, the tissue regions (e.g., invasive tumor regions in HER2 scoring) that
contribute to the diagnosis are usually sparse, compared
with the large-size WSI. Some works (Wang et al. 2019;
Zhao et al. 2020) required regions-of-interest (ROIs) annotations for WSI dataset, which is impractical in application scenarios. On the other hand, some other works randomly extracted patches (Courtiol et al. 2018; Hashimoto
et al. 2020) or integrated all patches of tissue (Campanella

Introduction
Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent type of cancer
among females worldwide, especially affecting women aged
20-59 years (Loibl and Gianni 2017). By revealing the pro* Equal contribution; †Corresponding authors.

This work was done when Z. Chen interned at Tencent AI Lab.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

47

