The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Physics-constrained Automatic Feature Engineering for Predictive Modeling in
Materials Science
Ziyu Xiang1 , Mingzhou Fan1 , Guillermo Vázquez Tovar2 , William Trehem2 , Byung-Jun Yoon1,4 ,
Xiaofeng Qian2 , Raymundo Arroyave2 , Xiaoning Qian1,3
1

Electrical & Computer Engineering, 2 Materials Science & Engineering, 3 Computer Science & Engineering,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843,
4
Computational Science Initiative, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973
Abstract

neering (AFE) (Khurana et al. 2016; Kaul, Maheshwary,
and Pudi 2017) has attracted much attention in recent literature. For example, many black-box deep neural network
based AFE models (Long, Lu, and Cui 2019; Fan et al. 2019)
have shown their great potential to improve the corresponding ML algorithms’ performance and be general to be implemented on different datasets without too much additional
manual labor. However, on one hand, the brute force way to
generate and select features by exhausting the possible feature transformations takes too much time and is difficult to
scale up with the number of original raw features. On the
other hand, a good interpretability to the generated features
is usually hard to attain through such black-box methods.
For the materials science problems we study in this paper, finding the actuating mechanisms of a certain property
or function and describing it in terms of a set of physically
meaningful variables is the desired scientific solution (Ghiringhelli et al. 2015). Such a set of physical variables with
corresponding parameters that uniquely describe the material and its function of interest, can be denoted as “descriptors”. One of the purposes of discovering descriptors
in materials-science data, is to predict a target functional
property of interest for a given complete class of materials
(Ghiringhelli et al. 2017). Hence, AFE for materials science
faces two main challenges to build better ML models: a good
interpretability of the engineered descriptors from raw features, and the scalability and efficiency to select important
descriptors from the often enormous generated feature space
for the given target of interest.
A fundamental paradigm in materials science is the
existence of causal relationships–typically referred to as
Process-Structure-Property (PSP) relationships–that connect processing (i.e., the modifications to a material current state), structure (i.e., the multi-scale arrangement of the
material), and properties (i.e., the response of the material
to an external stimulus). The navigation of this PSP space
is enormously resource-intensive, regardless of whether this
query is on physical experiments or computational ones. As
a result, it often takes more than two decades to identify,
develop, and finally deploy a novel material in real-world
applications—a key bottleneck that Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) tried to resolve. Attempting to use physicsagnostic machine learning methods to infer these relation-

Automatic Feature Engineering (AFE) aims to extract useful knowledge for interpretable predictions given data for the
machine learning tasks. Here, we develop AFE to extract dependency relationships that can be interpreted with functional
formulas to discover physics meaning or new hypotheses for
the problems of interest. We focus on materials science applications, where interpretable predictive modeling may provide
principled understanding of materials systems and guide new
materials discovery. It is often computationally prohibitive to
exhaust all the potential relationships to construct and search
the whole feature space to identify interpretable and predictive features. We develop and evaluate new AFE strategies
by exploring a feature generation tree (FGT) with deep Qnetwork (DQN) for scalable and efficient exploration policies. The developed DQN-based AFE strategies are benchmarked with the existing AFE methods on several materials
science datasets.

Introduction
Feature engineering (FE) is to create features that capture
hidden dependency relationships in data and improve the
prediction performances of machine learning (ML) algorithms (Brownlee 2014). It usually involves two steps: generating new feature representations by transforming the original raw or primary features in the given dataset, and selecting those engineered features that are important (interpretable and predictive) for the ML tasks. Such prepossessing pipelines and data transformations are crucial and often take most of the actual efforts in deploying ML algorithms (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013; Heaton 2016).
However, traditional FE is a labor-intensive and timeconsuming task, which requires complex exercises being
performed in an iterative manner with trial and error,
driven by domain knowledge developed over time (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013; Khurana et al. 2016). Thus
such methods are usually problem-specific and not generally
applicable to different datasets, limiting their direct adoption in corresponding applications, especially when both domain knowledge and available training data are scarce. Compared to traditional FE methods, Automated Feature EngiCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10414

