The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interactive Speech and Noise Modeling for Speech Enhancement
Chengyu Zheng1 * , Xiulian Peng2 , Yuan Zhang1 , Sriram Srinivasan3 , Yan Lu 2
1

Communication University of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
Microsoft Corporation
zhengchengyu@cuc.edu.cn, xipe@microsoft.com, yzhang@cuc.edu.cn, Sriram.Srinivasan@microsoft.com,
yanlu@microsoft.com
Abstract
Speech enhancement is challenging because of the diversity
of background noise types. Most of the existing methods are
focused on modelling the speech rather than the noise. In
this paper, we propose a novel idea to model speech and
noise simultaneously in a two-branch convolutional neural
network, namely SN-Net. In SN-Net, the two branches predict speech and noise, respectively. Instead of information fusion only at the final output layer, interaction modules are
introduced at several intermediate feature domains between
the two branches to benefit each other. Such an interaction
can leverage features learned from one branch to counteract the undesired part and restore the missing component of
the other and thus enhance their discrimination capabilities.
We also design a feature extraction module, namely residualconvolution-and-attention (RA), to capture the correlations
along temporal and frequency dimensions for both the speech
and the noises. Evaluations on public datasets show that the
interaction module plays a key role in simultaneous modeling and the SN-Net outperforms the state-of-the-art by a large
margin on various evaluation metrics. The proposed SN-Net
also shows superior performance for speaker separation.

Figure 1: Illustration of different methods. (a) Most existing deep-learning-based methods directly model speech. (b)
Most traditional methods predict speech with noise estimate.
(c) Our method simultaneously models speech and noise
with information interaction.
Instead of only predicting speech and ignoring the characteristics of background noises, traditional signal processing
and modeling based methods mostly take the other way (see
Figure 1 (b)), i.e. estimating noise or building noise models
for speech enhancement (Boll 1979; Hendriks, Heusdens,
and Jensen 2010; Wang and Brookes 2017; Wilson et al.
2008; Mohammadiha, Smaragdis, and Leijon 2013). Some
model-based methods instead model both speech and noise
(Srinivasan, Samuelsson, and Kleijn 2005b,a), possibly with
alternate model update. However, they typically cannot generalize well when prior noise assumption cannot be met or
the interference signal is not structured. In deep-learningbased methods, two recent attempts (Odelowo and Anderson
2017, 2018) focus on directly predicting noise considering
that noise is dominant in low-SNR conditions. However, the
benefit is limited.
The remaining correlation between predicted speech and
noise motivates us to explore the information flow between
speech and noise estimations, as shown in Figure 1 (c).
Since speech-related information exists in predicted noise,
and vice versa, adding information communication between
them may help to recover some missing components and
remove undesired information from each other. In this paper, we propose a two-branch convolutional neural network,
namely SN-Net, to simultaneously predict speech and noise
signals. Between them are information interaction modules, by which noise or speech related information are extracted from the noise branch and added back to speech features to counteract the undesired noise part or recover the

Introduction
Speech enhancement aims at separating speech from background interference signals. Mainstream deep learningbased methods learn to predict the speech signal in a supervised manner, as shown in Figure 1 (a). Most prior works
operate in the time-frequency (T-F) domain by predicting a
mask between noisy and clean spectra (Wang, Narayanan,
and Wang 2014; Williamson, Wang, and Wang 2015) or directly predicting the clean spectrum (Xu et al. 2013; Tan and
Wang 2018). Some methods operate in the time domain by
estimating speech signals from raw-waveform noisy signals
in an end-to-end way (Fu et al. 2017; Pascual, Bonafonte,
and Serra 2017; Pandey and Wang 2019). These methods
have considerably improved the quality of enhanced speech
compared with traditional signal processing based schemes.
However, speech distortion or residual noise can often be
observed in the enhanced speech, showing that there are still
correlations between predicted speech and the residual signal by subtracting enhanced speech from noisy signal.
* The work was done at Microsoft Research Asia.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14549

