The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Accurate and Interpretable Decision Rule Sets from Neural Networks
Litao Qiao∗ , Weijia Wang∗ , Bill Lin
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego
l1qiao@eng.ucsd.edu, wweijia@eng.ucsd.edu, billlin@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract

interpretable models is the use of decision rule sets (Cohen
1995; Su et al. 2015; Lakkaraju, Bach, and Leskovec 2016;
Wang et al. 2017; Dash, Günlük, and Wei 2018), where the
model comprises an unordered set of independent logical
rules in disjunctive normal form (DNF). Decision rule sets
are inherently interpretable because the rules are expressed
in simple IF-THEN sentences that correspond to logical
combinations of input conditions that must be satisfied for a
classification. An example of a decision rule set with three
clauses is as follows:

This paper proposes a new paradigm for learning a set of
independent logical rules in disjunctive normal form as an
interpretable model for classification. We consider the problem of learning an interpretable decision rule set as training
a neural network in a specific, yet very simple two-layer architecture. Each neuron in the first layer directly maps to an
interpretable if-then rule after training, and the output neuron
in the second layer directly maps to a disjunction of the firstlayer rules to form the decision rule set. Our representation
of neurons in this first rules layer enables us to encode both
the positive and the negative association of features in a decision rule. State-of-the-art neural net training approaches can
be leveraged for learning highly accurate classification models. Moreover, we propose a sparsity-based regularization approach to balance between classification accuracy and the
simplicity of the derived rules. Our experimental results show
that our method can generate more accurate decision rule sets
than other state-of-the-art rule-learning algorithms with better
accuracy-simplicity trade-offs. Further, when compared with
uninterpretable black-box machine learning approaches such
as random forests and full-precision deep neural networks,
our approach can easily find interpretable decision rule sets
that have comparable predictive performance.

IF
THEN

(age ≤ 50) OR
(NOT smoker) OR
(cholesterol ≤ 130 AND blood pressure ≤ 120)
low heart disease risk.

In this example, the model would predict someone to
have a low risk for heart disease if the person’s cholesterol
level and blood pressure are below the specified thresholds. The model not only provides a prediction, but the
corresponding matching rule also provides an explanation
that humans can easily understand. In particular, the explanations are stated directly in terms of the input features,
which can be categorical (e.g., color equal to red, blue, or
green) or numerical (e.g., age ≤ 50) attributes, where the
binary encoding of categorical and numerical attributes is
well-studied (Wang et al. 2017; Dash, Günlük, and Wei
2018).
In this paper, we propose a new paradigm for learning
accurate and interpretable decision rule sets as a neural network training problem. In particular, we consider the problem of learning an interpretable decision rule set as training a
neural network in a simple two-layer fully-connected neural
network architecture called a Decision Rules Network (DRNet). In the first layer, called the Rules Layer, each trainable neuron with binary activation directly maps to a logical
IF-THEN rule after training, where a positive input weight
corresponds to a positive association of the input feature, a
negative input weight corresponds to a negative association
of the input feature, and a zero weight corresponds to an exclusion of the input feature. In the second layer, called the
OR Layer, the trainable output neuron with binary activation directly maps to a disjunction of the first-layer rules to
form the decision rule set.
By formulating the interpretable rules learning problem

Introduction
Machine learning is finding its way to impact every sector of our society, including healthcare, information technology, transportation, entertainment, business, and criminal
justice. In recent years, machine learning using neural networks have made tremendous advances in solving perceptual tasks like computer vision and natural language processing, with breakthrough performance in classification accuracy and generalization capability. However, neural network
methods have generally produced black box models that are
difficult or impossible for humans to understand. Their lack
of interpretability makes it difficult to gain public trust for
their use in high-stakes human-centered applications like
medical-diagnosis and criminal justice, where decisions can
have serious consequences on human lives (Rudin 2019).
Indeed, interpretability is a well-recognized goal in the
machine learning community. One popular approach to
∗

The two authors contributed equally to this paper.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4303

