The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Latent Independent Excitation for Generalizable Sensor-based Cross-Person
Activity Recognition
Hangwei Qian, Sinno Jialin Pan, Chunyan Miao
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{hangwei.qian, sinnopan, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

from wearable sensors. As the activity recognition applications become more and more pervasive, constructing a
model that works well for different persons becomes increasingly important. Some state-of-the-art models improve
the model capacity by improving feature learning capabilities with multiple neural network modules such as Convolutional Neural Networks, Recurrent Neural Networks
and Autoencoders (Yang et al. 2015; Morales and Roggen
2016a; Qian et al. 2019). These models work well when the
training and test data have overlapping data distributions,
which are achieved by splitting data of each participant into
both training and test sets (Micucci, Mobilio, and Napoletano 2016). Nevertheless, this kind of training/test split is
rather impractical in real world applications, as it is almost
impossible to annotate sufficient training data for every new
user. What’s worse, the accuracy of such models plummets
when applied to data collected from new unseen participants, indicating lack of generality across different persons.

In wearable-sensor-based activity recognition, it is often assumed that the training and the test samples follow the same
data distribution. This assumption neglects practical scenarios where the activity patterns inevitably vary from person
to person. To solve this problem, transfer learning and domain adaptation approaches are often leveraged to reduce the
gaps between different participants. Nevertheless, these approaches require additional information (i.e., labeled or unlabeled data, meta-information) from the target domain during
the training stage. In this paper, we introduce a novel method
named Generalizable Independent Latent Excitation (GILE)
for human activity recognition, which greatly enhances the
cross-person generalization capability of the model. Our proposed method is superior to existing methods in the sense that
it does not require any access to the target domain information. Besides, this novel model can be directly applied to various target domains without re-training or fine-tuning. Specifically, the proposed model learns to automatically disentangle
domain-agnostic and domain-specific features, the former of
which are expected to be invariant across various persons. To
further remove correlations between the two types of features,
a novel Independent Excitation mechanism is incorporated in
the latent feature space. Comprehensive experimental evaluations are conducted on three benchmark datasets to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over state-ofthe-art solutions.

To tackle the distribution discrepancies among different
persons, transfer learning and domain adaptation methods
are proposed in the literature (Pan and Yang 2010). Transfer learning methods typically train a model from multiple source domains and then adapt to the target domain.
In order to avoid negative transfer, additional information is
more or less required from the target domain, such as annotated or unlabeled data, or other meta-information (e.g., the
class label proportion) (Morales and Roggen 2016b; Wang
et al. 2018; Khan, Roy, and Misra 2018; Wilson, Doppa,
and Cook 2020). With the auxiliary information representing the target domain, it is possible to fine-tune the models to adapt to the target domain (Buffelli and Vandin 2020;
Rokni, Nourollahi, and Ghasemzadeh 2018; Mazankiewicz,
Böhm, and Bergés 2020). In the meanwhile, features can be
mapped to a common subspace in order to reduce domain
gap (Bai et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2018). From the literature,
transfer-based approaches are demonstrated to be effective
to reduce domain gaps. However, these existing approaches
have a notable limitation, that is, in the case of multiple target domains, the models need to be re-trained for each target domain. Domain generalization approaches aim to learn
generalizable features from several related source domains,
to make the model work well on previously unseen domains
during test time (Khosla et al. 2012; Li et al. 2017). While
many methods have been designed for computer vision ap-

Introduction
With the development of ubiquitous wearable sensors, such
as mobile phones, smart watches and sports bracelets, human activity recognition has become one of the most crucial techniques in a wide range of real-world applications,
such as healthcare, gait analysis, assisted living, security
and smart homes (Chen et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2019;
Janidarmian et al. 2017; Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014;
Lara and Labrador 2013). The goal of activity recognition
is to classify the activities conducted by the participants via
machine learning algorithms. Generally, there are two types
of scenarios: wearable-sensor-based and video-based settings (Wang et al. 2019). In this work, we focus on wearablesensor-based human activity recognition, in which the raw
data is composed of streams of sensor readings received
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11921

