The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Curriculum-Meta Learning for Order-Robust Continual Relation Extraction
Tongtong Wu1∗ , Xuekai Li1 , Yuan-Fang Li2 , Gholamreza Haffari2 , Guilin Qi1† ,
Yujin Zhu3 , Guoqiang Xu3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
2
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
3
Gamma Lab, Ping An OneConnect, Shanghai, China
{wutong8023,lxk,gqi}@seu.edu.cn, {yuanfang.li,Gholamreza.Haffari}@monash.edu,
{zhuyujin204, xuguoqiang371}@ocft.com

Abstract

Catastrophic Forgetting (CF) is a well-known problem in
continual learning (?). The problem is that when a neural
network is utilized to learn a sequence of tasks, the learning
of the later tasks may degrade the performance of the learned
model for the previous tasks. Various recent works tackle the
CF problem, including consolidation-based methods (??),
dynamic architecture methods (??), or memory-based methods (???). These methods have been demonstrated in simple image classication tasks. Yet the memory-based methods have been proven to be the most promising for NLP
applications. EA-EMR (?) proposes a sentence embedding
alignment mechanism in memory maintenance and adopt
it to continual relation extraction learning. Based on EAEMR, MLLRE (?) introduces a meta-learning framework
for fast adaptation and EMAR (?) introduces a multi-turn cotraining procedure for memory-consolidation. Most of these
methods explore CF problem in the overall performance of
task sequences, but they lack the insight analysis of the characteristics of each subtask and the corresponding model performance.
Order-sensitivity (OS) is another major problem in continual learning, which is relatively under-explored (??). It
refers to the phenomenon that the performance of tasks
varies based on the order of the task arrival sequence. This is
due to not only the CF incurred by the different sequences of
previous tasks but also the unidirectional knowledge transfer from the previous tasks. Order-sensitivity can be problematic in various aspects: (i) ethical AI considerations in
continual learning, e.g. fairness in the medical domain (?);
(ii) bench-marking of continual learning algorithms as most
of the existing works pick an arbitrary and random sequence
of the given tasks for evaluation (?); (iii) uncertainty to the
quality of extracted knowledge in the realistic scenario for
knowledge base population, where the model is faced with
only one sequence.
In this paper, we introduce the curriculum-meta learning (CML) method to tackle both the catastrophic forgetting
and order-sensitivity problems. Taking a memory-based approach, CML is based on the following observations about
the catastrophic forgetting and order sensitivity issues of the
previous works: (i) over-fitting to the experience memory,
indicating that the performance on any task will decrease as

Continual relation extraction is an important task that focuses
on extracting new facts incrementally from unstructured text.
Given the sequential arrival order of the relations, this task
is prone to two serious challenges, namely catastrophic forgetting and order-sensitivity. We propose a novel curriculummeta learning method to tackle the above two challenges
in continual relation extraction. We combine meta learning
and curriculum learning to quickly adapt model parameters
to a new task and to reduce interference of previously seen
tasks on the current task. We design a novel relation representation learning method through the distribution of domain and range types of relations. Such representations are
utilized to quantify the difficulty of tasks for the construction of curricula. Moreover, we also present novel difficultybased metrics to quantitatively measure the extent of ordersensitivity of a given model, suggesting new ways to evaluate
model robustness. Our comprehensive experiments on three
benchmark datasets show that our proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art techniques. The code is available at
https://github.com/wutong8023/AAAI-CML.

Introduction
Relation extraction (?) aims at extracting structured facts as
triples from unstructured text. As an essential component of
information extraction, relation extraction has been widely
utilized in downstream applications such as knowledge base
construction (?) and population (?). However, given the continuous and iterative nature of the update process, continual
relation extraction (??) is a more realistic and useful setting. Yet due to the limitations of storage and computational
resources, it is impractical to grant the relation extractor access to all the training instances in previously seen tasks.
Thus, this continual learning formulation is in contrast to
the conventional relation extraction setting where the extractor is generally trained from scratch with the full access to
the training corpus.
∗
This work has been done by Tongtong Wu during the visiting
period at Monash University, and the original idea was generated
in the internship at Gamma Lab, Ping An OneConnect.
†
Contact author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10363

