The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Image Captioning with Context-Aware Auxiliary Guidance
Zeliang Song,1,2 Xiaofei Zhou,1,2∗ Zhendong Mao,3 Jianlong Tan1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
{songzeliang, zhouxiaofei}@iie.ac.cn, zdmao@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Image captioning is a challenging computer vision task,
which aims to generate a natural language description of an
image. Most recent researches follow the encoder-decoder
framework which depends heavily on the previous generated words for the current prediction. Such methods can not
effectively take advantage of the future predicted information to learn complete semantics. In this paper, we propose
Context-Aware Auxiliary Guidance (CAAG) mechanism that
can guide the captioning model to perceive global contexts.
Upon the captioning model, CAAG performs semantic attention that selectively concentrates on useful information of
the global predictions to reproduce the current generation. To
validate the adaptability of the method, we apply CAAG to
three popular captioners and our proposal achieves competitive performance on the challenging Microsoft COCO image
captioning benchmark, e.g. 132.2 CIDEr-D score on Karpathy split and 130.7 CIDEr-D (c40) score on official online
evaluation server.

Figure 1: Comparison between (a) traditional captioner and
(b) our CAAG. The traditional captioner depends solely on
the previous generated words when predicting the current
word. Our method can take advantage of the future predictions to guide model learning.

algorithm (Williams and Zipser 1989) to maximize the loglikelihood of the next ground-truth word. This training approach creates a mismatch between training and inference
called “exposure bias” (Ranzato et al. 2015). During the
training phase, the model takes the ground-truth word as the
current input, while in the inference phase, the input can be
only sampled from the last time step. Recently, it has shown
that REINFORCE algorithm (Williams 1992) can avoid exposure bias through directly optimizing non-differentiable
sequence-level metrics, and has become a common component in the field of image captioning.
However, the existing image captioning methods depend
solely on the previous generated words when conducting the
current prediction, which will lead to the model learning
incomplete semantics. As illustrated in Figure 1, the traditional captioner predicts the current word based on the partial generated sentence “A boy is” during training. With the
incomplete information, the caption decoder tends to learn
by remembering experiences rather than by understanding
the scenes, and will easily generate incorrect word (e.g.
“standing”) when encountering similar situations in the inference stage. Therefore, the future predictions “baseball
game” may contain more critical information for current
word, and should be considered to improve the scene understanding ability of captioning model.
In order to better understand the scenes, we propose

Introduction
Image captioning is to automatically generate natural language descriptions of an input image, which is a challenging
task and also draws increasing attention in both computer
vision and natural language processing fields. The ability of
describing like humans for machine is important since it can
be widely applied to cross-modal retrieval (Karpathy, Joulin,
and Li 2014; Vo et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2019) and humanrobot interactions (Wu et al. 2018; Erden and Tomiyama
2010; Schmidt, Mael, and Wurtz 2006).
Most recent image captioning approaches follow the
encoder-decoder framework (Vinyals et al. 2015) which employs convolutional neural network (CNN) to encode images to visual features and utilizes recurrent neural network (RNN) decoder to generate captions. Inspired by the
recent success of employing attention in machine translation (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2015), the spatial attention mechanism is proposed in (Xu et al. 2015) to attend to
the salient regions of an image while generating captions.
These methods are typically trained by “Teacher-Forcing”
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2584

