The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Membership Privacy for Machine Learning Models Through Knowledge Transfer
Virat Shejwalkar and Amir Houmansadr
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{vshejwalkar, amir}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract

et al. 2017) which is the focus of our work. An MIA adversary with a blackbox or whitebox access to a target model
aims to determine if a given target sample belonged to
the private training data of the target model or not. MIAs
are able to distinguish the members from non-members by
learning the behavior of the target model on member versus
non-member inputs. They use different features of the target
model for this classification, e.g., model predictions (Shokri
et al. 2017), model loss, and gradients of the model parameters for given input (Nasr et al. 2019). MIAs are particularly
more effective against deep neural networks (Shokri et al.
2017; Salem et al. 2019), because, with their large capacities, such models can better memorize their training data.
Recent work has investigated several defenses against
membership inference attacks. In order to provide the worst
case privacy guarantees, Differential Privacy (DP) based defenses add very large amounts of noise to the learning objective or model outputs (Papernot et al. 2017, Chaudhuri et
al. 2011). This results in models with unacceptable tradeoffs between privacy and utility (Jayaraman et al. 2019),
therefore questioning their use in practice. Sablayrolles et
al. (2019) showed that membership privacy is a weaker notion of privacy than DP, which improves with generalization
of ML models. Similarly, Nasr et al. (2018) proposed adversarial regularization targeted to defeat MIAs by improving
the target model’s generalization. However, as we demonstrate, the adversarial regularization and other state-of-theart regularizations, including label smoothing (Szegedy et al.
2016) and dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014), fail to provide acceptable membership privacy-utility tradeoffs (simply called
‘tradeoffs’ here onward). Memguard (Jia et al. 2019), a
blackbox defense, improves model utility, but it cannot protect the model from whitebox MIAs and even the simple
threshold based MIAs (Yeom et al. 2018). In summary, existing defenses against MIAs offer poor tradeoffs between
model utility and membership privacy.
To this end, our work proposes a defense against MIAs
that significantly improves the tradeoffs compared to prior
defenses. That is, for a given degree of membership privacy (i.e., MIA resistance), our defense produces models
with significantly higher classification performances compared to prior defenses. Our defense, called Distillation for
Membership Privacy (DMP), leverages knowledge distillation (Hinton et al. 2014), which transfers the knowledge

Large capacity machine learning (ML) models are prone
to membership inference attacks (MIAs), which aim to infer whether the target sample is a member of the target
model’s training dataset. The serious privacy concerns due to
the membership inference have motivated multiple defenses
against MIAs, e.g., differential privacy and adversarial regularization. Unfortunately, these defenses produce ML models
with unacceptably low classification performances.
Our work proposes a new defense, called distillation for membership privacy (DMP), against MIAs that preserves the utility of the resulting models significantly better than prior defenses. DMP leverages knowledge distillation to train ML
models with membership privacy. We provide a novel criterion to tune the data used for knowledge transfer in order to
amplify the membership privacy of DMP.
Our extensive evaluation shows that DMP provides significantly better tradeoffs between membership privacy and
classification accuracies compared to state-of-the-art MIA
defenses. For instance, DMP achieves ∼100% accuracy
improvement over adversarial regularization for DenseNet
trained on CIFAR100, for similar membership privacy (measured using MIA risk): when the MIA risk is 53.7%, adversarially regularized DenseNet is 33.6% accurate, while DMPtrained DenseNet is 65.3% accurate. We have released our
code at github.com/vrt1shjwlkr/AAAI21-MIA-Defense.

Introduction
The remarkable performance of machine learning (ML) in
solving many classification tasks has facilitated its adoption
in various domains ranging from recommendation systems
to critical health-care management. Many ML-as-a-Service
platforms (e.g., Google API, Amazon AWS) enable novice
data owners to train ML models and release the models either as a blackbox prediction API or as model parameters
that can be accessed in whitebox fashion.
ML models are often trained on data with sensitive user
information such as clinical records and personal photos.
Hence, ML models trained using sensitive data can leak
private information about their data owners. This has been
demonstrated through various inference attacks (Fredrikson
et al. 2015, Hitaj et al. 2017, Carlini et al. 2018), and most
notably the membership inference attack (MIA) (Shokri
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9549

