The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Path to Automating Ocean Health Monitoring
Mak Ahmad,1 J. Scott Penberthy,2 Abigail Powell3
1

UC Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Google, Mountain View, CA, USA
3
Lynker Technologies under contract to NOAA Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, WA, USA
shahmad@ucdavis.edu, scottpenberthy@google.com, abigail.powell@noaa.gov
2

Abstract

contributes to the identification and cataloging of species,
enabling scientists to study trends over time in ocean health.
The goal of this study is to design an applied machine
learning (ML) application that leverages Google’s TensorFlow framework to classify coral species for NOAA. The
application uses a fine tuned Inception v3 CNN ML model
to classify species from coral images. We analyze test results and various TensorFlow parameters to show the significance of fine tuning the model. This paper will provide a
complete ML solution (using coral classification) to be used
by field scientists. This solution could be extended to detect coral health automatically. An autonomous underwater
drone could capture coral images and send them to a central
database where the images could be analyzed by our application. This approach would be a significant step towards the
larger goal of monitoring ocean health automatically.
Starting in 2007 Northwest Fisheries Science Center
(NWFSC) survey scientists began collecting clippings from
corals collected during trawl surveys for genetic analysis
and photos of whole specimens for field identification purposes. These collections have resulted in increased knowledge about the distribution and abundance of corals and sea
pens along the western coast of the U.S. Although this has
resulted in range extensions and discovery of new species,
each encounter needs to be classified by either expert taxonomists or by genetic methods. The problem is that this
process takes significant time and resources, resulting in delays in providing timely data on the distribution and health
of these organisms. We aim to develop an automated classification system which aids the classification process on the
vessel.

Marine ecosystems directly and indirectly impact human
health, providing benefits such as essential food sources,
coastal protection and biomedical compounds. Monitoring
changes in marine species is important because impacts such
as overfishing, ocean acidification and hypoxic zones can
negatively affect both human and ocean health. The US
west coast supports a diverse assemblage of deep-sea corals
that provide habitats for fish and numerous other invertebrates. Currently, National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) scientists manually track the health of coral
species using extractive methods. In this paper, we test the
viability of using a machine learning algorithm Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to automatically classify coral
species, using field-collected coral images in collaboration
with NOAA. We fine tune the hyperparameters of our model
to surpass the human F-score. We also highlight a scalable
opportunity to monitor ocean health automatically while preserving corals.

Introduction
Deep-sea corals are a widespread and diverse group that
provide complex habitats for many other species (Roberts,
Wheeler, and Freiwald 2006). They are distributed in cold
water from 4-12°C and can occur as individual colonies
or in dense aggregations. Deep-sea coral ecosystems have
been shown to be important spawning, nursery and feeding grounds for numerous associated fish species (D’Onghia
2019). Despite their important functional roles, deep-sea
corals are vulnerable to damage caused by fishing and
changing environmental conditions including rising ocean
temperatures and acidity. Monitoring changes in the deepsea is challenging but important as the health of the oceans is
inextricably linked to human health. In addition to providing
seafood, the ocean also removes atmospheric CO2 and regulates global temperature, thereby affecting our weather, agriculture and water supply. Consequently, monitoring oceans’
health is essential to understanding how environmental
changes will impact humans. Improving ocean monitoring
technology may contribute to the global effort to maintain a
healthy environment for all life. For example, coral imaging

Related Work
NWFSC scientists are currently doing manual classification
on coral samples, as shown in Figure 1, based on reference
documents to identify species.
There have been some efforts such as the Video and Image Analytics for Marine Environments (VIAME) to classify fish and scallops however none to classify coral automatically (Dawkins et al. 2017). Coral classification is difficult: many types of corals look alike or are only identified
by microscopic characteristics, and some surveys, such as
those that utilize bottom trawls, often only retrieve pieces of
damaged species, making them difficult to identify.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15240

