The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimation of Spectral Risk Measures
Ajay Kumar Pandey, 1 Prashanth L. A., 1 Sanjay P. Bhat 2
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
TCS Research, Hyderabad, India, and Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai,
India
ajaykp@cse.iitm.ac.in, prashla@cse.iitm.ac.in, sanjay.bhat@tcs.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a spectral risk measure
(SRM) from i.i.d. samples, and propose a novel method that
is based on numerical integration. We show that our SRM
estimate concentrates exponentially when the underlying distribution has bounded support. Further, we also consider the
case when the underlying distribution satisfies an exponential moment bound, which includes sub-Gaussian and subexponential distributions. For these distributions, we derive a
concentration bound for our estimation scheme. We validate
the theoretical findings on a synthetic setup, and in a vehicular
traffic routing application.

1

Introduction

Conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) is a popular measure in the
context of risk-sensitive optimization. CVaR is the expectation of a random variable (r.v.) (usually the loss in a financial
application) conditioned on the r.v. exceeding the value-atrisk (VaR). The latter is a high-probability upper bound on
the random loss that could be incurred. The advantage of employing CVaR instead of VaR in a risk-sensitive optimization
setting is that CVaR is a coherent risk measure (Artzner et al.
1999), while VaR is not.
Spectral risk measures (SRM), proposed in (Acerbi 2002),
generalize VaR and CVaR. SRM uses a ‘risk-aversion’ function to assign a weight to each loss. Note that VaR gives
a zero weight for each loss beyond a given quantile, while
CVaR assigns a constant weight in the tail region beyond
VaR. In contrast, SRMs can assign larger weights to higher
losses, and thus model a user’s risk attitude better. Moreover,
SRMs satisfy coherency provided the risk-aversion function
is positive, increasing and integrates to one.
In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the
SRM of a r.v., given independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) samples from the underlying distribution. In this context, our contributions are as follows: First, we provide a
natural estimation scheme for SRM that uses the empirical
distribution function (EDF) to estimate quantiles, together
with a trapezoidal rule-based approximation to the integral in
the definition of the SRM. Second, we provide concentration
bounds for our proposed SRM estimate for the following two
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12166

cases: first, when the underlying distribution is assumed to
have bounded support; and second, when the distribution satisfies an exponential moment bound. The latter class includes
sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential distributions (Wainwright
2019). Third, we perform simulation experiments to show the
efficacy of our proposed SRM estimation scheme. In particular, we consider a synthetic setup, and show that our scheme
provides accurate estimates of SRM. Next, we incorporate
our SRM estimation scheme in the inner loop of the successive rejects (SR) algorithm (Audibert, Bubeck, and Munos
2010), which is a popular algorithm in the best arm identification framework for multi-armed bandits. We test the resulting
SR algorithm variant in a vehicular traffic routing application
using SUMO traffic simulator (Behrisch et al. 2011). The
application is motivated by the fact that, in practice, human
road users may not always prefer the route with lowest mean
delay. Instead, a route that minimizes worst-case delay, while
doing reasonably well on the average, is preferable, and such
a preference can be encoded into the risk aversion function
employed in SRMs.
Related work. In (Brown 2007; Wang and Gao 2010) concentration bounds for the classic CVaR estimator are derived
assuming that the underlying distribution has bounded support. Our bound, using a different estimator, exhibits a similar
rate of exponential convergence around true CVaR. For the
case of distributions with unbounded support, concentration
bounds for empirical CVaR have been derived recently in
(Kolla et al. 2019; Kagrecha, Nair, and Jagannathan 2019;
Bhat and Prashanth 2019; Prashanth, Jagannathan, and Kolla
2020). In (Kolla et al. 2019) (resp. (Bhat and Prashanth 2019;
Prashanth, Jagannathan, and Kolla 2020)), the authors derive
a one-sided concentration bound (resp. two-sided bounds),
when the underlying distributions are either sub-Gaussian
or sub-exponential. In comparison to (Kolla et al. 2019), we
derive two-sided concentration results, and our bounds show
an improved dependence on the number of samples, say n,
and accuracy, say . In (Khim et al. 2020), the authors employ
tools from statistical learning theory to derive a concentration result for a class of risk measures that includes CVaR
under the assumption that the underlying loss distribution has
bounded support.
The closest related work is (Bhat and Prashanth 2019),
where the authors employ a Wasserstein distance approach to
provide concentration bounds for SRM estimation. In com-

