The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Estimating Calibrated Individualized Survival Curves with Deep Learning
Fahad Kamran, Jenna Wiens
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
fhdkmrn, wiensj@umich.edu

Abstract

To better understand what these individualized underlying
survival probabilities represent, consider building an estimate of survival for an entire population using a simple
counting-based Kaplan-Meier estimate (Kaplan and Meier
1958). Differences among individuals will lead to events at
different time-points, resulting in a decreasing estimate of
population-level survival over time. This estimate reflects
the variation in the time-to-event distribution. Now consider
a set of individuals with identical or near-identical covariates. Despite the similarity among individuals, we might still
expect the time-to-event distribution for this homogeneous
population to exhibit some variation due to the stochasticity
in nature, resulting in a gradually decreasing survival curve
for these individuals. Along these lines, the underlying survival curve for an individual should reflect such variation.
Figure 1 illustrates potential differences in discriminative performance and calibration performance via a hypothetical example. The solid curves represent the true underlying survival distributions, and the dashed lines represent
hypothetical estimates for three different individuals. With
respect to the observed event times, all three sets of estimated survival curves correctly rank the individuals, and
hence, have good discriminative performance. However, the
first two sets of survival curves (a and b) consistently underestimate or overestimate the survivival probabilities with
respect to the true survival curve. Hence, these estimates are
miscalibrated. Meanwhile, the third set of estimated survival
curves (c) is well calibrated, since it aligns with the true survival probabilities. These calibrated estimates provide an accurate probabilistic interpretation of survival for an individual throughout the time horizon.
Deep survival models have achieved state-of-the-art discriminative performance by relaxing any distributional assumptions and directly estimating the underlying process
(Lee et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2019). However, to date, such
models are trained by optimizing for discriminative performance and have not been evaluated in terms of calibration.
Though useful for ranking individuals, the resulting survival
curves may consistently overestimate or underestimate an
individual’s probability of survival, as in Figure 1.
In light of these issues, we focus on approaches for training and evaluating deep survival analysis models that account for both calibration and discriminative performance.
Our contributions include:

In survival analysis, deep learning approaches have been proposed for estimating an individual’s probability of survival
over some time horizon. Such approaches can capture complex non-linear relationships, without relying on restrictive
assumptions regarding the relationship between an individual’s characteristics and their underlying survival process. To
date, however, these methods have focused primarily on optimizing discriminative performance and have ignored model
calibration. Well-calibrated survival curves present realistic
and meaningful probabilistic estimates of the true underlying survival process for an individual. However, due to the
lack of ground-truth regarding the underlying stochastic process of survival for an individual, optimizing and measuring calibration in survival analysis is an inherently difficult
task. In this work, we i) highlight the shortcomings of existing approaches in terms of calibration and ii) propose a new
training scheme for optimizing deep survival analysis models
that maximizes discriminative performance, subject to good
calibration. Compared to state-of-the-art approaches across
two publicly available datasets, our proposed training scheme
leads to significant improvements in calibration, while maintaining good discriminative performance.

Introduction
In survival analysis, one aims to learn the relationship between an individual’s covariates and the underlying stochastic process of some event (e.g., disease onset). Beyond discriminative performance (i.e., how the relative predictions
between individuals match the observed outcomes), to be
useful for real-world applications, survival models must be
well calibrated (Gneiting and Katzfuss 2014). In clinical settings, making decisions at a patient-level requires survival
estimates that are accurate with respect to the ground-truth
survival probability. Poor calibration can lead to misleading
predictions, resulting in potentially clinically harmful models (Van Calster and Vickers 2015; Van Calster et al. 2019;
Shah, Steyerberg, and Kent 2018; Steyerberg et al. 2019).
Accurate estimates of survival at different time-points can
help augment clinical decision making at a per-patient level.
We define a calibrated model as one that consistently produces estimates of survival that match the underlying survival probabilities for each individual (Haider et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

240

