The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Parameterizing Branch-and-Bound Search Trees to Learn Branching Policies
Giulia Zarpellon,1 * Jason Jo,2, 3 Andrea Lodi,1 Yoshua Bengio2, 3
1

Polytechnique Montréal
2
Mila
3
Université de Montréal
giulia.zarpellon@polymtl.ca, jason.jo.research@gmail.com, andrea.lodi@polymtl.ca, yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Abstract

variables’ values and smartly uses bounds from problem relaxations to prune unpromising regions from the tree. The
B&B algorithm actually relies on expertly-crafted heuristic rules for its two most fundamental decisions: branching
variable selection (BVS) and node selection. In particular,
BVS is a crucial factor for B&B’s success (Achterberg and
Wunderling 2013), and will be the main focus of the present
article.
Understanding why B&B works has been called “one of
the mysteries of computational complexity theory” (Lipton
and Regan 2012), and there currently is no mathematical theory of branching; to the best of our knowledge, the only attempt in formalizing BVS is the recent work of Le Bodic
and Nemhauser. One central reason why B&B is difficult to
formalize resides in its inherent exponential nature: millions
of BVS decisions could be needed to solve a MILP, and a
single bad one could result in a doubled tree size and no
improvement in the search. Such a complex and data-rich
setting, paired with a lack of formal understanding, makes
B&B an appealing ground for machine learning (ML) techniques, which have lately been thriving in discrete optimization (Bengio, Lodi, and Prouvost 2018). In particular, there
has been substantial effort towards “learning to branch”,
i.e., in using ML methods to learn BVS policies (Lodi and
Zarpellon 2017). Up to now, most works in this area focused
on learning branching policies by supervision or imitation
of strong branching (SB), a valid but expensive heuristic
scheme (see Sections 2 and 5). The latest and state-of-theart contribution to “learning to branch” (Gasse et al. 2019)
frames BVS as a classification problem on SB expert decisions, and employs a graph-convolutional neural network
(GCNN) to represent MILPs via their variable-constraint
structure. The resulting branching policies improve on the
solver by specializing SB to different classes of synthetic
problems, and the attained generalization ability is to similar MILP instances (within the same class), possibly larger
in formulation size.
The present work seeks a different type of generalization
for a branching policy, namely a systematic generalization
across heterogeneous MILPs, i.e., across problems not belonging to the same combinatorial class, without any restriction on the formulation’s structure and size. To achieve this
goal, we parameterize BVS in terms of B&B search trees.
On the one hand, information about the state of the B&B

Branch and Bound (B&B) is the exact tree search method
typically used to solve Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
problems (MILPs). Learning branching policies for MILP has
become an active research area, with most works proposing
to imitate the strong branching rule and specialize it to distinct classes of problems. We aim instead at learning a policy
that generalizes across heterogeneous MILPs: our main hypothesis is that parameterizing the state of the B&B search
tree can aid this type of generalization. We propose a novel
imitation learning framework, and introduce new input features and architectures to represent branching. Experiments
on MILP benchmark instances clearly show the advantages
of incorporating an explicit parameterization of the state of
the search tree to modulate the branching decisions, in terms
of both higher accuracy and smaller B&B trees. The resulting
policies significantly outperform the current state-of-the-art
method for “learning to branch” by effectively allowing generalization to generic unseen instances.

1

Introduction

Many problems arising from transportation, healthcare, energy and logistics can be formulated as Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problems, i.e., optimization problems in which some decision variables represent discrete or
indivisible choices. A MILP is written as
min {cT x : Ax ≥ b, x ≥ 0, xi ∈ Z ∀i ∈ I},
(1)
x

where A ∈ Rm×n , b ∈ Rm , c, x ∈ Rn and I ⊆ {1, . . . , n}
is the set of indices of variables that are required to be integral, while the other ones can be real-valued. Note that one
can consider a MILP as defined by (c, A, b, I); we do not assume any special combinatorial structure on the parameters
c, A, b. While MILPs are in general N P-hard, MILP solvers
underwent dramatic improvements over the last decades
(Lodi 2009; Achterberg and Wunderling 2013) and now
achieve high-performance on a wide range of problems.
The fundamental component of any modern MILP solver
is Branch and Bound (B&B) (Land and Doig 1960), an exact tree search method. Following a divide-and-conquer approach, B&B partitions the search space by branching on
* Corresponding author. Code, data and supplementary materials can be found at: https://github.com/ds4dm/branch-search-trees
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3931

