The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Liquid Time-Constant Networks
Ramin Hasani,1,3∗ Mathias Lechner,2∗ Alexander Amini,1 Daniela Rus,1 Radu Grosu3
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Institute of Science and Technology Austria (IST Austria)
3
Technische Universitaẗ Wien (TU Wien)
rhasani@mit.edu, mathias.lechner@ist.ac.at, amini@mit.edu, rus@csail.mit.edu, radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at
2

Abstract

by the following equation (Funahashi and Nakamura 1993):
dx(t)
x(t)
x(t)
dt = − τ + f (x(t), I(t), t, θ), in which the term − τ
assists the autonomous system to reach an equilibrium state
with a time-constant τ . x(t) is the hidden state, I(t) is the
input, t represents time, and f is parametrized by θ.
We propose an alternative formulation: let the hidden state
flow of a network be declared by a system of linear ODEs of
the form: dx(t)/dt = −x(t)/τ + S(t), and let S(t) ∈ RM
represent the following nonlinearity determined by S(t) =
f (x(t), I(t), t, θ)(A − x(t)), with parameters θ and A. Then,
by plugging in S into the hidden states equation, we get:

We introduce a new class of time-continuous recurrent neural
network models. Instead of declaring a learning system’s dynamics by implicit nonlinearities, we construct networks of
linear first-order dynamical systems modulated via nonlinear
interlinked gates. The resulting models represent dynamical
systems with varying (i.e., liquid) time-constants coupled to
their hidden state, with outputs being computed by numerical differential equation solvers. These neural networks exhibit stable and bounded behavior, yield superior expressivity
within the family of neural ordinary differential equations,
and give rise to improved performance on time-series prediction tasks. To demonstrate these properties, we first take a
theoretical approach to find bounds over their dynamics, and
compute their expressive power by the trajectory length measure in a latent trajectory space. We then conduct a series of
time-series prediction experiments to manifest the approximation capability of Liquid Time-Constant Networks (LTCs)
compared to classical and modern RNNs.

h1
i
dx(t)
=−
+ f (x(t), I(t), t, θ) x(t)+
dt
τ
f (x(t), I(t), t, θ)A.

(1)

Eq. 1 manifests a novel time-continuous RNN instance
with several features and benefits:
Liquid Time-Constant. A neural network f not only determines the derivative of the hidden state x(t), but also
serves as an input-dependent varying time-constant (τsys =
τ
1+τ f (x(t),I(t),t,θ) ) for the learning system (Time constant is
a parameter characterizing the speed and the coupling sensitivity of an ODE).This property enables single elements of
the hidden state to identify specialized dynamical systems
for input features arriving at each time-point. We refer to
these models as liquid time-constant networks (LTCs). LTCs
can be implemented by an arbitrary choice of ODE solvers.
In Section 2, we introduce a practical fixed-step ODE solver
that simultaneously enjoys the stability of the implicit Euler
and the efficiency of the explicit Euler methods.
Reverse-Mode Automatic Differentiation of LTCs. LTCs
realize differentiable computational graphs. Similar to neural ODEs, they can be trained by variform of gradient-based
optimization algorithms. We settle to trade memory for numerical precision during a backward-pass by using a vanilla
backpropagation through-time algorithm to optimize LTCs
instead of an adjoint-based optimization method (Pontryagin 2018). In Section 3, we motivate this choice thoroughly.
Bounded Dynamics - Stability. In Section 4, we show that
the state and the time-constant of LTCs are bounded to a finite range. This property assures the stability of the output
dynamics and is desirable when inputs to the system relentlessly increase.

Introduction
Recurrent neural networks with continuous-time hidden
states determined by ordinary differential equations (ODEs),
are effective algorithms for modeling time series data that
are ubiquitously used in medical, industrial and business settings. The state of a neural ODE, x(t) ∈ RD , is defined by
the solution of this equation (Chen et al. 2018): dx(t)/dt =
f (x(t), I(t), t, θ), with a neural network f parametrized by
θ. One can then compute the state using a numerical ODE
solver, and train the network by performing reverse-mode
automatic differentiation (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams
1986), either by gradient descent through the solver (Lechner et al. 2019), or by considering the solver as a black-box
(Chen et al. 2018; Dupont, Doucet, and Teh 2019; Gholami,
Keutzer, and Biros 2019) and apply the adjoint method (Pontryagin 2018). The open questions are: how expressive are
neural ODEs in their current formalism, and can we improve
their structure to enable better representation learning?
Rather than defining the derivatives of the hidden-state
directly by a neural network f , one can determine a more
stable continuous-time recurrent neural network (CT-RNN)
∗

Authors with equal contributions
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7657

