The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Online Search with Maximum Clearance
Spyros Angelopoulos, 1, 3 Malachi Voss2, 3
1

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS)
2
École Normale Supérieure
3
Sorbonne Université, Laboratoire d’informatique de Paris 6, LIP6, F-75252 Paris, France.
spyros.angelopoulos@lip6.fr, malachi.voss@ens.fr

Abstract

has been applied to several search problems in robotics,
for example (Sung and Tokekar 2019), (Magid and Rivlin
2004), (Taylor and Kriegman 1998) (Isler, Kannan, and
Daniilidis 2003). See also the survey (Ghosh and Klein
2010).
In this work we will study the following classes of environments: First, we consider the problem of searching on the
line, informally known as the cow path problem (Kao and
Littman 1997), in which the environment is the unbounded,
infinite line. Next, we consider a generalization of linear
search, in which the environment consists of m unbounded
rays, concurrent at O; this problem is known as the m-ray
search or star search problem. This environment can model
much broader settings in which we seek an intelligent allocation of resources to tasks under uncertainty. Thus, it is a
very useful paradigm that arises often in applications such
as the design of interruptible systems based on contract algorithms (Bernstein, Finkelstein, and Zilberstein 2003; Angelopoulos 2015; Kupavskii and Welzl 2018), or pipeline filter ordering (Condon et al. 2009). Last, we consider general
undirected, edge-weighted graph networks, and a target that
can hide anywhere over an edge or a vertex of this graph.
In some previous work, online search may refer to the setting in which the searcher has no information about the environment or the position of the target. In this work we assume
that the searcher knows the environment, but not the precise
position of the target. This is in line with some foundational
work on competitive analysis of online search algorithms,
e.g. (Koutsoupias, Papadimitriou, and Yannakakis 1996).

We study the setting in which a mobile agent must locate
a hidden target in a bounded or unbounded environment,
with no information about the hider’s position. In particular,
we consider online search, in which the performance of the
search strategy is evaluated by its worst case competitive ratio. We introduce a multi-criteria search problem in which the
searcher has a budget on its allotted search time, and the objective is to design strategies that are competitively efficient,
respect the budget, and maximize the total searched ground.
We give analytically optimal strategies for the line and the star
environments, and efficient heuristics for general networks.

Introduction
We study a general search problem, in which a mobile agent
with unit speed seeks to locate a target that hides in some
unknown position of the environment. Specifically, we are
given an environment which may be bounded or unbounded,
with a point O designated as its root. There is an immobile
target (or hider) H that is hiding in some unknown point in
the environment, whereas the searcher is initially placed at
the root O. The searcher has no information concerning the
hider’s position. A search strategy S determines the precise
way in which the searcher explores the environment, and we
assume deterministic strategies. The cost of S given hider
H, denoted by d(S, H), is the total distance traversed by
the searcher the first time it reaches the location of H, or
equivalently the total search time.
There is a natural way to evaluate the performance of the
search strategy that goes back to (Bellman 1963) and (Beck
and Newman 1970): we can compare the cost paid by the
searcher in a worst-case scenario to the cost paid in the ideal
situation where the searcher knows the hider’s position. We
define the competitive ratio of strategy S as
cr(S) = sup
H

d(S, H)
,
d(H)

Searching With a Budget
Most previous work on competitive analysis of searching
has assumed that a target is indeed present, and so the
searcher will eventually locate it. Thus, the only consideration is minimizing the competitive ratio. However, this assumption does not reflect realistic settings. Consider the example of Search-And-Rescue (SAR) operations: first, it is
possible that the search mission may fail to locate the missing person, in which case searching should resume from its
starting point instead of continuing fruitlessly for an exorbitant amount of time. If, say, the first day’s efforts were unsuccessful, it would be best to have covered as much ground
as possible before restarting. Second, and more importantly,
SAR operations come with logistical constraints and limited

(1)

with d(H) the distance of H from O in the environment.
Competitive analysis allows to evaluate a search strategy under a status of complete uncertainty, and provides strict, worst-case guarantees. Competitive analysis
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3642

