The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

GLIB: Efficient Exploration for Relational Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
via Goal-Literal Babbling
Rohan Chitnis∗ , Tom Silver∗ , Joshua Tenenbaum, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Tomás Lozano-Pérez
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{ronuchit, tslvr, jbt, lpk, tlp}@mit.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of efficient exploration for transition
model learning in the relational model-based reinforcement
learning setting without extrinsic goals or rewards. Inspired
by human curiosity, we propose goal-literal babbling (GLIB),
a simple and general method for exploration in such problems. GLIB samples relational conjunctive goals that can be
understood as specific, targeted effects that the agent would
like to achieve in the world, and plans to achieve these goals
using the transition model being learned. We provide theoretical guarantees showing that exploration with GLIB will converge almost surely to the ground truth model. Experimentally, we find GLIB to strongly outperform existing methods
in both prediction and planning on a range of tasks, encompassing standard PDDL and PPDDL planning benchmarks
and a robotic manipulation task implemented in the PyBullet physics simulator. Video: https://youtu.be/F6lmrPT6TOY
Code: https://git.io/JIsTB

1

Figure 1: We study goal babbling as a paradigm for exploration in relational transition model learning. Left: A robot in
our PyBullet domain sets itself a goal of holding the blue
object. Middle: The robot (mistakenly) believes the goal can
be achieved by executing pick on the blue object. When it
tries this plan, it fails due to the purple object in the way.
From this and previous data, the robot can update its transition model. In this case, the robot learns that a precondition
of picking an object is that nothing is on top of it. Right:
In more complex environments involving novel objects, the
robot can plan with its learned model to achieve goals.

Introduction

Human curiosity often manifests in the form of a question:
“I wonder if I can do X?” A toddler wonders whether she
can climb on the kitchen counter to reach a cookie jar. Her
dad wonders whether he can make dinner when he’s missing
one of the key ingredients. These questions lead to actions,
actions may lead to surprising effects, and from this surprise,
we learn. In this work, inspired by this style of playful experimentation (Gil 1994; Cropper 2019), we study exploration
via goal-setting for the problem of learning relational transition models to enable robust, generalizable planning.
Transition model learning is central to model-based reinforcement learning (RL), where an agent learns an approximate transition model through online interaction with its
environment. The learned transition model can be used in
combination with a planner to maximize a reward function
or reach a goal. If the transition model is relational, that is,
represented in terms of lifted relations between objects in
the environment, then it generalizes immediately to problems involving new and different objects than those previously encountered by the agent (Džeroski, De Raedt, and
Driessens 2001; Tadepalli, Givan, and Driessens 2004).

In this paper, we address the problem of efficient exploration for online relational transition model learning. This
setting isolates the exploration problem in model-based RL,
and can be understood as model-based RL without an extrinsic reward function. Previous approaches to exploration
for relational model-based RL have considered extensions
of classical tabular methods like R- MAX and E3 to the relational regime (Lang, Toussaint, and Kersting 2012; Ng
and Petrick 2019). Prior work in the AI planning literature
has also considered exploration for learning and refining
planning operators (Gil 1994; Shen and Simon 1994; Wang
1996; Rodrigues et al. 2011). In practice, these approaches
tend to be myopic, exploring locally and cautiously while
leaving far-away regions of the state space unexplored.
In pursuit of an exploration strategy that can drive an
agent toward interesting regions of the state space, we
propose a novel family of exploration methods for relational transition model learning called Goal-Literal Babbling (GLIB). The basic approach is illustrated in Figure 1.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
* Equal contribution.

11782

