The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ePointDA: An End-to-End Simulation-to-Real Domain Adaptation Framework for
LiDAR Point Cloud Segmentation
Sicheng Zhao1 * # , Yezhen Wang23# , Bo Li1 , Bichen Wu4 , Yang Gao5 , Pengfei Xu2 ,
Trevor Darrell1 , Kurt Keutzer1
1

University of California, Berkeley 2 Didi Chuxing 3 University of California, San Diego 4 Facebook Inc 5 Tsinghua University
{schzhao,yezhen.wang0305,drluodian}@gmail.com, wbc@fb.com, gaoyangiiis@tsinghua.edu.cn,
xupengfeipf@didichuxing.com, trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu, keutzer@berkeley.edu
Abstract

Recent research has shown that deep neural networks
(DNNs) can achieve state-of-the-art performance for point
cloud classification and segmentation (Qi et al. 2017a,b; Wu
et al. 2018a, 2019; Zhang, Hua, and Yeung 2019) with largescale labeled data, which is usually time-consuming and expensive to obtain (Wang et al. 2019a). However, unlimited
synthetic labeled data can be created using advanced simulators, such as CARLA2 and GTA-V3 for autonomous driving.
Unfortunately, due to the presence of domain shift between
simulation and the real-world (Wu et al. 2019), as shown
in Figure 1, direct transfer often results in significant performance decay. Domain adaptation (DA) aims to learn a
transferable model to minimize the impact of domain shift
between the source and target domains (Patel et al. 2015;
Zhao et al. 2020b).
As the only simulation-to-real domain adaptation (SRDA)
method for LiDAR point cloud segmentation, SqueezeSegV2 (Wu et al. 2019) consists of three stages: learned intensity rendering, Geodesic correlation alignment, and progressive domain calibration. Although it achieved state-ofthe-art SRDA performance at the time, there are some limitations. First, it employs a multi-stage pipeline and cannot
be trained end-to-end. Second, it does not consider the pixellevel dropout noise gap between different domains. Third,
the progressive calibration is inefficient and lacks of robustness, as the accurate real-world statistics is difficult to estimate and is evolving with incremental data. Fourth, the
standard convolution in the segmentation model neglects the
drastic difference between spatial features and corresponding spatial feature gap across domains.
One might argue that we can apply the DA methods
for RGB image segmentation, especially the ones performing both feature-level and pixel-level alignments (e.g. GTAGAN (Sankaranarayanan et al. 2018), CyCADA (Hoffman
et al. 2018)), to the SRDA problem for LiDAR point cloud
segmentation. However, the 2D LiDAR images generated
from 3D LiDAR point clouds projected onto a spherical surface (Wu et al. 2018a, 2019) are significantly different from
RGB images. For example, RGB images mainly consist of
color and texture, the style of which can be well translated by
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al.

Due to its robust and precise distance measurements, LiDAR plays an important role in scene understanding for autonomous driving. Training deep neural networks (DNNs)
on LiDAR data requires large-scale point-wise annotations,
which are time-consuming and expensive to obtain. Instead,
simulation-to-real domain adaptation (SRDA) trains a DNN
using unlimited synthetic data with automatically generated
labels and transfers the learned model to real scenarios. Existing SRDA methods for LiDAR point cloud segmentation
mainly employ a multi-stage pipeline and focus on featurelevel alignment. They require prior knowledge of real-world
statistics and ignore the pixel-level dropout noise gap and the
spatial feature gap between different domains. In this paper,
we propose a novel end-to-end framework, named ePointDA,
to address the above issues. Specifically, ePointDA consists
of three modules: self-supervised dropout noise rendering,
statistics-invariant and spatially-adaptive feature alignment,
and transferable segmentation learning. The joint optimization enables ePointDA to bridge the domain shift at the
pixel-level by explicitly rendering dropout noise for synthetic LiDAR and at the feature-level by spatially aligning
the features between different domains, without requiring the
real-world statistics. Extensive experiments adapting from
synthetic GTA-LiDAR to real KITTI and SemanticKITTI
demonstrate the superiority of ePointDA for LiDAR point
cloud segmentation.

Introduction
Many types of multimedia data, such as images captured by
cameras and point clouds collected by LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) and RADAR (RAdio Detection And
Ranging) can help to understand the semantics of complex
scenes for autonomous driving. Among these sensors, LiDAR is an essential one for its specific properties (Wu et al.
2018a). LiDAR can provide precise distance measurements;
for example, the error of Velodyne HDL-64E is less than
2cm1 . Further, it is more robust to ambient lighting conditions (e.g. night and shadow) than cameras and can obtain
higher resolution and field of view than RADAR.
* Corresponding Author. # Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://velodyneLiDAR.com/products/hdl-64e

2
3

3500

http://www.carla.org
https://www.rockstargames.com/V

