The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Vid-ODE: Continuous-Time Video Generation
with Neural Ordinary Differential Equation
Sunghyun Park1* , Kangyeol Kim1* , Junsoo Lee1 ,
Jaegul Choo1 , Joonseok Lee2 , Sookyung Kim3 , Edward Choi1
1
KAIST
Google Research
3
Lawrence Livermore Nat’l Lab.
psh01087@kaist.ac.kr, kangyeolk@kaist.ac.kr, junsoolee93@kaist.ac.kr,
jchoo@kaist.ac.kr, joonseok@google.com, kim79@llnl.gov, edwardchoi@kaist.ac.kr
2

Abstract
Video generation models often operate under the assumption
of fixed frame rates, which leads to suboptimal performance
when it comes to handling flexible frame rates (e.g., increasing the frame rate of the more dynamic portion of the video
as well as handling missing video frames). To resolve the restricted nature of existing video generation models’ ability to
handle arbitrary timesteps, we propose continuous-time video
generation by combining neural ODE (Vid-ODE) with pixellevel video processing techniques. Using ODE-ConvGRU as
an encoder, a convolutional version of the recently proposed
neural ODE, which enables us to learn continuous-time dynamics, Vid-ODE can learn the spatio-temporal dynamics of
input videos of flexible frame rates. The decoder integrates
the learned dynamics function to synthesize video frames at
any given timesteps, where the pixel-level composition technique is used to maintain the sharpness of individual frames.
With extensive experiments on four real-world video datasets,
we verify that the proposed Vid-ODE outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches under various video generation settings,
both within the trained time range (interpolation) and beyond
the range (extrapolation). To the best of our knowledge, VidODE is the first work successfully performing continuous-time
video generation using real-world videos.

1

Figure 1: Generating video frames in diverse time intervals
based on a 5 FPS video. (Top row: Input to Vid-ODE. Remaining rows: Videos in various FPS between the start frame
and the end frame.)

between t = 0 and t = 5, most existing models cannot create
video frames at t = 1.5 or t = 3.8.
This might not seem like a serious limitation at first glance,
since most videos we take and process are usually dense
enough to capture the essential dynamics of actions. However, video models are widely applied to understand spatiotemporal dynamics not just on visual recordings, but also on
various scientific spatio-temporal data, which often do not
follow the regular timestep assumption.
For instance, a climate video consists of multiple channels
of climate variables (i.e., air pressure and ground temperature) instead of color density on the 2-D geographic grid. Due
to the equipment cost, the time interval per each measurement
often spans minutes to hours, which is insufficient to capture
the target dynamics (e.g., creation and development of hurricanes). Consequently, existing video models often lead to
sub-optimal predictions. Another challenge with datasets collected from a wild environment is frequently missing values,
which in turn results in irregular timesteps.
To resolve this limitation, we propose a video generation
model based on Ordinary Differential Equation (Vid-ODE)

Introduction

Videos, the recording of the continuous flow of visual information, inevitably discretize the continuous time into a predefined, finite number of units, e.g., 30 or 60 frames-per-second
(FPS). This leads to the development of rather rigid video
generation models assuming fixed time intervals, restricting
the modeling of underlying video dynamics. Therefore it is
challenging for those models to accept irregularly sampled
frames or generate frames at unseen timesteps. For example,
most video generation models do not allow users to adjust
the framerate depending on the contents of the video (e.g.,
higher framerate for the more dynamic portion). This limitation applies not only to extrapolation (i.e., generating future
video frames), but also to interpolation; given a 1-FPS video
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*
These authors contributed equally.

2412

