The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning from My Friends:
Few-Shot Personalized Conversation Systems via Social Networks
Zhiliang Tian,1,4 * Wei Bi2 ,† Zihan Zhang,1 Dongkyu Lee,1 Yiping Song,3 Nevin L. Zhang1,4
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
4
HKUST Xiao-i Robot Joint Lab, Hong Kong SAR, China
{ztianac,dleear,lzhang}@cse.ust.hk victoriabi@tencent.com zzhangeo@connect.ust.hk songyiping@pku.edu.cn
et al. 2018b) or user profiles in social media (Mazare et al.
2018). Speaker descriptions are not always available due to
the cost of annotation and privacy concerns in social media. Conversation-conditioned tasks (Li et al. 2016b; Kottur, Wang, and Carvalho 2017) require models to generate personalized responses by exploiting speakers’ preferences from their conversation histories. In reality, conversation histories may provide very few utterances of a particular
speaker, which makes it hard to capture speaker preferences,
especially for the newcomers or inactive users.
To better cater for newcomers, we propose a few-shot personalized conversation task with an auxiliary social network.
The task has three characteristics: 1. During training, models
cannot access information about the speakers in the testing
set (i.e. newcomers); 2. During testing, there are only a few
samples available for each speaker, which are collectively
referred to as the support set; 3. There is a social network
among all the speakers. Given the input query, our task requires a conversation model to generate a response for a new
speaker with the help of the social network and a few (i.e.
10) past conversation samples from the speaker.
It is difficult to characterize the preferences of a new
speaker from only a few conversation samples. Social networks can help here. In a social network, neighbors are
users who follow each other, and they usually share interests
and have similar chatting preferences. As our observation
on our dataset, on average, the response similarity between
two neighbors (0.47) is higher than that between two random
speakers (0.38). 1 Consequently, we can utilize conversation
histories of neighbors to help to determine preferences of a
newcomer. In this way, we can handle newcomers even when
there are no descriptions or a few conversations available.
Existing conversation-conditioned PCMs can be applied
to our proposed task. Li et al. 2016b employ speaker embedding to capture speaker preferences. Based on this, Bak
and Oh 2019 pre-built a conversation graph to describe
speaker relations and learn node2vec embeddings (Grover
and Leskovec 2016) over the graph. The node2vec embed-

Abstract
Personalized conversation models (PCMs) generate responses according to speaker preferences. Existing personalized conversation tasks typically require models to extract
speaker preferences from user descriptions or their conversation histories, which are scarce for newcomers and inactive users. In this paper, we propose a few-shot personalized conversation task with an auxiliary social network. The
task requires models to generate personalized responses for
a speaker given a few conversations from the speaker and a
social network. Existing methods are mainly designed to incorporate descriptions or conversation histories. Those methods can hardly model speakers with so few conversations or
connections between speakers. To better cater for newcomers
with few resources, we propose a personalized conversation
model (PCM) that learns to adapt to new speakers as well
as enabling new speakers to learn from resource-rich speakers. Particularly, based on a meta-learning based PCM, we
propose a task aggregator (TA) to collect other speakers’ information from the social network. The TA provides prior
knowledge of the new speaker in its meta-learning. Experimental results show our methods outperform all baselines in
appropriateness, diversity, and consistency with speakers.

Introduction
Recently, there has been a boom in research on neural conversation models (Shang, Lu, and Li 2015) due to the accessibility of vast conversational data on social media (e.g.
Twitter). To generate appropriate and lively responses, researchers have proposed personalized conversation tasks
that require models to customize responses for specific
speakers, since different speakers tend to have different
styles or preferences for their responses. There are two subtypes of such tasks. Description-conditioned tasks (Yang
et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018b) require models to customize
responses according to explicit speaker descriptions. These
descriptions may come from human annotations (Zhang
* This work was partially done when Zhiliang Tian was an intern

at Tencent AI Lab
†
Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

The gap between 0.47 and 0.38 is quite large in this evaluation
metric, as a contrast, the gap between similarity of two responses
from one speaker (0.50) and 0.47 is only 0.03.
13907

