The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deeplite Neutrino™:
An End-to-End Framework for Constrained Deep Learning Model Optimization
Anush Sankaran1 , Olivier Mastropietro1 , Ehsan Saboori1 , Yasser Idris1 , Davis Sawyer1 ,
MohammadHossein AskariHemmat1,2 , Ghouthi Boukli Hacene1,3
1

Deeplite Inc., Montreal 2 Ecole Polytechnique, Montreal, 3 MILA, Montreal

Abstract

This explosive growth has led to the primary challenge
of the democratization of deep learning. Training such huge
models would require vast computing powers with supercomputers, which is not accessible to all. For example, the
latest GPT-3 model with over 350GB in memory size costs
over $12 million dollars to train using specialized super
computers1 . Such a computing infrastructure is not available
to everyone and is globally not affordable by all deep learning startups and researchers.
There are other implications in training huge DNN models such as energy and power consumption. Strubell et
al. (Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum 2019) studied that
the compute required to train large-scale DNN models produces carbon-dioxide emissions equivalent to five times the
lifetime emissions of an average American car. They also
showed that the annual power consumption of cloud computing giants such as Amazon AWS, Google, or Microsoft,
is equivalent to the annual power consumption of the United
States. Additionally, according to a recent Gartner survey,
as of 2020, there are more than six billion edge devices2 and
current state-of-the-art DNN models are not equipped to be
deployed directly on edge devices due to challenges in their
memory requirements.
Our objective is to optimize such DNN model architectures without a reduction in accuracy, as step progress towards enabling them to be directly deployed in edge devices. The idea behind model optimization is under the presumption that DNN architectures are over-parameterized.
Optimization reduces the number of parameters of the large
DNN model while improving the performance of the model
in metrics such as computational cost, inference time, and
energy consumed. This leads to the primary and the most important research question, “Can smaller models with fewer
parameters, achieve an accuracy performance equivalent to
a deeper model with a larger number of parameters?”
Challenges of Model Optimization in Production
In the research community, there are some popular approaches such as model pruning, model quantization, and
model decomposition to achieve model compression. How-

Designing deep learning-based solutions is becoming a race
for training deeper models with a greater number of layers.
While a large-size deeper model could provide competitive
accuracy, it creates a lot of logistical challenges and unreasonable resource requirements during development and deployment. This has been one of the key reasons for deep learning models not being excessively used in various production
environments, especially in edge devices. There is an immediate requirement for optimizing and compressing these deep
learning models, to enable on-device intelligence. In this research, we introduce a black-box framework, Deeplite Neutrino™ for production-ready optimization of deep learning
models. The framework provides an easy mechanism for the
end-users to provide constraints such as a tolerable drop in
accuracy or target size of the optimized models, to guide the
whole optimization process. The framework is easy to include
in an existing production pipeline and is available as a Python
Package, supporting PyTorch and Tensorflow libraries. The
optimization performance of the framework is shown across
multiple benchmark datasets and popular deep learning models. Further, the framework is currently used in production
and the results and testimonials from several clients are summarized.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been one of the most intrusive technologies of the 21st century, having revolutionized businesses
across multiple industries. From building better gaming opponents to translating languages in real-time, to the detailed understanding of large volumes of images and videos,
deep learning has enabled us to achieve automation in different applications. However, deep learning is now a race
for the ability to build deeper and larger models to produce better results. Recent models such as BiT-M from
Google (Kolesnikov et al. 2019) with 928 million parameters, Megatron-LM from NVIDIA (Shoeybi et al. 2019) with
8.3 billion parameters, Turing-NLG from Microsoft (Rasley
et al. 2020) with 17 billion parameters, and GPT-3 from
OpenAI (Brown et al. 2020) with 175 billion parameters
show the unprecedented growth in the size of deep neural
network (DNN) architectures.

1

https://venturebeat.com/2020/06/01/ai-machine-learningopenai-gpt-3-size-isnt-everything/
2
https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/201908-29-gartner-says-5-8-billion-enterprise-and-automotive-io

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15166

