The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning to Resolve Conflicts for Multi-Agent Path Finding
with Conflict-Based Search
Taoan Huang, Sven Koenig, Bistra Dilkina
University of Southern California
{taoanhua, skoenig, dilkina}@usc.edu

Abstract

a conflict between two current paths to resolve and adds constraints that prevent this conflict in the child CT nodes. Picking good conflicts is important, and a good strategy for conflict selection could have a big impact on the efficiency of
CBS by reducing both the size of CT and its runtime. Boyarski et al. (2015) propose to prioritize conflicts by categorizing them into three classes and always picking one from
the highest-priority class. This strategy has been proven to
be efficient (Boyarski et al. 2015) and is commonly used for
conflict selection in recent research (Li et al. 2019a; Felner
et al. 2018; Li et al. 2019c). In this paper, we propose a new
conflict-selection oracle that results in smaller CT sizes than
the one used in previous work but is much more computationally expensive since it has to compute 1-step lookahead
heuristics for each conflict.
To overcome the high computational cost of the oracle, we leverage insights from studies on variable selection for branching in Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) solving and propose to use machine learning (ML)
approaches for designing conflict-selection strategies that
imitate the oracle’s decisions to speed up CBS. Variable selection for branching in MILP solving is analogous to conflict selection in CBS. As part of the branch-and-bound algorithm for MILP solving (Wolsey and Nemhauser 1999),
non-leaf nodes in the CT must be expanded into two child
nodes by selecting one of the unassigned variables and splitting its domain by adding new constraints, while CBS selects and splits on conflicts. Recent studies (Khalil et al.
2016, 2017; He, Daume III, and Eisner 2014) have shown
that data-driven ML approaches for MILP solving are competitive with and can even outperform state-of-the-art commercial solvers.
We borrow such ML approaches from MILP solving
(Khalil et al. 2016) and propose a data-driven framework
for designing conflict-selection strategies for CBS. In the
first phase of our approach, we observe and record decisions made by the oracle on a set of instances and collect
data on features that characterize the conflicts at each CT
node. In the second phase, we learn a ranking function for
conflicts in a supervised fashion that imitates the oracle but
is faster to calculate. In the last phase, we use the learned
ranking function to replace the oracle and select conflicts in
CBS to solve unseen instances. Compared to previous work
on conflict selection for CBS, our ML-guided CBS is able

Conflict-Based Search (CBS) is a state-of-the-art algorithm
for multi-agent path finding. On the high level, CBS repeatedly detects conflicts and resolves one of them by splitting
the current problem into two subproblems. Previous work
chooses the conflict to resolve by categorizing conflicts into
three classes and always picking one from the highest-priority
class. In this work, we propose an oracle for conflict selection that results in smaller search tree sizes than the one used
in previous work. However, the computation of the oracle is
slow. Thus, we propose a machine-learning (ML) framework
for conflict selection that observes the decisions made by the
oracle and learns a conflict-selection strategy represented by
a linear ranking function that imitates the oracle’s decisions
accurately and quickly. Experiments on benchmark maps indicate that our approach, ML-guided CBS, significantly improves the success rates, search tree sizes and runtimes of the
current state-of-the-art CBS solver.

Introduction
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of finding
a set of conflict-free (that is, collision-free) paths for a given
number of agents on a given graph that minimize the sum
of costs or the makespan. Although MAPF is NP-hard to
solve optimally (Yu and LaValle 2013), significant research
effort has been devoted to MAPF to support its application
in distribution centers (Ma et al. 2017a; Hönig et al. 2019),
traffic management (Dresner and Stone 2008), airplane taxiing (Morris et al. 2015; Balakrishnan and Jung 2007) and
computer games (Ma et al. 2017b).
Conflict-Based Search (CBS) (Sharon et al. 2015) is one
of the leading algorithms for solving MAPF optimally, and a
number of enhancements to CBS have been developed (Boyarski et al. 2015; Li et al. 2019a; Felner et al. 2018; Barer
et al. 2014). The key idea behind CBS is to use a bi-level
search that resolves conflicts by adding constraints at the
high level and replans paths for agents respecting these constraints at the low level. The high level of CBS preforms
a best-first search on a binary search tree called constraint
tree (CT). To expand a CT node (that consists of a set of
paths and a set of constraints on these paths), CBS chooses
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11246

