The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sample Complexity of Policy Gradient Finding Second-Order Stationary Points
Long Yang1 Qian Zheng2 Gang Pan 1 *
1

2

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China.
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,Singapore.
1
{yanglong,gpan}@zju.edu.cn; 2 zhengqian@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Despite it has tremendous successful applications, suffering from high sample complexity is still a critical challenge
for the policy gradient (Haarnoja et al. 2018; Lee, Sungik,
and Chung 2019; Xu, Gao, and Gu 2020). Thus, for policy
gradient, theory analysis of its sample complexity plays an
important role in RL since the sample complexity not only
provides an understanding of the policy gradient but also
gives insights on how to improve the sample efficiency of
the existing RL algorithms.
Investigation of the sample complexity of policy gradient
algorithm (or its variant) can be traced back to the pioneer
works of (Kearns, Mansour, and Ng 2000; Kakade 2003).
Recently, to improve sample efficiency, Yang et al. (2018);
Papini et al. (2018); Shen et al. (2019); Xu, Gao, and Gu
(2020) introduce stochastic variance reduced gradient techniques (Johnson and Zhang 2013; Nguyen et al. 2017a) to
policy optimization, and they have studied the sample complexity of policy gradient methods to achieve a first-order
stationary point (FOSP), i.e., θ satisfies the following condition
k∇J(θ)k2 ≤ .

The policy-based reinforcement learning (RL) can be considered as maximization of its objective. However, due to the
inherent non-concavity of its objective, the policy gradient
method to a first-order stationary point (FOSP) cannot guarantee a maximal point. A FOSP can be a minimal or even a
saddle point, which is undesirable for RL. It has be found that
if all the saddle points are strict, all the second-order stationary points (SOSP) are exactly equivalent to local maxima. Instead of FOSP, we consider SOSP as the convergence criteria
to characterize the sample complexity of policy gradient.
√ Our
result shows that policy gradient converges to an (, χ)e
SOSP with probability at least 1 − O(δ)
after the total cost

−9
−9
 2
1
of O (1−γ)√χ log δ = O( 2 ), where γ ∈ (0, 1). It significantly improves the state of the art cost e
O(−9 ).Our analysis is based on the key idea that decomposes the parameter
space Rp into three non-intersected regions: non-stationary
point region, saddle point region, and local optimal region,
then making a local improvement of the objective of RL in
each region. This technique can be potentially generalized to
extensive policy gradient methods. For the complete proof,
please refer to https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.01491.pdf.

However, since the objective of RL is a non-concave function with respect to the standard policy parameterizations
(Papini et al. 2018; Agarwal et al. 2020), a FOSP could be
a maximal point, a minimal point, and even a saddle point.
Both minimal points and saddle points are undesirable for
policy gradient since its goal is to search a maximal point,
which implies within the numbers of samples provided by
Papini et al. (2018); Shen et al. (2019); Xu, Gao, and Gu
(2020), we can not guarantee the output of their policy gradient algorithm is a maximal point. This motivates a fundamental question as follows,

Introduction
Policy gradient method (Williams 1992; Sutton et al. 2000)
is widely used to search the optimal policy in modern reinforcement learning (RL). Such method (or its variant)
searches over a differentiable parameterized class of polices by performing a stochastic gradient on a cumulative
expected reward function. Due to its merits such as the simplicity of implementation in the simulated environment; it
requires low memory; it can be applied to any differentiable
parameterized classes (Agarwal et al. 2020), policy gradient method has achieved significant successes in challenging fields such as robotics (Deisenroth, Neumann, and Peters 2013; Duan et al. 2016), playing Go (Silver et al. 2016,
2017), neural architecture search (Zoph and Le 2017), NLP
(Kurita and Søgaard 2019; Whiteson 2019), computer vision
(Sarmad, Lee, and Kim 2019), and recommendation system
(Pan et al. 2019).

Question 1. How many samples does an agent need to collect to guarantee the policy gradient methods converge to a
maximal point certainly?

Our Work
In this paper, we consider the second-order stationary point
(SOSP) to answer Question 1. More specifically, inspired by
the previous works from non-convex optimization (Jin et al.
2017; Daneshmand et al. 2018), we investigate the sample
√
complexity of policy gradient methods finding an (, χ)-

* Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10630

