The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

CARE: Commonsense-Aware Emotional Response Generation with Latent
Concepts
Peixiang Zhong,1,2 Di Wang, 2 Pengfei Li, 3 Chen Zhang, 4 Hao Wang, 4 * Chunyan Miao 1,2 *
1

Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, NTU, Singapore
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, NTU, Singapore
4
Alibaba Group, China
{peixiang001, wangdi, pli006, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg, zhangchen010295@163.com, cashenry@126.com
Abstract

Model

Rationality and emotion are two fundamental elements of humans. Endowing agents with rationality and emotion has been
one of the major milestones in AI. However, in the field of
conversational AI, most existing models only specialize in
one aspect and neglect the other, which often leads to dull or
unrelated responses. In this paper, we hypothesize that combining rationality and emotion into conversational agents can
improve response quality. To test the hypothesis, we focus on
one fundamental aspect of rationality, i.e., commonsense, and
propose CARE, a novel model for commonsense-aware emotional response generation. Specifically, we first propose a
framework to learn and construct commonsense-aware emotional latent concepts of the response given an input message
and a desired emotion. We then propose three methods to
collaboratively incorporate the latent concepts into response
generation. Experimental results on two large-scale datasets
support our hypothesis and show that our model can produce
more accurate and commonsense-aware emotional responses
and achieve better human ratings than state-of-the-art models
that only specialize in one aspect.

EmoDS

Ours
(CARE)

Message Why do you avoid starbucks?
Gold
I don’t like their coffee.
Neutral
I’m not a gamer so it’s just that I’m a bit
more tired of them.
Joy
Yeah, that’s pretty cool. I like that.
Sadness That sucks.
Neutral
It’s just a general dislike of the company.
Joy
Tea is my favorite.
Sadness I’m not a big fan of coffee. It ’s too bitter for me.

Table 1: Sample responses from EmoDS (Song et al. 2019)
and our model. EmoDS generates generic or unrelated emotional responses. Our model extracts the message concept
“starbucks”, and generates more commonsense-aware emotional responses by referring to our constructed relational
(in bold) and emotional (in italic) latent concepts, e.g., company, coffee and bitter.
social interactions (Pham 2007). However, most existing
conversational models only specialize in one aspect and
neglect the other1 , which often leads to dull or unrelated
responses. For example, as shown in Table 1, the stateof-the-art emotional conversational model (EmoDS) (Song
et al. 2019) produces generic or unrelated emotional responses due to the lack of specific modelling of rationality. In addition, existing rational conversational models,
e.g., the commonsense-aware conversational model (CCM)
(Zhou et al. 2018b), are not able to generate emotional responses, rendering them difficult to build long-term relationships with users (Zhou et al. 2018c).
A recent work (Roller et al. 2020) proposed to blend several human skills such as knowledge, personality, and empathy into a conversational agent and obtained the stateof-the-art performance in human evaluations. Their experimental analysis suggests that blending these skills is critical for achieving good human ratings. Motivated by the facts
that 1) rationality and emotion are two fundamental qualities
of humans and that 2) empirical performance improvement
has been achieved via combining several human qualities

Introduction
Rationality and emotion are two fundamental elements of
humans and indispensable to our social interactions (Keltner
and Haidt 1999; Colman 2003). Endowing agents with rationality and emotion has been one of the major milestones in
AI. In recent studies of conversational AI, there is an emerging research trend in endowing conversational models with
rationality (Zhou et al. 2018b; Zhang et al. 2020) or emotion (Zhou et al. 2018a; Song et al. 2019). Rational conversational models can leverage commonsense knowledge to
reason and have been shown to produce more appropriate
and informative responses (Zhou et al. 2018b). Emotional
conversational models can generate appropriate emotional
responses, leading to improved user satisfaction (Prendinger
and Ishizuka 2005; Zhou et al. 2018a) and long-term relationships with users (Zhou et al. 2018c).
Rationality and emotion are not independent for humans
(De Sousa 1990). In fact, emotions are often rational in
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
One exception is XiaoIce (Zhou et al. 2018c); however, it has
no public API and only supports Mandarin.

14577

