The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multimodal Fusion via Teacher-Student Network for Indoor Action Recognition
Bruce X.B. Yu, Yan Liu,* Keith C.C. Chan
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{csxbyu, csyliu}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, keithccchan@gmail.com

Abstract
Indoor action recognition plays an important role in modern
society, such as intelligent healthcare in large mobile cabin
hospitals. With the wide usage of depth sensors like Kinect,
multimodal information including skeleton and RGB modalities brings a promising way to improve the performance.
However, existing methods are either focusing on a single
data modality or failed to take the advantage of multiple data
modalities. In this paper, we propose a Teacher-Student Multimodal Fusion (TSMF) model1 that fuses the skeleton and
RGB modalities at the model level for indoor action recognition. In our TSMF, we utilize a teacher network to transfer the structural knowledge of the skeleton modality to a
student network for the RGB modality. With extensive experiments on two benchmarking datasets: NTU RGB+D and
PKU-MMD, results show that the proposed TSMF consistently performs better than state-of-the-art single modal and
multimodal methods. It also indicates that our TSMF could
not only improve the accuracy of the student network but also
significantly improve the ensemble accuracy.

Reading

Playing with phone

Writing

Typing

Figure 1: Four sample actions that are challenging for the
skeleton modality in NTU-RGB+D (their left parts represent
the skeleton modality, while right parts represent the RGB
modality). Our motivation is to build effective representation for the RGB modality that will compensate the lack of
appearance features in the skeleton modality.
features so as to infer the particular type of an action (Yan,
Xiong, and Lin 2018; Si et al. 2019). To understand the
limitations of the current skeleton-based action recognition
methods, we illustrate four challenging actions (i.e., “reading”, “writing”, “playing with phone” and “typing”) from
the NTU-RGB+D dataset (Shahroudy et al. 2016) in Figure
1. The four actions have similar movements in the skeleton
modality, which makes them hard to be recognized by even
more advanced graph-based models like (Shi et al. 2019b;
Liu et al. 2020). The major limitation of these skeletonbased approaches is that they do not consider the appearance
feature of the RGB modality that contains different object
information. On the other hand, video-based methods are
mainly developed to model representations from the optical
flow and RGB video data modalities (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Xie et al. 2018; Tran et al. 2015; Feichtenhofer,
Pinz, and Zisserman 2016; Feichtenhofer et al. 2019). For
these video-based approaches, they fail to consider the 3D
structure information in the skeleton modality. Moreover,
existing video-based models (Carreira and Zisserman 2017;
Xie et al. 2018; Tran et al. 2015) seem to perform well for
outdoor actions with different background scenes but not for
indoor actions collected by Kinect. Specifically, (Choi et al.
2019) conducted experiments with human subjects masked
from video data so that only information about the background scenes was retained. Despite the loss of human subject information, video-based methods in (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Xie et al. 2018; Tran et al. 2015) still could

Introduction
Since the release of the depth sensor called Kinect, visionbased action recognition has been attracting increasing attention. Kinect can provide multiple data modalities like
skeleton and RGB. Plenty of methods have been proposed
to learn neural representations from different data modalities captured by the sensor. For example, neural representation approaches have been proposed to learn human actions from skeleton and RGB data (Wei et al. 2017; Baradel,
Wolf, and Mille 2017, 2018). A key motivation of these multimodal approaches is to improve the action recognition accuracy by learning mutually independent or complementary
features from different data modalities. However, prior work
on action recognition in the Kinect sensor usually focus on
handling a single data modality, which is either the skeleton modality (Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Si et al. 2019) or
the RGB modality (Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Xie et al.
2018; Tran et al. 2015).
Methods that make use of the skeleton modality for action recognition usually focus on learning spatial-temporal
* denotes the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Code is available: https://github.com/bruceyo/TSMF

3199

