The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

SMT-based Safety Checking of
Parameterized Multi-Agent Systems
Paolo Felli, Alessandro Gianola, Marco Montali
Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy
{pfelli,gianola,montali}@inf.unibz.it

Abstract

so that possibly infinitely many concrete MASs must be considered: the task is to check whether a property is satisfied
by any (or all) concrete MASs that adhere to a fixed behavioral structure (such as a known catalogue of possible agent
templates), without fixing their number a priori.
In particular, the property we consider is that of safety:
a PMAS is said to be safe if bad states, characterized by a
state formula (existentially quantifying on agents), can never
be reached. Crucially, this must be verified irrespective of (i)
the number of agent instances that will be present at runtime,
(ii) the possible interactions they may have and executions
they may induce and (iii) the initial setup of the PMAS, i.e.,
the possible initial interpretation of a read-only, relational
data store that is used by PMASs for background data.
Safety checking is a key property not only of MASs but of
dynamic systems in general, with a long-standing tradition
(see, e.g., (Abdulla et al. 1996; Bloem, Jacobs, and Khalimov 2015)). Applications range from verification of protocols for swarms to applications for Industry 4.0 and ‘cloud
manufacturing’, where an unbounded number of manufacturing resources must be considered (Alechina et al. 2019).
In this paper we illustrate our theoretical result based on
the application of satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) (Barrett and Tinelli 2018) techniques for array-based systems
(ABSs) (Ghilardi et al. 2008; Ghilardi and Ranise 2010a; Alberti, Ghilardi, and Sharygina 2017; Calvanese et al. 2020),
and we characterize its soundness and completeness (and
decidability of the task). Specifically, we do so for the notable case of interleaved PMASs. This gives us the theoretical foundation for a practical implementation based on stateof-the-art SMT-based model-checkers, which is showcased
in (Felli, Gianola, and Montali 2020b) for a class of PMASs
more restricted than the one we study here. The implementation is available at (Felli, Gianola, and Montali 2020a).
The paper is organized as follows. We first state the contributions and discuss related literature. Then, we introduce PMASs, their interleaved execution semantics, and the
(un)safety checking problem. We then encode PMASs into
ABSs, which allows us to apply SMT-based techniques for
their verification. We also show the theoretical guarantees of
our verification procedure. Finally we discuss future work.
A simple example. Consider a scenario in which a swarm
of robotic agents intends to reach a protected room denoted
as C. To do so, from their initial location they have to first

We study the problem of verifying whether a given parameterized multi-agent system (PMAS) is safe, namely whether
none of its possible executions can lead to bad states. These
are captured by a state formula existentially quantifying over
agents. As the MAS is parameterized, it only describes the
finite set of possible agent templates, while the actual number of concrete agent instances that will be present at runtime, for each template, is unbounded and cannot be foreseen. We solve this problem via infinite-state model checking
based on satisfiability modulo theories (SMT), relying on the
theory of array-based systems. We formally characterize the
soundness, completeness and termination guarantees of our
approach under specific assumptions. This gives us a technique that is implementable on top of third-party, SMT-based
model checkers. Finally, we discuss how this approach lends
itself to richer parameterized and data-aware MAS settings
beyond the state-of-the-art solutions in the literature.

Introduction
The automated verification of Multi-Agent Systems (MASs)
typically amounts to check the existence of execution strategies for the achievement of given goals, or to compute counterexamples as evidence of points of potential failure. Model
checking (Clarke et al. 2018) is one of the most common
approaches to the verification of MASs, often with a focus
on strategic abilities (Bulling, Goranko, and Jamroga 2015).
However, a common limitation in this literature is the assumption that the system is finite-state and fully specified,
which in many applications requires to abstract or propositionalize crucial system features. Other approaches have
thus tackled the verification of MASs in settings that are
intrinsically infinite-state (Esparza et al. 2017), for which
explicit model-checking techniques cannot be used off-theshelf. In these settings, the model of the MAS is partially
specified or some sort of data component is present.
A notable example is that of parameterized MASs
(PMASs), addressed by a growing literature (Bloem, Jacobs,
and Khalimov 2015; Kouvaros and Lomuscio 2016, 2017;
Esparza et al. 2017; De Masellis and Goranko 2020). In
PMASs, the number of agents is unbounded and unknown,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6321

