The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Structure-aware Person Image Generation with
Pose Decomposition and Semantic Correlation
Jilin Tang1 , Yi Yuan1∗ , Tianjia Shao2 , Yong Liu3 , Mengmeng Wang3 , Kun Zhou2
1

NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University
{tangjilin, yuanyi}@corp.netease.com, {tjshao,mengmengwang}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn, kunzhou@acm.org
2

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of pose guided person
image generation, which aims to transfer a person image
from the source pose to a novel target pose while maintaining the source appearance. Given the inefficiency of standard
CNNs in handling large spatial transformation, we propose
a structure-aware flow based method for high-quality person
image generation. Specifically, instead of learning the complex overall pose changes of human body, we decompose the
human body into different semantic parts (e.g., head, torso,
and legs) and apply different networks to predict the flow
fields for these parts separately. Moreover, we carefully design the network modules to effectively capture the local and
global semantic correlations of features within and among
the human parts respectively. Extensive experimental results
show that our method can generate high-quality results under large pose discrepancy and outperforms state-of-the-art
methods in both qualitative and quantitative comparisons.

Figure 1: The generated person images in random target
poses by our method.

and target features. Specifically, the appearance flow based
methods aim to calculate the 2D coordinate offsets (i.e., appearance flow fields) that indicate which positions in the
source features should be sampled to reconstruct the corresponding target features. With such flow mechanism, the existing flow based methods can synthesize target images with
visually plausible appearances for most cases. However, it
is still challenging to generate satisfying results when there
are large pose discrepancies between the source and target
images (see Figure 5 for example).
To tackle this challenge, we propose a structure-aware
flow based method for high-quality person image generation. The key insight of our work is, incorporating the structure information can provide important priors to guide the
network learning, and hence can effectively improve the results. First, we observe that the human body is composed of
different parts with different motion complexities w.r.t. pose
changes. Hence, instead of using a unified network to predict the overall appearance flow field of human body, we decompose the human body into different semantic parts (e.g.,
head, torso, and legs) and employ different networks to estimate the flow fields for these parts separately. In this way,
we not only reduce the difficulty of learning the complex
overall pose changes, but can more precisely capture the
pose change of each part with a specific network. Second,
for close pixels belonging to each part of human body, the
appearance features are often semantically correlated. For
example, the adjacent positions inside the arm should have
similar appearances after being transformed to a new pose.
To this end, compared to the existing methods which generate features at target positions independently with limited

Introduction
Pose guided person image generation (Ma et al. 2017),
which aims to synthesize a realistic-looking person image in
a target pose while preserving the source appearance details
(as depicted in Figure 1), has aroused extensive attention due
to its wide range of practical applications for image editing,
image animation, person re-identification (ReID), and so on.
Motivated by the development of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in the image-to-image transformation
task (Zhu et al. 2017), many researchers (Ma et al. 2017,
2018; Zhu et al. 2019; Men et al. 2020) attempted to tackle
the person image generation problem within the framework
of generative models. However, as CNNs are not good at
tackling large spatial transformation (Ren et al. 2020), these
generation-based models may fail to handle the feature misalignment caused by the spatial deformation between the
source and target image, leading to the appearance distortions. To deal with the feature misalignment, recently, appearance flow based methods have been proposed (Ren et al.
2020; Liu et al. 2019; Han et al. 2019) to transform the
source features to align them with the target pose, modeling
the dense pixel-to-pixel correspondence between the source
∗

Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2656

