The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Document-Level Relation Extraction with Reconstruction
Wang Xu1 , Kehai Chen2 and Tiejun Zhao1
2

1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Kyoto, Japan
xuwang@hit-mtlab.net, khchen@nict.go.jp, tjzhao@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

However, during the training of DocRE model, the graph
representation universally encodes relation information
between all entity pairs regardless of whether there are
relationships between these entity pairs. For example,
Figure 1 shows three entities in an input document: XFiles, Chris Carter, and Fox Mulder. Intuitively, they are
three entity pairs: {X-Files, Chris Carter}, {X-Files, Fox
Mulder}, and {Chris Carter, Fox Mulder}. The DocRE
model learns the node representations of each entity pair
to classify their relation. As seen, there exists relationship
between {Chris Carter, Fox Mulder} in the reference,
indicating that there is naturally a reliable reasoning
path from Chris Carter to Fox Mulder. In comparison,
there do not exist relationships between {X-Files, Chris
Carter} and between {X-Files, Fox Mulder}, indicating
that there are not reasoning paths between {X-Files-Chris
Carter} or {X-Files, Fox Mulder}. However, the learned
graph representation models the three path dependencies
universally and does not consider whether there is a path
dependency between one target entity pair. As a result, {XFiles, Chris Carter} and {X-Files, Fox Mulder} without
relationships disperse the attention of the DocRE model
for the learning of {Fox Mulder, Chris Carter} with
relationship, which may further hinder the improvement of
the DocRE model.

In document-level relation extraction (DocRE), graph
structure is generally used to encode relation information
in the input document to classify the relation category
between each entity pair, and has greatly advanced the
DocRE task over the past several years. However, the
learned graph representation universally models relation
information between all entity pairs regardless of whether
there are relationships between these entity pairs. Thus, those
entity pairs without relationships disperse the attention of
the encoder-classifier DocRE for ones with relationships,
which may further hind the improvement of DocRE. To
alleviate this issue, we propose a novel encoder-classifierreconstructor model for DocRE. The reconstructor manages
to reconstruct the ground-truth path dependencies from the
graph representation, to ensure that the proposed DocRE
model pays more attention to encode entity pairs with
relationships in the training. Furthermore, the reconstructor
is regarded as a relationship indicator to assist relation
classification in the inference, which can further improve
the performance of DocRE model. Experimental results on
a large-scale DocRE dataset show that the proposed model
can significantly improve the accuracy of relation extraction
on a strong heterogeneous graph-based baseline. The code is
publicly available at https://github.com/xwjim/DocRE-Rec.

Introduction

To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel reconstructor
method to enable the DocRE model to model path
dependency between one entity pair with the ground-truth
relationship. To this end, the reconstructor generates a
sequence of node representations on the path from one
entity node to another entity node and thereby maximizes
the probability of its path if there is a ground-truth
relationship between one entity pair and minimizes the
probability otherwise. This allows the proposed DocRE
model to pay more attention to the learning of entity
pairs with relationships in the training, thereby learning an
effective graph representation for the subsequent relation
classification. Furthermore, the reconstructor is regarded as
a relationship indicator to assist relation classification in the
inference, which can further improve the performance of
DocRE model. Experimental results on a large-scale DocRE
dataset show that the proposed method gained improvement
of 1.7 F1 points over a strong heterogeneous graph-based
DocRE model, especially outperformed the recent state-of-

Graph structure plays an important role in the document
relation extraction (DocRE) (Christopoulou, Miwa, and
Ananiadou 2019; Sahu et al. 2019; Nan et al. 2020; Tang
et al. 2020). Typically, one unstructured input document is
first organized as a structure input graph (i.e., homogeneous
or heterogeneous graphs) based on syntactic trees, coreference, or heuristics rules, thereby building relationships
between entity pairs within and across multiple sentences of
the input document. Neural networks (i.e., graph network)
are used to iteratively encode the structure input graph
as a graph representation to model relation information
in the input document. The graph representation is fed
into one classifier to classify the relation category between
each entity pair, which has achieved the state-of-theart performance in DocRE (Christopoulou, Miwa, and
Ananiadou 2019; Nan et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14167

