The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A General Class of Transfer Learning Regression without Implementation Cost
Shunya Minami,1 Song Liu, 2 Stephen Wu, 1,3 Kenji Fukumizu, 1,3 Ryo Yoshida 1,3,4
1

The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI)
2
University of Bristol
3
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
4
National Institute for Materials Science
{mshunya, stewu, fukumizu, yoshidar}@ism.ac.jp, song.liu@bristol.ac.uk
Abstract

keeping the given source model unchanged. Two hyperparameters and the choice of the density-ratio model characterize
the proposed class. It can integrate and extend three popular
methods of TL within a unified framework, including TL
based on the cross-domain similarity regularization (Jalem
et al. 2018; Marx et al. 2005; Raina, Ng, and Koller 2006;
Kuzborskij and Orabona 2013, 2017), probabilistic TL using the density-ratio estimation (Liu and Fukumizu 2016;
Sugiyama, Suzuki, and Kanamori 2012), and the fine-tuning
of pretrained neural networks (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean
2015; Kirkpatrick et al. 2017; Yosinski et al. 2014).
In general, the model transfer operates through a regularization scheme to leverage the transferred knowledge between
different tasks. A conventional regularization aims to retain
similarity between the pretrained and transferred models.
This natural idea is what we referred to as the cross-domain
similarity regularization. On the other hand, the density-ratio
method operates with an opposite learning objective that we
call the cross-domain dissimilarity regularization; the discrepancy between two tasks is modeled and inferred, and the
transferred model is a weighted sum of the pretrained source
model and the newly trained model on the discrepancy. These
totally different methods can be unified within the proposed
framework.
To summarize, the features and contributions of our
method are as follows:
• The method can operate with any kinds of regression models.
• The proposed class, which has two hyperparameters, can
unify and hybridize three existing methods of TL, including the regularization based on cross-domain similarity
and dissimilarity.
• The two hyperparameters and a model for the density-ratio
function are selected through cross-validation. With this
unified workflow, an ordinary supervised learning without transfer can also be chosen if the previous learning
experience interferes with learning in the new task.
• The proposed method can be implemented with no extra
cost. With a simple transformation of the output variable,
the model can be trained using off-the-shelf libraries for regression that implement the `2 -loss minimization with any
regularization scheme. In addition, the method is applicable in scenarios where only the source model is accessible

We propose a novel framework that unifies and extends existing methods of transfer learning (TL) for regression. To bridge
a pretrained source model to the model on a target task, we
introduce a density-ratio reweighting function, which is estimated through the Bayesian framework with a specific prior
distribution. By changing two intrinsic hyperparameters and
the choice of the density-ratio model, the proposed method
can integrate three popular methods of TL: TL based on crossdomain similarity regularization, a probabilistic TL using the
density-ratio estimation, and fine-tuning of pretrained neural
networks. Moreover, the proposed method can benefit from its
simple implementation without any additional cost; the regression model can be fully trained using off-the-shelf libraries
for supervised learning in which the original output variable is
simply transformed to a new output variable. We demonstrate
its simplicity, generality, and applicability using various real
data applications.

Introduction
Transfer learning (TL) (Pan and Yang 2009; Yang et al. 2020)
is an increasingly popular machine learning framework that
covers a broad range of techniques of repurposing a set of
pretrained models on source tasks for another task of interest.
It is proven that TL has the potential to improve the prediction performance on the target task significantly, in particular,
given a limited supply of training data in which the learning
from scratch is less effective. To date, the most outstanding
successes of TL have been achieved by refining and reusing
specific layers of deep neural networks (Yosinski et al. 2014).
One or more layers in the pretrained neural networks are refined according to the new task using a limited target dataset.
The remaining layers are either frozen (frozen featurizer)
or almost unchanged (fine-tuning) during the cross-domain
adaptation.
In this study, we aim to establish a new class of TL, which
is applicable to any regression models. The proposed class
unifies different classes of existing TL methods for regression. To model the transition from a pretrained model to a
new model, we introduce a density-ratio reweighting function. The density-ratio function is estimated by conducting
a Bayesian inference with a specific prior distribution while
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8992

