The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Modeling Voters in Multi-Winner Approval Voting
Jaelle Scheuerman, 1 Jason Harman, 1,2 Nicholas Mattei, 3 K. Brent Venable 4
1

U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Stennis Space Center, MS, USA
2
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA, USA
3
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA
4
University of West Florida and Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Pensacola, FL, USA
jaelle.scheuerman@nrlssc.navy.mil, jharman@lsu.edu, nsmattei@tulane.edu, bvenable@ihmc.org
Abstract

strategize (Faliszewski, Hemaspaandra, and Hemaspaandra
2010; Faliszewski and Procaccia 2010). Voting truthfully is
just one possible heuristic that voters may use when faced
with complex voting scenarios in which the optimal strategy
is not easy to compute. For example, a recent study showed
that in a plurality election where there was uncertainty over
how many more votes were to be cast and a preferred candidate had no chance to win, voters would compromise and
vote for the current leader (Tal, Meir, and Gal 2015). In other
work on allocations, agents have been observed using local
strategies to manipulate when faced with a complex computation to find the optimal strategy (Mennle et al. 2015).
In this paper, we examine both the accuracy with which
these heuristics model decision making in single-winner and
multi-winner approval voting elections. We consider scenarios both with and without uncertainty that is represented, in
our case, as missing ballots in the election.
Multi-winner approval voting is particularly interesting
as a voter may have multiple sincere ballots they can cast,
with some being better than others (Meir et al. 2008; Walsh
2007). Understanding the behavioral component of strategic
actions plays an important role in agent models as the complexity of the voting scenarios increases. A computational
model can capture contextual information about an election
to predict voter’s choices in such settings and provide a better understanding of how voters behave at both the individual
and group level. Prediction accuracy is an important metric
for evaluating models of how humans vote. Accurate models
play a fundamental role in providing more reliable forecasts,
plausible explanations of voter behavior, and new models for
complexity analysis of voting settings (Mattei 2020).
Contributions. We perform a novel experiment to investigate voter behavior in multi-winner approval voting under uncertainty. We identify cognitively plausible heuristics
from the psychology literature that may serve as models of
voters’ responses, and we provide a quantitative analysis of
when and how often these models are deployed in the real
world. We evaluate these heuristics against others from the
literature on voting in terms of accuracy in predicting voters’ behavior, showing that none of these existing models
are very accurate. Finally, we propose a new model which
exhibits a significant performance improvement by taking
into account contextual information, such as the size of the
winning set, as well as human cognitive constraints.

In many real world situations, collective decisions are made
using voting and, in scenarios such as committee or board
elections, employing voting rules that return multiple winners. In multi-winner approval voting (AV), an agent submits
a ballot consisting of approvals for as many candidates as they
wish, and winners are chosen by tallying up the votes and
choosing the top-k candidates receiving the most approvals.
In many scenarios, an agent may manipulate the ballot they
submit in order to achieve a better outcome by voting in a way
that does not reflect their true preferences. In complex and uncertain situations, agents may use heuristics instead of incurring the additional effort required to compute the manipulation which most favors them. In this paper, we examine voting
behavior in single-winner and multi-winner approval voting
scenarios with varying degrees of uncertainty using behavioral data obtained from Mechanical Turk. We find that people generally manipulate their vote to obtain a better outcome,
but often do not identify the optimal manipulation. There are
a number of predictive models of agent behavior in the social choice and psychology literature that are based on cognitively plausible heuristic strategies. We show that the existing approaches do not adequately model our real-world data.
We propose a novel model that takes into account the size of
the winning set and human cognitive constraints; and demonstrate that this model is more effective at capturing real-world
behaviors in multi-winner approval voting scenarios.

1

Introduction

Computational Social Choice (COMSOC) investigates computational issues surrounding the aggregation of individual
preferences for the purposes of collective decision-making
(Brandt et al. 2016). There is a rich body of work that
focuses on the computational complexity of manipulating
elections under various voting rules (Faliszewski and Procaccia 2010). In some cases, it is easy for a voter to compute the optimal manipulation for a given scenario, e.g., an
agent casting a ballot for their second ranked candidate, who
would win over their third ranked candidate, when their most
preferred candidate has no chance in a plurality election.
However, in cases when it is computationally hard for the
agent to manipulate an election optimally, it is assumed that
voters will report their true preferences rather than trying to
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5709

