The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

HiGAN: Handwriting Imitation Conditioned on Arbitrary-Length Texts and
Disentangled Styles
Ji Gan, Weiqiang Wang *
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
ganji15@mails.ucas.ac.cn, wqwang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
"latent"

Given limited handwriting scripts, humans can easily visualize (or imagine) what the handwritten words/texts would look
like with other arbitrary textual contents. Moreover, a person
also is able to imitate the handwriting styles of provided reference samples. Humans can do such hallucinations, perhaps
because they can learn to disentangle the calligraphic styles
and textual contents from given handwriting scripts. However, computers cannot study to do such flexible handwriting
imitation with existing techniques. In this paper, we propose
a novel handwriting imitation generative adversarial network
(HiGAN) to mimic such hallucinations. Specifically, HiGAN
can generate variable-length handwritten words/texts conditioned on arbitrary textual contents, which are unconstrained
to any predefined corpus or out-of-vocabulary words. Moreover, HiGAN can flexibly control the handwriting styles of
synthetic images by disentangling calligraphic styles from the
reference samples. Experiments on handwriting benchmarks
validate our superiority in terms of visual quality and scalability when comparing to the state-of-the-art methods for handwritten word/text synthesis. The code and pre-trained models
can be found at https://github.com/ganji15/HiGAN.

"behind"

(b) Imagining OOV words

"brilliantly"

"the long text is abcdefghijklmnopq"
"brilliantly"

(a) Imitating styles

(c) Hallucinating long texts

Alphabet
"Madeod"

"hello"

"brilliantly"

Figure 1: Humans can easily learn the handwriting imitation
with the ability of hallucination.

With the invention of variational auto-encoders (VAEs)
(Kingma and Welling 2013) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Ian Goodfellow 2014), it has witnessed significant progress in the field of image synthesis in recent
years. Combining conceptions of VAEs and GANs, computers nowadays can not only synthesize realistic images
but also perform image-to-image translation between different visual domains (Zhu et al. 2017; Andrew Brock and Simonyan 2019; Yunjey Choi and Choo 2018; Yunjey Choi
2020; Hsin-Ying Lee and Yang 2018). However, a significant observation is that VAEs/GANs for handwriting synthesis mainly focus on generating fixed-sized images of isolated digits/characters. On the contrary, very few works have
explored to synthesize handwritten words/texts with GANs.
Particularly, we demonstrate that handwritten word/text synthesis is much more challenging than isolated character generation, since it faces the following three difficulties:

Introduction
Handwriting imitation aims at (1) synthesizing diverse, realistic handwriting images conditioned on arbitrary textual
contents and (2) imitating the calligraphic styles (e.g., the
text skew, slant, roundness, ligature, and stroke-width) of
reference handwriting samples. As shown in Fig. 1, humans
can quickly learn such handwriting imitation with the ability of hallucination. Explicitly speaking, after learning from
limited handwriting documentations, a person can visualize
(or imagine) what the handwritten words/texts would look
like conditioned on other arbitrary textual contents. Furthermore, providing a reference handwriting sample, a person
can also hallucinate new handwriting images of similar calligraphic styles but with different textual contents. Humans
can do such hallucinations, perhaps because they can learn to
disentangle the calligraphic styles and textual contents from
provided handwriting samples. If we can teach computers to
mimic this process, they possibly are capable of imitating
realistic handwriting as well as humans.

• Variable-Sized Images. The model must be capable of
synthesizing variable-sized images, since handwriting images of variable-length texts should have different sizes
(e.g., text images typically are longer than word images).
• Arbitrary Words/Texts. Given the language alphabet,
the model should generate readable handwriting images
conditioned on arbitrary texts that unconstrained to any
predefined corpus or out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words.

* Corresponding Author: Weiqiang Wang

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7484

