The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Fully Automated Manga Translation
Ryota Hinami1* , Shonosuke Ishiwatari1* , Kazuhiko Yasuda2 , Yusuke Matsui2
1

Mantra Inc.
The University of Tokyo
{hinami,ishiwatari}@mantra.co.jp
matsui@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp, yasuda@tkl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2

Abstract
We tackle the problem of machine translation (MT) of manga,
Japanese comics. Manga translation involves two important
problems in MT: context-aware and multimodal translation.
Since text and images are mixed up in an unstructured fashion in manga, obtaining context from the image is essential
for its translation. However, it is still an open problem how to
extract context from images and integrate into MT models. In
addition, corpus and benchmarks to train and evaluate such
models are currently unavailable. In this paper, we make the
following four contributions that establish the foundation of
manga translation research. First, we propose a multimodal
context-aware translation framework. We are the first to incorporate context information obtained from manga images.
It enables us to translate texts in speech bubbles that cannot
be translated without using context information (e.g., texts in
other speech bubbles, gender of speakers, etc.). Second, for
training the model, we propose the approach to automatic corpus construction from pairs of original manga and their translations, by which a large parallel corpus can be constructed
without any manual labeling. Third, we created a new benchmark to evaluate manga translation. Finally, on top of our proposed methods, we devised a first comprehensive system for
fully automated manga translation.

Figure 1: Given a manga page, our system automatically
translates the texts on the page into English and replaces the
original texts with the translated ones. c Mitsuki Kuchitaka.

What makes the translation of comics difficult? In comics,
an utterance by a character is often divided up into multiple
bubbles. For example, in the manga page shown on the left
side of Fig. 1, the female’s utterance is divided into bubbles
#1 to #3 and the male’s into #4 to #5. Since both the subject “I” and the verb “know” are omitted in the bubble #3, it
is essential to exploit the context from the previous or next
bubbles. What makes the problem even more difficult is that
the bubbles are not simply aligned from right to left, left
to right, or top to bottom. While the bubble #4 is spatially
closed to #1, the two utterances are not continuous. Thus, it
is necessary to parse the structure of the manga to recognize
the texts in the correct order. In addition, the visual semantic
information must be properly captured to resolve the ambiguities. For example, some Japanese word can be translated
into both “he”, “him”, “she”, or “her” so it is crucial to capture the gender of the characters.
These problems are related to context and multimodality; considering context is essential in comics translation
and we need to understand an image to capture the context.
Context-aware (Jean et al. 2017; Tiedemann and Scherrer

Introduction
Comics are popular all over the world. There are many different forms of comics around the world, such as manga
in Japan, webtoon in Korea, and manhua in China, all of
which have their own unique characteristics. However, due
to the high cost of translation, most comics have not been
translated and are only available in their domestic markets.
What if all comics could be immediately translated into
any language? Such a panacea for readers could be made
possible by machine translation (MT) technology. Recent
advances in neural machine translation (NMT) (Cho et al.
2014; Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015; Wu et al. 2016; Vaswani et al. 2017) have increased the number of applications of MT in a variety of
fields. However, there are no successful examples of MT for
comics.
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12998

