The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An Adaptive Hybrid Framework for Cross-domain Aspect-based Sentiment
Analysis
Yan Zhou1 , Fuqing Zhu1* , Pu Song1,2 , Jizhong Han1 , Tao Guo1 , Songlin Hu1,2*
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhouyan, zhufuqing, songpu, hanjizhong, guotao, husonglin}@iie.ac.cn
Abstract

domain to improve the prediction of the aspect terms with
their sentiment polarities in a target domain.
There are some studies focused on the domain adaptation
of fine-grained sentiment analysis. Ding et al. (Ding, Yu, and
Jiang 2017) combined neural network with rule-based auxiliary task for the domain adaptation of aspect extraction,
which is only a subtask of ABSA. Wang and Pan (Wang and
Pan 2018) presented a recursive neural network for crossdomain aspect and opinion co-extraction, which utilized the
shared dependency structure between different domains. To
alleviate the dependency on linguistic resources, Wang and
Pan (Wang and Pan 2019) used local and global memory
units to capture the transferable interactions of aspect and
opinion terms. These researches merely focused on the detection of aspect and opinion terms, while ABSA also need
to find out the correspondences between them. Li et al. (Li
et al. 2019b) proposed a transferable neural network with selective adversarial training for cross-domain ABSA, which
is the first attempt for the domain adaptation of ABSA. In
their model, the unlabeled target data are used by the domain discriminator to learn the common features across domains, while the task classifier is only trained on the source
data. This leads the target data can not be utilized to refine
the task classifier, even though these data may contain some
beneficial aspect and sentiment information.
In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Hybrid Framework
(AHF) which combines semi-supervised learning and adversarial training together for cross-domain aspect-based sentiment analysis. On the one hand, our framework utilizes the
pseudo labels generated on the target data to train the task
classifier, which can improve the task decision boundary. On
the other hand, our framework is able to align the feature distribution through adversarial training. Specifically, AHF is
comprised by a domain discriminator, a student network and
a teacher network. The domain discriminator equipped with
a gradient reversal layer is used to learn domain-invariant
features. We employ Mean Teacher model (Tarvainen and
Valpola 2017) which is comprised by a student and a teacher
network to implement pseudo-label based semi-supervised
learning. The teacher network tracks an exponential moving average of the student network weights, thus the teacher
tends to generate better pseudo labels than the student. The
student is trained on the labeled source data and the target
data with pseudo labels.

Cross-domain aspect-based sentiment analysis aims to utilize
the useful knowledge in a source domain to extract aspect
terms and predict their sentiment polarities in a target domain. Recently, methods based on adversarial training have
been applied to this task and achieved promising results. In
such methods, both the source and target data are utilized to
learn domain-invariant features through deceiving a domain
discriminator. However, the task classifier is only trained on
the source data, which causes the aspect and sentiment information lying in the target data can not be exploited by the
task classifier. In this paper, we propose an Adaptive Hybrid
Framework (AHF) for cross-domain aspect-based sentiment
analysis. We integrate pseudo-label based semi-supervised
learning and adversarial training in a unified network. Thus
the target data can be used not only to align the features via
the training of domain discriminator, but also to refine the task
classifier. Furthermore, we design an adaptive mean teacher
as the semi-supervised part of our network, which can mitigate the effects of noisy pseudo labels generated on the target
data. We conduct experiments on four public datasets and the
experimental results show that our framework significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Introduction
Aspect-based sentiment analysis (ABSA) is an important
task in fine-grained sentiment analysis (Liu 2012; Pontiki
et al. 2014; Thelwall et al. 2010), which involves aspect
extraction(AE) and aspect sentiment classification(ASC).
Given a sentence, the goal of ABSA is to identify the aspect
terms and infer the sentiment expressed on these aspects.
For example, given a sentence “I love Windows 7 which is a
vast improvement over Vista.”, this task need to extract the
aspect terms “Windows 7” and “Vista”, and predict the sentiment polarities towards them are positive and negative respectively. Many supervised models have been proposed for
this task (Li et al. 2019a; He et al. 2019; Zhou et al. 2019)
and achieved promising results. Unfortunately, these models
are highly dependent on large-scale training dataset which
may be not available in many practical situations. One of the
solutions to this problem is cross-domain aspect-based sentiment analysis, which utilizes the labeled data in a source
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
*Corresponding author.

14630

