The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Ref-NMS:
Breaking Proposal Bottlenecks in Two-Stage Referring Expression Grounding
Long Chen,2∗ Wenbo Ma,1∗ Jun Xiao,1† Hanwang Zhang,3 Shih-Fu Chang4
1

College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen
3
MReaL Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
DVMM Lab, Columbia University, New York
#2

Abstract
The prevailing framework for solving referring expression
grounding is based on a two-stage process: 1) detecting proposals with an object detector and 2) grounding the referent
to one of the proposals. Existing two-stage solutions mostly
focus on the grounding step, which aims to align the expressions with the proposals. In this paper, we argue that these
methods overlook an obvious mismatch between the roles of
proposals in the two stages: they generate proposals solely
based on the detection confidence (i.e., expression-agnostic),
hoping that the proposals contain all right instances in the
expression (i.e., expression-aware). Due to this mismatch,
current two-stage methods suffer from a severe performance
drop between detected and ground-truth proposals. To this
end, we propose Ref-NMS, which is the first method to yield
expression-aware proposals at the first stage. Ref-NMS regards all nouns in the expression as critical objects, and introduces a lightweight module to predict a score for aligning
each box with a critical object. These scores can guide the
NMS operation to filter out the boxes irrelevant to the expression, increasing the recall of critical objects, resulting in
a significantly improved grounding performance. Since RefNMS is agnostic to the grounding step, it can be easily integrated into any state-of-the-art two-stage method. Extensive
ablation studies on several backbones, benchmarks, and tasks
consistently demonstrate the superiority of Ref-NMS. Codes
are available at: https://github.com/ChopinSharp/ref-nms.

R1: a cat laying down
on a white towel next to
some keys. (#1)

#1

R2: cute cat with stripes
looking toward the cat
on a white towel. (#2)
person 0.61
cup 0.98
person 0.70

pizza 0.90

pizza 0.99
pizza 1.00

knife 1.00
pizza 0.99

R3: a person holding a
slice of pizza.

book 0.77

Figure 1: Upper: A typical REC example from RefCOCOg.
The two “similar” expressions (R1 and R2) refer to different objects. Below: An example of proposals from the firststage of prevailing MAttNet (Yu et al. 2018a). The proposals only contain bboxes with high detection confidence (>
0.65) regardless of the content of expression (e.g., The candidates knife, book, and cup are not mentioned in R3).
Red dashline bbox denotes the missing referent.

tasks are important for many downstream high-level applications such as VQA (Antol et al. 2015), navigation (Chen
et al. 2019b), and autonomous driving (Kim et al. 2019).
State-of-the-art REG methods can be classified into two
major categories: one-stage, proposal-free methods and twostage, proposal-driven methods. For the one-stage methods (Chen et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2019b; Liao et al. 2020),
they regard REG as a generalized object detection (or segmentation) task, and the whole textual expression is treated
as a specific object category. Although these one-stage methods achieve faster inference speed, their grounding performance, especially for complex expressions (e.g., in dataset
RefCOCOg), is still behind the two-stage counterpart. The
main reasons for the differences are two-fold: 1) The onestage methods naturally focus on the local content, i.e., they
fail to perform well in the expressions which need global
reasoning. For example in Figure 1, when grounding “a cat
laying down on a white towel next to some keys”, it is even
difficult for humans to identify the referent cat without

Introduction
Referring Expression Grounding (REG), i.e., localizing the
targeted instance (referent) in an image given a natural language description, is a longstanding task for multimodal understanding. Considering different granularities of localization, there are two sub-types of REG: 1) Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) (Hu et al. 2017, 2016; Yu et al.
2016, 2017), where the referents are localized by bounding boxes (bboxes). 2) Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) (Hu, Rohrbach, and Darrell 2016; Liu et al.
2017; Shi et al. 2018; Margffoy-Tuay et al. 2018), where
the referents are localized by segmentation masks. Both two
∗

indicates equal contribution ({longc, mwb}@zju.edu.cn).
indicates corresponding author (junx@zju.edu.cn).
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1036

