The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Personalized Adaptive Meta Learning for Cold-start User Preference Prediction
Runsheng Yu,1 Yu Gong, 2 Xu He, 1 Yu Zhu , 2 Qingwen Liu,2 Wenwu Ou,2 Bo An 1
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
Alibaba Group
runshengyu@gmail.com, gongyu.gy@alibaba-inc.com, hexu0003@e.ntu.edu.sg, boan@ntu.edu.sg, zy143829@alibaba-inc.com,
xiangsheng.lqw@alibaba-inc.com, santong.oww@taobao.com

Abstract
A common challenge in personalized user preference prediction is the cold-start problem. Due to the lack of user-item
interactions, directly learning from the new users’ log data
causes serious over-fitting problem. Recently, many existing
studies regard the cold-start personalized preference prediction
as a few-shot learning problem, where each user is the task and
recommended items are the classes, and the gradient-based
meta learning method (MAML) is leveraged to address this
challenge. However, in real-world application, the users are
not uniformly distributed (i.e., different users may have different browsing history, recommended items, and user profiles.
We define the major users as the users in the groups with large
numbers of users sharing similar user information, and other
users are the minor users), existing MAML approaches tend
to fit the major users and ignore the minor users. To address
this cold-start task-overfitting problem, we propose a novel
personalized adaptive meta learning approach to consider both
the major and the minor users with three key contributions:
1) We are the first to present a personalized adaptive learning
rate meta-learning approach to improve the performance of
MAML by focusing on both the major and minor users. 2)
To provide better personalized learning rates for each user,
we introduce a similarity-based method to find similar users
as a reference and a tree-based method to store users’ features for fast search. 3) To reduce the memory usage, we
design a memory agnostic regularizer to further reduce the
space complexity to constant while maintain the performance.
Experiments on MovieLens, BookCrossing, and real-world
production datasets reveal that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods dramatically for both the minor and
major users.

Figure 1: An example illustrating that MAML has limitations
in the cold-start user imbalanced dataset. Users 1, 2, 3 are the
major users and user 4 is the minor user.

Introduction
Recommender Systems (RS) help people to discover the
items they prefer (Guo et al. 2017; Qu et al. 2016). In order
to train a well-performing personalized user preference predictor, enough interactions with users are indispensable. To
address this challenge, many researchers take advantage of
the offline supervised training methods, which leverage the
historical data (log data) to train the model. However, when
the log data is lacking, these supervised training methods
cause the over-fitting issues (Vanschoren 2018), which is
known as the cold-start problem.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10772

To train a well-performing model in the cold-start problem, meta learning-based approaches are introduced (Lee
et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2020). Intuitively, learning with a
few samples can be viewed as a few-shot learning problem
and meta learning, especially gradient-based meta learning
(e.g., Model Agnostic Meta Learning, MAML (Finn, Abbeel,
and Levine 2017)), which aims to adapt to any task with
only a few steps of parameter update, has been proven as
one of the most successful approaches for these problems.
Thanks to its good generalization ability, MAML has already
been leveraged into various domains, including computer vision, natural language process, and robotics (Gui et al. 2018;
Madotto et al. 2019; Finn et al. 2017). Recently, in the RS
area, meta learning is introduced for the cold-start problem
for either users or items, which treats the users/items as tasks,
log data as samples, and learns to do fast adaptation when
meeting new tasks (Dong et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2019; Lee
et al. 2019; Luo et al. 2020).
However, these MAML methods assume that the distribution of tasks (users) is uniform. But in the recommendation
systems, the user distribution is not always balanced, i.e.,
the user profile, browsing history, as well as the features of

