The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Feature Space Adversarial Attack by Style Perturbation
Qiuling Xu, Guanhong Tao, Siyuan Cheng, Xiangyu Zhang
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
305 N University St
West Lafayette, Indiana 47907
{xu1230, taog, cheng535, xyzhang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose a new adversarial attack to Deep Neural Networks
for image classification. Different from most existing attacks
that directly perturb input pixels, our attack focuses on perturbing abstract features, more specifically, features that denote
styles, including interpretable styles such as vivid colors and
sharp outlines, and uninterpretable ones. It induces model misclassfication by injecting imperceptible style changes through
an optimization procedure. We show that our attack can generate adversarial samples that are more natural-looking than
the state-of-the-art unbounded attacks. The experiment also
supports that existing pixel-space adversarial attack detection
and defense techniques can hardly ensure robustness in the
style related feature space. 1

Introduction
Adversarial attacks are a prominent threat to the broad application of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). In the context of
classification applications, given a pre-trained model M and
a benign input x of some output label y, adversarial attack
perturbs x such that M misclassifies the perturbed x. The
perturbed input is called an adversarial example. Such perturbations are usually bounded by some distance norm such that
they are not perceptible by humans. Since it was proposed
in (Szegedy et al. 2014), there has been a large body of research that develops various methods to construct adversarial
examples with different modalities (e.g., images (Carlini and
Wagner 2017), audio (Qin et al. 2019), text (Ebrahimi et al.
2018), and video (Li et al. 2019)), to detect adversarial examples (Tao et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2019), and use adversarial
examples to harden models (Madry et al. 2018; Zhang et al.
2019).
However, most existing attacks (in the context of image
classification) are in the pixel space. That is, bounded perturbations are directly applied to pixels. In this paper, we
illustrate that adversarial attack can be conducted in the style
related feature space. The underlying assumption is that during training, a DNN may extract a large number of abstract
features. While many of them denote critical characteristics
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
The appendix and code are available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2004.12385 and https://github.com/qiulingxu/FeatureSpaceAttack
respectively.

10523

of the object, some of them are secondary, for example, the
different styles of an image (e.g., vivid colors versus pale
colors, sharp outlines versus blur outlines). These secondary
features may play an improperly important role in model
prediction. As a result, feature space attack can inject such
secondary features, which are not simple pixel perturbation,
but rather functions over the given benign input, to induce
model misclassification. Since humans are not sensitive to
these features, the resulted adversarial examples look natural from humans’ perspective. As many of these features
are pervasive, the resulted pixel space perturbation may be
much more substantial than existing pixel space attacks. As
such, pixel space defense techniques may become ineffective
for feature space attacks (see Evaluation section). Figure 1
shows a number of adversarial examples generated by our
technique, their comparison with the original examples, and
the pixel space distances. Observe that while the distances
are much larger compared to those in pixel space attacks, the
adversarial examples are natural, or even indistinguishable
from the original inputs in humans’ eyes. The contrast of the
benign-adversarial pairs illustrates that the malicious perturbations largely co-locate with the primary content features,
denoting imperceptible style changes.
Under the hood, we consider that the activations of an inner layer represent a set of abstract features, including those
primary and secondary. Distinguishing the two types of features is crucial for the quality of feature-space attack. To
avoid generating adversarial examples that are unnatural, we
refrain from tampering with the primary features (or content
features) and focus on perturbing the secondary style features. Inspired by the recent advance in style transfer (Huang
and Belongie 2017), the mean and variance of activations
are considered the style. As such, we focus on perturbing
the means and variances while preserving the shape of the
activation values (i.e., the up-and-downs of these values and
the relative scale of such up-and-downs). We use gradient
driven optimization to search for the style perturbations that
can induce misclassification. Since our threat model is the
same as existing pixel space attacks, that is, the attack is
launched by providing the adversarial example to the model.
An important step is to translate the activations with style
changes back to a naturally looking pixel space example. We
address the problem by considering the differences of any
pair of training inputs of the same class as the possible style

