The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Secure Bilevel Asynchronous Vertical Federated Learning
with Backward Updating
Qingsong Zhang1,2 , Bin Gu 3,4 , Cheng Deng1,∗ , and Heng Huang3,5∗
1

School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China; 2 JD Tech, Beijing 100176, China.
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA; 4 MBZUAI, United Arab Emirates
5
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{qszhang1995, jsgubin, chdeng.xd, henghuanghh}@gmail.com
Abstract

Vertical federated learning (VFL) attracts increasing attention
due to the emerging demands of multi-party collaborative modeling and concerns of privacy leakage. In the real VFL applications, usually only one or partial parties hold labels, which
makes it challenging for all parties to collaboratively learn
the model without privacy leakage. Meanwhile, most existing
VFL algorithms are trapped in the synchronous computations,
which leads to inefficiency in their real-world applications. To
address these challenging problems, we propose a novel VFL
framework integrated with new backward updating mechanism and bilevel asynchronous parallel architecture (VFB2 ),
under which three new algorithms, including VFB2 -SGD, SVRG, and -SAGA, are proposed. We derive the theoretical
results of the convergence rates of these three algorithms under both strongly convex and nonconvex conditions. We also
prove the security of VFB2 under semi-honest threat models.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our algorithms are efficient, scalable and lossless.

Introduction
Federated learning (McMahan et al. 2016; Smith et al. 2017;
Kairouz et al. 2019) has emerged as a paradigm for collaborative modeling with privacy-preserving. A line of recent
works (McMahan et al. 2016; Smith et al. 2017) focus on
the horizontal federated learning, where each party has a subset of samples with complete features. There are also some
works (Gascón et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2019b; Dang et al.
2020) studying the vertical federated learning (VFL), where
each party holds a disjoint subset of features for all samples.
In this paper, we focus on VFL that has attracted much attention due to its wide applications to emerging multi-party
collaborative modeling with privacy-preserving.
Currently, there are two mainstream methods for VFL, including homomorphic encryption (HE) based methods and
exchanging the raw computational results (ERCR) based
methods. The HE based methods (Hardy et al. 2017; Cheng
et al. 2019) leverage HE techniques to encrypt the raw data
and then use the encrypted data (ciphertext) for training
model with privacy-preserving. However, there are two major
drawbacks of HE based methods. First, the complexity of
∗

Corresponding Authors
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10896

homomorphic mathematical operation on ciphertext field is
very high, thus HE is extremely time consuming for modeling
(Liu, Ng, and Zhang 2015; Liu et al. 2019). Second, approximation is required for HE to support operations of non-linear
functions, such as Sigmoid and Logarithmic functions, which
inevitably causes loss of the accuracy for various machine
learning models using non-linear functions (Kim et al. 2018;
Yang et al. 2019a). Thus, the inefficiency and inaccuracy of
HE based methods dramatically limit their wide applications
to realistic VFL tasks.
ERCR based methods (Zhang et al. 2018; Hu et al. 2019;
Gu et al. 2020b) leverage labels and the raw intermediate computational results transmitted from the other parties to compute stochastic gradients, and thus use distributed stochastic
gradient descent (SGD) methods to train VFL models efficiently. Although ERCR based methods circumvent aforementioned drawbacks of HE based methods, existing ERCR
based methods are designed with only considering that all
parties have labels, which is not usually the case in real-world
VFL tasks. In realistic VFL applications, usually only one
or partial parties (denoted as active parties) have the labels,
and the other parties (denoted as passive parties) can only
provide extra feature data but do not have labels. When these
ERCR based methods are applied to the real situation with
both active and passive parties, the algorithms even cannot
guarantee the convergence because only active parties can
update the gradient of loss function based on labels but the
passive parties cannot, i.e. partial model parameters are not
optimized during the training process. Thus, it comes to the
crux of designing the proper algorithm for solving real-world
VFL tasks with only one or partial parties holding labels.
Moreover, algorithms using synchronous computation
(Gong, Fang, and Guo 2016; Zhang et al. 2018) are inefficient when applied to real-world VFL tasks, especially, when
computational resources in the VFL system are unbalanced.
Therefore, it is desired to design the efficient asynchronous
algorithms for real-world VFL tasks. Although there have
been several works studying asynchronous VFL algorithms
(Hu et al. 2019; Gu et al. 2020b), it is still an open problem to
design asynchronous algorithms for solving real-world VFL
tasks with only one or partial parties holding labels.
In this paper, we address these challenging problems by
proposing a novel framework (VFB2 ) integrated with the
novel backward updating mechanism (BUM) and bilevel

