The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Efficient Online Allocations with Normalized Valuations
Vasilis Gkatzelis,1 Alexandros Psomas, 2 Xizhi Tan 1
1

Drexel University
Purdue University
gkatz@drexel.edu, apsomas@cs.purdue.edu, xizhi@drexel.edu
2

fairness, requires that each of the n agents should eventually receive at least a 1/n fraction of their total value for all
the T items. But, agents who only value highly demanded
items are harder to satisfy than agents who value items of
low demand, and online algorithms may be unable to distinguish between these two types of agents soon enough. As a
result, designing efficient online algorithms that also satisfy
the fair-share property is an important, yet non-trivial, task.
In fact, it is easy to show that without imposing any normalization on the agent values, essentially the only algorithm that guarantees the fair-share property is the naive one
that equally splits every item among all agents (see the full
version of this paper for a proof). This yields an outcome that
is inefficient unless all agents happen to have the same values. But, the standard approach in fair division is to normalize the agents’ values so that they add up to the same constant (that constant is usually 1) (Aziz 2019). As we show in
this paper, this normalization is sufficient for us to escape the
strong impossibility result and achieve non-trivial efficiency
guarantees while satisfying the fair-share property.

Abstract
A set of divisible resources becomes available over a sequence of rounds and needs to be allocated immediately and
irrevocably. Our goal is to distribute these resources to maximize fairness and efficiency. Achieving any non-trivial guarantees in an adversarial setting is impossible. However, we
show that normalizing the agent values, a very common assumption in fair division, allows us to escape this impossibility. Our main result is an online algorithm for the case of
two agents that ensures the outcome is fair while guaranteeing 91.6% of the optimal social welfare. We also show that
this is near-optimal: there is no fair algorithm that guarantees
more than 93.3% of the optimal social welfare.

Introduction
We consider a basic problem in online fair division: a set
of divisible items become available over a sequence of T
rounds (one item per round), and in each round we need to
make an irrevocable decision regarding how to distribute the
corresponding item among a set N of n agents. The value
vit of each agent i for the item in round t is revealed at the
beginning of that round and our goal is to ensure that the
overall allocation at the end of the T rounds is fair and efficient, despite the information limitations that we face.
Prior work on online resource allocation problems such as
the one above has mostly focused on maximizing efficiency.
In our setting, this could easily be achieved by fully allocating the item of each round t to the agent i with the largest
vit value. However, this approach can often lead to outcomes
that are patently unfair, which is unacceptable in many important real-world applications. For example, ensuring that
the outcome is fair is crucial for food banks that allocate
food each day to soup kitchens and other local charities depending on the demand (Prendergast 2017), or software engineering companies that distribute shared computational resources among their employees (Gorokh et al. 2020).
Achieving fairness in such an online setting can be significantly more complicated than just maximizing efficiency.
This is mostly due to the fact that reaching a fair outcome
may require a more holistic view of the instance at hand.
For example, the fair-share property (also referred to as proportionality in some contexts), one of the classic notions of

Our Results and Techniques
With the exception of a few results in Section , all of our results focus on instances involving two agents, which already
pose several non-trivial obstacles.
We first consider the performance of non-adaptive online algorithms, i.e., algorithms whose allocation decision
in each round t depends only on the agents’ values for item
t. A major benefit of these algorithms is that they need not
keep track of any additional information, making them easy
to implement. We focus on the interesting family of polyproportional algorithms that are parameterized by a value
p ≥ 0, and in each round t allocate to each agent i a fracvp
tion of the item equal to P it vp . For p = 0, we recover
j∈N jt
the algorithm that splits each item equally among the agents
(which satisfies fair-share but can be inefficient), while for
p = ∞ we get the algorithm that allocates each item to the
agent with the highest value (which is efficient but violates
fair-share). Another well-studied algorithm from this family,
that is used widely in practice, is the proportional allocation
(or just proportional) algorithm, which corresponds to the
case p = 1. We show that this algorithm satisfies fair-share
and is a significant improvement in terms of efficiency: it

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5440

