The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Verifier Networks: Verification of Deep Discriminative Models with Deep
Generative Models
Tong Che†1 , Xiaofeng Liu† * 2 , Site Li3 , Yubin Ge4 , Ruixiang Zhang1 , Caiming Xiong5 ,
Yoshua Bengio1
1

Mila, Universit de Montral
Harvard Medical School, Harvard University
3
Carnegie Mellon University
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
5
Salesforce Research
liuxiaofengcmu@gmail.com

2

AI Safety is a major concern in many deep learning applications such as autonomous driving. Given a trained deep
learning model, an important natural problem is how to reliably verify the model’s prediction. In this paper, we propose a novel framework — deep verifier networks (DVN)
to detect unreliable inputs or predictions of deep discriminative models, using separately trained deep generative models. Our proposed model is based on the concise conditional
variational auto-encoders with disentanglement constraints to
separate the label information from the latent representation.
We give both intuitive and theoretical justifications for the
model. Our verifier network is trained independently with the
prediction model, which eliminates the need of retraining the
verifier network for a new model. We test the verifier network
on both out-of-distribution detection and adversarial example
detection problems, as well as anomaly detection problems in
structured prediction tasks such as image caption generation.
We achieve state-of-the-art results in all of these problems.

Classifier
Training

softmax

Abstract

CE loss

The logo of AAAI
（resized）

Testing

Classifier

softmax

CIFAR-10

Plane

Figure 1: A network trained on CIFAR-10 will predict the
resized 32×32×3 AAAI logo (OOD sample w.r.t. CIFAR10) as the plane with high confidence.

different test distribution is unpredictable. One such problematic case is also shown in Fig. 1. Unfortunately, there
is very little control over the test distribution in real-world
deployments due to dynamically changing environments or
malicious attacks (Guo et al. 2017). In fact, well calibrating
the predictive uncertainty of DNNs is important for many
authentication, medical and self-driving systems (Liu et al.
2019b, 2017a, 2019a, 2020d,c,e, 2019c, 2020b,f, 2019f,
2018e,c; Han et al. 2020).
Being overconfident on out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs
has raised concerns about the safety of artificial intelligence
(AI) systems. Recent research efforts try to address these
concerns by developing models that can identify anomalous inputs, i.e., OOD samples (Amodei et al. 2016). Formally, the OOD detection problem can be formulated as a
binary classification problem where the objective is to decide whether a test sample is from the training distribution (i.e., in-distribution, ID) or from a different distribution
(i.e., OOD).
In this paper, we propose to verify the predictions of deep
discriminative models by using deep generative models that
try to generate the input conditioned on the label selected by
the discriminative model. We call this concept ”deep ver-

Introduction
Deep learning models provide state-of-the-art performance in various applications such as image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Wang et al.
2020), caption generation (Xu et al. 2015), sequence modeling (Chung et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2018a) and machine
translation (Xu et al. 2015). However, such performance is
based on the assumption that the training and testing data
are sampled from the same distribution (Goodfellow et al.
2016). Without this assumption, deep learning models can
fail silently by producing high confidence incorrect predictions even on completely unrecognizable or irrelevant inputs (Amodei et al. 2016). For instance, the models trained
on MNIST can produce 91% confidence on random noise
images (Hendrycks and Gimpel 2016). Generally speaking,
the behavior of a trained deep learning model on a slightly
* Corresponding author. † Contribute equally

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7002

