The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

TIME: Text and Image Mutual-Translation Adversarial Networks
Bingchen Liu, Kunpeng Song, Yizhe Zhu, Gerard de Melo, Ahmed Elgammal
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
{bingchen.liu, kunpeng.song, yizhe.zhu}@rutgers.edu
gdm@demelo.org, elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract

is introduced, which better aligns the image features and
word embeddings via an attention mechanism.
While the T2I performance continues to advance (Qiao
et al. 2019; Zhu et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a;
Yin et al. 2019; Hinz, Heinrich, and Wermter 2019), the
follow-up methods all share two common traits. First, they
all adopt the same stacked structure of G that requires multiple Ds. Second, they all rely on the pre-trained DAMSM
from AttnGAN to maintain the image–text consistency. However, these methods fail to take advantage of recent advances
in both the GAN and NLP literature (Karras et al. 2017;
Karras, Laine, and Aila 2019; Vaswani et al. 2017; Devlin
et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2019). The rapidly progressing research in these two fields provides the opportunity to explore
a substantial departure from previous work on text-to-image
modeling. In particular, as StackGAN and follow-up works
all depend on 1. a pre-trained text encoder for word and
sentence embeddings, 2. an additional image encoder to ascertain image–text consistency, two important questions arise.
First, can we skip the pre-training step and elegantly train
the text encoder as part of D? Second, can we abandon the
extra CNN (in the DAMSM module which extracts image
features) and use D as the image encoder? If the answers are
affirmative, two further questions can be explored. When D
and the text encoder are jointly trained to match the visual
and text features, can we obtain an image captioning model
from them? Furthermore, since D is trained to extract textrelevant image features, will it benefit G in generating more
semantically consistent images?
With these questions in mind, we present the Text and
Image Mutual-translation adversarial nEtwork (TIME). To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that jointly
handles both text-to-image and image captioning in a single
model using the GAN framework. Our contributions can be
summarized as follows:

Focusing on text-to-image (T2I) generation, we propose Text
and Image Mutual-Translation Adversarial Networks (TIME),
a lightweight but effective model that jointly learns a T2I generator G and an image captioning discriminator D under the
Generative Adversarial Network framework. While previous
methods tackle the T2I problem as a uni-directional task and
use pre-trained language models to enforce the image–text
consistency, TIME requires neither extra modules nor pretraining. We show that the performance of G can be boosted
substantially by training it jointly with D as a language model.
Specifically, we adopt Transformers to model the cross-modal
connections between the image features and word embeddings,
and design an annealing conditional hinge loss that dynamically balances the adversarial learning. In our experiments,
TIME achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on the
CUB dataset (Inception Score of 4.91 and Fréchet Inception
Distance of 14.3 on CUB), and shows promising performance
on MS-COCO dataset on image captioning and downstream
vision-language tasks.

Introduction
There are two main aspects to consider when approaching the
text-to-image (T2I) task: the image generation quality and the
image–text semantic consistency. The T2I task is commonly
modeled by a conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(cGAN) (Mirza and Osindero 2014; Goodfellow et al. 2014),
where a Generator (G) is trained to generate images given the
texts describing the contents, and a Discriminator (D) learns
to determine the authenticity of the images, conditioned on
the semantics defined by the given texts.
To address the first aspect, Zhang et al. (2017) introduced
StackGAN by letting G generate images at multiple resolutions, and adopted multiple Ds to jointly refine G from coarse
to fine levels. StackGAN invokes a pre-trained RecurrentNeural-Network (RNN) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997;
Mikolov et al. 2010) to provide text conditioning for the
image generation. To approach the second aspect, Xu et al.
(2018) take StackGAN as the base model and propose AttnGAN, which incorporates word embeddings into the generation and consistency-checking processes. A pre-trained
Deep-Attentional-Multimodal-Similarity-Model (DAMSM)

1. We propose an efficient model, Text and Image MutualTranslation Adversarial Networks (TIME), for T2I tasks
trained in an end-to-end fashion, without any need for
pre-trained models or complex training strategies.
2. We introduce two techniques: 2-D positional encoding for
a better attention operation and annealing hinge loss to
dynamically balance the learning paces of G and D.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3. We show that sentence-level text features are no longer
2082

