The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Topology Distance: A Topology Based Approach for Evaluating Generative
Adversarial Networks
Danijela Horak,1 Simiao Yu, 1 Gholamreza Salimi-Khorshidi 1,2
1
AIG
University of Oxford
danijela.horak@aig.com, simiao.yu@aig.com, reza.khorshidi@aig.com
2

Abstract

of the goodness of such models (e.g., whether or not the data
generated by such models are similar to the data they were
trained on). Unlike supervised learning, where the goodness
of the models can be assessed by comparing their predictions
with the actual labels, or in some other deep-learning models
where the goodness of the model can be assessed using the
likelihood of the validation data under the distribution that
the real data comes from, in most state of the art generative
models we do not know this distribution explicitly or can not
rely on labels for such evaluations.
Given that the data (or their corresponding features) in
such situations can be assumed to lie on a manifold embedded in a high dimensional space (Goodfellow, Bengio, and
Courville 2016), tools from topology and geometry come
as a natural choice when studying differences between two
data set. We propose topology distance (TD) for the evaluation of GANs; it compares the the topological structures
of two manifolds, and calculates a distance between them to
evaluate their (dis)similarities. We compare TD with widelyused and relevant metrics, and demonstrate that it is more robust to noise compared to competing distance measures on
GAN’s, and it is better suited to distinguish among various
shapes that the data might come in. TD is able to evaluate
GANs with new insights different from other existing measurements. It can therefore be used either as an alternative
to, or in conjunction with other metrics.

Automatic evaluation of the goodness of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) has been a challenge for the field of
machine learning. In this work, we propose a distance complementary to existing measures: Topology Distance (TD),
the main idea behind which is to compare the geometric and
topological features of the latent manifold of real data with
those of generated data. More specifically, we build VietorisRips complex on image features, and define TD based on the
differences in persistent-homology groups of the two manifolds. We compare TD with the most commonly-used and
relevant measures in the field, including Inception Score (IS),
Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), Kernel Inception Distance
(KID) and Geometry Score (GS), in a range of experiments
on various datasets. We demonstrate the unique advantage
and superiority of our proposed approach over the aforementioned metrics. A combination of our empirical results and
the theoretical argument we propose in favour of TD, strongly
supports the claim that TD is a powerful candidate metric that
researchers can employ when aiming to automatically evaluate the goodness of GANs’ learning.

Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow
et al. 2014) are a class of deep generative models that have
achieved unprecedented performance in generating highquality and diverse images (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan
2019). They have also been successfully applied to a variety of image-generation tasks, e.g. super resolution (Ledig
et al. 2017), image-to-image translation (Zhu et al. 2017),
and text-to-image synthesis (Reed et al. 2016), to name a
few. The GAN framework consists of a generator G and a
discriminator D, where G generates images Xg that are expected to resemble real images Xr , while D discriminates
between Xg and Xr . G and D are trained by playing a twoplayer minimax game in a competing manner. Such novel
adversarial training process is a key factor in GANs’ success: It implicitly defines a learnable objective that is flexibly adaptive to various complicated image-generation tasks,
in which it would be difficult or impossible to explicitly define such an objective.
One of the biggest challenges in the field of generative
models – including for GANs – is the automatic evaluation

Related Work
There have been multiple metrics proposed to evaluate the
performance of GANs. In this paper we focus on the most
commonly-used and relevant approaches (as follows); for a
detailed account see (Borji 2018; Sajjadi et al. 2018).
Inception Score (IS) The main idea behind IS (Salimans
et al. 2016) is that generated images of high quality are expected to meet two requirements: They should contain easily classifiable objects (i.e. the conditional label distribution
p(y|x) with low entropy) and should be diverse (i.e. the
marginal distribution p(y) with high entropy). IS measures
the average KL divergence between these two distributions:
IS = exp(Ex∼pg [KL(p(y|x) || p(y))]),

(1)

where pg is the generative distribution. IS relies on a pretrained Inception model (Szegedy et al. 2016) for the classification of the generated images. Therefore, a key limitation

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7721

