The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Norm-Based Generalisation Bounds for Deep Multi-Class Convolutional Neural
Networks
Antoine Ledent 1 , Waleed Mustafa 1 , Yunwen Lei 1,2 and Marius Kloft 1
2

1
Department of Computer Science, TU Kaiserslautern, 67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany.
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom
1
{ledent,mustafa,kloft}@cs.uni-kl.de
2
y.lei@bham.ac.uk

Abstract

Bartlett, Foster, and Telgarsky 2017; Zhang, Lei, and Dhillon
2018; Li et al. 2018; Allen-Zhu, Li, and Liang 2019). Many
improvements have surfaced to make bounds non-vacuous at
realistic scales, including better depth dependence, bounds
that apply to ResNets (He, Liu, and Tao 2020), and PACBayesian bounds using network compression (Zhou et al.
2019), data-dependent Bayesian priors (Dziugaite and Roy
2018), fast rates (Suzuki 2018), and reduced dependence
on the product of spectral norms via data-dependent localisation (Wei and Ma 2019; Nagarajan and Kolter 2019). A
particularly interesting new branch of research combines
norm-based generalisation bounds with the study of how the
optimisation procedure (stochastic gradient descent) implicitly restricts the function class (Cao and Gu 2019; Du et al.
2019a; Arora et al. 2019; Du et al. 2019b; Jacot, Gabriel, and
Hongler 2018; Frankle and Carbin 2019). One idea at the
core of many of these works is that the weights stay relatively
close to initialisation throughout training, reinforcing lucky
guesses from the initialised network rather than constructing
a solution from scratch. Thus, in this branch of research, it
is critical that the bound is negligible when the network approaches initialisation, i.e., the number of weights involved
is not as important as their size. This observation was first
made as early as in (Bartlett 1998).
Despite progress in so many new directions, we note that
some basic questions of fundamental theoretical importance
have remain unsolved. (1) How can we remove or decrease
the dependence of bounds on the number of classes? (2) How
can we account for weight sharing in convolutional neural
networks (CNNs)? In the present paper, we contribute to an
understanding of both questions.
Question (1) is of central importance in extreme classification (Prabhu and Varma 2014), where we deal with an
extremely high number of classes (e.g. millions). (Bartlett,
Foster, and Telgarsky 2017) showed a bound with no explicit
class dependence (except for log terms). However, this bound
is formulated in terms of the L2,1 norms of the network’s
weight matrices. If we convert the occurring L2,1 norms into
the more commonly used L2 norms, we obtain a square-root
dependence on the number of classes.
Regarding (2), (Li et al. 2018) showed a bound that accounts for weight sharing. However, this bound is valid
only under the assumption of orthonormality of the weight
matrices. The assumption of unit norm weights—which is

We show generalisation error bounds for deep learning with
two main improvements over the state of the art. (1) Our
bounds have no explicit dependence on the number of classes
except for logarithmic factors. This holds even when formulating the bounds in terms of the Frobenius-norm of the weight
matrices, where previous bounds exhibit at least a squareroot dependence on the number of classes. (2) We adapt the
classic Rademacher analysis of DNNs to incorporate weight
sharing—a task of fundamental theoretical importance which
was previously attempted only under very restrictive assumptions. In our results, each convolutional filter contributes only
once to the bound, regardless of how many times it is applied.
Further improvements exploiting pooling and sparse connections are provided. The presented bounds scale as the norms of
the parameter matrices, rather than the number of parameters.
In particular, contrary to bounds based on parameter counting, they are asymptotically tight (up to log factors) when
the weights approach initialisation, making them suitable as a
basic ingredient in bounds sensitive to the optimisation procedure. We also show how to adapt the recent technique of loss
function augmentation to replace spectral norms by empirical
analogues whilst maintaining the advantages of our approach.

Introduction
Deep learning has enjoyed an enormous amount of success
in a variety of engineering applications in the last decade (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016; Silver
et al. 2018). However, providing a satisfying explanation to
its sometimes surprising generalisation capabilities remains
an elusive goal (Zhang et al. 2017; Du et al. 2019a; Asadi,
Abbe, and Verdu 2018; Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015). The statistical learning theory of deep learning approaches this question by providing a theoretical analysis
of the generalisation performance of deep neural networks
(DNNs) through better understanding of the complexity of
the function class corresponding to a given architecture or
training procedure.
This field of research has enjoyed a revival since 2017
with the advent of learning guarantees for DNNs expressed
in terms of various norms of the weight matrices and classification margins (Neyshabur, Bhojanapalli, and Srebro 2018;
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8279

