The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Planning from Pixels in Atari with Learned Symbolic Representations
Andrea Dittadi,* Frederik K. Drachmann,* Thomas Bolander
Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark
adit@dtu.dk, fdrachmann@hotmail.dk, tobo@dtu.dk

Abstract

integrated with heuristic search methods, leading to BestFirst Width Search (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2017) that performed well at the 2017 IPC. Width-based search has also
been adapted to reward-driven problems where the algorithm uses a simulator for interacting with the environment
(Francès et al. 2017). This has enabled the use of widthbased search in reinforcement learning environments such
as the Atari 2600 video game suite, through the Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al. 2013). There
have been several implementations of width-based search directly using the RAM states of the Atari computer as features (Lipovetzky, Ramirez, and Geffner 2015; Shleyfman,
Tuisov, and Domshlak 2016; Jinnai and Fukunaga 2017).
Motivated by the fact that humans do not have access to
RAM states when playing video games, methods for using
these algorithms from screen pixels have been developed.
Bandres, Bonet, and Geffner (2018) propose a modified version of IW, called RolloutIW, that uses pixel-based features
and achieves results comparable to learning methods in almost real-time on ALE. The combination of reinforcement
learning and RolloutIW in the pixel domain is explored by
Junyent, Jonsson, and Gómez (2019), who propose to train
a policy to guide the action selection in rollouts.
Width-based algorithms are highly exploratory and, not
surprisingly, significantly dependent on the quality of
the features defined. Bandres, Bonet, and Geffner (2018)
use a set of low-level, color-based features called BPROST (Liang et al. 2015), designed by humans to achieve
good performance in ALE. Integrating feature learning into
the algorithms themselves rather than using hand-crafted
features is an interesting challenge—and a challenge that
will bring the algorithms more on a par with humans learning to play those video games. The features used by Junyent,
Jonsson, and Gómez (2019) were the output features of the
last layer of the policy network, improving the performance
of IW. With the attempt to learn efficient features for widthbased search, and inspired by the results of Junyent, Jonsson,
and Gómez (2019), this paper investigates the possibility of
a more structured approach to generate features for widthbased search using deep generative models.
More specifically, in this paper we use variational autoencoders (VAE)—latent variable models that have been widely
used for representation learning (Kingma and Welling 2019)
as they allow for approximate inference of the latent vari-

Width-based planning methods have been shown to yield
state-of-the-art performance in the Atari 2600 domain using
pixel input. One successful approach, RolloutIW, represents
states with the B-PROST boolean feature set. An augmented
version of RolloutIW, π-IW, shows that learned features can
be competitive with handcrafted ones for width-based search.
In this paper, we leverage variational autoencoders (VAEs)
to learn features directly from pixels in a principled manner,
and without supervision. The inference model of the trained
VAEs extracts boolean features from pixels, and RolloutIW
plans with these features. The resulting combination outperforms the original RolloutIW and human professional play on
Atari 2600 and drastically reduces the size of the feature set.

Introduction
Width-based search algorithms have in the last few years
become among the state-of-the-art approaches to automated planning, e.g. the original Iterated Width (IW) algorithm (Lipovetzky and Geffner 2012). As in propositional
STRIPS planning, states are represented by a set of propositional literals, also called boolean features. The state space is
searched with breadth-first search (BFS), but the state space
explosion problem is handled by pruning states based on
their novelty. First, a parameter k is chosen, called the width
parameter of the search. Searching with width parameter k
essentially means that we only consider k literals/features at
a time. A state s generated during the search is called novel
if there exists a set of k literals/features not made true in
any earlier generated state. Unless a state is novel, it is immediately pruned from the search. Clearly, we then reduce
the size of the searched state space to be exponential in k.
It has been shown that many classical planning problems,
e.g. problems from the International Planning Competition
(IPC) domains, can be solved efficiently using width-based
search with very low values of k.
The essential benefit of using width-based algorithms is
the ability to perform semi-structured (based on feature
structures) exploration of the state space, and reach deep
states that may be important for achieving the planning
goals. In classical planning, width-based search has been
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4941

