The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adversarial Partial Multi-Label Learning with Label Disambiguation
Yan Yan,∗1 Yuhong Guo2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Canada
yanyan.nwpu@gmail.com, yuhong.guo@carleton.ca

Abstract

good multi-label prediction model from such a partial label
training set, and hence reduce the annotation cost.
An intuitive strategy of PML is to treat all candidate labels
as relevant ground truth, thus any off-the-shelf multi-label
classification method can be adapted to induce an expected
multi-label predictor (Zhang and Zhou 2014). This strategy,
though simple, cannot work well since taking the noise labels as part of the true labels will mislead the multi-label
training and induce inferior prediction models. The PML
work in (Xie and Huang 2018) assumes that each candidate label has a confidence score of being a true label, and
learns the confidence scores and the classifier in an alternative manner by minimizing a confidence weighted ranking
loss. Although this work yields some reasonable results, the
estimation of label confidence scores is error-prone, especially when noise labels dominate, which can seriously impair the classifier’s performance. The recent work in (Xie
and Huang 2020) proposes to perform ground-truth label recovery and noise label identification simultaneously by exploring the label correlations and the relationships between
the noise labels and feature representations. Another recent
work in (Fang and Zhang 2019) presents a two-stage PML
method. It estimates the confidence values of the candidate
labels using iterative label propagation and then chooses the
highly confident candidate labels as credible labels to induce
a multi-label prediction model. This work however suffers
from the cumulative errors induced in propagation, which
can impact the label confidence estimation and consequently
impair the prediction.
In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial learning
model, PML-GAN, under a generalized encoder-decoder
framework to tackle the partial multi-label learning problem.
The PML-GAN model comprises four component networks:
a disambiguation network that predicts the probability of
each candidate label being an additive noise for a training instance; a prediction network that predicts the disambiguated
true labels of each instance from its input features; a generation network that generates samples in the feature space
given latent vectors in the label space; and a discrimination
network that separates the generated samples from the real
data. The prediction network and disambiguation network
together form an encoder that maps data samples in the input feature space to the disambiguated label vectors, while
the generation network and discrimination network form a

Partial multi-label learning (PML), which tackles the problem
of learning multi-label prediction models from instances with
overcomplete noisy annotations, has recently started gaining
attention from the research community. In this paper, we propose a novel adversarial learning model, PML-GAN, under
a generalized encoder-decoder framework for partial multilabel learning. The PML-GAN model uses a disambiguation
network to identify irrelevant labels and uses a multi-label
prediction network to map the training instances to their disambiguated label vectors, while deploying a generative adversarial network as an inverse mapping from label vectors to
data samples in the input feature space. The learning of the
overall model corresponds to a minimax adversarial game,
which enhances the correspondence of input features with the
output labels in a bi-directional mapping. Extensive experiments are conducted on both synthetic and real-world partial
multi-label datasets, while the proposed model demonstrates
the state-of-the-art performance.

Introduction
In partial multi-label learning (PML), each training instance
is assigned multiple candidate labels which are only partially
relevant; that is, some irrelevant noise labels are assigned
together with the ground-truth labels. As it is typically difficult and costly to precisely annotate instances for multi-label
data (Xie and Huang 2018), the task of PML naturally arises
in many real-world scenarios with crowdsource annotations.
In such a scenario, in order to collect the complete set of
positive labels for each data instance, one can gather all labels provided by multiple annotators to form the candidate
label set, which is usually overcomplete and contains additional noisy labels beyond all the true labels, leading to the
PML problem. Figure 1 presents such example of an overcompletely annotated training image for object recognition,
where the candidate labels provided by crowdsource annotators cover all the ground truth labels (in black color) and
some irrelevant noise labels (in red color). PML is much
more challenging than standard multi-label learning as the
true labels are hidden among irrelevant labels and the number of true labels is unknown. The goal of PML is to learn a
∗

Work conducted while visiting Carleton University.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10568

