The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Active Bayesian Assessment of Black-Box Classifiers
Disi Ji1 , Robert L. Logan IV1 , Padhraic Smyth1 , Mark Steyvers2
1

Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine
Department of Cognitive Sciences, University of California, Irvine
disij@uci.edu, rlogan@uci.edu, smyth@ics.uci.edu, mark.steyvers@uci.edu
2

Abstract

model being deployed in a diagnostic imaging context in a
particular hospital where labeling requires expensive human
expertise. Thus, it is important to be able to accurately assess
the performance black-box classifiers in environments where
there is limited availability of labeled data. With this in mind
we develop a framework for active Bayesian assessment of
black-box classifiers, using techniques from active learning
to efficiently select instances to label so that uncertainty of
assessment can be reduced, and deficiencies of models such
as low accuracy, high calibration error or high cost mistakes
can be quickly identified.
The primary contributions of our paper are:
• We propose a general Bayesian framework to assess blackbox classifiers, providing uncertainty quantification for
quantities such as classwise accuracy, expected calibration error (ECE), confusion matrices, and performance
comparisons across groups.
• We develop a methodology for active Bayesian assessment
for an array of fundamental tasks including (1) estimation of model performance; (2) identification of model
deficiencies; (3) performance comparison between groups.
• We demonstrate that our proposed approaches need significantly fewer labels than baselines, via a series of experiments assessing the performance of modern neural
classifiers (e.g., ResNet and BERT) on several standard
image and text classification datasets.

Recent advances in machine learning have led to increased
deployment of black-box classifiers across a wide variety of
applications. In many such situations there is a critical need
to both reliably assess the performance of these pre-trained
models and to perform this assessment in a label-efficient
manner (given that labels may be scarce and costly to collect).
In this paper, we introduce an active Bayesian approach for
assessment of classifier performance to satisfy the desiderata
of both reliability and label-efficiency. We begin by developing inference strategies to quantify uncertainty for common
assessment metrics such as accuracy, misclassification cost,
and calibration error. We then propose a general framework for
active Bayesian assessment using inferred uncertainty to guide
efficient selection of instances for labeling, enabling better
performance assessment with fewer labels. We demonstrate
significant gains from our proposed active Bayesian approach
via a series of systematic empirical experiments assessing
the performance of modern neural classifiers (e.g., ResNet
and BERT) on several standard image and text classification
datasets.

Introduction
Complex machine learning models, particularly deep learning models, are now being applied to a variety of practical
prediction problems ranging from diagnosis of medical images (Kermany et al. 2018) to autonomous driving (Du et al.
2017). Many of these models are black boxes from the perspective of downstream users, for example, models developed
remotely by commercial entities and hosted as a service in
the cloud (Yao et al. 2017; Sanyal et al. 2018).
For a variety of reasons (legal, economic, competitive),
users of machine learning models increasingly may have no
direct access to the detailed workings of the model, how
the model was trained, or the training data. In this context,
careful attention needs to be paid to accurate, detailed and
robust assessments of the quality of a model’s predictions,
such that the model can be held accountable by users. This is
particularly true in the common scenario where the model is
being deployed in an environment that does not necessarily
distributionally match the data that the model was trained.
In real-world application scenarios, labeled data for assessment is likely to be scarce and costly to collect, e.g., for a

Notation
We consider classification problems with a feature vector
x and a class label y ∈ {1, . . . , K}, e.g., classifying image pixels x into one of K classes. We are interested in assessing the performance of a pretrained prediction model
M that makes predictions of y given a feature vector x,
where M produces K numerical scores per class in the
form of a set of estimates of class-conditional probabilities
pM (y = k|x), k = 1, . . . , K. ŷ = arg maxk pM (y = k|x)
is the classifier’s label prediction for a particular input x.
s(x) = pM (y = ŷ|x) is the score of a model, as a function
of x, i.e., the class probability that the model produces for its
predicted class ŷ ∈ {1, . . . , K} given input x. This is also
referred to as a model’s confidence in its prediction and can
be viewed as a model’s own estimate of its accuracy. The
model’s scores in general need not be perfectly calibrated,
i.e., they need not match the true probabilities p(y = ŷ|x).

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7935

