The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Relaxed Clustered Hawkes Process for Procrastination Modeling in MOOCs
Mengfan Yao,1 Siqian Zhao, 1 Shaghayegh Sahebi, 1 Reza Feyzi Behnagh 2
1

Department of Computer Science, University at Albany - SUNY
Department of Educational Theory & Practice, University at Albany - SUNY
myao@albany.edu, szhao2@albany.edu, ssahebi@albany.edu,rfeyzibehnagh@albany.edu
2

Abstract

followed by a burst of studying (cramming) closer to the
deadline Perrin et al. (2011); Gelman et al. (2016). However, these studies do not provide a unified quantitative definition of procrastination, other than qualitative student selfreports, that can be scarce and hard to obtain. Prior work
also shows that although each student has their individual
studying habits, students can be clustered into a few distinct groups by their studying behaviors (Yao, Sahebi, and
Feyzi-Behnagh 2020; Uzir et al. 2020). In essence, in highly
procrastinating students, getting closer to the deadline may
trigger more intense studying activities, while in others, their
studies are more regulated and distributed across the time interval. Despite these finding, most of the studies on student
procrastination either ignored the temporal aspects of students’ behavior (Cerezo et al. 2017; Kazerouni et al. 2017),
or were not personalized for students (Baker, Evans, and Dee
2016; Park et al. 2018; Backhage, Ojeda, and Sifa 2017).
More importantly, current research cannot predict when student’s next activity will take place. Ideally, a procrastination model can capture the underlying cluster structures in
student activity sequences, can be personalized to capture
different students’ studying habits, and can deal with unseen
data such as assignments that are not yet started by students,
and represent students’ activity burstiness.
We note that Hawkes processes (Hawkes 1971) have the
potential to represent students’ procrastination behavior, as
they model activity burstiness, as opposed to memoryless
Poisson processes. However, when modeling one sequence
per user-item pair, conventional Hawkes processes model
each item’s sequences individually and do not rely on the
similarities between different items. Thus, they cannot infer
parameters for items that have unseen data (Hosseini et al.
2016; Choi et al. 2015; Mei and Eisner 2017; Du et al. 2016).
In some recent work, low-rank personalized Hawkes models
aim to address this problem (Du et al. 2015b), usually with
the help of auxiliary features to reinforce the low-rank assumption (Shang and Sun 2018, 2019). Yet, to the best of our
knowledge, none of the previous Hawkes models were able
to represent the cluster structure between sequences, while
being personalized and inferring unseen data.
In this paper, we propose a novel Relaxed Clustered
Hawkes process with a Gamma prior (RCHawkes-Gamma)
to model and predict the cramming procrastination behavior
in students of Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). To

Hawkes processes have been shown to be efficient in modeling bursty sequences in a variety of applications, such
as finance and social network activity analysis. Traditionally, these models parameterize each process independently
and assume that the history of each point process can be
fully observed. Such models could however be inefficient
or even prohibited in certain real-world applications, such
as in the field of education, where such assumptions are violated. Motivated by the problem of detecting and predicting student procrastination in students Massive Open Online
Courses (MOOCs) with missing and partially observed data,
in this work, we propose a novel personalized Hawkes process model (RCHawkes-Gamma) that discovers meaningful
student behavior clusters by jointly learning all partially observed processes simultaneously, without relying on auxiliary
features. Our experiments on both synthetic and real-world
education datasets show that RCHawkes-Gamma can effectively recover student clusters and their temporal procrastination dynamics, resulting in better predictive performance of
future student activities. Our further analyses of the learned
parameters and their association with student delays show
that the discovered student clusters unveil meaningful representations of various procrastination behaviors in students.

Introduction
Academic procrastination, or postponing the starting of
planned studies, has been associated with negative sideeffects on students’ academic performance, psychological
well-being, and health (Moon and Illingworth 2005; Steel
2007). This behavior is more prevalent in online educational
settings, that require high levels of time-management and
self-regulation skills (Lee and Choi 2011) and can lead to
low academic outcomes and course drop-outs (Vitiello et al.
2018). With the growth of online education, it is essential to
devise mechanisms to detect the potential future procrastination in students, to be able to prevent this behavior and its
associated negative consequences.
In studies on self-reported academic procrastination, this
behavior is indicated by cramming of studying activities:
given a time interval followed by a deadline, students show
limited studying activities at the beginning of the interval,
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4599

