The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Maximin Fairness with Mixed Divisible and Indivisible Goods
Xiaohui Bei,1 Shengxin Liu,2 ∗ Xinhang Lu,1 Hongao Wang1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
xhbei@ntu.edu.sg, sxliu@hit.edu.cn, {xinhang001@e., hongao.wang@}ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

is not the case when goods are indivisible, with the simplest counterexample of two agents dividing a single valuable good. In order to circumvent this issue, Budish (2011)
presented a natural alternative to the classic proportionality notion that also works for indivisible goods, known as
the maximin share (MMS) guarantee. In this definition, the
maximin share (MMS) of an agent is defined as the largest
value she can get if she is allowed to partition goods into n
bundles and always receives the least desirable bundle. An
allocation is said to be an MMS allocation if every agent
receives a bundle which is worth at least her maximin share.
The notion of MMS nicely captures the local measure of
fairness even when the goods to be allocated are indivisible. A natural question then arises of whether an MMS allocation always exists in all problem instances. Surprisingly,
Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang (2018) showed that even
with additive valuation functions, an MMS allocation may
not always exist. However, a 2/3-MMS allocation can always be found, in which each agent is guaranteed to receive
a bundle worth at least 2/3 of their MMS value. In other
words, if we define the MMS approximation guarantee of
a problem instance as the largest α such that the instance
admits an α-MMS allocation, the results in (Kurokawa, Procaccia, and Wang 2018) imply that the worst MMS approximation guarantee across all indivisible problem instances
is strictly less than 1 and at least 2/3. Since then, many
subsequent works have been carried out on the improvements of MMS approximation guarantee, design of simpler
algorithms, etc. (Amanatidis et al. 2017; Barman and Krishnamurthy 2020; Ghodsi et al. 2018; Garg, McGlaughlin,
and Taki 2019; Garg and Taki 2020). MMS has also been
adopted as the fairness solution concept in several practical
applications (Budish 2011; Goldman and Procaccia 2015).
Even though MMS has been mainly studied in the context
of indivisible resource allocation, it is also a well-defined
fairness notion in a more general setting where both divisible
and indivisible goods are to be allocated. Many real-world
scenarios, including but not limited to divorce or inheritance settlements, involve allocating simultaneously divisible goods such as land or money and indivisible goods such
as houses or cars. What fairness notion should one adopt
when dividing resources of such mixed types? The problem
of fairly allocating mixed divisible and indivisible goods was
first studied by Bei et al. (2020a) (and recently by Bhaskar,

We study fair resource allocation when the resources contain a mixture of divisible and indivisible goods, focusing
on the well-studied fairness notion of maximin share fairness
(MMS). With only indivisible goods, a full MMS allocation
may not exist, but a constant multiplicative approximate allocation always does. We analyze how the MMS approximation
guarantee would be affected when the resources to be allocated also contain divisible goods. In particular, we show that
the worst-case MMS approximation guarantee with mixed
goods is no worse than that with only indivisible goods. However, there exist problem instances to which adding some divisible resources would strictly decrease the MMS approximation ratios of the instances. On the algorithmic front, we
propose a constructive algorithm that will always produce an
α-MMS allocation for any number of agents, where α takes
values between 1/2 and 1 and is a monotonically increasing
function determined by how agents value the divisible goods
relative to their MMS values.

1

Introduction

Fair division concerns the problem of allocating a set of
goods among interested agents in a way that is fair to all
participants involved. The goods involved could be heterogeneous and divisible, usually modelled by a cake, in which
case the problem is also known as cake-cutting; in some
other cases, the goods are heterogeneous and indivisible, and
the problem is known as indivisible resource allocation.
Due to its subjective nature, a plethora of fairness notions
have been proposed and investigated in different resource allocation scenarios (see (Young 1995) and (Brams and Taylor 1996) for a survey). In particular, as one of the most
classic and widely known fairness notions, Steinhaus (1948)
proposed that in an allocation that involves n participating
agents, each agent should receive a bundle which is worth
at least 1/n of her value for the entire set of goods. An allocation satisfying such property is then known as a proportional allocation. Moreover, Steinhaus (1948) also showed
that a proportional allocation can always be found for any
number of agents over any divisible good. However, this
∗

Shengxin Liu is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5167

