The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Attention Attribution:
Interpreting Information Interactions Inside Transformer
Yaru Hao,1,2∗ Li Dong,2 Furu Wei,2 Ke Xu 1
1

Beihang University
Microsoft Research
{haoyaru@,kexu@nlsde.}buaa.edu.cn
{lidong1,fuwei}@microsoft.com
2

Abstract

periments for BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) because it is one
of the most representative Transformer-based models. Notice that our method is general enough, and can be applied
to other Transformer networks without significant modifications. Results show that our method well indicates the information flow inside Transformer, which makes the selfattention mechanism more interpretable.
Firstly, we identify the most important attention connections in each layer using ATTATTR. We find that attention
weights do not always correlate well with their contributions
to the model prediction. We then introduce a heuristic algorithm to construct self-attention attribution trees, which discovers the information flow inside Transformer. In addition,
a quantitative analysis is applied to justify how much the
edges of an attribution tree contribute to the final prediction.
Next, we use ATTATTR to identify the most important attention heads and perform head pruning. The derived algorithm achieves competitive performance compared with the
Taylor expansion method (Michel, Levy, and Neubig 2019).
Moreover, we find that the important heads of BERT are
roughly consistent across different datasets as long as the
tasks are homogeneous.
Finally, we extract the interaction patterns that contribute
most to the model decision, and use them as adversarial triggers to attack BERT-based models. We find that the finetuned models tend to over-emphasize some word patterns to
make the prediction, which renders the prediction process
less robust. For example, on the MNLI dataset, adding one
adversarial pattern into the premise can drop the accuracy
of entailment from 82.87% to 0.8%. The results show
that ATTATTR not only can interpret the model decisions,
but also can be used to find anomalous patterns from data.
The contributions of our work are as follows:

The great success of Transformer-based models benefits from
the powerful multi-head self-attention mechanism, which
learns token dependencies and encodes contextual information from the input. Prior work strives to attribute model decisions to individual input features with different saliency measures, but they fail to explain how these input features interact
with each other to reach predictions. In this paper, we propose a self-attention attribution method to interpret the information interactions inside Transformer. We take BERT as an
example to conduct extensive studies. Firstly, we apply selfattention attribution to identify the important attention heads,
while others can be pruned with marginal performance degradation. Furthermore, we extract the most salient dependencies
in each layer to construct an attribution tree, which reveals the
hierarchical interactions inside Transformer. Finally, we show
that the attribution results can be used as adversarial patterns
to implement non-targeted attacks towards BERT.

Introduction
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) is one of state-of-the-art
NLP architectures. For example, most pre-trained language
models (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Dong et al. 2019;
Bao et al. 2020; Clark et al. 2020; Conneau et al. 2020; Chi
et al. 2020a,b) choose stacked Transformer as the backbone
network. Their great success stimulates broad research on
interpreting the internal black-box behaviors. Some prior efforts aim at analyzing the self-attention weights generated
by Transformer (Clark et al. 2019; Kovaleva et al. 2019). In
contrast, some other work argues that self-attention distributions are not directly interpretable (Serrano and Smith 2019;
Jain and Wallace 2019; Brunner et al. 2020). Another line
of work strives to attribute model decisions back to input tokens (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017; Shrikumar, Greenside, and Kundaje 2017; Binder et al. 2016). However, most
previous attribution methods fail on revealing the information interactions between the input words and the compositional structures learnt by the network.
To address the above issues, we propose a self-attention
attribution method (ATTATTR) based on integrated gradient (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan 2017). We conduct ex-

• We propose to use self-attention attribution to interpret the
information interactions inside Transformer.
• We conduct extensive studies for BERT. We present how
to derive interaction trees based on attribution scores,
which visualizes the compositional structures learnt by
Transformer.
• We show that the proposed attribution method can be used
to prune self-attention heads, and construct adversarial
triggers.

∗

Contribution during internship at Microsoft Research.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12963

