The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Minimizing Labeling Cost for Nuclei Instance Segmentation and Classification
with Cross-domain Images and Weak Labels
Siqi Yang1∗ , Jun Zhang2∗ , Junzhou Huang 2† , Brian C. Lovell1 , Xiao Han2†
1

The University of Queensland, Australia
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
siqi.yang@uq.net.au, junejzhang@tencent.com, joehhuang@tencent.com, lovell@itee.uq.edu.au, haroldhan@tencent.com

Abstract

image) with full nucleus masks in a pixel-level. Currently,
only a few datasets (e.g., CoNSep (Graham et al. 2019) and
PanNuke (Gamper et al. 2019)) for nucleus instance segmentation and classification are publicly available. To minimize the labeling cost, previous works in medical image
analysis resort to the techniques of unsupervised domain
adaptation or weakly supervised learning, but these techniques are utilized independently.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods minimize labeling costs by utilizing the cross-domain data and
aligning the distribution shift between the labeled source
domain data and unlabeled target domain data. In the area
of medical image analysis, several studies have been proposed to tackle the UDA for image classification (Ren et al.
2018; Huang et al. 2017), semantic segmentation (Zhang
et al. 2018a; Chen et al. 2019) and instance segmentation
with binary classification (Liu et al. 2020).
Recent UDA methods for object detection and semantic
segmentation have used two main mechanisms: adversarial
training to align domain distribution and pseudo-label selftraining. Adversarial alignment does not guarantee the alignment of class conditional distributions and thus some methods propose to select source-like images (Saito et al. 2019)
or instances (Zhu et al. 2019a). Pseudo labels are the confident predictions by the source-trained model and thus are
source-like samples. These two mechanisms mainly focus
on aligning source-like samples on the target domain, and
we denote them as easy-transfer samples. On the contrary,
the hard-transfer samples, predictions with low probability,
are ignored, and the target-specific characteristics on hardtransfer samples are not investigated.
On the other hand, as annotating the centers of nuclei only
or annotating image-level labels require much fewer efforts,
weakly supervised learning has been studied for nucleus instance segmentation (Tian et al. 2020; Qu et al. 2019; Yoo,
Yoo, and Paeng 2019). However, these weakly supervised
methods do not consider domain distribution alignment and
thus could not make full use of the labeled data from different domains.
Both annotating weak labels and utilizing labeled crossdomain images are the effective efforts to minimize the labeling cost, but no work integrates them for nucleus instance segmentation and classification. As such, we propose

Nucleus instance segmentation and classification in
histopathological images is an essential prerequisite in
pathology diagnosis/prognosis. However, nucleus annotations (e.g., segmentation and labeling) require domain experts, and annotating nuclei at pixel-level is time-consuming
and labor-intensive. Moreover, nuclei from different cancer
types vary in shapes and appearances. These inter-cancer
variations require careful annotations for specific cancer
types. Therefore, to minimize the labeling cost, we propose
a novel application that considers each cancer type as an
individual domain and apply domain adaptation techniques
to improve the segmentation/classification performance
among different cancer types. Unlike the previous studies
that focus on unsupervised or weakly-supervised domain
adaptation independently, we would like to discover what
kinds of labeling can achieve the most cost-effective domain
adaptation performance in nucleus instance segmentation
and classification. Specifically, we propose a unified framework that is applicable to different level annotations: no
annotations, image-level, and point-level annotations. Cyclic
adaptation with pseudo labels and adversarial discriminator
are utilized for unsupervised domain alignment. Image-level
or point-level annotations are additionally adopted to supervise the nucleus classification and refine the pseudo labels.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficacy of
the proposed framework (jointly using unsupervised and
weakly supervised learning) on adapting the segmentation
and classification model from one cancer type to 18 other
cancer types.

1

Introduction

Segmenting nuclei and classifying each nucleus into a specific category (e.g., neoplastic, epithelial, or inflammatory)
are of importance and could assist the diagnose in digital
pathology, such as survival prediction (Lu et al. 2018) and
cancer recurrence prediction (Corredor et al. 2019). However, it often tasks hours to annotate an pathology 512 × 512
image patch (cropped from 40x magnification whole-slide
∗
Equal contribution. Work done when Siqi Yang worked as an
intern at Tencent AI Lab.
†
Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

697

