The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Computing Quantal Stackelberg Equilibrium in Extensive-Form Games
Jakub Černý1 , Viliam Lisý2 , Branislav Bošanský2 , Bo An1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
AI Center, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
cerny@disroot.org, {viliam.lisy, branislav.bosansky}@fel.cvut.cz, boan@ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract

players choose better actions more often than worse actions
instead of playing only the best action (McKelvey and Palfrey 1995). When facing a human opponent we aim to find
a strategy optimal against QR, termed Quantal Stackelberg
Equilibrium (QSE). Relying on SE is not advisable in such
situations as the committing player can suffer huge losses
when deploying rational strategies against boundedly rational counterparts (Yang et al. 2011).
QSE was studied extensively in Stackelberg Security
Games (SSGs) (Sinha et al. 2018), and the developed algorithms were used in many real-world applications. SSG
is a widely applicable game model, but it requires formulating the problem in terms of allocating limited resources to
a set of targets. To solve real-world problems beyond SSGs,
QSE was recently introduced also in a more general model
of normal-form games (NFGs) (Černý et al. 2020). However, even NFGs model only one-shot interactions. To the
best of our knowledge, QSE was never properly analyzed
for extensive-form (i.e., sequential) games (EFGs), despite
the fact that many real-world domains are sequential.
In this paper, we develop methods for finding QSE in
EFGs. There are two main challenges that prevent us from
using techniques from SSGs or NFGs directly. First, while
there is only one decision point for the boundedly rational player in NFGs, any non-trivial EFG contains multiple
causally linked decision points where the same player acts.
The psychological studies show that humans prefer shortterm, delayed heuristic decisions (Gigerenzer and Goldstein 1996) rather than long-term, premeditated decisions.
This behavior arises especially in conflicts (Gray 1999) or
when facing information overload caused by large decision space (Malhotra 1982). Therefore, a natural assumption
is that a subrational player acts according to a QR model
in each decision point separately. This behavior cannot be
modeled by an equivalent NFG. Second, contrary to NFGs,
the number of rational player’s pure strategies in EFGs is
exponential in the game size. Therefore, even if the QSE
concepts would coincide in NFGs and EFGs, applying the
algorithms for NFGs directly would scale much worse. We
begin our analysis by showing that finding QSE is NP-hard,
and the straightforward formulation of QSE in EFGs is a
non-concave fractional problem that is difficult to optimize.
Therefore, we derive an equivalent Dinkelbach-type formulation of QSE that does not contain any fraction, and rep-

Deployments of game-theoretic solution concepts in the real
world have highlighted the necessity to consider human opponents’ boundedly rational behavior. If subrationality is not
addressed, the system can face significant losses in terms
of expected utility. While there exist algorithms for computing optimal strategies to commit to when facing subrational decision-makers in one-shot interactions, these algorithms cannot be generalized for solving sequential scenarios
because of the inherent curse of strategy-space dimensionality in sequential games and because humans act subrationally
in each decision point separately. We study optimal strategies to commit to against subrational opponents in sequential
games for the first time and make the following key contributions: (1) we prove the problem is NP-hard in general; (2)
to enable further analysis, we introduce a non-fractional reformulation of the direct non-concave representation of the
equilibrium; (3) we identify conditions under which the problem can be approximated in polynomial time in the size of the
representation; (4) we show how an MILP can approximate
the reformulation with a guaranteed bounded error, and (5)
we experimentally demonstrate that our algorithm provides
higher quality results several orders of magnitude faster than
a baseline method for general non-linear optimization.

Introduction
In recent years, game theory has achieved many groundbreaking advances both in large games (e.g., super-human
AI in poker (Moravčı́k et al. 2017; Brown and Sandholm
2018)), and practical applications (physical security (Sinha
et al. 2018), wildlife protection (Fang et al. 2017), AI for social good (Yadav et al. 2016)). In deployed two-player realworld solutions, the aim is often to compute an optimal strategy to commit to while assuming that the other player plays
the best response to this commitment – i.e., to find a Stackelberg Equilibrium (SE). While the traditional theory (e.g.,
the SE) assumes that all players behave entirely rationally,
the real world’s deployments proved that taking into account
the bounded rationality of the human players is necessary to
provide higher quality solutions (An et al. 2013; Fang et al.
2017). One of the most commonly used models of bounded
rationality is Quantal Response (QR), which assumes that
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5260

