The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

FaceController: Controllable Attribute Editing for Face in the Wild
Zhiliang Xu 1 * , Xiyu Yu 2 * , Zhibin Hong 2 , Zhen Zhu 1 , Junyu Han 2 ,
Jingtuo Liu 2 , Errui Ding 2 , Xiang Bai 1†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Baidu Inc.
{zhiliangxu1, zzhu, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, {yuxiyu, hongzhibin, hanjunyu, liujingtuo, dingerrui}@baidu.com

Abstract

for a real face, known as GAN inversion. For example, (Abdal, Qin, and Wonka 2019; Zhu et al. 2020a) opt to embed a real face into the latent space of StyleGAN (Karras,
Laine, and Aila 2019) by optimizing a randomly initialized
code through back-propagation. In practice, approaches of
this kind are often time-consuming and cumbersome.
Inspired by recent face synthesis methods such as (Gecer
et al. 2018; Deng et al. 2020), we propose a simple feedforward face generation network that is fed with some existing and easy-obtainable prior information. As such, this
method can avoid the costly learning process of disentangled representation. In this paper, we name our method as
FaceController, which enables the control of face attributes.
We embed 3DMM coefficients into an adversarial learning framework. However, we observe there exists a domain
gap between real faces and the counterpart ones rendered
from 3DMM. For example, the makeup of a woman cannot be perfectly expressed by 3DMM. To combat this, we
further employ the embedding of identity and region-wise
style codes as side information to complement the information gap between 3DMM coefficients and real faces, making
our method stand out from previous works.
In the proposed FaceController, a new identity-style normalization module is proposed to fuse all the prior information. The identity-style normalization module is an extension of SPADE (Park et al. 2019) in which we use the
embedding of identity and region-wise style codes to modulate the feature maps originated from 3DMM coefficients.
Furthermore, to make the generator generalize to different
editing, we devise unsupervised face generation losses on
identity, landmarks, and textures to enforce the generator to
control each attribute independently.
FaceController provides more comprehensive functions
of real face editing by precisely controlling the latent codes
of a wide range of face attributes. Unlikely previous methods, which mainly address the disentanglement of attributes
such as identity and expression, identity and pose, our
method is able to disentangle in total five different attributes,
including identity, pose, expression, illumination, and local
region styles. As a result, FaceController enables a variety of
face applications. For example, it can transfer the lip color or
eye shadow makeup by editing the region-wise codes; it can
also be applied to adjust the illumination of a given face image. In this paper, we empirically validate that the proposed

Face attribute editing aims to generate faces with one or multiple desired face attributes manipulated while other details
are preserved. Unlike prior works such as GAN inversion,
which has an expensive reverse mapping process, we propose a simple feed-forward network to generate high-fidelity
manipulated faces. By simply employing some existing and
easy-obtainable prior information, our method can control,
transfer, and edit diverse attributes of faces in the wild. The
proposed method can consequently be applied to various applications such as face swapping, face relighting, and makeup
transfer. In our method, we decouple identity, expression,
pose, and illumination using 3D priors; separate texture and
colors by using region-wise style codes. All the information
is embedded into adversarial learning by our identity-style
normalization module. Disentanglement losses are proposed
to enhance the generator to extract information independently
from each attribute. Comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations have been conducted. In a single framework,
our method achieves the best or competitive scores on a variety of face applications.

Introduction
Manipulating and editing real faces in the wild has countless
applications in the areas of visual effects and e-commerce.
Face editing tasks often benefit from the highly disentangled latent representation of face attributes such that one can
precisely manipulate corresponding attributes. For example,
face swapping, a special case of face editing, aims to preserve the identity of a source face while retaining the pose
and expression of a target face. Therefore, achieving fortified disentanglement of face attribute latent codes is the core
of many works (Zhang et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2020; Ha et al.
2019; Zeng et al. 2020).
However, deriving such disentangled latent representation
from a real face is still challenging. Directly mapping a face
into the latent space by an encoder (Chen et al. 2018; Klys,
Snell, and Zemel 2018) can be efficient. But it is not ensured
to extract latent codes that express semantically-meaningful
factors of variations (Nie et al. 2020). Thus, another common practice is to obtain the reverse mapping in latent space
* Authors contribute equally.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3083

