The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Certifying Parity Reasoning Efficiently Using Pseudo-Boolean Proofs
Stephan Gocht,1,2 Jakob Nordström,2,1
1

2

Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
stephan.gocht@cs.lth.se, jn@di.ku.dk

Abstract

algorithms are correct and complete. The answer, unfortunately, is currently a clear “no”: State-of-the-art solvers
sometimes return “solutions” that do not satisfy the constraints or erroneously claim optimality (Cook et al. 2013;
Akgün et al. 2018; Gillard, Schaus, and Deville 2019). This
can be fatal for applications such as, e.g., chip design, compiler optimization, and combinatorial auctions, where correctness is absolutely crucial, not to speak about when human lives depend on finding the best solutions.
Conventional software testing has made little progress in
addressing this problem, and formal verification techniques
cannot handle the level of complexity of modern solvers. Instead, the most successful approach to date has been that
of proof logging in the Boolean satisfiability (SAT) community, where solvers are required to certify (McConnell et al.
2011) their answer by outputting also a simple, machineverifiable proof that this answer is correct. This does not
certify the correctness of the solver itself, but it does mean
that if it ever produces an incorrect answer (even if due to
hardware errors), then this can be detected. A number of
different proof logging formats such as RUP (Goldberg and
Novikov 2003), TraceCheck (Biere 2006), DRAT (Heule,
Hunt Jr., and Wetzler 2013a,b; Wetzler, Heule, and Hunt Jr.
2014), GRIT (Cruz-Filipe, Marques-Silva, and SchneiderKamp 2017), and LRAT (Cruz-Filipe et al. 2017) have been
developed, with DRAT now established as the standard in
the SAT competitions (www.satcompetition.org).
A quite natural, and highly desirable, goal would be to extend these proof logging techniques to stronger paradigms
such as pseudo-Boolean (PB) optimization, MaxSAT solving, mixed integer programming, and constraint programming, but such attempts have had limited success. Either the
proofs require trusting in powerful and complicated rules
(as in, e.g., (Veksler and Strichman 2010)), defeating simplicity and verifiability, or they have to justify such rules
by long explanations, leading to an exponential slow-down
(see (Gange and Stuckey 2019)). In fact, even for SAT
solvers a long-standing problem is that more advanced techniques reasoning with parity constraints (XORs), cardinality constraints, and symmetries have remained out of reach
for efficient proof logging. Although in theory there should
be no problems—DRAT is extremely powerful, and can in
principle justify such reasoning and much more with at
most a polynomial amount of work (Sinz and Biere 2006;

The dramatic improvements in combinatorial optimization algorithms over the last decades have had a major impact in artificial intelligence, operations research, and beyond, but the
output of current state-of-the-art solvers is often hard to verify and is sometimes wrong. For Boolean satisfiability (SAT)
solvers proof logging has been introduced as a way to certify correctness, but the methods used seem hard to generalize to stronger paradigms. What is more, even for enhanced
SAT techniques such as parity (XOR) reasoning, cardinality detection, and symmetry handling, it has remained beyond reach to design practically efficient proofs in the standard DRAT format. In this work, we show how to instead
use pseudo-Boolean inequalities with extension variables to
concisely justify XOR reasoning. Our experimental evaluation of a SAT solver integration shows a dramatic decrease
in proof logging and verification time compared to existing
DRAT methods. Since our method is a strict generalization
of DRAT, and readily lends itself to expressing also 0-1 programming and even constraint programming problems, we
hope this work points the way towards a unified approach for
efficient machine-verifiable proofs for a rich class of combinatorial optimization paradigms.

1

Introduction

Since around the turn of the millennium, combinatorial optimization has been successfully applied to solve an ever
increasing range of problems in e.g., resource allocation,
scheduling, logistics, and disaster management (Pardalos,
Du, and Graham 2013), and more recent applications in
biology, chemistry, and medicine (Archibald et al. 2019)
include, e.g., protein analysis and design (Allouche et al.
2014; Mann, Will, and Backofen 2008) and kidney transplants (Manlove and O’Malley 2012). Yet other examples
are government auctions generating billions of dollars in
revenue (Leyton-Brown, Milgrom, and Segal 2017), as well
as allocation of education and work opportunities (Manlove
2016; Manlove, McBride, and Trimble 2017) and matching
of adoptive families with children (Delorme et al. 2019).
As more and more such problems are dealt with using
combinatorial optimization solvers, an urgent question is
whether we can trust that the solutions computed by such
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3768

