The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AttnMove: History Enhanced Trajectory Recovery via Attentional Network
Tong Xia1 , Yunhan Qi1 , Jie Feng1 , Fengli Xu1 , Funing Sun2 , Diansheng Guo2 , Yong Li1∗
1

Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University.
2
Tencent Corporation.
xia-t17@tsinghua.org.cn, liyong07@tsinghu.edu.cn

Abstract

response (Li, Li, and Li 2013). Therefore, it is of great importance to rebuild individual trajectories at a fine-grained
spatial-temporal granularity by imputing missing or unobserved locations.
One commonest solution to this problem is to impute
the missing value by treating individual trajectories as
two-dimensional time series with latitude and longitude at
each timestamp (Alwan and Roberts 1988; Moritz and
Bartz-Beielstein 2017). As such, smoothing filters (Alwan
and Roberts 1988; Moritz and Bartz-Beielstein 2017) and
LSTM-based models (Cao et al. 2018; Wang et al. 2019a)
have been proposed. Their performance is acceptable when
only a small percentage of locations are missing due to limited movement during a short time span. However, in highly
sparse scenarios, their performance degrades significantly,
since they fail to effectively model complex mobility regularity. Another line of study is to model users’ transition regularity among different locations, so as to generate the missing locations according to the highest transition probability
from observed location (Liu et al. 2016; Wang et al. 2019a).
But this kind of strategy is still insufficient in the sense that
the observed records are unevenly distributed in time in LBS
data, and thus transition regularity is incapable of inferring
those locations which are continuously unobserved.
Luckily, human mobility has some intrinsic and natural characteristics like periodicity and repeatability, which
can help to better rebuild the trajectory (Gonzalez, Hidalgo,
and Barabasi 2008; Schneider et al. 2013). In this regard, a
promising direction is to leverage long-term mobility history, i.e., mobility records prior to the targeted trajectory
to be recovered, considering both that daily movements are
spatially and temporally periodic, and that collecting longterm data is quite achievable in LBS. In addition, previous
work has also shown that explicitly utilizing historical trajectory can help with next location prediction (Feng et al.
2018), which is similar to our task. All of this has inspired
us to design a history enhanced recovery model.
However, trajectory recovery is still challenging for the
following reasons: first of all, the high sparsity of both targeted day and historical trajectories hinder us from inferring the missing locations by spatial-temporal constraints,
i.e., how far a user can move in the unobserved periods.
Because of the high uncertainty between two consecutive
records in a sparse trajectory, a framework which can better

A considerable amount of mobility data has been accumulated due to the proliferation of location-based service. Nevertheless, compared with mobility data from transportation
systems like the GPS module in taxis, this kind of data is commonly sparse in terms of individual trajectories in the sense
that users do not access mobile services and contribute their
data all the time. Consequently, the sparsity inevitably weakens the practical value of the data even it has a high user penetration rate. To solve this problem, we propose a novel attentional neural network-based model, named AttnMove, to
densify individual trajectories by recovering unobserved locations at a fine-grained spatial-temporal resolution. To tackle
the challenges posed by sparsity, we design various intraand inter- trajectory attention mechanisms to better model
the mobility regularity of users and fully exploit the periodical pattern from long-term history. We evaluate our model on
two real-world datasets, and extensive results demonstrate the
performance gain compared with the state-of-the-art methods. This also shows that, by providing high-quality mobility data, our model can benefit a variety of mobility-oriented
down-stream applications.

Introduction
Widely adopted location-based services have accumulated
large-scale human mobility data, which have great potential to benefit a wide range of applications, from personalized location recommendations to urban transportation planning (Zheng et al. 2014). Nevertheless, since users may not
allow the service provider to collect their locations continuously, individual trajectory records in such data are extremely sparse and unevenly distributed in time, which inevitably harms the performance of downstream applications,
even when it has a notable user penetration rate and covers
a long period of time (Gao et al. 2019). For example, with
a limited number of trajectory records per day, it is difficult to predict an individual’s next location and recommend
proper points-of-interests (Xi et al. 2019). As for collective mobility behaviour, because personal location records
are missing for most of the time, it is also hard to produce
exact estimates of hourly crowd flow in cities for emergency
∗

This is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4494

