The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generalizable Representation Learning for Mixture Domain Face Anti-Spoofing
Zhihong Chen1,2∗ , Taiping Yao2∗ , Kekai Sheng2 , Shouhong Ding2† , Ying Tai2 ,
Jilin Li2 , Feiyue Huang2 , Xinyu Jin1
1

College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University,
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{zhihongchen, jinxy}@zju.edu.cn, {taipingyao, ericshding, yingtai, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com,
Shengkekai D@163.come
Abstract

Conventional DG method

Face anti-spoofing approach based on domain generalization
(DG) has drawn growing attention due to its robustness for
unseen scenarios. Existing DG methods assume that the domain label is known. However, in real-world applications, the
collected dataset always contains mixture domains, where the
domain label is unknown. In this case, most of existing methods may not work. Further, even if we can obtain the domain
label as existing methods, we think this is just a sub-optimal
partition. To overcome the limitation, we propose domain dynamic adjustment meta-learning (D2 AM) without using domain labels, which iteratively divides mixture domains via
discriminative domain representation and trains a generalizable face anti-spoofing with meta-learning. Specifically, we
design a domain feature based on Instance Normalization
(IN) and propose a domain representation learning module
(DRLM) to extract discriminative domain features for clustering. Moreover, to reduce the side effect of outliers on clustering performance, we additionally utilize maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) to align the distribution of sample features
to a prior distribution, which improves the reliability of clustering. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method
outperforms conventional DG-based face anti-spoofing methods, including those utilizing domain labels. Furthermore, we
enhance the interpretability through visualization.

Model
training

Our method

Mixture domains

D2AM: Iteratively dividing and training

Figure 1: Unlike conventional DG method that requires domain labels, our method can iteratively assign pseudo domain labels and be trained using meta-learning by D2 AM.
cross-domain dataset. To improve generalization ability under unseen situations, a variety of domain generalization
(DG)-based methods (Wang et al. 2020; Shao, Lan, and
Yuen 2020; Qin et al. 2019; Jia et al. 2020; Saha et al.
2020) are proposed by leveraging domain labels from multiple source domains.
These DG-based methods require domain labels that indicate where each sample in multiple source domains comes
from. However, in a more practical scenario, we may obtain
a mixture domain dataset, in which the domain label of each
sample is unknown as shown in Figure 1. The existing DG
methods may not work if the domain label is not available.
There are mainly three challenges to relax the constraint: (1)
While it could be solved by assigning the domain label manually, it can be very expensive and time-consuming; (2) Even
worse, since the domain information of face acti-spoofing
is composed of various factors such as illumination, background, camera type, etc., it is not clear how to define the domain and divide the mixture domains; (3) Further, even if we
can obtain the domain label which defined as the dataset to
which the sample belongs, as existing methods, we think this
is just a suboptimal partition. The reason is that the samples
among different datasets may partially overlap in distribution, especially when the model can extract a certain degree
of domain invariant features in the middle stage of training,

Introduction
Despite recent significant progress, the security of face
recognition systems is still vulnerable to presentation attacks (PA), e.g., photo, video replay, or 3D facial mask. To
cope with these presentation attacks, face anti-spoofing (Tan
et al. 2010; Liu, Jourabloo, and Liu 2018) is deployed as a
pre-step prior to face recognition. Various face anti-spoofing
methods have been proposed, which assume that there are
inherent differences between live and spoof faces, such as
color textures (Boulkenafet, Komulainen, and Hadid 2016),
image distortion cues (Wen, Han, and Jain 2015), temporal variation (Shao, Lan, and Yuen 2017), or deep features
(Yang, Lei, and Li 2014; Zhang et al. 2020). Although these
methods achieve promising performance in intra-dataset experiments, the performance dramatically degrades under a
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

1132

