The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Sparse Single Sweep LiDAR Point Cloud Segmentation via Learning Contextual
Shape Priors from Scene Completion
Xu Yan1,2† , Jiantao Gao2,4 † , Jie Li1,3 , Ruimao Zhang1,2 , Zhen Li1,2 * ,
Rui Huang1,3 , Shuguang Cui1,2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen),
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data,
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society,
4
Shanghai University
{xuyan1@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn
Abstract
LiDAR point cloud analysis is a core task for 3D computer vision, especially for autonomous driving. However, due to the
severe sparsity and noise interference in the single sweep LiDAR point cloud, the accurate semantic segmentation is nontrivial to achieve. In this paper, we propose a novel sparse LiDAR point cloud semantic segmentation framework assisted
by learned contextual shape priors. In practice, an initial semantic segmentation (SS) of a single sweep point cloud can
be achieved by any appealing network and then flows into
the semantic scene completion (SSC) module as the input.
By merging multiple frames in the LiDAR sequence as supervision, the optimized SSC module has learned the contextual shape priors from sequential LiDAR data, completing
the sparse single sweep point cloud to the dense one. Thus,
it inherently improves SS optimization through fully end-toend training. Besides, a Point-Voxel Interaction (PVI) module is proposed to further enhance the knowledge fusion between SS and SSC tasks, i.e., promoting the interaction of incomplete local geometry of point cloud and complete voxelwise global structure. Furthermore, the auxiliary SSC and
PVI modules can be discarded during inference without extra
burden for SS. Extensive experiments confirm that our JS3CNet achieves superior performance on both SemanticKITTI
and SemanticPOSS benchmarks, i.e., 4% and 3% improvement correspondingly.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Learning shape priors from multiple frames. For
the sparse per-sweep point cloud shown in (a), it is nontrivial for current methods to recognize the truck from partial
components. However, if we introduce the auxiliary information from adjacent frames (b) and (c), it is much easier to
segment the complete truck in (d).

which are post-processed by merging multiple collected LiDAR or RGB-D sequences (e.g., ScanNet (Dai et al. 2017),
S3DIS (Armeni et al. 2016) and Semantic3D (Hackel et al.
2017)). However, raw per-sweep LiDAR point clouds, as
the original input of autonomous driving, are much sparser.
Their sparsity usually increases with the reflection distance,
which often leads to extremely shapes missing and uneven
point sampling for various categories. Therefore, despite the
promising performance on complete data (e.g., 80% mIOU
on Semantic3D), the semantic segmentation of sparse single sweep LiDAR point cloud still remains a big challenge,
which extremely limits its accuracy in real applications.
In this paper, we try to break through the barrier of semantic segmentation on sparse single sweep LiDAR point
clouds. One plausible way to solve this problem is to fully
utilize the sequential nature of LiDAR data. Taking the scenario shown in Fig. 1(a) as an example, for a per-sweep point
cloud with extremely sparse points of the truck, it seems
impossible for previous methods to conduct accurate segmentation. Nevertheless, such segmentation would be possible, if we introduce the richer shape information from the
other two frames, i.e., Fig. 1(b) and Fig. 1(c), to recon-

Introduction
LiDAR point clouds, compared with data from other sensors, such as cameras and radars in autonomous driving perception, have advantages of both accurate distance measurements and fine semantic descriptions. Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds is usually conducted by assigning a semantic class label to each point. It is traditionally
viewed as a typical task in the computer vision community.
In autonomous driving, accurate and effective point cloud
semantic segmentation undoubtedly plays a critical role.
Previous studies (Thomas et al. 2019; Wu, Qi, and Fuxin
2019) about point cloud semantic segmentation mainly focused on the complete or dense point cloud scenarios,
* Corresponding author. † Equal first authorship.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3101

