The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Nyströmformer: A Nyström-based Algorithm for Approximating Self-Attention
Yunyang Xiong 1 , Zhanpeng Zeng 1 , Rudrasis Chakraborty 2 , Mingxing Tan 3 , Glenn Fung 4 ,
Yin Li 1 , Vikas Singh 1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
UC Berkeley
3
Google Brain
4
American Family Insurance
yxiong43@wisc.edu, zzeng38@wisc.edu, rudra@berkeley.edu, tanmingxing@google.com, gfung@amfam.com,
yin.li@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
and time complexity of O(n2 ) where n is the length of an input sequence. This leads to high memory and computational
requirements for training large Transformer-based models.
For example, training a BERT-large model (Devlin et al.
2019) will need 4 months using a single Tesla V100 GPU
(equivalent to 4 days using a 4x4 TPU pod). Further, the
O(n2 ) complexity makes it prohibitively expensive to train
large Transformers with long sequences (e.g., n = 2048).
To address this challenge, several recent works have proposed strategies that avoid incurring the quadratic cost when
dealing with longer input sequences. For example, (Dai
et al. 2019) suggests a trade-off between memory and computational efficiency. The ideas described in (Child et al.
2019; Kitaev, Kaiser, and Levskaya
2019) decrease the self√
attention complexity to O(n n) and O(n log n) respectively. In (Shen et al. 2018b; Katharopoulos et al. 2020;
Wang et al. 2020), self-attention complexity can be reduced
to O(n) with various approximation ideas, each with its own
strengths and limitations.
In this paper, we propose a O(n) approximation, both
in the sense of memory and time, for self-attention. Our
model, Nyströmformer, scales linearly with the input sequence length n. This is achieved by leveraging the celebrated Nyström method, repurposed for approximating selfattention. Specifically, our NyströmFormer algorithm makes
use of landmark (or Nyström) points to reconstruct the softmax matrix in self-attention, thereby avoiding computing the
n × n softmax matrix. We show that this yields a good approximation of the true self-attention.
To evaluate our method, we consider a transfer learning
setting using Transformers, where models are first pretrained
with a language modeling objective on a large corpus, and
then finetuned on target tasks using supervised data (Devlin
et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Lewis et al. 2020; Wang et al.
2020). Following BERT (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019),
we pretrain our proposed model on English Wikipedia and
BookCorpus (Zhu et al. 2015) using a masked-languagemodeling objective. We observe a similar performance to
the baseline BERT model on English Wikipedia and BookCorpus. We then finetune our pretrained models on multiple downstream tasks in the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al.
2018) and IMDB reviews (Maas et al. 2011), and compare

Abstract
Transformers have emerged as a powerful tool for a broad
range of natural language processing tasks. A key component that drives the impressive performance of Transformers is the self-attention mechanism that encodes the influence
or dependence of other tokens on each specific token. While
beneficial, the quadratic complexity of self-attention on the
input sequence length has limited its application to longer sequences – a topic being actively studied in the community. To
address this limitation, we propose Nyströmformer – a model
that exhibits favorable scalability as a function of sequence
length. Our idea is based on adapting the Nyström method
to approximate standard self-attention with O(n) complexity. The scalability of Nyströmformer enables application to
longer sequences with thousands of tokens. We perform evaluations on multiple downstream tasks on the GLUE benchmark and IMDB reviews with standard sequence length, and
find that our Nyströmformer performs comparably, or in a
few cases, even slightly better, than standard self-attention.
On longer sequence tasks in the Long Range Arena (LRA)
benchmark, Nyströmformer performs favorably relative to
other efficient self-attention methods. Our code is available
at https://github.com/mlpen/Nystromformer.

Introduction
Transformer-based models, such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al. 2020), have been very
successful in natural language processing (NLP), achieving state-of-the-art performance in machine translation
(Vaswani et al. 2017), natural language inference (Williams,
Nangia, and Bowman 2018), paraphrasing (Dolan and
Brockett 2005), text classification (Howard and Ruder
2018), question answering (Rajpurkar et al. 2016) and many
other NLP tasks (Peters et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2018).
A key feature of transformers is what is known as the selfattention mechanism (Vaswani et al. 2017), where each token’s representation is computed from all other tokens. Selfattention enables interactions of token pairs across the full
sequence and has been shown quite effective.
Despite the foregoing advantages, self-attention also turns
out to be a major efficiency bottleneck since it has a memory
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

14138

