The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Game of Gradients: Mitigating Irrelevant Clients in Federated Learning
Lokesh Nagalapatti* ,1 Ramasuri Narayanam2
1

IIT Bombay, Mumbai India
2
IBM Research - India
nlokeshiisc@gmail.com, ramasurn@in.ibm.com

Abstract

(FedAvg) (McMahan et al. 2017b). This framework is different from distributed optimization setting (Smith et al. 2018;
Recht et al. 2011) primarily in two aspects: (a) Non-IID
Data: Any particular client’s local dataset will not be representative of the population distribution; (b) Unbalanced
Data: The size of private data owned by individual clients
could vary significantly. FL setting assumes a synchronous
update of the central model and the following steps proceed in each round of the learning process (McMahan et al.
2017b). There is a fixed set of K clients and each client
owns a fixed local dataset. In each round, the central server
randomly selects a fraction of clients. Each selected client
downloads the state of current central model and then performs local computation based on its local dataset. Finally,
it sends the model updates to the server. The server then aggregates the updates received from each selected client and
applies them to its global model. The state of the central
model is thus updated and this process repeats until the central model converges. Note that only a fraction of clients is
selected in each round as adding more clients would lead
to diminishing returns beyond a certain point (McMahan
et al. 2017b). Though initially the emphasis was on mobilecentric FL applications involving thousands of clients, recently there is significant interest in enterprise driven FL
applications that involve only a few tens of clients (Verma,
White, and de Mel 2019). Though FL paradigm has received
significant interest recently from the research community,
the problem of assessing quality of the individual client’s
private data with respect to the central server’s learning objective is still under-explored and we refer to this as Federated Relevant Client Selection (FRCS) problem. This is
an important problem as selecting clients with irrelevant or
corrupted data could annihilate the stability of the central
model. We call a client as irrelevant if the updates shared
by it adversely affects the performance of the central model.
Next, we motivate the need for studying FRCS problems.

The paradigm of Federated learning (FL) deals with multiple clients participating in collaborative training of a machine
learning model under the orchestration of a central server. In
this setup, each client’s data is private to itself and is not transferable to any other client or the server. Though FL paradigm
has received significant interest recently from the research
community, the problem of selecting relevant clients w.r.t.
the central server’s learning objective is under-explored. We
refer to these problems as Federated Relevant Client Selection (FRCS). Because the server doesn’t have explicit control
over the nature of data possessed by each client, the problem of selecting relevant clients is significantly complex in
FL settings. In this paper, we resolve important and related
FRCS problems viz., selecting clients with relevant data, detecting clients that possess data relevant to a particular target label, and rectifying corrupted data samples of individual clients. We follow a principled approach to address the
above FRCS problems and develop a new federated learning method using the Shapley value concept from cooperative game theory. Towards this end, we propose a cooperative
game involving the gradients shared by the clients. Using this
game, we compute Shapley values of clients and then present
Shapley value based Federated Averaging (S-FedAvg) algorithm that empowers the server to select relevant clients with
high probability. S-FedAvg turns out to be critical in designing specific algorithms to address the FRCS problems. We
finally conduct a thorough empirical analysis on image classification and speech recognition tasks to show the superior
performance of S-FedAvg than the baselines in the context of
supervised federated learning settings.

Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) (McMahan et al. 2017b) is a machine learning paradigm where the objective is to collectively train a high-quality central model while the training
data remains distributed over a number of clients. The data
that is owned by each client is private to itself and not transferable to other clients or the server. Hence, each client participates in FL by sharing updates derived from data rather
than sharing the data itself. One popular algorithm that is
used in FL settings is called federated averaging algorithm

Motivation: To motivate the impact of clients’ local data
quality on the central model, we apply standard FedAvg algorithm to two cases – (a) where all clients possess relevant
data (b) where some clients possess irrelevant data. The central server tries to build a three layered neural network that
classifies even labeled hand written digits i.e., {0, 2, 4, 6, 8}.
In this setting, all the data with odd labeled digits becomes
irrelevant w.r.t. the central server’s objective. We work with

* Work done while at IBM Research-India
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9046

