The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

An End-to-End Solution for Named Entity Recognition in eCommerce Search
Xiang Cheng, Mitchell Bowden, Bhushan Ramesh Bhange,
Priyanka Goyal, Thomas Packer, Faizan Javed
The Home Depot
2455 Paces Ferry Rd NW, Atlanta, GA 30339
{xiang cheng, mitchell s bowden, bhushan ramesh bhange, faizan javed}@homedepot.com

However, there is a gap between academic research and
industrial applications of NER. Recent research works often use the latest neural architectures (Yadav and Bethard
2019) and language models (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014; Devlin et al. 2018; Peters et al. 2018) to improve
performance on popular NER shared tasks and datasets
(Sang and De Meulder 2003). The focused outcome is often marginal improvement of F1 scores, while the feasibility
in real-world applications is not often considered.

Abstract
Named entity recognition (NER) is a critical step in modern
search query understanding. In the domain of eCommerce,
identifying the key entities, such as brand and product type,
can help a search engine retrieve relevant products and therefore offer an engaging shopping experience. Recent research
shows promising results on shared benchmark NER tasks using deep learning methods, but there are still unique challenges in the industry regarding domain knowledge, training
data, and model production. This paper demonstrates an endto-end solution to address these challenges. The core of our
solution is a novel model training framework ”TripleLearn”
which iteratively learns from three separate training datasets,
instead of one training set as is traditionally done. Using this
approach, the best model lifts the F1 score from 69.5 to 93.3
on the holdout test data. In our offline experiments, TripleLearn improved the model performance compared to traditional training approaches which use a single set of training data. Moreover, in the online A/B test, we see significant improvements in user engagement and revenue conversion. The model has been live on homedepot.com for more
than 9 months, boosting search conversions and revenue. Beyond our application, this TripleLearn framework, as well as
the end-to-end process, is model-independent and problemindependent, so it can be generalized to more industrial applications, especially to the eCommerce industry which has
similar data foundations and problems.

1

1.1

Recent Research in NER

In recent years, deep-learning-based NER together with embeddings has become increasingly popular in the research
community. Collobert et al. proposed the first neural network architecture for NER (Collobert and Weston 2008; Li
et al. 2020) and later experimented pre-trained word embeddings (Collobert et al. 2011) as model features. Since
then various neural architectures and word representations
have been studied (Yadav and Bethard 2019). The most popular approach is to use recurrent neural networks (RNN)
over word, sub-word, and/or character embeddings (Yadav
and Bethard 2019; Lee 2017). Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM) and its variants (e.g. Gated Recurrent Unit, i.e.
GRU) are the most common neural architectures for NER
as well as for sequence tagging (Huang, Xu, and Yu 2015;
Ma and Hovy 2016; Lample et al. 2016; Lee 2017). Recently, transformer-based language models (Vaswani et al.
2017; Devlin et al. 2018) have been tested on benchmark
NER tasks and claim the state-of-art performance (Liu et al.
2019; Li et al. 2020).
It is exciting to see the booming research progress based
on modern deep learning methods and latest language models. However, industrial applications still seem being left behind due to unique challenges as described below.

Introduction

The search engine at homedepot.com processes billions of
search queries, serves tens of millions of customers, and
generates tens of billions of dollars in revenue every year for
The Home Depot (THD). One of the most fundamental challenges in our search engine is to understand a search query
and extract entities, which is critical to retrieve the most
relevant products. This task can be framed as named entity
recognition (NER) which is a common information retrieval
task to locate, segment, and categorize a pre-defined set of
entities from unstructured text. Since its introduction in the
early 1990s, NER has been studied extensively and is evolving rapidly (Nadeau and Sekine 2007; Yadav and Bethard
2019), especially after the adoption of deep learning and related techniques in recent years (Yadav and Bethard 2019).

1.2

Industry Applications and Challenges

Compared to the large amount of research on deep-learningbased NER, there are relatively few publications that explore
its applications in industrial settings, and fewer still that address the task of performing NER as a step in eCommerce
search query understanding.
Guo et al. (Guo et al. 2009) apply a probabilistic topic
model, Weakly Supervised Latent Dirichlet Allocation, to
identify four types of entities from commercial web search

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
15098

