The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

RESA: Recurrent Feature-Shift Aggregator for Lane Detection
Tu Zheng1,2 * , Hao Fang1 * , Yi Zhang1 , Wenjian Tang2 , Zheng Yang2 , HaiFeng Liu1 , Deng Cai1,2†
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
zhengtuzju@gmail.com fanghao zju@163.com {tangwenjian, yangzheng}@fabu.ai
{yizhang2019, haifengliu, dcai}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

CNN

Lane detection is one of the most important tasks in selfdriving. Due to various complex scenarios (e.g., severe occlusion, ambiguous lanes, etc.) and the sparse supervisory
signals inherent in lane annotations, lane detection task is
still challenging. Thus, it is difficult for the ordinary convolutional neural network (CNN) to train in general scenes to
catch subtle lane feature from the raw image. In this paper,
we present a novel module named REcurrent Feature-Shift
Aggregator (RESA) to enrich lane feature after preliminary
feature extraction with an ordinary CNN. RESA takes advantage of strong shape priors of lanes and captures spatial relationships of pixels across rows and columns. It shifts sliced
feature map recurrently in vertical and horizontal directions
and enables each pixel to gather global information. RESA
can conjecture lanes accurately in challenging scenarios with
weak appearance clues by aggregating sliced feature map.
Moreover, we propose a Bilateral Up-Sampling Decoder that
combines coarse-grained and fine-detailed features in the upsampling stage. It can recover the low-resolution feature map
into pixel-wise prediction meticulously. Our method achieves
state-of-the-art results on two popular lane detection benchmarks (CULane and Tusimple). Code has been made available at: https://github.com/ZJULearning/resa.

RESA

(a) Comparision betwenn CNN and RESA

(b) Information Aggregation

stride = 2
stride = 3

Figure 1: Feature aggregation illustration. (a) Comparison between CNN semantic segmentation and our
method (RESA). The segmentation method with ordinary
CNN suffers from bad performance due to severe occlusion.
(b) Illustration of feature aggregation. Spatial lane feature
can be enriched, owing to horizontal and vertical feature aggregation in a layer. Thus, RESA can infer lanes even if
they are occluded. We add different strides to gather features within different distances, which relieves information
loss problem during long-distance propagation.

Introduction

to a lane. These methods solve the problem with an encoderdecoder framework. They first apply a CNN as the encoder
to extract high semantic information into a feature map, then
use an up-sampling decoder to recover the feature map to
its original size and finally perform a pixel-wise prediction.
Due to the thin and long property of lanes, the number of
annotated lane pixels is far fewer than background pixels.
These methods often struggle to extract subtle lane feature
and may ignore the strong shape prior or high relevance between lanes, yielding inferior detection performance. The
more challenging case is that the lane may be almost entirely occluded by crowded cars, and we can only conjecture
the lane with common sense. Therefore, low-quality feature extracted by ordinary CNN tends to drop subtle lane
features. Several methods try to pass spatial information
within feature maps, e.g., SCNN (Pan et al. 2018). SCNN
typically proposes a spatial convolution to pass information between adjacent rows or columns within feature map.

Lane detection is an essential task in the computer vision community. It could serve as significant cues for autonomous driving and Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS) (bar hillel et al. 2014) to keep a car from staying beyond lane markings. Detecting lanes in-the-wild is
challenging due to severe occlusion caused by other vehicles, bad weather conditions, ambiguous pavement, and the
inherent long and thin property of the lane itself.
Modern algorithms (Chen and Chen 2017), (Bergasa et al.
2018), (Chen, Liu, and Lian 2019) typically adopt a pixelwise prediction formulation, i.e., treat lane detection as a semantic segmentation problem, where each pixel in an image
is assigned with a binary label to indicate whether it belongs
* Equal Contribution
†

Deng Cai is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3547

