The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multilingual Transfer Learning for QA Using Translation as Data Augmentation
Mihaela Bornea, Lin Pan, Sara Rosenthal, Radu Florian, Avirup Sil
IBM Research AI, Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
{mabornea,panl,sjrosenthal,raduf,avi}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

Wikipedia Page: The Reader (2008 film)
English

Prior work on multilingual question answering has mostly focused on using large multilingual pre-trained language models
(LM) to perform zero-shot language-wise learning: train a QA
model on English and test on other languages. In this work,
we explore strategies that improve cross-lingual transfer by
bringing the multilingual embeddings closer in the semantic
space. Our first strategy augments the original English training
data with machine translation-generated data. This results in a
corpus of multilingual silver-labeled QA pairs that is 14 times
larger than the original training set. In addition, we propose
two novel strategies, language adversarial training and language arbitration framework, which significantly improve the
(zero-resource) cross-lingual transfer performance and result
in LM embeddings that are less language-variant. Empirically,
we show that the proposed models outperform the previous
zero-shot baseline on the recently introduced multilingual
MLQA and T Y D I QA datasets.

Context: Hanna receives a life sentence for her admitted leadership role in the church deaths, while the other defendants are
sentenced to four years and three months each.
Question: What was Hanna’s prison sentence?
Prior work predictions: four years and three months each
This work predictions: life
Multilingual
Context: Hanna es declarada culpable y sentenciada
a cadena perpetua, mientras que sus compañeras reciben
sentencias de cuatro años de cárcel.
Question: Welche Gefängnisstrafe erhielt Hanna?
Prior work predictions: cuatro años
This work predictions: a cadena perpetua

Introduction
Recent advances in open domain question answering (QA)
have mostly revolved around machine reading comprehension (MRC) where the task is to read and comprehend a
given text and then answer questions based on it. However,
most recent work in MRC has only been in English e.g.
SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al. 2016; Rajpurkar, Jia, and Liang
2018), HotpotQA (Yang et al. 2018) and Natural Questions
(Kwiatkowski et al. 2019). Significant performance gains
and the state-of-the-art (SOTA) on these datasets are credited to large pre-trained language models (Devlin et al. 2019;
Radford et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2019b).
Multilingual BERT (M BERT), which is trained on
Wikipedia articles from 104 languages and equipped with
a 120k shared wordpiece vocabulary, has encouraged a lot
of progress on cross-lingual tasks e.g. XNLI (Conneau et al.
2018), NER (Keung, Lu, and Bhardwaj 2019; Wu and Dredze
2019) and QA (Artetxe, Ruder, and Yogatama 2019; Cui et al.
2019b; He et al. 2018) by performing zero-shot training: train
on one language and test on unseen target languages.
In this work, we focus on multilingual QA and, in particular, on two recent large-scale datasets: MLQA (Lewis
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: Examples from the MLQA dataset. Prior zero-shot
(ZS) learning models (Lewis (2020)) cannot answer these
examples correctly whereas our proposed models (LAF and
AT) can. The correct answer is underlined in the context.
et al. 2020) and T Y D I QA1 (Clark et al. 2020). Both datasets
contain English QA pairs but also examples from 13 other
diverse languages.
Some examples are shown in Figure 1. MLQA evaluates
two challenging scenarios: 1) Cross-Lingual Transfer (XLT)
when the question and the context are in the same language,
and 2) Generalized Cross-lingual Transfer (G-XLT) when
the question is in one language (eg. En) and the context
is in another language (eg. De). T Y D I QA is designed for
XLT only. The two datasets are challenging for multilingual
QA due to the large number of languages and the variety
of linguistic phenomena they encompass (e.g. word order,
re-duplication, grammatical meanings).
Ideally, we want to build QA systems for all existing
languages but it is impractical to collect manually labeled
training data for all of them. In the absence of labeled data,
(Clark et al. 2020) suggested several research directions
for pushing the boundaries in multilingual QA, including
zero-shot QA, exploring data augmentation with machine
1

12583

T Y D I QA in our paper refers to the Gold Passage task.

