The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PointINet: Point Cloud Frame Interpolation Network
Fan Lu,1 Guang Chen,1 * Sanqing Qu,1 Zhijun Li,2 Yinlong Liu,3 Alois Knoll3
1

Tongji University
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Technische Universität München
{lufan, guangchen, 2011444}@tongji.edu.cn, zjli@ieee.org, Yinlong.Liu@tum.de, knoll@in.tum.de
2

Abstract
LiDAR point cloud streams are usually sparse in time dimension, which is limited by hardware performance. Generally,
the frame rates of mechanical LiDAR sensors are 10 to 20
Hz, which is much lower than other commonly used sensors
like cameras. To overcome the temporal limitations of LiDAR
sensors, a novel task named Point Cloud Frame Interpolation
is studied in this paper. Given two consecutive point cloud
frames, Point Cloud Frame Interpolation aims to generate intermediate frame(s) between them. To achieve that, we propose a novel framework, namely Point Cloud Frame Interpolation Network (PointINet). Based on the proposed method,
the low frame rate point cloud streams can be upsampled
to higher frame rates. We start by estimating bi-directional
3D scene flow between the two point clouds and then warp
them to the given time step based on the 3D scene flow. To
fuse the two warped frames and generate intermediate point
cloud(s), we propose a novel learning-based points fusion
module, which simultaneously takes two warped point clouds
into consideration. We design both quantitative and qualitative experiments to evaluate the performance of the point
cloud frame interpolation method and extensive experiments
on two large scale outdoor LiDAR datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed PointINet. Our code is available
at https://github.com/ispc-lab/PointINet.git.

Figure 1: Illustration of Point Cloud Frame Interpolation.
The blue and green point clouds are two input frames and
the red point clouds are four interpolated frames. We zoom
in an area to display the details for better visualization.

Introduction
LiDAR is one of the most important sensors in numerous applications (e.g., autonomous vehicles and intelligent robots).
However, the frame rates of typical mechanical LiDAR sensors (e.g., Velodyne HDL-64E, Hesai Pandar64, etc.) are
greatly limited by hardware performance. Frame rates of LiDAR are generally 10 to 20 Hz, which contributes to temporal and spatial discontinuity of point cloud streams. Compared with the low frame rate of LiDAR, the frame rates
of other commonly used sensors on intelligent vehicles and
robots are typically much higher. For example, the frame
rate of cameras and Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) can
achieve over 100 Hz. The large difference in frame rate
can cause difficulty to synchronize LiDAR with other sensors. Upsampling low frame rate LiDAR point cloud streams
to higher frame rates can be an efficient solution to that

(Liu et al. 2020). Besides, higher frame rate may enhance
the performance of several applications like object tracking
(Kiani Galoogahi et al. 2017). It is worth noting that video
frame interpolation is commonly utilized to generate high
frame rate videos from low frame rate ones (Jiang et al.
2018) (e.g., from 30 Hz to 240 Hz). Compared to the success
of video frame interpolation, frame interpolation of 3D point
clouds has not been well explored. Therefore, it is needed to
explore frame interpolation algorithms for 3D point clouds
to overcome the temporal limitations of LiDAR sensors.
Based on the above considerations, a novel task named
Point Cloud Frame Interpolation is studied in this paper.
Given two consecutive point clouds, point cloud frame interpolation aims to predict intermediate point cloud frame
according to the given time step to form spatially and tem-

* Guang Chen is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2251

