The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Visual Tracking via Hierarchical Deep Reinforcement Learning
Dawei Zhang1 , Zhonglong Zheng1∗ , Riheng Jia1 , Minglu Li1,2
1

2

College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{davidzhang, zhonglong, rihengjia, mlli}@zjnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual tracking has achieved great progress due to numerous
different algorithms. However, deep trackers based on classification or Siamese network still have their specific limitations. In this work, we show how to teach machines to track
a generic object in videos like humans, who can use a few
search steps to perform tracking. By constructing a Markov
decision process in Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL), our
agents can learn to determine hierarchical decisions on tracking mode and motion estimation. To be specific, our Hierarchical DRL framework is composed of a Siamese-based observation network which models the motion information of
an arbitrary target, a policy network for mode switch and an
actor-critic network for box regression. This tracking strategy
is more in line with human behavior paradigm, and is effective and efficient to cope with fast motion, background clutter
and large deformations. Extensive experiments on the GOT10k, OTB-100, UAV-123, VOT and LaSOT tracking benchmarks, demonstrate that the proposed tracker achieves stateof-the-art performance while running in real-time.

(a) MDNet

(b) ADNet

(c) Ours

Figure 1: The different strategies of three tracking algorithms. (a) MDNet (Nam and Han 2016): classify with random sampling; (b) ADNet (Yun et al. 2017): iterative search
with a series of discrete actions; and (c) our tracker: DRLbased hierarchical search with less continuous actions.

and Han 2016), it only runs 1 fps due to an inefficient search
strategy that samples 256 candidates randomly like particle
filter framework, and selects the best candidate by verifying
each sample with the binary classification model. To alleviate this issue, an novel action-decision network (ADNet)
(Yun et al. 2017) based on DRL is proposed to generate a
series of discrete actions to adjust the aspect ratio and center position of the target in each frame. The searching steps
of this scheme are much fewer than sliding window (Tao,
Gavves, and Smeulders 2016) and random sampling (Nam
and Han 2016) approaches. ADNet obtains slightly worse
but three times faster performance than MDNet. Furthermore, Actor-Critic tracking framework (Chen et al. 2018)
is developed to predict only one continuous action to locate
the tracked object. However, these tracking methods (Chen
et al. 2018; Dunnhofer et al. 2019) with one search step can
not effectively capture all possible motion variations of the
target of interest in some complex scenes.
Similar to the discussion in (Ren et al. 2018), an intelligent tracking algorithm is required to understand the motion
information of the target and quality of the current observation state, and make optimal decisions online at the right
moments, i.e., whether to continue or stop searching or even
reinitialize tracking if necessary. To this end, a straightforward approach is to learn a policy network that can select
the optimal action during tracking by deep reinforcement
learning. Besides, another overlooked point for visual object tracking is the limited use of the temporal information in

Introduction
Object tracking is one of the fundamental vision tasks in
the artificial intelligence field. Generally speaking, a modelfree tracker is aimed to localize an arbitrary object in a
video sequence, given its initial annotation in the first frame.
Even though much effort has been made recently, there are
still many challenges including illumination variations, deformation, motion blur, occlusions, and abrupt motion, to
name a few. Meanwhile, many practical applications of visual tracking, such as video surveillance, autonomous driving, robotics and human-computer interaction, require a high
performance tracker with a real-time constraint.
Recently, tracking algorithms (Nam and Han 2016;
Danelljan et al. 2017; Li et al. 2019) base on deep learning
have obviously improved the tracking performance. Generally, the pre-trained Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
are capable to extract rich deep features. Thus numerous
deep trackers utilize the CNNs pre-trained on ImageNet
(Russakovsky et al. 2015) to perform robust online tracking.
Through top-ranked performance achieved by MDNet (Nam
∗

Corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3315

