The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Movie Summarization via Sparse Graph Construction
Pinelopi Papalampidi, Frank Keller and Mirella Lapata
Institute for Language, Cognition and Computation, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
p.papalampidi@sms.ed.ac.uk, {keller,mlap}@inf.ed.ac.uk

1. Opportunity
Introductory event that occurs after presentation of setting and
background of main characters. (Juno discovers she is pregnant
with a child fathered by her friend and longtime admirer.)
2. Change of Plans
Main goal of story is defined; action begins to increase. (Juno
decides to give the baby up for adoption.)
3. Point of No Return
Event that pushes the main characters to fully commit to their
goal. (Juno meets a couple, and agrees to a closed adoption.)
4. Major Setback
Event where everything falls apart, temporarily or permanently.
(Juno watches the couple’s marriage fall apart.)
5. Climax
Final event of the main story, moment of resolution and “biggest
spoiler”. (Juno gives birth and spouse from ex-couple claims
newborn as single adoptive mother.)

Abstract
We summarize full-length movies by creating shorter videos
containing their most informative scenes. We explore the hypothesis that a summary can be created by assembling scenes
which are turning points (TPs), i.e., key events in a movie
that describe its storyline. We propose a model that identifies
TP scenes by building a sparse movie graph that represents
relations between scenes and is constructed using multimodal
information1 . According to human judges, the summaries created by our approach are more informative and complete, and
receive higher ratings, than the outputs of sequence-based
models and general-purpose summarization algorithms. The
induced graphs are interpretable, displaying different topology
for different movie genres.

Introduction
Automatic summarization has received considerable attention due to its importance for downstream applications. Although current research has primarily focused on news articles (Grusky, Naaman, and Artzi 2018; Narayan, Cohen,
and Lapata 2018; Liu and Lapata 2019), other application
domains include meetings (Murray et al. 2007), lectures (Fujii, Kitaoka, and Nakagawa 2007), social media (Syed et al.
2018), scientific articles (Teufel and Moens 2002), and narratives ranging from short stories (Goyal, Riloff, and Daumé III
2010; Finlayson 2012) to books (Mihalcea and Ceylan 2007),
and movies (Gorinski and Lapata 2015).
In this work, we aim at summarizing full-length movies by
creating shorter video summaries encapsulating their most
informative parts. Aside from enabling users to skim through
movies quickly — Netflix alone has over 148 million subscribers worldwide, with more than 6000–7000 movies, series, and shows available — movie summarization is an ideal
platform for real-world natural language understanding and
the complex inferences associated with it. Movies are often
based on elaborate stories, with non-linear structure and multiple characters, rendering the application of popular summarization approaches based on position biases, importance, and
diversity problematic (Jung et al. 2019). Another key challenge in movie summarization lies in the scarcity of labeled
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
We make our data and code publicly available at https://github.
com/ppapalampidi/GraphTP.

13631

Figure 1: Turning points (from the movie “Juno”) and their
definitions.
data. For most movies there are no naturally occurring summaries (trailers aim to attract an audience to a film without
revealing spoilers which a summary will contain), and manually creating these would be a major undertaking requiring
substantial effort to collect, watch, preprocess, and annotate
videos. As a result, the majority of available movie datasets
contain at most a few hundred movies focusing on tasks like
Question-Answering (QA) or the alignment between video
clips and captions (Tapaswi et al. 2016; Xiong et al. 2019;
Rohrbach et al. 2015) which are limited to video snippets
rather than entire movies, or restricted to screenplays disregarding the video (Gorinski and Lapata 2015; Papalampidi
et al. 2020).
Following previous work (Gorinski and Lapata 2015), we
formalize movie summarization as the selection of a few important scenes from a movie. We further assume that important scenes display events which determine the progression
of the movie’s narrative and segment it into thematic sections.
Screenwriting theory (Thompson 1999; Cutting 2016; Hauge
2017) reserves the term turning points (TPs) for events which
have specific functionality inside a narrative and reveal its storyline. TPs are considered key for making successful movies
whose stories are expected to consist of six basic stages, defined by five key turning points in the plot. An example of

