The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Hierarchical Approach to Multi-Event Survival Analysis ∗
Donna Tjandra,1 Yifei He, 1 Jenna Wiens 1
1

Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, USA
dotjandr, heyifei, wiensj@umich.edu

Abstract

potentially complex interdependence among events. This relationship is further complicated by the natural variation in
time-to-events, as one typically assumes that they are nondeterministic and are drawn from some distribution. In light
of these challenges, researchers commonly make the simplifying assumption that the events are independent and apply
existing single-event analysis techniques (Roe et al. 2012).
However, when this assumption does not hold, it can lead to
poor performance (Castañeda and Gerritse 2010). Recently,
Lee et al. (Lee et al. 2018) used multitask learning to jointly
model events. While this improved performance over existing approaches that assume independence, it remains limited
in that it does not directly account for the natural variation
in time-to-events. To address this, we propose a novel hierarchical approach that jointly models events. Our approach
improves performance by solving a series of simpler tasks
building up to the original target task.
Given a complex target task, we first divide it into a series
of simpler tasks that serve as guides to help complete the target task. Our hierarchical approach iteratively predicts survival at multiple granularities of time (e.g., months, weeks,
then days). Predictions at coarser time scales (e.g., will the
event happen during the prediction horizon or not) are used
to guide predictions at finer time scales (a more complex
task), improving the overall accuracy on the target task. Our
approach applies to the general multi-event setting. We do
not assume any constraints on the order in which events may
occur (Hsieh and Wang 2018), though we outline ways to
account for such constraints if the setting calls for it.
Applied to publicly available data, we present a comprehensive evaluation of our proposed approach relative to
existing baselines. To date, evaluation of survival analysis
models in the multi-event setting has been limited. Common
evaluation techniques like the C-index focus on discriminative performance at the global level (i.e., comparing the risk
of two different individuals for the same event) but not at the
local level (i.e., comparing the risk for two different events
for the same individual). We propose new evaluation metrics
that address these limitations.
Overall, we introduce a novel, hierarchical approach for
multi-event survival analysis. Across several datasets, both
synthetic and real, we show that the proposed method consistently outperforms several well-accepted baselines. More
specifically, our contributions are as follows:

In multi-event survival analysis, one aims to predict the probability of multiple different events occurring over some time
horizon. One typically assumes that the timing of events
is drawn from some distribution conditioned on an individual’s covariates. However, during training, one does not
have access to this distribution, and the natural variation in
the observed event times makes the task of survival prediction challenging, on top of the potential interdependence
among events. To address this issue, we introduce a novel
approach for multi-event survival analysis that models the
probability of event occurrence hierarchically at different
time scales, using coarse predictions (e.g., monthly predictions) to iteratively guide predictions at finer and finer grained
time scales (e.g., daily predictions). We evaluate the proposed approach across several publicly available datasets in
terms of both intra-event, inter-individual (global) and intraindividual, inter-event (local) consistency. We show that the
proposed method consistently outperforms well-accepted and
commonly used approaches to multi-event survival analysis.
When estimating survival curves for Alzheimer’s disease and
mortality, our approach achieves a C-index of 0.91 (95% CI
0.88-0.93) and a local consistency score of 0.97 (95% CI
0.94-0.98) compared to a C-index of 0.75 (95% CI 0.70-0.80)
and a local consistency score of 0.94 (95% CI 0.91-0.97)
when modeling each event separately. Overall, our approach
improves the accuracy of survival predictions by iteratively
reducing the original task to a set of nested, simpler subtasks.

Introduction
Survival analysis, commonly used in fields such as healthcare, aims to estimate the probability of an event occurring
over some time horizon (Lanza et al. 2020; Wongvibulsin,
Wu, and Zeger 2020). In contrast to single-event analysis,
multi-event survival analysis is more challenging due to the
∗
Data used in preparation of this article were in part obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
(ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or writing of this report. A complete listing of
ADNI investigators can be found at: http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wpcontent/uploads/how to apply/ADNI Acknowledgement List.pdf
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

591

