The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning with Safety Constraints: Sample Complexity of Reinforcement Learning
for Constrained MDPs
Aria HasanzadeZonuzy, Archana Bura, Dileep Kalathil, Srinivas Shakkottai
Texas A & M University
{azonuzy, archanabura, dileep.kalathil, sshakkot} @tamu.edu

Abstract

as few samples as possible to quickly determine the optimal
policy, minimizing the number of samples taken is even more
important in the CMDP setting. This because constraints are
violated during the learning process, and it might be critical
to keep the number of such violations as low as possible due
to safety considerations mentioned earlier, and yet ensure that
the system objectives are maximized. Hence, determining
how the joint metrics of objective maximization and safety
violation evolve over time as the model becomes more and
more accurate is crucial to understand the efficacy of a proposed RL algorithm for CMDPs.

Many physical systems have underlying safety considerations
that require that the policy employed ensures the satisfaction
of a set of constraints. The analytical formulation usually
takes the form of a Constrained Markov Decision Process
(CMDP).We focus on the case where the CMDP is unknown,
and RL algorithms obtain samples to discover the model and
compute an optimal constrained policy. Our goal is to characterize the relationship between safety constraints and the number of samples needed to ensure a desired level of accuracy—
both objective maximization and constraint satisfaction—in a
PAC sense. We explore two classes of RL algorithms, namely,
(i) a generative model based approach, wherein samples are
taken initially to estimate a model, and (ii) an online approach,
wherein the model is updated as samples are obtained. Our
main finding is that compared to the best known bounds of the
unconstrained regime, the sample complexity of constrained
RL algorithms are increased by a factor that is logarithmic in
the number of constraints, which suggests that the approach
may be easily utilized in real systems.

Main Contributions: Our goal is to analyze the sample
complexity of solving CMDPs to a desired accuracy with
a high probability in both objective and constraints in the
context of finite horizon (episodic) problems. We focus on
two figures of merit pertaining to objective maximization and
constraint satisfaction in a probably-approximately-correct
(PAC) sense. Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) We develop two model-based algorithms, namely, (i) a
generative approach that obtains samples initially then creates a model, and (ii) an online approach in which the model
is updated as time proceeds. In both cases, the estimated
model might have no solution, and we utilize a confidenceball around the estimate to ensure that a solution may be
found with high probability (assuming that the real model
has a solution).
(ii) The algorithms follow the general pattern of model construction or update, followed by a solution using linear programming (LP) of the CMDP generated in this manner, with
the addendum that the LP is extended to account for the fact
that a search is made over the entire ball of models given
the current samples. This procedure not only contributes to
optimism as (Efroni, Mannor, and Pirotta 2020), but also
guarantees feasibility of the solution.
(iii) We develop PAC-type sample complexity bounds for
both algorithms, accounting for both objective maximization
and constraint satisfaction. The general intuition is that the
model accuracy should be higher than in the unconstrained
case and, our main finding agrees with this intuition. Furthermore, comparing our main results with lower bounds
on sample complexity of MDPs (Azar, Munos, and Kappen
2013; Dann and Brunskill 2015), we discover that the in-

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are used to model a
variety of systems for which stationary control policies are
appropriate. In many cyber-physical systems (algorithmically
controlled physical systems) restrictions may be placed on
functions of the probability with which states may be visited. For example, in power systems, the frequency must be
kept within tolerable limits, and allowing it to go outside
these tolerances often might be unsafe. Similarly, in communication systems the number of transmissions that may
be made in a time interval is limited by an average radiated
power constraint due to interference and human safety considerations. The number of constraints can be large, since
they can represent physical limitations (e.g., communication
or transmission link capacities), performance requirements
(per-flow packet delays, tolerable frequencies) and so on. The
Constrained-MDP (CMDP) framework is used to model such
circumstances (Altman 1999).
In this paper, our objective is to design simple algorithms
to solve CMDP problems under an unknown model. Whereas
the goal of a typical model-based RL approach would take
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7667

