The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Interpretable Sequence Classification via Discrete Optimization*
Maayan Shvo,1,2,3 Andrew C. Li,1,2 Rodrigo Toro Icarte,1,2 Sheila A. McIlraith1,2,3
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
2
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society, Toronto, Canada
{maayanshvo,andrewli,rntoro,sheila}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

of finite state automata, each capturing the rationale for classification in a compact extractable form. To classify a sequence of observations, we then employ Bayesian inference
to produce a posterior probability distribution over the set
of class labels. Importantly, our automata-based classifiers,
by virtue of their connection to formal language theory, are
both generators and recognizers of the pattern language that
describes each behavior or sequence class. We leverage this
property in support of a variety of interpretability services,
including explanation, counterfactual reasoning, verification
of properties, and human modification.

Sequence classification is the task of predicting a class label given a sequence of observations. In many applications
such as healthcare monitoring or intrusion detection, early
classification is crucial to prompt intervention. In this work,
we learn sequence classifiers that favour early classification from an evolving observation trace. While many stateof-the-art sequence classifiers are neural networks, and in
particular LSTMs, our classifiers take the form of finite
state automata and are learned via discrete optimization. Our
automata-based classifiers are interpretable—supporting explanation, counterfactual reasoning, and human-in-the-loop
modification—and have strong empirical performance. Experiments over a suite of goal recognition and behaviour classification datasets show our learned automata-based classifiers to have comparable test performance to LSTM-based
classifiers, with the added advantage of being interpretable.

1

Previous work on learning automata from data has focused on learning minimum-sized automata that perfectly
classify the training data (e.g., Gold 1967; Angluin 1987;
Oncina and Garcia 1992; Ulyantsev, Zakirzyanov, and Shalyto 2015; Angluin, Eisenstat, and Fisman 2015; Giantamidis and Tripakis 2016; Smetsers, Fiterău-Broştean,
and Vaandrager 2018). Nonetheless, such approaches learn
large, overfitted models in noisy domains that generalize
poorly to unseen data. We propose novel forms of regularization to improve robustness to noise and introduce an efficient mixed integer linear programming model to learn these
automata-based classifiers. Furthermore, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work that proposes automata for
early classification. Experiments on a collection of synthetic
and real-world goal recognition and behaviour classification
problems demonstrate that our learned classifiers are robust
to noisy sequence data, are well-suited to early prediction,
and achieve comparable performance to an LSTM, with the
added advantage of being interpretable.

Introduction

Sequence classification—the task of predicting a class label given a sequence of observations—has a myriad of
applications including biological sequence classification
(e.g., Deshpande and Karypis 2002), document classification (e.g., Sebastiani 2002), and intrusion detection (e.g.,
Lane and Brodley 1999). In many settings, early classification is crucial to timely intervention. For example, in hospital neonatal intensive care units, early diagnosis of infants
with sepsis (based on the classification of sequence data) can
be life-saving (Griffin and Moorman 2001).
Neural networks such as LSTMs (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber 1997), learned via gradient descent, are natural and
powerful sequence classifiers (e.g., Zhou et al. 2015; Karim
et al. 2019), but the rationale for classification can be difficult for a human to discern. This is problematic in many
domains, where machine decision-making requires a degree
of accountability in the form of verifiable guarantees and explanation for decisions (Doshi-Velez and Kim 2017).
In this work, we use discrete optimization to learn interpretable classifiers that favour early classification. In particular, we learn a suite of binary classifiers that take the form

In Section 2, we provide necessary background and introduce our running example. In Section 3, we discuss our
method for learning DFA sequence classification models and
elaborate on the interpretability services afforded by these
models in Section 4. In Section 5, we discuss the experimental evaluation of our approach on a number of goal recognition and behaviour classification domains, and in Section 6
we situate our work within the body of related work, followed by concluding remarks. For detailed discussion of the
data we use in experiments, background on Linear Temporal
Logic, examples of learned automata classifiers, and details
of our experimental setup, the reader is directed to the technical appendix associated with this work (Shvo et al. 2020).

* Associated technical appendix appears in (Shvo et al. 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9647

