The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ChronoR: Rotation Based Temporal Knowledge Graph Embedding
Ali Sadeghian* 1 , Mohammadreza Armandpour*2 , Anthony Colas 1 , Daisy Zhe Wang 1
1

University of Florida
Texas A&M University
{asadeghian, acolas1, daisyw}@ufl.edu, armand@stat.tamu.edu
2

Abstract
Despite the importance and abundance of temporal knowledge graphs, most of the current research has been focused
on reasoning on static graphs. In this paper, we study the
challenging problem of inference over temporal knowledge
graphs. In particular, the task of temporal link prediction. In
general, this is a difficult task due to data non-stationarity,
data heterogeneity, and its complex temporal dependencies.
We propose Chronological Rotation embedding (ChronoR),
a novel model for learning representations for entities, relations, and time. Learning dense representations is frequently
used as an efficient and versatile method to perform reasoning on knowledge graphs. The proposed model learns a kdimensional rotation transformation parametrized by relation
and time, such that after each fact’s head entity is transformed
using the rotation, it falls near its corresponding tail entity. By
using high dimensional rotation as its transformation operator, ChronoR captures rich interaction between the temporal
and multi-relational characteristics of a Temporal Knowledge
Graph. Experimentally, we show that ChronoR is able to outperform many of the state-of-the-art methods on the benchmark datasets for temporal knowledge graph link prediction.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Graphs (KGs) organize information around entities (people, countries, organizations, movies, etc.) in the
form of factual triplets, where each triplet represents how
two entities are related to each other, for example (Washington DC, captialOf, USA).
There exists an ever growing number of publicly available KGs, for example DBPedia (Auer et al. 2007),
Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), Google Knowledge
Graph (Blog 2012), NELL (Carlson et al. 2010), OpenIE (Yates et al. 2007; Etzioni et al. 2011), YAGO (Biega,
Kuzey, and Suchanek 2013; Hoffart et al. 2013; Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2013), and UMLS (Burgun
and Bodenreider 2001). This structured way of representing knowledge makes it easy for computers to digest and
utilize in various applications. For example KGs are used
in recommender systems (Cao et al. 2019; Zhang et al.
2016), the medical domain (Sang et al. 2018; Abdelaziz et al.

Figure 1: A timeline of events extracted from the ICEWS14
knowledge graph. The events are chronologically sorted
from top to bottom, demonstrating interactions between,
president Obama, NATO, Afghanistan and Russia.
2017), question-answering (Hao et al. 2017), information retrieval (Xiong, Power, and Callan 2017), and natural language processing (Yang and Mitchell 2017).
Though these graphs are continuously growing, they remain particularly incomplete. Knowledge Base Completion
(KBC) focuses on finding/predicting missing relations between entities. A wide range of work explores various methods of finding extraction errors or completing KGs (Bordes et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2014; Trouillon et al. 2016;
Sadeghian et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2019).
Different events and actions cause relations and entities
to evolve over time. For example, Figure 1 illustrates a
timeline of relations and events happening in 2014 involving entities like Obama (president of USA at the time),

* Authors contributed equally.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6471

