The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Disentangled Motif-aware Graph Learning for Phrase Grounding
Zongshen Mu1 , Siliang Tang1∗ , Jie Tan1 , Qiang Yu2 , Yueting Zhuang1
1

DCD Lab, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
City Cloud Technology (China) Co., Ltd
{zongshen,siliang,tanjie95,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, yq@citycloud.com.cn

Abstract

Visual Dense Graph

In this paper, we propose a novel graph learning framework
for phrase grounding in the image. Developing from the sequential to the dense graph model, existing works capture
coarse-grained context but fail to distinguish the diversity of
context among phrases and image regions. In contrast, we pay
special attention to different motifs implied in the context of
the scene graph and devise the disentangled graph network to
integrate the motif-aware contextual information into representations. Besides, we adopt interventional strategies at the
feature and the structure levels to consolidate and generalize
representations. Finally, the cross-modal attention network
is utilized to fuse intra-modal features, where each phrase
can be computed similarity with regions to select the bestgrounded one. We validate the efficiency of disentangled and
interventional graph network (DIGN) through a series of ablation studies, and our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on Flickr30K Entities and ReferIt Game benchmarks.

context:

Visual Scene Graph

context:

Visual Disentangled Graph
spatial motif
decorative
motif

Introduction

A woman pushes a child
on a swing.

On giving an image-sentence pair, the Phrase Grounding (or
more generally, Language Grounding) task aims to ground
multiple noun phrases from the given sentence to the corresponding image regions, as illustrated in Figure 2. By aligning textual modality to visual modality, phrase grounding is
able to link knowledge from both modalities and improves
multimodal tasks that span visual question answering, visual
commonsense reasoning, and robotic navigation.
Since the information that the image usually contains is
more than that of the sentence, the general solution is to understand the surrounding visual context of a visual object,
especially pay attention to the context considered by the sentence as well, and then map it to its referent words. Nevertheless, previous studies fail to consider such fine-grained
context. Some methods neglect the importance of visual or
textual context, nor do they ground individual phrases independently (Plummer et al. 2018) or sequentially (Dogan
et al. 2019; Li et al. 2020). This leads to poor performance
when objects with completely different functions or actions
have the similar visual effect in the same image. More recently, Bajaj et al. (2019) and Liu et al. (2020) utilize fully

Language Graph
a woman
a swing

action
motif

a child
context:

context:

Figure 1. An example of phrase grounding.
connected dense graphs to capture coarse-grained context
among visual objects, and improve grounding results.
However, their graphs have three fatal problems. First, the
dense graph holds noisy false connections and makes errors in complex scenes. Second, they treat all the relations
equally. Under such a framework, the node (i.e., phrase or
visual object) representation is a mixture of all the possible
relations. In reality, it is insufficient to reveal various highorder relation categories between nodes, or motifs1 (e.g.,
decorative, part-of, spatial, action), in the contextual information. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, “a child” needs
to be grounded in the image that includes multiple similar

∗

corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

13587

We post-hoc motifs referring to the method in the topic model.

