The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Knowledge-Guided Object Discovery with Acquired Deep Impressions
Jinyang Yuan, Bin Li* , Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{yuanjinyang, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a framework called Acquired Deep Impressions
(ADI) which continuously learns knowledge of objects as
“impressions” for compositional scene understanding. In this
framework, the model first acquires knowledge from scene
images containing a single object in a supervised manner, and
then continues to learn from novel multi-object scene images
which may contain objects that have not been seen before
without any further supervision, under the guidance of the
learned knowledge as humans do. By memorizing impressions of objects into parameters of neural networks and applying the generative replay strategy, the learned knowledge
can be reused to generate images with pseudo-annotations
and in turn assist the learning of novel scenes. The proposed
ADI framework focuses on the acquisition and utilization of
knowledge, and is complementary to existing deep generative
models proposed for compositional scene representation. We
adapt a base model to make it fall within the ADI framework
and conduct experiments on two types of datasets. Empirical
results suggest that the proposed framework is able to effectively utilize the acquired impressions and improve the scene
decomposition performance.

Figure 1: Scenes are diverse compositions of various objects.
In recent years, a large body of deep generative models such as variational autoencoders (VAE) (Kingma and
Welling 2014; Rezende, Mohamed, and Wierstra 2014) and
flow-based generative models (Dinh, Krueger, and Bengio
2015; Dinh, Sohl-Dickstein, and Bengio 2017; Kingma and
Dhariwal 2018) have been proposed and provide mechanisms to represent images with latent variables by building nonlinear mappings between images and latent variables with neural networks. The prior distribution of the latent variable along with the neural network characterize the
distribution of images and can thus be seen as the learned
knowledge of images. By sampling latent variables from the
prior distribution and transforming latent variables with the
decoding neural network, novel images similar to those used
for training can be generated. Most existing VAEs and flowbased models learn a single representation for the whole image, and cannot be used to decompose the scene image into
individual objects directly.
It is intriguing to design human-like machines that are
able to compositionally represent scenes with individual objects and continuously learn knowledge of objects which
acts as priors to assist the decomposition of novel scenes.
In contrast to the aforementioned approaches which treat
the full scene as a whole and lack effective mechanisms of
incorporating accumulated prior knowledge, such machines
lower the complexity to represent visual scenes and facilitate understanding novel visual scenes. As shown in Figure
2, under the guidance of impressions of objects which are

Introduction
The world is complex not only in the great variations of objects that constitute it, but also in the diverse compositions
of these objects. Figure 1 presents some toy examples of
scenes constructed from various simple objects. In order to
interact with the world efficiently and effectively, humans
tend to understand the perceived visual scenes in a compositional and structured way by decomposing the complex
scenes into relatively simple objects and organizing these
objects structurally (Lake et al. 2017). Regularized by possibly inborn mental laws (Koffka 2013; Goldstein and Brockmole 2016) and based on the previously learned knowledge
of objects, humans can decompose and understand novel visual scenes composed of familiar objects reliably, and build
up new knowledge of novel objects efficiently with few examples of visual scenes containing these objects. The newly
acquired knowledge is accumulated in the memory and assists the understanding of new scenes in the future.
* Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10798

