The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PoseBlocks: A Toolkit for Creating (and Dancing) with AI
Brian Jordan, Nisha Devasia, Jenna Hong, Randi Williams, Cynthia Breazeal
MIT Media Lab
bcjordan@media.mit.edu, ndevasia@mit.edu, jhong19@mit.edu, randiw12@media.mit.edu, cynthiab@media.mit.edu

Abstract

students to import their own custom trained image and pose
recognition models from Google’s Teachable Machine (Carney et al. 2020). With these new tools, students can design and build naturally interactive AI-powered projects that
align with their interests, train their own supervised machine
learning models, and reason about the ethics and presence of
AI systems in their everyday lives.
In this paper we discuss the design and development
of these blocks, additional affordances added to the PoseBlocks editor, materials developed to support use in classrooms, and the results of piloting these tools with 46 students
aged 9-14. We examine the projects students created with
the toolkit and reflections from students and their teachers
who participated in the pilots. Students quickly learned to
design, train, and integrate custom machine learning models into their drag-and-drop programming projects, and they
designed projects that incorporated real-world elements relevant to their interests and surroundings.

Body-tracking artificial intelligence (AI) systems like Kinect
games, Snapchat Augmented Reality (AR) Lenses, and Instagram AR Filters are some of the most engaging ways
students experience AI in their everyday lives. Additionally,
many students have existing interests in physical hobbies like
sports and dance. In this paper, we present PoseBlocks; a
suite of block-based programming tools which enable students to build compelling body-interactive AI projects in
any web browser, integrating camera/microphone inputs and
body-sensing user interactions. To accomplish this, we provide a custom block-based programming environment building on the open source Scratch project, introducing new AImodel-powered blocks supporting body, hand, and face tracking, emotion recognition, and the ability to integrate custom
image/pose/audio models from the online transfer learning
tool Teachable Machine. We introduce editor functionality
such as a project video recorder, pre-computed video loops,
and integration with curriculum materials. We discuss deploying this toolkit with an accompanying curriculum in a
series of synchronous online pilots with 46 students, aged 914. In analyzing class projects and discussions, we find that
students learned to design, train, and integrate machine learning models in projects of their own devising while exploring
ethical considerations such as stakeholder values and algorithmic bias in their interactive AI systems.

Background
AI Education Many children growing up today have access to AI-enabled devices from an early age. However,
studies have shown that children lack understanding of how
their smart toys and AI assistants work (Druga et al. 2017;
McReynolds et al. 2017). Education and awareness are key
to resolving such misunderstandings. Understanding how AI
works affects students’ perceptions of smart devices; a better understanding leads to belief that AI devices are not as
smart as humans (Williams, Park, and Breazeal 2019), and
gives children a framework to safely interact with the smart
devices in their lives.
The concept of teaching AI to children dates back many
decades (Papert et al. 1971), but researchers have only just
begun to systematically study and develop standards for AI
education more broadly (AAAI 2018; Long and Magerko
2020). Many researchers and teachers have created workshops and curricula to teach AI concepts to K-12 students
(Karaman et al. 2017; Tang 2019; Van Brummelen 2019;
Lin et al. 2020; Payne 2020; Williams and Breazeal 2020)
and even preschoolers (Williams et al. 2019). However, no
existing learning experiences substantially support the creation of body-movement-focused interactive AI projects.

Introduction
Physical movement is one of the most engaging and increasingly common mechanisms for interacting with AI systems,
but students rarely have the opportunity to engage with it in
K-12 AI curricula. Many middle school students have passionate interests in dance, art, physical movement in sports,
and video games that involve physical motion which aren’t
easy to construct within the typical block-based coding environments found in classrooms. With the PoseBlocks toolkit,
we introduce a suite of AI-integrated block-based coding
tools used to complement learning activities in which students conceptualize, design, build, and reflect on interactive physical-movement-based multimedia experiences. Students can build interactive AI projects with two new sets
of AI-powered blocks: (1) hand/body/face position-tracking
and expression-detecting blocks, and (2) blocks that allow
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15551

