The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Adaptive Algorithms for Multi-armed Bandit with Composite and Anonymous
Feedback
Siwei Wang1 , Haoyun Wang2 , Longbo Huang1
1
Tsinghua University
Georgia Institute of Technology
wangsw2020@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, hwang800@gatech.edu, longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract

cher 2002) and EXP3 (Auer et al. 2002), are based on the
fact that feedback for the arm-pulling action can be observed
precisely and immediately. However, in many real-world applications, it is common that arm rewards spread over an
interval and are convoluted with each other. As a concrete
example, consider a company conducting advertisements via
Internet. The effect of an ads, i.e., how it affects the number
of clicks (reward), can often spread over the next few days
after it is displayed. Specifically, in the next couple of days,
there will be continuous clicks affected by the ad. Moreover,
during this time, the company usually launches some other
ads, which may also impact the number of clicks. As a result,
the company only observes aggregated information on the
reward (thus the feedback is also anonymous). This situation
also happens in medical problems. For example, recent research found that the variability of blood glucose level is the
key in controlling diabetes (Hirsch and Brownlee 2005). Yet,
diabetes medicines do not cause sudden jumps on the blood
glucose level. Instead, their effects last for a period, and the
blood glucose level is often jointly affected by medicines
taken within a period. These two features make it hard to
separate effects of different medicines, as well as to estimate
their effectiveness.
To address the above difficulties, in this paper, we consider an MAB model where the reward in each time slot is a
positive vector. Specifically, the reward vector from pulling
arm i at time t is ri (t) = (ri,τ (t), τ ≥ 1), where ri,τ (t)
denotes the reward component in time t + τ from pulling
arm i at time t. In addition, at time t, the player cannot observe each individual ri,τ (t)
Pdirectly. Instead, he observes
the aggregated reward, i.e., τ ≥1 ra(τ ),t−τ (τ ), where a(τ )
represents the chosen arm at time step τ .
Existing solution for this problem is to group time slots
into rounds (Pike-Burke et al. 2018; Cesa-Bianchi, Gentile,
and Mansour 2018), and choose to pull only one arm in
each round. With a proper selection of the round size and
other parameters, the problem can be connected to the nonanonymous setting (Neu et al. 2010; Joulani, Gyorgy, and
Szepesvári 2013). However, these algorithms crucially rely
on the precise knowledge of the reward interval size (or the
delay of rewards). As a result, underestimating the interval
size leads to no theoretical guarantees, whereas overestimation worsens the performances, since their regret bounds are
positively related to this estimation. This makes the algo-

We study the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem with composite and anonymous feedback. In this model, the reward
of pulling an arm spreads over a period of time (we call this
period as reward interval) and the player receives partial rewards of the action, convoluted with rewards from pulling
other arms, successively. Existing results on this model require prior knowledge about the reward interval size as an
input to their algorithms. In this paper, we propose adaptive algorithms for both the stochastic and the adversarial
cases, without requiring any prior information about the reward interval. For the stochastic case, we prove that our algorithm guarantees a regret that matches the lower bounds
(in order). For the adversarial case, we propose the first algorithm to jointly handle non-oblivious adversary and unknown
reward interval size. We also conduct simulations based on
real-world dataset. The results show that our algorithms outperform existing benchmarks.

Introduction
The multi-armed bandit (MAB) model (Berry and Fristedt
1985; Sutton and Barto 1998) has found wide applications
in Internet services, e.g., (Chen et al. 2018; Chapelle, Manavoglu, and Rosales 2015; Chen, Wang, and Yuan 2013;
Jain and Jamieson 2018; Wang and Huang 2018), and attracts increasing attention. The classic MAB model can be
described as a time-slotted game between the environment
and a player. In each time slot, the player has N actions
(or arms) to choose from. After he makes the selection, the
player receives a reward from the chosen arm immediately.
The rewards can be independent random variables generated
from certain unknown distributions, known as the stochastic
MAB problem (Lai and Robbins 1985), or arbitrarily chosen by the environment, called the adversarial MAB problem (Auer et al. 2002). In both models, the player’s goal is to
maximize his expected cumulative reward during the game
by choosing arms properly. To evaluate the player’s performance, the concept of “regret”, defined as the expected gap
between the player’s total reward and offline optimal reward,
is introduced as the evaluation metric.
Most of existing MAB algorithms, e.g., UCB (Gittins,
Glazebrook, and Weber 2011; Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and FisCopyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10210

