The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Evolution Strategies for Approximate Solution of Bayesian Games
Zun Li and Michael P. Wellman
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{lizun, wellman}@umich.edu

Abstract

vectors defining valuations for sets of goods, and strategies
mapping such types to bids for these goods.
A Bayesian-Nash equilibrium (BNE) is a configuration
of strategies that is stable in the sense that no player can
increase the expected value of its outcome by deviating to
another strategy. As our games are symmetric, it is natural
to seek symmetric BNE, and to exploit symmetric representations for computational purposes. A classical approach
(Milgrom and Weber 1982; McAfee and McMillan 1987) for
deriving pure symmetric BNE is to solve a differential equation for a fixed point of an analytical best response mapping.
However for many SBGs of interest, analytic solution is hindered by irregular type distributions and nonlinear payoffs,
and dimensionality of type and action spaces.
Instead of seeking analytical solutions, we formulate the
problem of computing BNE as a high-dimensional optimization, and present computational results that bridge classical
economic theories and modern AI techniques. We parameterize agent strategies as neural networks, therefore approximate
the original functional strategy space as a high-dimensional
vector space of network weights. Our algorithmic approach
is based on natural evolution strategies (NES) (Wierstra et al.
2014), a black-box optimization algorithm based on stochastic search in the parameter space. NES has been recently
shown a competitive optimization technique for non-smooth
environments like those often tackled by RL (Salimans et al.
2017). We consider it well suited for our purpose of equilibrium computation, as SBGs typically exhibit large payoff
discontinuities (Reny 1999).
We present methods for computing both pure and mixed
BNE (PBNE and MBNE). With player symmetry, computing
PBNE can be cast as a minimax optimization. Our proposed
algorithm employs one NES process to implement an approximate best response operator, and another NES to search for
an approximate fixed-point of this operator via regret minimization. This approach to some extent mirrors the classical
analytic approach mentioned above.
Finding stable profiles in pure strategies may be difficult
for games endowed with complex strategic landscape. Indeed
the existence of PBNE can be assured only with certain assumptions such as regularity of type distributions (Milgrom
and Weber 1985). To search for approximate MBNE, we construct finite approximations of the original infinite game by
discretizing the strategy space (Dasgupta and Maskin 1986),

We address the problem of solving complex Bayesian games,
characterized by high-dimensional type and action spaces,
many (> 2) players, and general-sum payoffs. Our approach
applies to symmetric one-shot Bayesian games, with no given
analytic structure. We represent agent strategies in parametric
form as neural networks, and apply natural evolution strategies
(NES) (Wierstra et al. 2014) for deep model optimization. For
pure equilibrium computation, we formulate the problem as
bi-level optimization, and employ NES in an iterative algorithm to implement both inner-loop best response optimization
and outer-loop regret minimization. In simple games including
first- and second-price auctions, it is capable of recovering
known analytic solutions. For mixed equilibrium computation,
we adopt an incremental strategy generation framework, with
NES as strategy generator producing a finite sequence of approximate best-response strategies. We then calculate equilibria over this finite strategy set via a model-based optimization
process. Both our pure and mixed equilibrium computation
methods employ NES to efficiently search for strategies over
the function space, given only black-box simulation access
to noisy payoff samples. We experimentally demonstrate the
efficacy of all methods on two simultaneous sealed-bid auction
games with distinct type distributions, and observe that the
solutions exhibit qualitatively different behavior in these two
environments.

1

Introduction

Bayesian games (Harsanyi 1967) model incomplete information by encoding uncertainty over opponents’ hidden information in terms of beliefs over player types. Types are
drawn from a common knowledge prior distribution. Each
player is informed of its own type, and decides its action
strategically as a function of this private information. This
framework provides a standard model for many economic
games, such as auctions, and has informed the design of
many real-world market-based systems, including mechanisms for online advertising. In this paper, we focus on
one-shot, symmetric Bayesian games (SBG), where both
type space and action space are subsets of multidimensional
Euclidean spaces (McAdams 2003). Multi-object auctions
(Christodoulou, Kovács, and Schapira 2008) provide a canonical example of this game class, with types as parameter
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5531

