The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Multinomial Logit Contextual Bandits:
Provable Optimality and Practicality
Min-hwan Oh1 and Garud Iyengar2
1

Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
Columbia University, New York, USA
1
minoh@snu.ac.kr, 2 garud@ieor.columbia.edu

Abstract

fers a menu of options to the user, rather than a single option
as in traditional bandit action selection. The user chooses
at most one of the offered options, and the agent receives a
reward associated with the user choice.
In this paper, we consider a sequential assortment selection problem which is a combinatorial variant of the bandit
problem. The goal is to offer a sequence of assortments of
at most K items from a set of N possible items. The sequence can be chosen as a function of the contextual information of items, and possibly users, in order to minimize
the expected regret, which is defined as the gap between the
expected revenue generated by the algorithm and the offline
optimal expected revenue when the true parameter is known.
The d-dimensional contextual information, or a set of feature
vectors, is revealed at each round t, allowing the feature information of items to change over time. The feedback here
is the particular item chosen by the user from the offered
assortment. We assume that the item choice follows a multinomial logistic (MNL) distribution (McFadden 1978). This
is one of the most widely used model in dynamic assortment optimization literature (Caro and Gallien 2007; Rusmevichientong, Shen, and Shmoys 2010; Sauré and Zeevi
2013; Agrawal et al. 2019, 2017; Aouad, Levi, and Segev
2018).
For sequential decision-making with contextual information, (generalized) linear bandits (Abe and Long 1999; Auer
2002; Filippi et al. 2010; Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis 2010; Abbasi-Yadkori, Pál, and Szepesvári 2011; Chu
et al. 2011; Li, Lu, and Zhou 2017) and their variants have
been widely studied. However, these methods are only limited to a single item selection which is increasingly rarer in
practice as compared to multiple item offering that we consider in this work. There are a line of works in combinatorial variants of contextual bandit problems (Qin, Chen, and
Zhu 2014; Wen, Kveton, and Ashkan 2015; Kveton et al.
2015; Zong et al. 2016) mostly with semi-bandit feedback
or cascading feedback. However, these methods do not take
the user choice into account. Hence, substitution effect is
not considered. In contrast to these contextual bandit problems and their combinatorial variants, in the multinomial
logit (MNL) contextual bandit, the item choice (feedback)
is a function of all items in the offered assortment. The key
challenges are how to design an algorithm that offers assortments to simultaneously learn the unknown parameter

We consider a sequential assortment selection problem where
the user choice is given by a multinomial logit (MNL) choice
model whose parameters are unknown. In each period, the
learning agent observes a d-dimensional contextual information about the user and the N available items, and offers
an assortment of size K to the user, and observes the bandit feedback of the item chosen from the assortment. We
propose upper confidence bound based algorithms for this
MNL contextual bandit. The first algorithm
√ is a simple and
practical method which achieves an e
O(d T ) regret over T
rounds.
√ Next, we propose a second algorithm which achieves
e dT ) regret. This matches the lower bound for the MNL
a O(
bandit problem, up to logarithmic
terms, and improves on the
√
best known result by a d factor. To establish this sharper
regret bound, we present a non-asymptotic confidence bound
for the maximum likelihood estimator of the MNL model that
may be of independent interest as its own theoretical contribution. We then revisit the simpler, significantly more practical, first algorithm and show that a simple variant of the algorithm achieves the optimal regret for a broad class of important applications.

Introduction
In many of the human-algorithm interactions today, a learning agent (algorithm) makes sequential decisions and receives user (human) feedback only for the chosen decisions.
The multi-armed bandit (Lattimore and Szepesvári 2019)
is a model for this sequential decision making with partial
feedback. It is a classic reinforcement learning problem that
exemplifies the dilemma of exploration vs. exploitation. This
multi-armed bandit model has found diverse applications,
e.g. learning click-through rates in search engines, product recommendations in online retailing, movie suggestions
on streaming services, news feeds, etc. Note that in several
of the applications, the goal is to maximize an appropriate “clickthrough” rate. Often information about the features
of the agent’s actions and contextual information about the
user are available. The contextual bandit extends the multiarmed bandit by making the decision conditional on this
context and feature information. In many real-world problems including the aforementioned examples, the agent ofCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9205

