The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Agreement-Discrepancy-Selection:
Active Learning with Progressive Distribution Alignment
Mengying Fu1 , Tianning Yuan1 , Fang Wan1∗ , Songcen Xu2 and Qixiang Ye1∗
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
{fumengying19, yuantianning19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xusongcen@huawei.com, {wanfang, qxye}@ucas.ac.cn
2

Abstract
In active learning, the ignorance of aligning unlabeled samples’ distribution with that of labeled samples hinders the
model trained upon labeled samples from selecting informative unlabeled samples. In this paper, we propose an
agreement-discrepancy-selection (ADS) approach, and target
at unifying distribution alignment with sample selection by
introducing adversarial classifiers to the convolutional neural network (CNN). Minimizing classifiers’ prediction discrepancy (maximizing prediction agreement) drives learning CNN features to reduce the distribution bias of labeled
and unlabeled samples, while maximizing classifiers’ discrepancy highlights informative samples. Iterative optimization of agreement and discrepancy loss calibrated with an entropy function drives aligning sample distributions in a progressive fashion for effective active learning. Experiments on
image classification and object detection tasks demonstrate
that ADS is task-agnostic, while significantly outperforms the
previous methods when the labeled sets are small.

Figure 1: Overview of ADS, which leverages the prediction
agreement and discrepancy to select informative unlabeled
samples.
Despite of the great progress, most existing methods remain simply generalizing the models trained on the labeled
set to the unlabeled set while ignoring the distribution alignment issue. This is problematic when there is a significant
distribution bias between the labeled and unlabeled sets (Gudovskiy et al. 2020). Active learning fused with deep learning has alleviated this problem by sharing an implicit feature space. However, there remains lacking an explicit way
to unify distribution alignment with sample selection, which
hinders the model trained upon labeled samples from selecting informative unlabeled samples.
In this paper, we propose the ADS approach1 and target
at unifying distribution alignment with sample selection in a
continuous and explainable manner. Considering the unreliability of predictions themselves, we propose to leverage the
prediction agreement and discrepancy of two classifiers to
estimate the distribution continuity, Fig. 1. The motivation
behind ADS is that maximizing the prediction agreement
and discrepancy upon unlabeled samples makes it possible
to quantify the distribution overlap and bias, while avoiding
directly predicting the uncertainty or diversity of samples.
To fulfill this purpose, we introduce adversarial classifiers atop the convolutional neural network (CNN). During training, minimizing the prediction discrepancy (maximizing their agreement) of fixed classifiers’ drives learning CNN features to align the distribution of easy unlabeled samples. Maximizing classifiers’ prediction discrepancy upon fixed features finds out the hard samples, which

Introduction
The key idea behind active learning is that a machine learning algorithm can achieve better performance with fewer
training labels if it is allowed to choose the data it wants to
learn from. Despite of the rapid progress of learning methods with less supervision, e.g., weakly supervised learning
and semi-supervised learning, active learning remains the
cornerstone of many artificial intelligence applications for
its simplicity and higher performance bound.
The majority of previous researches suggests that active
learning is an empirical method which generalizes models trained on a labeled set to an unlabeled set by iterative
sample selection. Uncertainty-based methods define various
metrics to select informative samples to adapt the trained
model to the unlabeled set (Gal, Islam, and Ghahramani
2017). Distribution-based approaches aim at estimating the
layout of unlabeled samples for selecting samples of large
diversity or loss. Expected model change methods (Freytag,
Rodner, and Denzler 2014; Käding et al. 2016) find out samples which can cause the greatest change to the model parameters or prediction samples’ loss (Yoo and Kweon 2019).
∗

Correspond author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

7466

Code is enclosed in the supplementary material.

