The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

PGNet: Real-time Arbitrarily-Shaped Text Spotting
with Point Gathering Network
Pengfei Wang,1 * Chengquan Zhang,2 * Fei Qi,1 * Shanshan Liu,2 Xiaoqiang Zhang,2
Pengyuan Lyu,2 Junyu Han,2 Jingtuo Liu,2 Errui Ding,2 Guangming Shi1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University,
Department of Computer Vision Technology, Baidu Inc.
pfwang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, zhangchengquan@baidu.com, fred.qi@ieee.org, {liushanshan07,
zhangxiaoqiang01}@baidu.com, lvpyuan@gmail.com, {hanjunyu, liujingtuo, dingerrui}@baidu.com, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Accuracy
2

The reading of arbitrarily-shaped text has received increasing
research attention. However, existing text spotters are mostly
built on two-stage frameworks or character-based methods,
which suffer from either Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS),
Region-of-Interest (RoI) operations, or character-level annotations. In this paper, to address the above problems, we propose a novel fully convolutional Point Gathering Network
(PGNet) for reading arbitrarily-shaped text in real-time. The
PGNet is a single-shot text spotter, where the pixel-level character classification map is learned with proposed PG-CTC
loss avoiding the usage of character-level annotations. With
a PG-CTC decoder, we gather high-level character classification vectors from two-dimensional space and decode them
into text symbols without NMS and RoI operations involved,
which guarantees high efficiency. Additionally, reasoning the
relations between each character and its neighbors, a graph
refinement module (GRM) is proposed to optimize the coarse
recognition and improve the end-to-end performance. Experiments prove that the proposed method achieves competitive accuracy, meanwhile significantly improving the running
speed. In particular, in Total-Text, it runs at 46.7 FPS, surpassing the previous spotters with a large margin.

70
60

PGNet-A
with GRM

CharNet-H57
TextNet

ABCNet-F
PGNet-E

50

Mask TextSpotter

40
30

Textboxes

10

Speed(FPS)
20

30

40

50

Figure 1: Model Speed vs. Recognition Accuracy on TotalText: Our PGNet-E achieves at least two times faster than
the most recent state-of-the-art method ABCNet (Liu et al.
2020) with competitive recognition accuracy. Complete results are in Table. 3.

Reading of arbitrarily-shaped scene text is a challenging
task, as compared in Fig. 2, and the most recent works may
suffer from the following disadvantages: (1) The pipelines
of two-stage methods (Sun et al. 2018; Lyu et al. 2018;
Feng et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2020) are inefficient, which
may involve time-consuming Non-maximum Suppression
(NMS) and Region of Interest (RoI) operations. Especially
for arbitrarily-shaped text spotter, specific RoI transformation operation, such as RoISlide (Feng et al. 2019) or BezierAlign (Liu et al. 2020), brings non-negligible computational overhead. (2) In Mask TextSpotter (Lyu et al. 2018)
and CharNet (Xing et al. 2019), character-level annotations
are required for training, which is too expensive to afford.
Though CharNet could be trained in a weakly supervised
manner by character-level annotations in synthetic datasets,
free synthesized data is not completely replaceable for real
data in practice. (3) The recognition of text in non-traditional
reading directions would be failed with pre-defined rules.
For example, TextDragon (Feng et al. 2019) and Mask
TextSpotter (Lyu et al. 2018) make a strong assumption that
the reading direction of text region is either from left to right
or from up to down, which precludes correct recognition of
more challenging text.

Introduction
Recently, scene text reading has attracted extensive attention in both academia and industry for its numerous applications, such as scene understanding, image retrieval, augmented reality translation (Wu et al. 2019), and robot navigation. Thanks to the surge of deep neural networks, significant progress has been made in detection and recognition
separable solutions (Wu and Natarajan 2017; Long et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2019b,a; Zhan and Lu 2019; Shi et al.
2018; Yu et al. 2020; Wan et al. 2019), as well as end-to-end
text spotting methods. However, existing end-to-end models (Sun et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2018; Feng et al. 2019) are
mostly built on two-stage frameworks or character-based
methods (Xing et al. 2019; Lyu et al. 2018) with complex
pipelines, which are inefficient for real-time applications. In
this paper, we try to investigate a real-time text spotter for
arbitrarily-shaped text.
* Equal contribution. Fei Qi is the corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2782

