The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploring the Vulnerability of Deep Neural Networks:
A Study of Parameter Corruption
Xu Sun,1,2∗ Zhiyuan Zhang,1∗ Xuancheng Ren,1 Ruixuan Luo,2 Liangyou Li3
1

MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistic, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{xusun, zzy1210,renxc,luoruixuan97}@pku.edu.cn, liliangyou@huawei.com
Abstract

ImageNet

Random
Corruption

ResNet-34
……

We argue that the vulnerability of model parameters is of crucial value to the study of model robustness and generalization but little research has been devoted to understanding this
matter. In this work, we propose an indicator to measure the
robustness of neural network parameters by exploiting their
vulnerability via parameter corruption. The proposed indicator describes the maximum loss variation in the non-trivial
worst-case scenario under parameter corruption. For practical
purposes, we give a gradient-based estimation, which is far
more effective than random corruption trials that can hardly
induce the worst accuracy degradation. Equipped with theoretical support and empirical validation, we are able to systematically investigate the robustness of different model parameters and reveal vulnerability of deep neural networks that
has been rarely paid attention to before. Moreover, we can enhance the models accordingly with the proposed adversarial
corruption-resistant training, which not only improves the parameter robustness but also translates into accuracy elevation.

Only 10
Acc: 72.5%
parameters
are corrupted Predict: mushroom
……
and 𝑳𝟐 -norm
ResNet-34
of corruption
Acc: 72.5%
is 0.03.
Predict: mushroom

ResNet-34

……

Label: mushroom

Gradient-based
Corruption

Acc: 0.1%
Prediction: ant

Figure 1: Parameter corruptions with ResNet-34 on ImageNet. It shows that deep neural networks are robust to random corruptions, but the accuracy can drop significantly in
the worst case suggested by the gradient-based method. The
accuracy is measured on the development set.

in parameter vulnerability because of hardware deterioration
and background noise, which can be seen as parameter corruption. More importantly, study on parameter vulnerability can deepen our understanding of various mechanisms in
neural networks, inspiring innovation in architecture design
and training paradigm.
To probe the vulnerability of neural network parameters and evaluate the parameter robustness, we propose an
indicator that measures the maximum loss change caused
by small perturbations on model parameters in the nontrivial worst-cased scenario. The perturbations can be seen
as artificial parameter corruptions. We give an infinitesimal
gradient-based estimation of the indicator that is efficient for
practical purposes compared with random corruption trials,
which can hardly induce optimal loss degradation. Our theoretical and empirical results both validate the effectiveness
of the proposed gradient-based method. As shown in Figure 1, model parameters are generally resistant to random
corruptions but the worst outlook can be quite bleak suggested by the gradient-based corruption result.
Intuitively, the indicator shows the maximum altitude ascent within a certain distance of the current parameter on the
loss surface, as illustrated conceptually in Figure 2. The traditional learning algorithms focus on obtaining lower loss,
which means generally the parameters at point B are preferred. However, the local geometry of the landscape also
indicates the generalization performance of the learning algorithm (Keskar et al. 2017; Chaudhari et al. 2017). The pa-

Introduction
Despite the promising performance of Deep neural networks
(DNNs), research has discovered that DNNs are vulnerable
to adversarial examples, i.e., simple perturbations to input
data can mislead models (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy
2015; Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2017; Madry et al.
2018). These findings concern the vulnerability of DNNs
against input data. However, the vulnerability of DNNs does
not only exhibit in input data. As functions of both input data
and model parameters, the parameters of neural networks
are a source of vulnerability of equal importance. For neural networks deployed on electronic computers, parameter
attacks can be conducted in the form of training data poisoning (Dai, Chen, and Li 2019; Chen et al. 2017; Gu et al.
2019), bit flipping (Rakin, He, and Fan 2020), compression (Arora et al. 2018) or quantization (Nagel et al. 2019;
Weng et al. 2020). For neural networks deployed in physical devices, advances in hardware neural networks (Feldmann et al. 2019; Misra and Saha 2010; Abdelsalam et al.
2018; Salimi-Nezhad et al. 2019; Weber, da Silva Labres,
and Cabrera 2019; Bui and Phillips 2019) also call for study
∗

Equal Contribution.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11648

