The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Interpretable Models for Coupled Networks Under Domain Constraints
Hongyuan You, Sikun Lin, Ambuj K. Singh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Santa Barbara
2120A Harold Frank Hall
Santa Barbara, California 93106
{hyou, sikun, ambuj}@ucsb.edu
Abstract

To achieve the above goal, we consider an edge-by-edge
formulation. We treat one set of edges in G1 as predictors
and the other set of edges in G2 as response variables in a
multivariate linear regression model. Past research for the
above problem relies on the restrictive Gaussian assumption,
which simplifies the problem but is difficult to justify, especially in the domain of brain architectures. Adopting Gaussian assumption on non-Gaussian data can significantly prevent the detection of conditional dependencies and may lead
to incorrectly inferred relationships among variables.
The learning of relationships between two different
modalities can be difficult without sufficient data. As a result, in sparser data settings, the ability to specify constraints based on domain knowledge can be beneficial. For
example, in the case of brain data, functional edges have
mainly local influences, and structural edges are more responsible for long-distance influences (Rubinov and Sporns
2010; Batista-Garcı́a-Ramó and Fernández-Verdecia 2018).
We want preferences encoded in domain knowledge to guide
the selection of partial correlations of unexplained noise
terms in the constructed model.
Based on the above motivations, we propose a flexible and
efficient framework CC-MRCE (Convex-set Constrained
Multivariate Regression with Covariance Estimation) that
simultaneously learns both regression coefficients between
two coupled networks and the correlation structure of noise
terms. In a departure from existing methods, our framework encodes domain knowledge as a set of convex constraints and adopts a pseudolikelihood-based neighborhoodselection objective in partial correlation estimation, which
has been shown to be more robust to non-Gaussian data. Because of the CC-MRCE objective’s bi-convex nature, we alternately solve a regression sub-problem and a constrained
partial correlation sub-problem until convergence. The latter
sub-problem requires feasible solutions under given domain
constraints that we render tractable via a modified two-stage
proximal gradient descent method.
We illustrate the use of our method in the context of
the human brain. Brain data presents one of the greatest technical challenges in analysis and modeling due to a
network-based characterization (Bassett and Sporns 2017;
Bassett, Zurn, and Gold 2018), non-Gaussian nature of data,
high dimensionality, a small number of samples, and the
need to incorporate domain knowledge. We apply the pro-

Modeling the behavior of coupled networks is challenging
due to their intricate dynamics. For example in neuroscience,
it is of critical importance to understand the relationship between the functional neural processes and anatomical connectivities. Modern neuroimaging techniques allow us to separately measure functional connectivity through fMRI imaging and the underlying white matter wiring through diffusion
imaging. Previous studies have shown that structural edges in
brain networks improve the inference of functional edges and
vice versa. In this paper, we investigate the idea of coupled
networks through an optimization framework by focusing on
interactions between structural edges and functional edges
of brain networks. We consider both types of edges as observed instances of random variables that represent different
underlying network processes. The proposed framework does
not depend on Gaussian assumptions and achieves a more
robust performance on general data compared with existing
approaches. To incorporate existing domain knowledge into
such studies, we propose a novel formulation to place hard
network constraints on the noise term while estimating interactions. This not only leads to a cleaner way of applying network constraints but also provides a more scalable solution
when network connectivity is sparse. We validate our method
on multishell diffusion and task-evoked fMRI datasets from
the Human Connectome Project, leading to both important
insights on structural backbones that support various types of
task activities as well as general solutions to the study of coupled networks.

Introduction
Recently, there has been an effort to move research from the
investigation of single networks to the more realistic scenario of multiple coupled networks. In this paper, we consider the case of pairs of networks, (G1 , G2 ), that are categorized into different modalities over a population. Such
coupled network systems can be found in infrastructures
of modern society (energy-communication), financial systems (ownership-trade), or even human brains (anatomical
substrate-cortical activation). Our goal is to reconstruct one
network from information on the other, and during such a
process obtaining a concise interpretation of how one network affects the other.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10727

