The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Generating Diversified Comments via Reader-Aware Topic Modeling and
Saliency Detection
Wei Wang1,2, * , Piji Li3 , Hai-Tao Zheng1,2,†
1

2

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
3
Tencent AI Lab
w-w16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, pijili@tencent.com
zheng.haitao@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

Title: Andrew Lincoln Poised To Walk Off ‘The Walking Dead’
Next Season; Norman Reedus To Stay

Automatic comment generation is a special and challenging
task to verify the model ability on news content comprehension and language generation. Comments not only convey
salient and interesting information in news articles, but also
imply various and different reader characteristics which we
treat as the essential clues for diversity. However, most of
the comment generation approaches only focus on saliency
information extraction, while the reader-aware factors implied by comments are neglected. To address this issue, we
propose a unified reader-aware topic modeling and saliency
information detection framework to enhance the quality of
generated comments. For reader-aware topic modeling, we
design a variational generative clustering algorithm for latent
semantic learning and topic mining from reader comments.
For saliency information detection, we introduce Bernoulli
distribution estimating on news content to select saliency information. The obtained topic representations as well as the
selected saliency information are incorporated into the decoder to generate diversified and informative comments. Experimental results on three datasets show that our framework
outperforms existing baseline methods in terms of both automatic metrics and human evaluation. The potential ethical
issues are also discussed in detail.

Body (truncated): He has lost his on-screen son, his wife and
a number of friends to the zombie apocalypse, and now The
Walking Dead star Andrew Lincoln looks to be taking his own
leave of the AMC blockbuster. Cast moves on the series will
also see Norman Reedus stay put under a new $ 20 million contract.
Almost unbelievable on a show where almost no one is said to
be safe, the man who has played Rick Grimes could be gone
by the end of the upcoming ninth season... The show will reset
with Reedus ’ Daryl Dixon even more in the spotlight ...
Comment A: I’m not watching TWD without Lincoln.
Comment B: Storylines getting stale and they keep having the
same type trouble every year.
Comment C: Reedus ca n’t carry the show playing Daryl.

Figure 1: A news example from Yahoo.
event and conveys lots of detailed information, readers usually pay attention to part of the content, which means that
not all the content information is salient and important. As
shown in Figure 1, the first two readers both focus on “The
Walking Dead” and the third reader focuses on “Reedus”.
None of them mention other details in the content. (2) Different readers are usually interested in different topics, and
even on the same topic, they may hold different opinions,
which makes the comments diverse and informative. For
example, the first reader gives the comment from the topic
of “feeling” and he “cannot accept Lincoln’s leaving”. The
second reader comments on the topic of “plot” and thinks “it
is old-fashioned”. The third reader comments from the topic
of “acting”, saying that “Reedus can’t play that role”.
Therefore, news comments are produced based on the interactions between readers and news articles. Comments not
only imply different important information in news articles,
but also convey distinct reader characteristics. Precisely because of these reader-aware factors, we can obtain a variety of diversified comments under the same news article. Intuitively, as the essential reason for diversity, these readeraware factors should be considered jointly with saliency information detection in the task of diversified comment generation. However, it is rare that works consider these two
components simultaneously. Zheng et al.(2017) proposed to

Introduction
For natural language generation research, automatic comment generation is a challenging task to verify the model
ability on aspects of news information comprehension and
high-quality comment generation (Reiter and Dale 1997;
Gatt and Krahmer 2018; Qin et al. 2018; Huang et al. 2020).
One common phenomenon is that, for the same news article, there are usually hundreds or even thousands of different comments proposed by readers in different backgrounds.
Figure 1 depicts an example of a news article (truncated)
and three corresponding comments from Yahoo. The news
article is about “The Walking Dead”. From the example,
we can observe and conclude two characteristics: (1) Although the news article depicts many different aspects of the
* Work was done during internship at Tencent AI Lab.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

13988

