The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

M ELINDA: A Multimodal Dataset
for Biomedical Experiment Method Classification
Te-Lin Wu1 , Shikhar Singh2 , Sayan Paul3 , Gully Burns4 , Nanyun Peng1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, 2 University of Southern California
3
Intuit Inc., 4 Chan Zuckerberg Initiative
1
{telinwu, violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu , ssingh43@usc.edu2 , sayan.paul6@gmail.com3 , gully.burns@chanzuckerberg.com4
Abstract

GT Experiment Method:

We introduce a new dataset, M ELINDA, for Multimodal
biomEdicaL experImeNt methoD clAssification. The dataset
is collected in a fully automated distant supervision manner, where the labels are obtained from an existing curated
database, and the actual contents are extracted from papers
associated with each of the records in the database. We benchmark various state-of-the-art NLP and computer vision models, including unimodal models which only take either caption texts or images as inputs, and multimodal models. Extensive experiments and analysis show that multimodal models, despite outperforming unimodal ones, still need improvements especially on a less-supervised way of grounding visual concepts with languages, and better transferability to low
resource domains. We release our dataset and the benchmarks
to facilitate future research in multimodal learning, especially
to motivate targeted improvements for applications in scientific domains.

Identification by antibody
Figure

Assembly of the outer kinetochore

Models

Predictions

Unimodal
(Image) Model

Predetermined
participant

Multimodal
Model

Identification
by antibody

Unimodal
(Text) Model

Predetermined
participant

Figure 5. KNL-1, CeNDC-80, and HIM-10 exhibit asymmetric dependencies during kinetochore assembly. (A) Wild-type, CeNDC80-depleted (n = 33), HIM-10-depleted (n = 36), and KNL-1-depleted (n = 67) embryos were stained for DNA (left panels), CeNDC-80
(middle panels), and HIM-10 (right panels). Chromosomes from prometaphase-stage one-cell embryos are shown. (B) Wild-type,
CeNDC-80-depleted (n = 37), and HIM-10-depleted (n = 40) embryos were stained for DNA (left panels), KNL-1 (middle panels), and
the depletion target (right panels). (C) Western blot of extracts prepared from wild-type, KNL-1-depleted, CeNDC-80-depleted, and
HIM-10-depleted worms. Serial dilutions of wild-type extract were loaded to quantify depletion levels.

depletion experiments. Depletion of CeBUB-1, HCP-1, or
CeCLASP-2 had no effect on the kinetochore targeting of
KNL-1 (Fig. 6E). Because HCP-1 is functionally redundant with HCP-2 (Moore et al. 1999), the reverse RNAi
was performed using a mixture of HCP-1/HCP-2 doublestranded RNAs, and depletion was assessed using a mixture of anti-HCP-1 and anti-HCP-2 antibodies.
The above results indicate that KNL-1 is upstream of
CeBUB-1, HCP-1, and CeCLASP-2 in the kinetochore
assembly hierarchy. None of these proteins was detected
in KNL-1 immunoprecipitates (Fig. 6F), suggesting that
KNL-1-dependent targeting of these three components is
likely to involve additional intermediates and/or a
higher-order structure formed on the chromosome. Cu-

mulatively, these results suggest that the kinetochorenull phenotype of KNL-1-depleted embryos arises from a
failure to form the microtubule-binding outer domain of
the kinetochore.

Caption

Architectural logic of a metazoan kinetochore

The results described above lead us to propose an architectural hierarchy for the mitotic C. elegans kinetochore
(Fig. 7A). In this hierarchy, KNL-1 plays a central role by
linking the DNA-proximal elements of the kinetochore
to its outer microtubule-binding domain. One interesting prediction of this hierarchy is that depletion of
CeNDC-80/HIM-10 should reduce the levels of other
GENES & DEVELOPMENT

2429

PDF Article

Figure 1: The M ELINDA dataset & the biomedical experiment classification task: We introduce a new dataset
which concerns learning to recognize the underlying experiment methods used to produce an experimental figure
in biomedical research articles. The recognition is fundamentally multimodal, where justification of the experiment
methods takes both figures and captions into consideration.
The M ELINDA dataset could serve as a good testbed for
benchmarking, as well as motivating multimodal models
particularly in biomedical and low-resource domains.

Introduction
Biocuration, the activity of manually organizing biological
information, is a crucial yet human-effort-intensive process
in biomedical research (ISB 2018). Organizing such knowledge in a structured way is important for accelerating science since it facilitates downstream tasks such as scientific
information retrieval (Craven, Kumlien et al. 1999; Mohan
et al. 2018; Burns et al. 2018; Burns, Li, and Peng 2019),
and question answering (Ben Abacha et al. 2019; Nguyen
et al. 2019; He et al. 2020).
One such curation task is recognizing experiment methods, which identifies the underlying experimental protocols
that result in the figures in research articles. It can be formulated as a multi-class classification task, which takes as
inputs the figures and their captions, and outputs the corresponding experiment types that generate the figures, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The task is inherently multimodal as biocurators need to
take both the figure and the caption into consideration to
make their decisions (Demner-Fushman et al. 2012).1 While

scientists can do the task with perfect accuracy, the requirements of manual labeling from experts hinder the scalability of the process. It is thus imperative to develop advanced
language and computer vision multimodal tools to help accelerate the aforementioned scientific discovery process.
However, automatically identifying the experiment methods poses significant challenges for multimodal processing tools. One major challenge is how to ground the visual
concepts to language. Most current visual-linguistics multimodal models (Li et al. 2019; Lu et al. 2019; Su et al. 2020;
Chen et al. 2020) rely on a robust object detection module to
identify predefined objects for grounding finer granularity of
visual and linguistics concepts. However, as it requires extra efforts from experts, scientific images often lack ground
truth object annotations, and the transfer of pretrained detection models suffers from significant domain shifts. As a result, this specific domain would appreciate multimodal mod-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Although different experiment methods tend to generate visually different results, the differences can be subtle and the captions
often help distinguish these subtle differences among figures.
14076

