The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

eT REE: Learning Tree-structured Embeddings
Faisal M. Almutairi1,2 , Yunlong Wang2 , Dong Wang2 , Emily Zhao2 , and Nicholas D. Sidiropoulos3
1

Department of ECE, University of Minnesota, MN, USA
Advanced Analytics, IQVIA Inc., Plymouth Meeting, PA, USA
3
Department of ECE, University of Virginia, VA, USA
almut012@umn.edu, {yunlong.wang, dong.wang, emily.zhao}@iqvia.com, nikos@virginia.edu
2

Abstract
Matrix factorization (MF) plays an important role in a wide
range of machine learning and data mining models. MF is
commonly used to obtain item embeddings and feature representations due to its ability to capture correlations and higherorder statistical dependencies across dimensions. In many applications, the categories of items exhibit a hierarchical tree
structure. For instance, human diseases can be divided into
coarse categories, e.g., bacterial, and viral. These categories
can be further divided into finer categories, e.g., viral infections can be respiratory, gastrointestinal, and exanthematous viral diseases. In e-commerce, products, movies, books,
etc., are grouped into hierarchical categories, e.g., clothing
items are divided by gender, then by type (formal, casual,
etc.). While the tree structure and the categories of the different items may be known in some applications, they have
to be learned together with the embeddings in many others.
In this work, we propose eT REE, a model that incorporates
the (usually ignored) tree structure to enhance the quality of
the embeddings. We leverage the special uniqueness properties of Nonnegative MF (NMF) to prove identifiability of
eT REE. The proposed model not only exploits the tree structure prior, but also learns the hierarchical clustering in an unsupervised data-driven fashion. We derive an efficient algorithmic solution and a scalable implementation of eT REE that
exploits parallel computing, computation caching, and warm
start strategies. We showcase the effectiveness of eT REE on
real data from various application domains: healthcare, recommender systems, and education. We also demonstrate the
meaningfulness of the tree obtained from eT REE by means of
domain experts interpretation.

Figure 1: An example of hierarchical movie categories.
statistical dependencies across dimensions. The entry corresponding to the ith user and j th item can be inferred
by the inner product of their embeddings. Matrix completion finds a wide range of applications including collaborative filtering in recommender systems (Koren 2008), disease
and treatment prediction and patient subtyping (Wang et al.
2019) in healthcare analytics, student performance prediction and course recommendation in learning analytics (Almutairi, Sidiropoulos, and Karypis 2017), and image processing (Liu et al. 2015).
Incorporating side contextual information or priors, e.g.,
sparsity (Hoyer 2004), smoothness, and latent clustering
(Yang, Fu, and Sidiropoulos 2016), is well-motivated in matrix factorization and completion of sparse data. This is because a major challenge stems from the fact that we aim to
find latent representations from very few samples. In this paper, we present a principled approach that incorporates the
unknown implicit tree structure prior. In many applications,
categories of items display a hierarchical tree structure. In
higher education, for instance, courses form multiple trees
via their prerequisite hierarchy. Movie genres, e.g., comedy,
action, and fantasy, comprise different fine subcategories as
illustrated in the example in Fig. 1. Another example appears in Electronics Health Records (EHR) in healthcare analytics, where medical service (diagnoses, procedures, and
prescription) can be clustered into subcategories, and these
subcategories can also be grouped into coarse categories (examples are provided in the experimental results in Fig. 3).
Individuals, e.g., users, students, and patients, also exhibit
hierarchical clusters where the common traits between people increase as we move down from the root nodes to the leaf
nodes in a tree (Maleszka, Mianowska, and Nguyen 2013;
Wang, Pan, and Xu 2014). In many applications, the categorical hierarchy is either unknown, or requires manual labeling
of massive amounts of data.
Incorporating tree structures in machine learning models
has been recently considered, mostly in recommender sys-

Introduction
Matrix Factorization (MF) plays an important role in a wide
range of machine learning models, for various applications
such as dimensional reduction and embedding. A popular
task is matrix completion, where the goal is to infer the
unknown/missing matrix entries from the observed ones.
A common approach is to employ MF to find a reduceddimension representation (embedding) of each element corresponding to the matrix dimensions (e.g., users and items)
These embeddings capture the essential information due to
the ability of MF to capture correlations and higher-order
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6609

