The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

A Trace-restricted Kronecker-factored Approximation to Natural Gradient
Kaixin Gao1∗ , Xiaolei Liu1∗ , Zhenghai Huang1∗ , Min Wang2 ,
Zidong Wang2 , Dachuan Xu3† , Fan Yu2
1
School of Mathematics, Tianjin University, China
Central Software Institute, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd, China
3
Department of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, China
1
{gaokaixin, liuxiaolei, huangzhenghai}@tju.edu.cn, 2 {wangmin106, wang1, fan.yu}@huawei.com, 3 xudc@bjut.edu.cn
2

Abstract

ciencies efficiently. The most well-known second-order optimization method may be the Newton’s method. Natural gradient descent (NGD) (Amari 1998), which gives the steepest descent direction in the space of distributions, also can
be viewed as a second-order optimization method (Martens 2014). However, second-order optimization methods are
clearly not computationally competitive with first-order alternatives, because they need to invert the large curvature
matrix (the Hessian matrix for Newton’s method and the
Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) for NGD) whose dimension is the number of model’s parameters. In practice, they
require cubic computation time and quadratic storage for
every update. Obviously, it is impractical to directly apply
second-order optimization methods for training DNNs with
hundreds of millions of parameters. So a series of approximations have been proposed.
Many methods can be viewed as diagonal approximation
of the curvature matrix (Becker and Lecun 1988; John, Elad,
and Yoram 2011; Tieleman and Hinton 2012; Kingma and
Ba 2014; Yao et al. 2020), and these algorithms are computationally tractable. However, we know that the curvature
matrix of DNNs’ objective function is highly non-diagonal,
and hence, diagonal approximations lose much curvature
matrix information. More complex algorithms are not limited to diagonal approximations, but instead focus on some
correlations between parameters of neural networks and use
the non-diagonal part of the curvature matrix, such as quasiNewton methods (Likas and Stafylopatis 2000; Keskar and
Berahas 2016; Berahas, Jahani, and Takáč 2019; Goldfarb, Ren, and Bahamou 2020), Hessian-Free optimization approach (Martens 2010; Martens and Ilya 2011; Kiros 2013;
Pan, Innanen, and Liao 2017), and Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature (KFAC) (Martens and Grosse 2015;
Grosse and Martens 2016; Martens, Ba, and Johnson 2018;
Zhang et al. 2018; George et al. 2018). These methods have
achieved advanced performance on some complicated DNN
models and training tasks.
In this paper, our main focus will be on the NGD. Motivated by the diagonal approximations, we think that the diagonal elements’ information of the curvature matrix plays an
important role, so we pay more attention to the diagonal information and keep the trace relationship in our approximation. Inspired by both diagonal and factored approximations,
we present a new approximation to the FIM of DNNs called

Second-order optimization methods have the ability to accelerate convergence by modifying the gradient through the curvature matrix. There have been many attempts to use secondorder optimization methods for training deep neural networks. In this work, inspired by diagonal approximations and factored approximations such as Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature (KFAC), we propose a new approximation to
the Fisher information matrix (FIM) called Trace-restricted
Kronecker-factored Approximate Curvature (TKFAC), which
can hold the certain trace relationship between the exact and
the approximate FIM. In TKFAC, we decompose each block
of the approximate FIM as a Kronecker product of two smaller matrices and scaled by a coefficient related to trace.
We theoretically analyze TKFAC’s approximation error and
give an upper bound of it. We also propose a new damping
technique for TKFAC on convolutional neural networks to
maintain the superiority of second-order optimization methods during training. Experiments show that our method has
better performance compared with several state-of-the-art algorithms on some deep network architectures.

Introduction
Recently, deep learning has made great progress in a host
of application areas, such as computer vision and natural
language processing. However, as the size of deep neural
networks (DNNs) increases rapidly, more and more computational power and time are needed to train these models. Therefore, efficient algorithms are necessary for training
DNNs.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Bottou 1991) and its
extension Stochastic Gradient Descent with momentum (SGDM) (Qian 1999) are ubiquitously used for training DNNs,
due to low computational cost and ease of implementation. However, SGD is a first-order optimization method
and only considers first-order gradient information, which
leads to some deficiencies, including sensitivity to hyperparameter settings and relatively-slow convergence. By using the curvature matrix to correct gradient, second-order
optimization methods have the ability to solve these defi∗

Equal contribution
Corresponding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

7519

