The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Inference-Based Deterministic Messaging For Multi-Agent Communication
Varun Bhatt, Michael Buro
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Canada
vbhatt@ualberta.ca, mburo@ualberta.ca

Abstract

pends on the drivers’ actions, but not on the state of the
lights.
The aim of this paper is to study the performance of learning algorithms in synthetic cooperation tasks involving rational agents that know that they are in a cooperative setting and require communication to act optimally. First, we
consider one of the simplest setting to study communication: one-step, two-agent cooperative signaling games (Gibbons 1992) depicted in Fig. 1, with arbitrary payoffs such
as those used in the climbing game ((Claus and Boutilier
1998)). In every round of such games, the sender receives a
state s from the environment and then sends message m to
the receiver which, based only on m, takes action a. In the
problems studied here, both agents receive the same payoff
R(s, a), independent of m. We restrict our studies to decentralized training methods that learn from experience. In the
algorithms we consider, each agent maintains its own parameters and updates them only dependent on its private observations and rewards. Such methods are more scalable compared to centralized training and allow the agents to keep
their individual training methods private while still allowing
cooperation.
We also consider a more complex gridworld cooperation
task, in which two agents need to share their private information using a limited communication channel while simultaneously acting in the environment to achieve the best possible performance. Since both agents receive the same rewards in both domains, the agents are always motivated to
correctly communicate their private observations.
In what follows, we first discuss related work and then
propose a method of communication based on the sender

Communication is essential for coordination among humans
and animals. Therefore, with the introduction of intelligent
agents into the world, agent-to-agent and agent-to-human
communication becomes necessary. In this paper, we first
study learning in matrix-based signaling games to empirically
show that decentralized methods can converge to a suboptimal policy. We then propose a modification to the messaging
policy, in which the sender deterministically chooses the best
message that helps the receiver to infer the sender’s observation. Using this modification, we see, empirically, that the
agents converge to the optimal policy in nearly all the runs.
We then apply this method to a partially observable gridworld
environment which requires cooperation between two agents
and show that, with appropriate approximation methods, the
proposed sender modification can enhance existing decentralized training methods for more complex domains as well.

Introduction
Humans rely extensively on communication to both learn
quickly and to act efficiently in environments in which
agents benefit from cooperation. As artificial intelligence
(AI) applications become commonplace in the real world,
intelligent agents therefore can benefit greatly from being
able to communicate with humans and each other. For example, a group of self-driving cars can improve their driving
performance by communicating with other cars about what
they see and what they intend to do (Yang et al. 2004). As
advances in other fields of AI have shown, a learned solution is often better than a manually designed one (He et al.
2015; Silver et al. 2018). Hence, training the agents to learn
to communicate has the potential to lead to more efficient
protocols than pre-defined ones.
One assumption that is commonly held when studying
communication between agents is that messages do not directly affect the payoffs or the rewards that the agents obtain,
which is also known as the “cheap-talk” assumption (Crawford and Sobel 1982). While it does not accurately reflect all
real-world scenarios, it is a reasonable assumption in many
cases. For example, turn indicators and traffic lights do not
affect driving directly because the driving outcome only de-

Figure 1: Signaling game with the normalized payoff matrix
of the climbing game.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11228

