The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Model-Agnostic Fits for Understanding Information Seeking Patterns in Humans
Soumya Chatterjee1 * , Pradeep Shenoy 2†
1

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
2
Google Research India
soumya@cse.iitb.ac.in, shenoypradeep@google.com

Abstract

Tversky 1979). Modeling and understanding the computational provenance of such behavior is fundamental to the
study of cognitive science; it may also underlie quintessentially human qualities such as optimism bias (Sharot 2011).
The study of information seeking & integration is equally
relevant to a wide range of applications involving humancomputer or human-AI interactions – examples include preventing “filter bubbles” and polarization in recommender
systems and media consumption (Pariser 2011), and efficacy
of digital assistants or health & wellness tracking software.
In addition to clever experimental design to empirically
demonstrate biases (Hunt et al. 2016), research also aims
to understand the underlying computations driving these biases. Typically, under the constraints of a specific task, human behavior is hypothesized to arise from carefully specified models, whether computational (Marr 1982) such as
reward maximizing using reinforcement learning, bayesoptimal under a specific uncertainty model, etc., or algorithmic, i.e., in terms of mechanism, such as drift-diffusion
processes (Ratcliff and McKoon 2008) or neuronal circuits
performing predefined computations (Ma et al. 2006).
A critical commonality in much of the literature is the
strong inductive bias implicit or explicit in proposed models, which are validated against each other in terms of quality of data fit, or via correlational analyses against taskextrinsic data such as personality traits or diagnosis. Two
major challenges to this approach are (a) the extreme paucity
of data for subject-specific model fits to data, and (b) limitations of modeler-specified inductive biases in capturing
the actual, underlying computations in humans. An increasing trend towards large-scale experimentation in naturalistic
settings (Brown et al. 2014) partially alleviates data paucity
by enabling data collection from larger numbers of participants. These trends present an opportunity for developing
new modeling & analysis techniques that can effectively
leverage the availability of large-population data.
In this paper, we propose a deep learning approach for fitting human behavior, in very sparse data scenarios, by leveraging large subject populations and simultaneously learning
population- and individual- level model fits in a single learning process. We apply our methods to a recent large study
cataloguing biases in human information seeking, integration, and decision-making (Hunt et al. 2016), and demonstrate the following results:

In decision making tasks under uncertainty, humans display characteristic biases in seeking, integrating, and
acting upon information relevant to the task. Here, we
reexamine data from previous carefully designed experiments, collected at scale, that measured and catalogued
these biases in aggregate form. We design deep learning
models that replicate these biases in aggregate, while
also capturing individual variation in behavior. A key
finding of our work is that paucity of data collected from
each individual subject can be overcome by sampling
large numbers of subjects from the population, while
still capturing individual differences. We predict human
behavior with high accuracy without making any assumptions about task goals, reward structure, or individual biases, thus providing a model-agnostic fit to human
behavior in the task. Such an approach can sidestep potential limitations in modeler-specified inductive biases,
and has implications for computational modeling of human cognitive function in general, and of human-AI interfaces in particular.

Introduction
A rich tradition of interdisciplinary research in cognitive science, economics, and computational modeling has studied
humans’ apparent suboptimality in decision-making tasks
of various kinds (see, for instance, Gilovich, Griffin, and
Kahneman (2002)). In particular, humans appear to deviate significantly from task-optimal behavior in a fundamental aspect of decision-making under uncertainty: seeking
and integrating relevant information in service of decision
accuracy. For instance, research suggests that instinctive
“approach” and “avoidance” tendencies can interfere with
learning action-reward associations (Mkrtchian et al. 2017;
Huys et al. 2011), and prevent subjects from seeking balanced information (Hunt et al. 2016); further, the integration of observed evidence and subsequent decision-making
also appear to be influenced by irrelevant variables such
as desired outcomes (Gesiarz, Cahill, and Sharot 2019) or
framing of the question (Hunt et al. 2016; Kahneman and
* Work done while at Google Research India
†

Corresponding Author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

784

