The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Type-augmented Relation Prediction in Knowledge Graphs
Zijun Cui,1 Pavan Kapanipathi,2 Kartik Talamadupula,2 Tian Gao,2 Qiang Ji1
1

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
2
IBM Research
1
2
{cuiz3, jiq}@rpi.edu, {kapanipa, krtalamad, tgao}@us.ibm.com

Abstract

entity
award
category

The
Queen

relation

person

on

Helen
Mirren

pla

ce_

to

r

of_

bir

th Chiswick

by

ti

d_

na

location

ne

mi

co

c
?a

type information

ai

no

actor

nt

d_

r

ar

to

award_winning_work

Best
Actress aw

types

ac

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are of great importance to many
real world applications, but they generally suffer from incomplete information in the form of missing relations between
entities. Knowledge graph completion (also known as relation prediction) is the task of inferring missing facts given
existing ones. Most of the existing work is proposed by maximizing the likelihood of observed instance-level triples. Not
much attention, however, is paid to the ontological information, such as type information of entities and relations.
In this work, we propose a type-augmented relation prediction (TaRP) method, where we apply both the type information and instance-level information for relation prediction.
In particular, type information and instance-level information are encoded as prior probabilities and likelihoods of relations respectively, and are combined by following Bayes’
rule. Our proposed TaRP method achieves significantly better performance than state-of-the-art methods on four benchmark datasets: FB15K, FB15K-237, YAGO26K-906, and
DB111K-174. In addition, we show that TaRP achieves significantly improved data efficiency. More importantly, the
type information extracted from a specific dataset can generalize well to other datasets through the proposed TaRP model.

award
winner

Inkheart

olympic_host_city

London
film

netflix_title

Figure 1: An example in a knowledge graph (KG).

Instance-level information, i.e., existing triples connecting entities through relations, such as Helen Mirren
→ place of birth → Chiswick; and (ii) Ontological information, i.e., meta information about entities and
relations, such as the type information of entities e.g.,
Helen Mirren is of types {actor, award winner, person}. The majority of existing methods use merely instancelevel information for learning the embeddings (Sun et al.
2019; Zhang et al. 2019), while a few other models use both
instance-level information and ontological information (Hao
et al. 2019; Garg et al. 2019; Xie et al. 2016). Ontological
information such as type information can intuitively help relation prediction, as most relations may connect two distinct
types of entities as domain and range. For example, the relation place of birth always connects entities of type
person to entities of type location. Integrating such type information into instance-level training triples can benefit the
relation prediction task, in particular when there is a lack of
sufficient training data for learning embeddings.
A few existing embedding based models with such type
information integrated have shown success (Guo et al. 2015;
Xie, Liu, and Sun 2016; Ma et al. 2017; Jain et al. 2018;
Garg et al. 2019; Hao et al. 2019). However, these models integrate the ontological information through the model
training procedure for better learning the embeddings, and
are hence prone to the following drawbacks: (i) the type information is not explicitly differentiated from the instance-

Introduction
Knowledge graphs (KGs) have gained significant popularity due to successful applications to many different AI tasks
such as question answering (Huang et al. 2019), recommendation (Wang et al. 2019a), dialogue generation (Xu, Bao,
and Zhang 2020), and natural language inference (Wang
et al. 2019b; Kapanipathi et al. 2020). However, KGs are
generally incomplete and suffer from missing relations between entities (Socher et al. 2013; West et al. 2014). The
task of knowledge graph completion or relation prediction
is aimed at tackling this issue, i.e., inferring missing facts
given existing ones. For example, in Figure 1, given two entities, e.g., Helen Mirren and The Queen, the relation
prediction task predicts if those entities are connected by any
of the existing relations in the KG, e.g., actor.
Relation prediction methodologies are mostly based on
KG embeddings, and can primarily be categorized based
on the two kinds of information they use from KGs: (i)
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7151

