The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Minimax Regret Optimisation for Robust Planning in Uncertain Markov Decision
Processes
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, Nick Hawes
Oxford Robotics Institute, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
{mrigter, bruno, nickh}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The parameters for a Markov Decision Process (MDP) often cannot be specified exactly. Uncertain MDPs (UMDPs)
capture this model ambiguity by defining sets which the parameters belong to. Minimax regret has been proposed as an
objective for planning in UMDPs to find robust policies which
are not overly conservative. In this work, we focus on planning
for Stochastic Shortest Path (SSP) UMDPs with uncertain cost
and transition functions. We introduce a Bellman equation
to compute the regret for a policy. We propose a dynamic
programming algorithm that utilises the regret Bellman equation, and show that it optimises minimax regret exactly for
UMDPs with independent uncertainties. For coupled uncertainties, we extend our approach to use options to enable a
trade off between computation and solution quality. We evaluate our approach on both synthetic and real-world domains,
showing that it significantly outperforms existing baselines.

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a powerful tool for
sequential decision making in stochastic domains. However,
the parameters of an MDP are often estimated from limited
data, and therefore cannot be specified exactly (Lacerda et al.
2019; Moldovan and Abbeel 2012). By disregarding model
uncertainty and planning on the estimated MDP, performance
can be much worse than anticipated (Mannor et al. 2004).
For example, consider an MDP model for medical decision
making, where transitions correspond to the stochastic health
outcomes for a patient as a result of different treatment options. An estimated MDP model for this problem can be generated from observed data (Schaefer et al. 2005). However,
such a model does not capture the variation in transition probabilities due to patient heterogeneity: any particular patient
may respond differently to treatments than the average due
to unknown underlying factors. Additionally, such a model
does not consider uncertainty in the model parameters due
to limited data. As a result, Uncertain MDPs (UMDPs) have
been proposed as more suitable model for domains such as
medical decision making (Zhang, Steimle, and Denton 2017)
where the model cannot be specified exactly.
UMDPs capture model ambiguity by defining an uncertainty set in which the true MDP cost and transition functions
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11930

lie. In this work, we address offline planning for UMDPs.
Most research in this setting has focused on optimising the expected value for the worst-case MDP parameters using robust
dynamic programming (Iyengar 2005; Nilim and El Ghaoui
2005). However, this can result in overly conservative policies which perform poorly in the majority of possible scenarios (Delage and Mannor 2010). Minimax regret has been
proposed as alternative metric for robust planning which is
less conservative (Regan and Boutilier 2009; Xu and Mannor
2009). The aim is to find the policy with the minimum gap
between its expected value and the optimal value over all
possible instantiations of model uncertainty. However, optimising minimax regret is challenging and existing methods
do not scale well.
In this work, we introduce a Bellman equation to decompose the computation of the regret for a policy into a dynamic
programming recursion. We show that if uncertainties are
independent, we can perform minimax value iteration using
the regret Bellman equation to efficiently optimise minimax
regret exactly. To our knowledge, this is the first scalable
exact algorithm for minimax regret planning in UMDPs with
both uncertain cost and transition functions. To address problems with dependent uncertainties, we introduce the use of
options (Sutton, Precup, and Singh 1999) to capture dependence over sequences of n steps. By varying n, the user may
trade off computation time against solution quality.
Previous works have addressed regret-based planning in finite horizon problems (Ahmed et al. 2013, 2017), or problems
where there is only uncertainty in the cost function (Regan
and Boutilier 2009, 2010, 2011; Xu and Mannor 2009). We
focus on the more general problem of Stochastic Shortest
Path (SSP) UMDPs with uncertain cost and transition functions. The main contributions of this work are:
• Introducing a Bellman equation to compute the regret for
a policy using dynamic programming.
• An efficient algorithm to optimise minimax regret exactly
in models with independent uncertainties by performing
minimax value iteration using our novel Bellman equation.
• Proposing the use of options to capture dependencies between uncertainties to trade off solution quality against
computation for models with dependent uncertainties.
Experiments in both synthetic and real-world domains
demonstrate that our approach considerably outperforms existing baselines.

