The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Quantum Exploration Algorithms for Multi-Armed Bandits
Daochen Wang,∗1,2 Xuchen You,∗1,3 Tongyang Li,†1,3,4 Andrew M. Childs1,3
1

Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Maryland
3
Department of Computer Science and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland
4
Center for Theoretical Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{daochen,xyou,amchilds}@umd.edu, tongyang@mit.edu

Abstract

sampling task (Arute et al. 2019). While noise limits the current practical usefulness of quantum computers, they can in
principle be made fault tolerant and thus capable of executing a wide variety of algorithms. It is therefore of significant
interest to understand quantum algorithms from a theoretical perspective to anticipate future applications. In particular, there has been increasing interest in quantum machine
learning (see for example the surveys by Biamonte et al.
2017; Schuld, Sinayskiy, and Petruccione 2015; Arunachalam and de Wolf 2017; Dunjko and Briegel 2018). In this
paper, we study best-arm identification in multi-armed bandits, establishing quantum speedup.

Identifying the best arm of a multi-armed bandit is a central
problem in bandit optimization. We study a quantum computational version of this problem with coherent oracle access to
states encoding the reward probabilities of each arm as quantum amplitudes. Specifically, we provide an algorithm to find
the best arm with fixed confidence based on variable-time amplitude amplification and estimation. This algorithm gives a
quadratic speedup compared to the best possible classical result in terms of query complexity. We also prove a matching
quantum lower bound (up to poly-logarithmic factors).

Introduction
Problem setup. We work in a standard multi-armed bandit
setting (Even-Dar, Mannor, and Mansour 2002) in which the
MAB has n arms, where arm i ∈ [n] := {1, . . . , n} is a
Bernoulli random variable taking value 1 with probability pi
and value 0 with probability 1 − pi . Each arm can therefore
be regarded as a coin with bias pi . As our algorithms and
lower bounds are symmetric with respect to the arms, we
assume without loss of generality that p1 ≥ · · · ≥ pn , and
denote ∆i := p1 − pi for all i ∈ {2, . . . , n}. We further
assume that p1 > p2 , i.e., the best arm is unique. Given a
parameter δ ∈ (0, 1), our goal is to use as few queries as
possible to determine the best arm with probability ≥ 1 − δ.
This is known as the fixed-confidence setting. We primarily
characterize complexity in terms of the parameter

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) model is one of the most
fundamental settings in reinforcement learning. This simple
scenario captures crucial issues such as the tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation. Furthermore, it has wide applications to areas including operations research, mechanism
design, and statistics.
A basic challenge about multi-armed bandits is the problem of best-arm identification, where the goal is to efficiently identify the arm with the largest expected reward.
This problem captures a common difficulty in practical scenarios, where at unit cost, only partial information about the
system of interest can be obtained. A real-world example is
a recommendation system, where the goal is to find appealing items for users. For each recommendation, only feedback on the recommended item is obtained. In the context of
machine learning, best-arm identification can be viewed as
a high-level abstraction and core component of active learning, where the goal is to minimize the uncertainty of an underlying concept, and each step only reveals the label of the
data point being queried.
Quantum computing is a promising technology with potential applications to diverse areas including cryptanalysis,
optimization, and simulation of quantum physics. Quantum
computing devices have recently been demonstrated to experimentally outperform classical computers on a specific

H :=

n
X
1
2
∆
i
i=2

(1)

which arises in the analysis of classical MAB algorithms (as
discussed below).
We consider a quantum version of best-arm identification
in which we can access the arms coherently. This means we
have access to a quantum oracle O that acts as
O : |iiI |0iB |0iJ
p
p
(2)
7→ |iiI ( pi |1iB |vi iJ + 1 − pi |0iB |ui iJ ),

∗
Equal contribution. Full version of the paper (including the
supplementary material) is at https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.07049
†
Corresponding author. Email: tongyang@mit.edu
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where |vi i and |ui i are arbitrary states, for all i ∈ [n].
We have used standard Dirac notation which we review in
the Preliminaries section. Register I is the “index” register with n states that correspond to the n arms. Register
10102

