The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Apparently Irrational Choice as Optimal Sequential Decision Making
Haiyang Chen,1 Hyung Jin Chang, 1 Andrew Howes 1,2
1

2

School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
Department of Communications and Networking, Aalto University
{hxc797, h.j.chang, howesa}@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a normative approach to modeling apparently human irrational decision making (cognitive
biases) that makes use of inherently rational computational
mechanisms. We view preferential choice tasks as sequential
decision making problems and formulate them as Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs). The resulting sequential decision model learns what information to
gather about which options, whether to calculate option values or make comparisons between options and when to make
a choice. We apply the model to choice problems where context is known to influence human choice, an effect that has
been taken as evidence that human cognition is irrational. Our
results show that the new model approximates a bounded optimal cognitive policy and makes quantitative predictions that
correspond well to evidence about human choice. Furthermore, the model uses context to help infer which option has
a maximum expected value while taking into account computational cost and cognitive limits. In addition, it predicts
when, and explains why, people stop evidence accumulation
and make a decision. We argue that the model provides evidence that apparent human irrationalities are emergent consequences of processes that prefer higher value (rational) policies.

Figure 1: An example of a context-of-choice bias. If a person
chooses an apple over a cake on the grounds of health, but
then chooses the same cake when the choice is between an
apple, the cake and another cake with extra sugar, then the
clearly inferior (on health grounds) “cake with extra sugar”
has influenced the choice between two superior alternatives.

However, the fact that humans appear to exhibit decisionmaking biases seems to pose a severe challenge to this contention. There are a variety of apparent human biases (Kahneman 2016) suggesting that people are not good expected
value maximizers and that they are subject to irrationalities
of choice that are counter to their own self interest. In this
paper, we focus on context effects which show that human
preference between two options changes when a third (dominated) alternative is introduced, e.g. as shown in Figure 1.
As the dominated choice is irrelevant to the choice between
the other two options, it should have no effect on their valuation, nor on the choice. This effect has been taken by some as
evidence that human cognition is irrational since it appears
to violate the normative principles of independence (Usher
and McClelland 2001). A number of computational models
reproduce these effects. They explain context effects with algorithms that concern what evidence to gather and how that
evidence is accumulated (Stewart, Chater, and Brown 2006;
Busemeyer et al. 2019; Wollschlaeger and Diederich 2020).
While they offer accounts of how the dynamics of the decision making unfold they do not explain why cognitive processing would lead to apparently irrational responses.
However, recent research has begun to show that people
may exhibit rationality more often than supposed (Lewis,
Howes, and Singh 2014; Chen 2015; Chen et al. 2017;
Lieder and Griffiths 2019; Todd and Gigerenzer 2012; Fra-

Introduction
Recent efforts toward a computational understanding of the
human mind have been invigorated by advances in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) (Lewis, Howes, and Singh 2014; Cichy and
Kaiser 2019; Lieder and Griffiths 2019; Gershman, Horvitz,
and Tenenbaum 2015). As machine learning has progressed,
reinforcement and deep learning algorithms have generated
systems that attained human- and superhuman-level performance in a number of domains and it is believed by many researchers that modern AI not only has the capacity to equal
human performance but also to help inform deeper understandings of human cognition (Hassabis et al. 2017; Lake
et al. 2017). In other words, building computational models
of human cognition, informed by modern machine learning,
offers a potential way to advance our understanding of cognitive processes (McClelland 2009; Fontanesi et al. 2019;
Lieder and Griffiths 2017; Lieder, Griffiths, and Goodman
2012; Milli, Lieder, and Griffiths 2017).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

792

