The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Uncertainty-Matching Graph Neural Networks to
Defend Against Poisoning Attacks
Uday Shankar Shanthamallu1 , Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan2 , Andreas Spanias1
1

Arizona State University
Lawrence Livermore National Labs
ushantha@asu.edu, jjayaram@llnl.gov, spanias@asu.edu
2

Abstract

hood, are not immune to poisoning attacks, wherein an attacker adds fictitious edges to the graph before the model is
trained. Though there exists a vast literature on adversarial
attacks on images (Goodfellow, Shlens, and Szegedy 2014;
Szegedy et al. 2013) and their countermeasures (Ren et al.
2020; Chakraborty et al. 2018), designing attack strategies
for graphs is a more recent topic of research. In general, designing graph attacks poses a number of challenges: (i) the
adversarial search space is discrete; (ii) nodes in the graphs
are non-i.i.d., and (iii) lack of effective metrics to measure
structural perturbations. Following the progress in graph adversarial attacks, designing defense mechanisms or building
robust variants of GNNs have become critical (Zhu et al.
2019).
In this paper, we propose a new approach UM-GNN aimed
at improving the robustness of GNN models, particularly
against challenging poisoning attacks to the graph structure.
Our approach jointly trains a standard GNN model (implemented using GCN) and a surrogate predictor, which accesses only the features, using a novel uncertainty matching
strategy. Through a systematic knowledge transfer from the
GNN model, the surrogate demonstrates significantly improved robustness to challenging attacks. The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows:

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), a generalization of neural
networks to graph-structured data, are often implemented using message passes between entities of a graph. While GNNs
are effective for node classification, link prediction and graph
classification, they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, i.e.,
a small perturbation to the structure can lead to a non-trivial
performance degradation. In this work, we propose Uncertainty Matching GNN (UM-GNN), that is aimed at improving
the robustness of GNN models, particularly against poisoning
attacks to the graph structure, by leveraging epistemic uncertainties from the message passing framework. More specifically, we propose to build a surrogate predictor that does not
directly access the graph structure, but systematically extracts
reliable knowledge from a standard GNN through a novel
uncertainty-matching strategy. Interestingly, this uncoupling
makes UM-GNN immune to evasion attacks by design, and
achieves significantly improved robustness against poisoning
attacks. Using empirical studies with standard benchmarks
and a suite of global and target attacks, we demonstrate the
effectiveness of UM-GNN, when compared to existing baselines including the state-of-the-art robust GCN.

Introduction
Representation learning methods, in particular deep learning, have produced state-of-the-art results in image analysis,
language modeling and more recently with graph-structured
data (Torng and Altman 2019). In particular, graph neural
networks (GNNs) (Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying,
and Leskovec 2017) have gained prominence due to their
ability to effectively leverage the inherent structure to solve
challenging tasks including node classification, link prediction and graph classification (Wu et al. 2020).
Despite their wide-spread use, GNNs are known to be vulnerable to a variety of adversarial attacks, similar to standard
deep models. In other words, a small imperceptible perturbation intentionally designed in the graph structure can lead
to a non-trivial performance degradation as seen in (Zügner,
Akbarnejad, and Günnemann 2018). This limits their application to high-risk and safety critical domains. For example, the popular graph convolutional networks (GCN), which
rely on aggregating message passes from a node’s neighbor-

• A novel architecture for semi-supervised learning,
UM-GNN, that can be built upon any existing GNN model
and is immune to evasion attacks by design;
• An uncertainty matching-based knowledge transfer strategy for achieving robustness to structural perturbations;
• Across a suite of global poisoning attacks, UM-GNN consistently outperforms existing methods including the recent Robust GCN (Zhu et al. 2019);
• UM-GNN achieves significantly lower misclassification
rate (> 50% improvement) against targeted attacks.

Problem Setup
In this paper, we are interested in building graph neural networks that are robust to adversarial attacks on the graph
structure. We represent an unweighted graph using the tuple G = (V, E), where V = {v1 , v2 , · · · , vN } denotes
the set of nodes with cardinality |V| = N , E denotes the
set of edges and E ⊆ V × V. The edges in the graph

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9524

