The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

How to Save your Annotation Cost for Panoptic Segmentation?
Xuefeng Du1 , ChenHan Jiang2 , Hang Xu∗2 , Gengwei Zhang3 , Zhenguo Li2
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Sun Yat-Sen University
{xuefengdu1,jchcyan,chromexbjxh,zgwdavid}@gmail.com, li.zhenguo@huawei.com
2

i. Simulation Results v.s. Annotation Cost ii.Actual Results v.s. Annotation Cost
PQ Improvement (%)

1.9

How to properly reduce the annotation cost for panoptic segmentation? How to leverage and optimize the cost-quality
trade-off for training data and model? These questions are
key challenges towards a label-efficient and scalable panoptic
segmentation system due to its expensive instance/semantic
pixel-level annotation requirements. By closely examining
different kinds of cheaper labels, we introduce a novel multiobjective framework to automatically determine the allocation of different annotations, so as to reach a better segmentation quality with a lower annotation cost. Specifically, we design a Cost-Quality Balanced Network (CQB-Net) to generate the panoptic segmentation map, which distills the crucial
relations between various supervisions including panoptic labels, image-level classification labels, bounding boxes, and
the semantic coherence information between the foreground
and background. Instead of ad-hoc allocation during training,
we formulate the optimization of cost-quality trade-off as a
Multi-Objective Optimization Problem (MOOP). We model
the marginal quality improvement of each annotation and approximate the Pareto-front to enable a label-efficient allocation ratio. Extensive experiments on COCO benchmark show
the superiority of our method, e.g. achieving a segmentation
quality of 43.4% compared to 43.0% of OCFusion while saving 2.4x annotation cost.

O6
O5

O3
O2

R7
R5
R4
R3

O4

1.5

44

R6

R2

PQall with Res50 (%)

Abstract

O3

O4 O5

40 O1O2
R2

O7

O6
R6

UPS-Net

R7 OCFusion
R5 Panoptic FPN
AUNet
R4
OANet
R3

O1

R1
R1
36
1.1
0.1
0.7
0.3
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.7
0.4
Annotation Cost f2 CQB-Net-R* (Random allocation)
CQB-Net-O* (Pareto-front)

Figure 1: Annotation Cost vs. COCO Panoptic Segmentation Quality. Our CQB-Net obtains a better allocation ratio for different labels by approximating the Pareto-front
(left) and in practice achieves a better tradeoff between
two essential objectives for panoptic segmentation, which
outperforms models trained with random ratios and fullysupervised baselines (right, on ResNet50).

and Ferrari 2018; Lin et al. 2014). Thus, developing a customized panoptic segmentation model from a large dataset
is restricted by both the budget of recruiting annotators and
limited class diversity due to the annotation difficulty.
One possible solution to alleviate this issue is adopting
weaker labels for training. As shown in Fig.2(a), while the
panoptic label is the most expensive (1104s), cheaper labels,
such as image labels (7s) and bounding box (32s), can be
obtained more easily or even readily available by an image search engine or boundary click (Papadopoulos et al.
2017). Verified by the success of weakly supervised learning (Zhang et al. 2018a; Song et al. 2019; Wan et al. 2019;
Ahn and Kwak 2018; Khoreva et al. 2017), these labels and
their mutual relationship should provide coarse but useful
information for our task. In Fig.2(b), five kinds of annotations carry different semantic/spatial information which may
compensate and fill up the missing information during training. However, directly ensembling weakly supervised approaches to the thing and stuff branches in a hand-crafted
fashion, such as (Li, Arnab, and Torr 2018), cannot guarantee to achieve an optimal trade-off between the segmentation
quality and the corresponding annotation cost while sometimes certain weak supervision will exert negative impacts
on others if trained in a unified framework.
Therefore, a natural question emerges: Assume we start

Introduction
Panoptic segmentation unifies foreground instance segmentation (named thing) and semantic segmentation on amorphous background regions (named stuff ) to generate rich
and coherent masks. It poses a challenging problem on
holistic image understanding of all foreground objects and
background contents simultaneously. State-of-the-art methods (Yang et al. 2019b) are trained in a fully-supervised fashion, for which per-pixel background class and foreground
instance labels are required. Due to the data-hungry nature of deep networks, these approaches demand an enormous number of training images with curated groundtruth
labels, which are given by hand in general. However, manual
annotation of such labels is extremely labor-intensive and
time-consuming, e.g. taking around 19 minutes for one single image in COCO to be fully annotated (Caesar, Uijlings,
∗

Corresponding Author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1282

