The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Tied Block Convolution:
Leaner and Better CNNs with Shared Thinner Filters
Xudong Wang, Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI
{xdwang, stellayu}@berkeley.edu

Abstract

layer 2
layer 4
layer 6
layer 8
layer 10
layer 12

Convolution is the main building block of a convolutional
neural network (CNN). We observe that an optimized CNN
often has highly correlated filters as the number of channels increases with depth, reducing the expressive power of
feature representations. We propose Tied Block Convolution
(TBC) that shares the same thinner filter over equal blocks of
channels and produces multiple responses with a single filter.
The concept of TBC can also be extended to group convolution and fully connected layers, and can be applied to various
backbone networks and attention modules.
Our extensive experimentation on classification, detection,
instance segmentation, and attention demonstrates that TBC
is consistently leaner and significantly better than standard
convolution and group convolution. On attention, with 64×
fewer parameters, our TiedSE performs on par with the standard SE. On detection and segmentation, TBC can effectively
handle highly overlapping instances, whereas standard CNNs
often fail to accurately aggregate information in the presence
of occlusion and result in multiple redundant partial object
proposals. By sharing filters across channels, TBC reduces
correlation and delivers a sizable gain of 6% in the average
precision for object detection on MS-COCO when the occlusion ratio is 80%. Our code is publicly available.

layer 2

layer 4

layer 6

layer 8

layer 10

layer 12

(a) Correlation matrix

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

(b) Histograms

Figure 1: Filters of an optimized CNN become more similar at an increasing depth. (a) Correlation matrix of 64 randomly selected filters at selected layers of the VGG16 ImageNet classifier. We compute the similarity between two filters based on their guided back-propagation patterns (Springenberg et al. 2014) averaged on a set of images. As the
layer goes deeper from 2 to 12, the pairwise similarity increases overall and the matrix turns from red to light yellow.
(b) Normalized histograms of these pairwise filter similarities. As the number of channels increases with depth from
64 to 128 to 256, the curve shifts right and becomes far narrower, i.e., more filters become similar.

Introduction
Convolution is the main building block of a convolutional
neural network (CNN), which has been widely successful
on image classification (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; He et al. 2016; Xie et al. 2017; Simonyan and Zisserman 2014), object detection (Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015;
He et al. 2017), image segmentation (Kirillov et al. 2019;
Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell 2015; Chen et al. 2017, 2018)
and action recognition (Ji et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2016; Carreira and Zisserman 2017; Wang et al. 2018). However, standard convolution is still costly in terms of computation, storage, and memory access. More importantly, an optimized
CNN often develops highly correlated filters.
We can evaluate pairwise filter similarity in standard convolution (SC), using the cosine similarity of guided backpropagation patterns (Springenberg et al. 2014) averaged
over a set of ImageNet images. Fig. 1 shows that the filter correlation increases with the layer depth: Filters at the

same layer become more similar from early to later layers,
reducing the expressive power of feature representations.
How to optimize a CNN with less redundancy has been
studied (Howard et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Ma et al.
2018; Xie et al. 2017), often by exploring dependencies
across space and channel dimensions. In SC, while each
filter can have a reduced size spatially, it extends to the
entire set of channels, whereas in group convolution (GC)
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), a filter only convolves with a subset of input channels. Therefore, if there are
B groups of input channels, each GC layer reduces the number of parameters B times by reducing the size of each filter by B times. Depth-wise convolution (DW) is an extreme
case of GC, where each group only contains one channel,
maximally reducing the parameter count.
While GC and DW are effective at reducing the model
size, there is no correlation between filters, resulting in an
isolated representation without cross-channel connections.
Instead of simply reducing the size of each filter as in GC

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

10227

