The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Neural Latent Space Model for Dynamic Networks and
Temporal Knowledge Graphs
Tony Gracious,1 * Shubham Gupta,1 * Arun Kanthali,1 Rui M. Castro,2 Ambedkar Dukkipati1
1

2

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560012, INDIA.
Eindhoven University of Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
[tonygracious, shubhamg, ambedkar]@iisc.ac.in, rmcastro@tue.nl

Abstract

techniques are of two kinds. The first kind is for homogeneous networks with only a single type of nodes and edges.
The second kind is for heterogeneous networks with multiple types of nodes and edges. These networks can also be
viewed as Knowledge Graphs (KG) with different types of
nodes as entities and different types of edges as relations between entities.
Early works on homogeneous network representation
learning use random walk models to capture the neighborhood context (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Grover
and Leskovec 2016). The embeddings are learned so that
nodes closer to each other have similar embeddings. In
a KG, real-world facts are stored using edges which are
represented as a triplet of the form (Subject Entity,
Relation, Object Entity). Here, Subject
Entity and Object Entity form the nodes, and
Relation is the type of edge. The modelling techniques
developed for homogeneous networks are not applicable
for KGs as the entities connected via a relation may not
be similar. For example, consider the edge (Barack
Obama, Born in , USA) which represents a relation
Born in between the entities Barack Obama and USA.
Here, entities are not similar because Barack Obama is
a person and USA is a country. For representation learning
in such heterogeneous networks, entities and relations are
given a finite representation which is then used as input
to a scoring function as in (Bordes et al. 2013; Dettmers
et al. 2018; Sun et al. 2019). The embeddings are learned
so that the observed edges in the KG get a higher score as
compared to the unobserved edges.
One aspect that is often ignored by the existing methods
is that most real-world networks evolve with time. For example, in social networks, new friendship links are formed
or broken with time. Similar observations can be made in
KGs as there are relations with temporal properties. For example, (Barack Obama, President of, USA) is
valid only between 2009 and 2017. KGs which encode such
facts are called temporal KGs. Here, the links change with
time. Owing to many practical applications, it is important
to integrate both dynamic and heterogeneous information
while modelling networks.
Existing methods for dynamic homogeneous networks
have used techniques such as temporal regularization loss
(Zhou et al. 2018; Goyal et al. 2018) and RNN based se-

Although static networks have been extensively studied in
machine learning, data mining, and AI communities for many
decades, the study of dynamic networks has recently taken
center stage due to the prominence of social media and its
effects on the dynamics of social networks. In this paper,
we propose a statistical model for dynamically evolving networks, together with a variational inference approach. Our
model, Neural Latent Space Model with Variational Inference, encodes edge dependencies across different time snapshots. It represents nodes via latent vectors and uses interaction matrices to model the presence of edges. These matrices can be used to incorporate multiple relations in heterogeneous networks by having a separate matrix for each of the
relations. To capture the temporal dynamics, both node vectors and interaction matrices are allowed to evolve with time.
Existing network analysis methods use representation learning techniques for modelling networks. These techniques are
different for homogeneous and heterogeneous networks because heterogeneous networks can have multiple types of
edges and nodes as opposed to a homogeneous network. Unlike these, we propose a unified model for homogeneous
and heterogeneous networks in a variational inference framework. Moreover, the learned node latent vectors and interaction matrices may be interpretable and therefore provide insights on the mechanisms behind network evolution. We experimented with a single step and multi-step link forecasting
on real-world networks of homogeneous, bipartite, and heterogeneous nature, and demonstrated that our model significantly outperforms existing models.

1

Introduction

Network analysis is by no means a new field and consequently, a towering wealth of literature that explores various aspects of network analysis is available (Goldenberg
et al. 2010). With the advent of deep learning, network analysis methods more recently started focusing on representation learning techniques. These methods learn finite vector
representations or embeddings for nodes and edges that can
be used for downstream tasks like link prediction (Grover
and Leskovec 2016), node classification (Sen et al. 2008),
community detection (Fortunato 2010), and so on. These
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4054

