The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Time-Independent Planning for Multiple Moving Agents
Keisuke Okumura, Yasumasa Tamura, Xavier Défago
School of Computing, Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
{okumura.k, tamura, defago}@coord.c.titech.ac.jp

Abstract

vative idea is to forcibly synchronize agents’ moves, globally or locally. Most decentralized approaches to MAPF take
this approach implicitly (Wiktor et al. 2014; Kim et al. 2015;
Okumura et al. 2019; Wang and Rubenstein 2020). This policy negatively affects the entire performance of the system
with unexpected delays and lacks flexibility (Ma, Kumar,
and Koenig 2017). The second policy makes agents preserve temporal dependencies of the planning (Hönig et al.
2016; Ma, Kumar, and Koenig 2017; Hönig et al. 2019; Atzmon et al. 2020). Two types of temporal dependencies exist:
1) internal events within one agent and, 2) order relation of
visiting one node. This policy is sound but still vulnerable
to delays. Consider an extreme example where one agent
moves very slowly or crashes. Due to the second type of
dependencies, the locations where the agent will be are constrained by the use of the other agents. Thus, the asynchrony
of the movements is sensitive to the whole system.
We, therefore, propose an alternative approach, called
time-independent planning, that aims at online and distributed execution focusing on agents’ moves. We represent
the whole system as a transition system that changes configurations according to atomic actions of agents, namely, 1)
request the next locations (requesting), 2) move (extended ),
and, 3) release the past locations, or stay (contracted ). In
this time-independent model, any a priori knowledge for
timings of atomic actions is unavailable, representing nondeterministic behaviors of the external environment. The
challenge is to design algorithms tolerant of all possible sequences of actions.
The main contributions of this paper are: 1) the formalization of the time-independent model and Causal-PIBT, a
proposed time-independent planning with guaranteed reachability, i.e., all agents are ensured to reach their destinations
within finite time. Causal-PIBT, as a proof-of-concept, extends a recently-developed decoupled approach that solves
MAPF iteratively, Priority Inheritance with Backtracking
(PIBT) (Okumura et al. 2019). We also present how an
offline MAPF plan enhances Causal-PIBT. 2) experimental results demonstrating the validity and robustness of the
proposal through the simulation with stochastic delays of
agents’ moves, using MAPF-DP (with Delay Probabilities) (Ma, Kumar, and Koenig 2017).
The remainder of this paper consists of the following
five sections: 1) preliminary including the formalization of

Typical Multi-agent Path Finding (MAPF) solvers assume
that agents move synchronously, thus neglecting the reality
gap in timing assumptions, e.g., delays caused by an imperfect execution of asynchronous moves. So far, two policies
enforce a robust execution of MAPF plans taken as input: either by forcing agents to synchronize or by executing plans
while preserving temporal dependencies. This paper proposes
an alternative approach, called time-independent planning,
which is both online and distributed. We represent reality
as a transition system that changes configurations according
to atomic actions of agents, and use it to generate a timeindependent schedule. Empirical results in a simulated environment with stochastic delays of agents’ moves support the
validity of our proposal.

Introduction
Multi-agent systems with physically moving agents are becoming gradually more common, e.g., automated warehouse (Wurman, D’Andrea, and Mountz 2008), traffic control (Dresner and Stone 2008), or self-driving cars. In such
systems, agents must move smoothly without colliding. This
is embodied by the problem of Multi-agent Path Finding
(MAPF) (Stern 2019). Planning techniques for MAPF have
been extensively studied in recent years.
The output of such planning is bound to be executed in
real-world situations with agents (robots). Typical MAPF is
defined in discrete time. Agents are assumed to do two kinds
of atomic actions synchronously: move to a neighboring location or stay at their current location. Perfect executions for
the planning are however difficult to ensure since timing assumptions are inherently uncertain in reality, due to the difficulty of: 1) accurately predicting the temporal behavior of
many aspects of the system, e.g., kinematics, 2) anticipating
external events such as faults and interference, and 3) ensuring a globally consistent and accurate notion of time in the
face of clock shift and clock drift. Even worse, the potential of unexpected interference increases with the number of
agents, hence the need to prepare for imperfect executions
regarding the timing assumptions.
There are two intuitive ways to tackle imperfect executions of MAPF plans taken as input. The first, and conserCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11299

