The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Submodel Decomposition Bounds for Influence Diagrams
Junkyu Lee1,2 , Radu Marinescu2 , Rina Dechter1
1

University of California Irvine
2
IBM Research
junkyul@uci.edu, radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com, dechter@ics.uci.edu

Abstract

(Bodlaender 1988) derived from tree decomposition methods that are tied to the algorithms for solving for IDs. A
valuation algebra (Kohlas and Shenoy 2000) for IDs was
introduced by (Jensen, Jensen, and Dittmer 1994) together
with a variable elimination algorithm over a corresponding constrained junction tree. More recently, (Dechter 2000)
presented an improved variable elimination algorithms with
lower width parameters, while (Pralet, Schiex, and Verfaillie
2006) developed a multi-cluster operator DAG (MC-DAG)
decomposition to capture the lowest possible treewidth of
IDs. Despite this progress, the MEU task remains clearly intractable so current research focuses on developing bounding schemes. One type of bounds uses the principle of information relaxation, thereby relaxing the constrained ordering of observations and decision variables and allowing more observations to be available to the DM (Nilsson and Hohle 2001; Jensen and Gatti 2010; Yuan, Wu,
and Hansen 2010). Other approaches are based on translation and exploit the equivalence between the MEU and the
Marginal MAP (MMAP) tasks (Mauá 2016), thus applying
bounding schemes for MMAP to the translated MEU (Liu
and Ihler 2012; Marinescu, Dechter, and Ihler 2014; Mauá
and Cozman 2016). Finally, state-of-the-art decomposition
bounds (Lee, Ihler, and Dechter 2018; Lee et al. 2019) apply decomposition schemes directly to IDs using methods
such as weighted mini-bucket (WMB) (Liu and Ihler 2011;
Marinescu et al. 2018), and generalized dual decomposition
(GDD) (Ping, Liu, and Ihler 2015). Yet, the quality of those
decomposition bounds quickly degrades due to non-convex
optimization routines that must be applied.

Influence diagrams (IDs) are graphical models for representing and reasoning with sequential decision-making problems under uncertainty. Limited memory influence diagrams
(LIMIDs) model a decision-maker (DM) who forgets the history in the course of making a sequence of decisions. The
standard inference task in IDs and LIMIDs is to compute
the maximum expected utility (MEU), which is one of the
most challenging tasks in graphical models. We present a
model decomposition framework in both IDs and LIMIDs,
which we call submodel decomposition that generates a tree
of single-stage decision problems through a tree clustering
scheme. We also develop a valuation algebra over the submodels that leads to a hierarchical message passing algorithm
that propagates conditional expected utility functions over a
submodel-tree as external messages. We show that the overall complexity is bounded by the maximum tree-width over
the submodels, common in graphical model algorithms. Finally, we present a new method for computing upper bounds
over a submodel-tree by first exponentiating the utility functions yielding a standard probabilistic graphical model as an
upper bound and then applying standard variational upper
bounds for the marginal MAP inference, yielding tighter upper bounds compared with state-of-the-art bounding schemes
for the MEU task.

Introduction
Influence diagrams (IDs) (Howard and Matheson 1981)
which extend Bayesian networks (BNs) with decision variables and utility functions, are discrete graphical models for
single-agent sequential decision making under uncertainty.
The standard inference task in IDs is finding the maximum
expected utility (MEU) and a set of optimal policy functions
that jointly achieve the MEU under given constraints on the
available information at each decision.
IDs assume perfect recall, namely that the agent or decision maker (DM) is “no-forgetting” and the sequence of
previous decisions and immediate observations are all available when making a decision. The naive evaluation of the
MEU leads to algorithms that are space and time exponential in the length of the history (Howard and Matheson
1981), hence, earlier works focused on variable elimination
algorithms with the complexity bounded by the treewidth

Relaxing the perfect recall condition leads to limited
memory influence diagrams (LIMIDs) that pose additional
challenges to the MEU task. A limited memory agent only
has access to partial knowledge in the sequence of decisions and observations which means that exact algorithms
for LIMIDs must jointly optimize multiple policy functions
by exhaustive enumeration (Mauá, de Campos, and Zaffalon
2012). Iterative local policy update algorithms can reduce
the complexity by locally improving a subset of policy functions. However, local policy search algorithms assume that
the local policy evaluation is easy (Lauritzen and Nilsson
2001; Detwarasiti and Shachter 2005; Mauá and Cozman
2016). To the best of our knowledge, the only upper bounds
available in the literature for LIMIDs are the theoretical er-

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12147

