The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

DeepCOVID: An Operational Deep Learning-driven Framework for Explainable
Real-time COVID-19 Forecasting
Alexander Rodrı́guez1 , Anika Tabassum2 , Jiaming Cui1 , Jiajia Xie1 , Javen Ho1 , Pulak Agarwal1 ,
Bijaya Adhikari3 , B. Aditya Prakash1
1

College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Arlington, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
{arodriguezc, jiamingcui1997, jxie, jho67, pulak.agarwal, badityap}@gatech.edu, anikat1@vt.edu, bijaya-adhikari@uiowa.edu
Abstract

Data Module

How do we forecast an emerging pandemic in real time in a
purely data-driven manner? How to leverage rich heterogeneous data based on various signals such as mobility, testing,
and/or disease exposure for forecasting? How to handle noisy
data and generate uncertainties in the forecast? In this paper,
we present D EEP C OVID, an operational deep learning framework designed for real-time COVID-19 forecasting. D EEP C OVID works well with sparse data and can handle noisy
heterogeneous data signals by propagating the uncertainty
from the data in a principled manner resulting in meaningful
uncertainties in the forecast. The deployed framework also
consists of modules for both real-time and retrospective exploratory analysis to enable interpretation of the forecasts. Results from real-time predictions (featured on the CDC website
and FiveThirtyEight.com) since April 2020 indicates that our
approach is competitive among the methods in the COVID-19
Forecast Hub, especially for short-term predictions.

1

Explainability Module
Feedback

• Alignment of delayed
signals
• Normalize temporal
granularities
• Spatial aggregation and
de-aggregation
• Imputation

Prediction Module
Individual
Input Data Bootstrapping Neural Models

Probabilistic
Predictions

Self-regressive
forecasting

Introduction

Motivation. The devastating impact of the currently unfolding global COVID-19 pandemic has sharply illustrated our
enormous vulnerability to emerging infectious diseases. Forecasting disease trajectories is a non-trivial and important task.
Estimating various measures related to the epidemic gives
policymakers valuable lead time to plan interventions and
optimize supply chain decisions. Hence, accurate forecasts
are critical in combating epidemic outbreaks including the
current pandemic (Holmdahl and Buckee 2020).
To encourage research in epidemic forecasting and to provide a unified prediction platform, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) organized a collaborative
forecasting task under the umbrella of the COVID-19 Forecast Hub (Reich et al. 2020). The forecasting targets include
various COVID-related metrics including mortality and hospitalizations at various temporal and spatial resolutions. The
initiative has attracted submissions from more than 58 teams
from industry and academia (as of Sept 2020).
Majority of the participating approaches can be classified
into two categories (i) mechanistic & (ii) statistical. Mechanistic approaches model the underlying disease transmission
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15393

Figure 1: Schematic of our D EEP C OVID framework for realtime COVID-19 forecasting. The data module is dedicated to
data pre-processing including imputation of missing values
and aggregating at the right temporal and spatial resolution.
The prediction module generates probabilistic forecasts based
on the curated data. Finally, the explainability module (with
interface) allows both the real-time and retrospective analysis
of forecasts to build intuitive explanations.

over the population under various assumptions like using ordinary differential equations (Zhang et al. 2017) and/or agent
based models (Venkatramanan et al. 2018). While valuable
for long-term ’what-if’ scenario generation, mechanistic approaches have several challenges in real-time forecasting of
an emerging pandemic. The first drawback is that the complexity of the model rises with the number of data sources
being used. Hence, to manage the complexity, most models
often use only one or two data signals (such as weather) along
with the observed disease incidence (Shaman, Goldstein, and
Lipsitch 2010). Hence it is not trivial to extend these models
to include various other data signals (e.g. social media data).
On the other hand, statistical approaches are fairly new in
epidemic forecasting. They exploit correlations between various data sources and the forecast targets to learn a functional

