The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deep Fusion Clustering Network
Wenxuan Tu,1, * Sihang Zhou,2,∗ Xinwang Liu,1,† Xifeng Guo,1 Zhiping Cai,1,†
En Zhu,1 Jieren Cheng3,4
1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China
3
College of Computer Science and Cyberspace Security, Hainan University, Haikou, China
4
Hainan Blockchain Technology Engineering Research Center, Haikou, China
{wenxuantu, guoxifeng1990, cjr22}@163.com, sihangjoe@gmail.com, {xinwangliu, zpcai, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Deep clustering is a fundamental yet challenging task for data
analysis. Recently we witness a strong tendency of combining
autoencoder and graph neural networks to exploit structure
information for clustering performance enhancement. However, we observe that existing literature 1) lacks a dynamic
fusion mechanism to selectively integrate and refine the information of graph structure and node attributes for consensus
representation learning; 2) fails to extract information from
both sides for robust target distribution (i.e., “groundtruth”
soft labels) generation. To tackle the above issues, we propose a Deep Fusion Clustering Network (DFCN). Specifically, in our network, an interdependency learning-based
Structure and Attribute Information Fusion (SAIF) module
is proposed to explicitly merge the representations learned
by an autoencoder and a graph autoencoder for consensus representation learning. Also, a reliable target distribution generation measure and a triplet self-supervision strategy, which facilitate cross-modality information exploitation, are designed for network training. Extensive experiments on six benchmark datasets have demonstrated that the
proposed DFCN consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art
deep clustering methods. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/WxTu/DFCN.

Figure 1: Network structure comparison. Different from the
existing structure and attribute information fusion networks
(such as SDCN), our proposed method is enhanced with
an information fusion module. With this module, 1) both
the decoder of AE and IGAE reconstruct the inputs with a
learned consensus latent representation. 2) The target distribution is constructed with sufficient negotiation between
AE and IGAE. 3) A self-supervised triplet learning strategy
is designed.

chitecture to enable the network to collect more comprehensive and discriminative information for intrinsic structure revealing is extremely crucial and challenging.
According to the network optimization objective, existing
deep clustering methods can be roughly grouped into five
categories, i.e., subspace clustering-based methods (Zhou
et al. 2019a; Ji et al. 2017; Peng et al. 2017), generative adversarial network-based methods (Mukherjee et al.
2019; Ghasedi et al. 2019), spectral clustering-based methods (Yang et al. 2019b; Shaham et al. 2018), Gaussian mixture model-based methods (Yang et al. 2019a; Chen et al.
2019), and self-optimizing-based methods (Xie, Girshick,
and Farhadi 2016; Guo et al. 2017). Our method falls into
the last category. In the early state, the above deep clustering methods mainly concentrate on exploiting the attribute
information in the original feature space of data and have
achieved good performance in many circumstances. To further improve the clustering accuracy, recent literature shows
a strong tendency in extracting geometrical structure information and then integrates it with attribute information for
representation learning. Specifically, Yang et al. design a

Introduction
Deep clustering, which aims to train a neural network for
learning discriminative feature representations to divide data
into several disjoint groups without intense manual guidance, is becoming an increasingly appealing direction to
the machine learning researchers. Thanks to the strong representation learning capability of deep learning methods,
researches in this field have achieved promising performance in many applications including anomaly detection
(Markovitz et al. 2020), social network analysis (Hu, Chan,
and He 2017), and face recognition (Wang et al. 2019b).
Two important factors, i.e., the optimization objective and
the fashion of feature extraction, significantly determine the
performance of a deep clustering method. Specifically, in the
unsupervised clustering scenario, without the guidance of labels, designing a subtle objective function and an elegant ar* First authors with equal contribution
†

Corresponding author
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9978

