The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Accurate and Interpretable Machine Learning for Transparent Pricing of Health
Insurance Plans
Rohun Kshirsagar, Li-Yen Hsu, Charles H. Greenberg, Matthew McClelland, Anushadevi Mohan,
Wideet Shende, Nicolas P. Tilmans, Min Guo, Ankit Chheda, Meredith Trotter, Shonket Ray,
Miguel Alvarado
Lumiata Data Science and Engineering
rohun@lumiata.com
single and family ESI plans have increased 50% and deAbstract
ductibles have doubled, making affordability of care a major
Health insurance companies cover half of the United States
issue for many Americans. Thirty four percent of patients
population through commercial employer-sponsored health
on ESI plans are reportedly unable to pay for an unexpected
plans and pay 1.2 trillion US dollars every year to cover
bill of $500 and over 50% skip or postpone medical care
medical expenses for their members. The actuary and unand prescription fills due to cost (Claxton et al. 2019). By
derwriter roles at a health insurance company serve to assess
making healthcare more affordable, it increases the chance
which risks to take on and how to price those risks to ensure
patients will receive needed medical care and refill medicaprofitability of the organization. While Bayesian hierarchical
tions in a timely manner. Increasing affordability improves
models are the current standard in the industry to estimate
patient health outcomes and quality of life, reducing familial
risk, interest in machine learning as a way to improve upon
these existing methods is increasing. Lumiata, a healthcare
strain of medical debt, postponing major household spendanalytics company, ran a study with a large health insurance
ing, and obviating the need to hold multiple jobs (Claxton
company in the United States. We evaluated the ability of maet al. 2019).
chine learning models to predict the per member per month
However, ESI premiums are the dominating source of revcost of employer groups in their next renewal period, espeenue
for US-based health insurance companies, many of
cially those groups who will cost less than 95% of what an
which are among the Fortune 500 companies. As such, acactuarial model predicts (groups with “concession opportunicurate rate-setting is a crucial component of revenue and
ties”). We developed a sequence of two models, an individual
membership growth for insurance companies; setting inadpatient-level and an employer-group-level model, to predict
the annual per member per month allowed amount for emequate rates can mean the difference between profitability
ployer groups, based on a population of 14 million patients.
and unprofitability (Steenwyk 2007). Traditionally, health
Our models performed 20% better than the insurance carrier’s
insurance companies set rates using a combination of acexisting pricing model, and identified 84% of the concestuarial science and underwriting judgement. Actuaries apsion opportunities. This study demonstrates the application
ply statistical modeling to claims data to set premiums for
of a machine learning system to compute an accurate and fair
each employer-group; underwriters use the actuary’s preprice for health insurance products and analyzes how explaindicted rate alongside non-claims data (e.g. health questionable machine learning models can exceed actuarial models’
naires) to decide which groups to cover and what their rates
predictive accuracy while maintaining interpretability.
will be. Accurate rate setting is essential to balance customer retention against business viability because the insurer needs to retain a group for several years before the
Introduction
account becomes profitable. Hence, insurers are willing to
The recent explosion of available electronic health record
reduce rates in the near-term, in exchange for the chance of
(EHR) and insurance claims data sets, coupled with the dea longer term relationship (i.e. greater persistency) (Lyons
mocratization of statistical learning algorithms, has set the
et al. 1961). Good financial standing allows insurers to fostage for machine learning (ML) applications to fundamencus on growing their business, influencing patient health outtally transform the healthcare industry. Employer-sponsored
comes, improving customer experience, and increasing efhealth insurance (ESI) currently covers 150 million Amerficiency (Schaudel et al. 2018). Reduced renewal premiums
icans (Kirzinger et al. 2019). With numerous subsidies in
can align patients’ financial interests and the insurer’s strateplace to make ESI more affordable (Buchmueller, Carey,
gic interests.
and Levy 2013; White 2017), it is by far the most popular
Within the ESI market, the <500 employer group segoption for obtaining health insurance in the United States
ment (employer groups with fewer than 500 enrollees) is
(Fritzsche and Emily Vreeland 2019). Since the passage
highly transactional, particularly during peak season (near
of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2009, premiums for
January 1st of each year). The largest insurance carriers
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

15127

https://fortune.com/fortune500/2019/

