The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

ERNIE-ViL: Knowledge Enhanced Vision-Language
Representations through Scene Graphs
Fei Yu* , Jiji Tang* , Weichong Yin, Yu Sun, Hao Tian, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
{yufei07, tangjiji, yinweichong, sunyu02, tianhao, wu hua, wanghaifeng}@baidu.com

Abstract

standing on boat”). These methods neglect the importance
of constructing detailed semantic alignments across vision
and language, therefore the trained models can not well represent fine-grained semantics required by some real scenes.
As shown in Figure 1, the detailed semantics are essential
to distinguish the listed scenes which mainly differ in objects, attributes and relationships. Hence, better joint visionlanguage representations should characterize detailed semantic alignments across the modalities.
Inspired by the knowledge masking strategy of ERNIE
(Sun et al. 2019), which aims at learning more structured knowledge by masking phrases and named entities
rather than individual sub-words, we propose ERNIE-ViL,
that incorporates knowledge obtained from scene graphs
(Johnson et al. 2015) to construct better representations
for vision-language joint modelling. Through constructing
Scene Graph Prediction tasks, ERNIE-ViL puts more emphasis on detailed semantic alignments across vision and
language. Concretely, we implement these pre-training tasks
by masking and predicting different types of nodes in the
scene graph parsed from the sentence. By concentrating
on understanding detailed semantic words rather than common words, these Scene Graph Prediction tasks force the
model to extract object/attribute/relationship information
from the visual modality, thus establish semantic connections between vision and language. Pre-training with the
Scene Graph Prediction tasks, ERNIE-ViL learns the visionlanguage detailed semantic alignments.
We pre-train ERNIE-ViL on two large commonly-used
image-text out-of-domain datasets, namely Conceptual Captions (Sharma et al. 2018) and SBU Captions (Ordonez,
Kulkarni, and Berg 2011). To evaluate the performance of
ERNIE-ViL, we conduct experiments on various visionlanguage tasks, (1) Visual Question Answering (VQA 2.0)
(Antol et al. 2015), (2) Visual Commonsense Reasoning
(VCR) (Zellers et al. 2019), (3) Region-to-Phrase Grounding
(RefCOCO+) (Kazemzadeh et al. 2014), (4, 5) Image-text
Retrieval / Text-image Retrieval (Flickr30K) (Young et al.
2014). On all these tasks, ERNIE-ViL obtains significant
improvements compared to those models pretrained on the
same datasets. Especially, on the Region-to-Phrase grounding task that relies more heavily on detailed semantic alignments, we achieve an improvement of 2.4% on both testsets. To compare with the models pretrained on both out-

We propose a knowledge-enhanced approach, ERNIE-ViL,
which incorporates structured knowledge obtained from
scene graphs to learn joint representations of vision-language.
ERNIE-ViL tries to build the detailed semantic connections
(objects, attributes of objects and relationships between objects) across vision and language, which are essential to
vision-language cross-modal tasks. Utilizing scene graphs of
visual scenes, ERNIE-ViL constructs Scene Graph Prediction
tasks, i.e., Object Prediction, Attribute Prediction and Relationship Prediction tasks in the pre-training phase. Specifically, these prediction tasks are implemented by predicting
nodes of different types in the scene graph parsed from the
sentence. Thus, ERNIE-ViL can learn the joint representations characterizing the alignments of the detailed semantics
across vision and language. After pre-training on large scale
image-text aligned datasets, we validate the effectiveness of
ERNIE-ViL on 5 cross-modal downstream tasks. ERNIE-ViL
achieves state-of-the-art performances on all these tasks and
ranks the first place on the VCR leaderboard with an absolute
improvement of 3.7%.

Introduction
Motivated by pre-trained models like BERT (Devlin et al.
2018) and GPT (Radford et al. 2018) which have significantly improved the performance of many NLP tasks, researchers (Lu et al. 2019; Li et al. 2019a; Su et al. 2019;
Li et al. 2019b; Chen et al. 2019) have noticed the importance of pre-training for vision-language tasks, e.g., Visual
Question Answering(VQA) (Antol et al. 2015) and Visual
Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) (Zellers et al. 2019).
Existing vision-language pre-training methods attempt to
learn joint representations through visual grounding tasks on
large image-text datasets, including Masked Language Modelling based on randomly-masked sub-words, Masked Region Prediction and Image-Text Matching at the image/textlevel. However, based on randomly-masking and predicting
the sub-words, current models did not distinguish common
words and words describing the detailed semantics (Johnson
et al. 2015), e.g., objects(“man”, “boat”), attributes of objects(“boat is white”), relationships between objects(“man
* indicates equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3208

