The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Controllable Guarantees for Fair Outcomes via
Contrastive Information Estimation
Umang Gupta1 , Aaron M Ferber2 , Bistra Dilkina2 , Greg Ver Steeg1
1

Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California
2
University of Southern California
{umanggup, gregv}@isi.edu, {aferber, dilkina}@usc.edu

Abstract
Controlling bias in training datasets is vital for ensuring equal
treatment, or parity, between different groups in downstream
applications. A naive solution is to transform the data so that
it is statistically independent of group membership, but this
may throw away too much information when a reasonable
compromise between fairness and accuracy is desired. Another common approach is to limit the ability of a particular
adversary who seeks to maximize parity. Unfortunately, representations produced by adversarial approaches may still retain biases as their efficacy is tied to the complexity of the
adversary used during training. To this end, we theoretically
establish that by limiting the mutual information between representations and protected attributes, we can assuredly control the parity of any downstream classifier. We demonstrate
an effective method for controlling parity through mutual information based on contrastive information estimators and
show that they outperform approaches that rely on variational bounds based on complex generative models. We test
our approach on UCI Adult and Heritage Health datasets
and demonstrate that our approach provides more informative representations across a range of desired parity thresholds
while providing strong theoretical guarantees on the parity of
any downstream algorithm.

1

Representative Methods

Adversarial
Guarantee

Controllable
Parity

Song et al. (2019)
Moyer et al. (2018)
Madras et al. (2018)
Roy and Boddeti (2019)
Ours

Weak1
Strong
None
None
Strong

Heuristic
No2
Heuristic
No
Provable

Table 1: Fair representation learning methods

Many recent approaches for learning fair representations
leverage adversarial learning to remove unwanted biases
from the data by limiting the ability of an adversary to reconstruct sensitive attributes from the representation during
training (Jaiswal et al. 2020; Roy and Boddeti 2019; Song
et al. 2019; Madras et al. 2018; Edwards and Storkey 2016).
While adversarial methods have been shown to be useful
in learning fair representations, they are often limited by
the adversary’s model capacity. A more powerful adversary
than the one used during training may reveal hidden biases
that are present in the representations (Xu et al. 2020). As
a result, a model trained to control fairness against one adversary has no guarantee to control fairness against an arbitrary adversary. Other methods for learning fair representations focus on inducing statistical independence (Moyer
et al. 2018; Louizos et al. 2016). While fairness guarantees
of these methods are agnostic to the downstream algorithms,
including adversarial attempts to exploit bias, they are inefficient at trading-off between fairness and informativeness in
the representation, which is often desirable for fairness applications. Some methods rely on complex generative modeling of data to discover representations that are invariant to
the protected attributes while preserving as much information as possible about the data. However, the quality of the
generative model is a performance bottleneck. We summarize some of these approaches and their properties in Table 1.

Introduction

Decisions based on biased data can promote biased outcomes. Learning algorithms often exploit and exaggerate biases present in the training dataset. One way to prevent algorithms from reproducing bias in the data is to pre-process
the data so that information about protected attributes is removed (Song et al. 2019; Madras et al. 2018; McNamara,
Ong, and Williamson 2017). Ideally, users of this transformed data can focus on maximizing performance for their
tasks using any available method without the risk of producing unfair outcomes (Cisse and Koyejo 2019). The strongest
requirement for fair representations is to be statistically independent of sensitive attributes, but this may lead to large
drops in predictive performance as sensitive attributes are
often correlated with the target. Therefore, it is desirable
to produce representations that can trade-off some measure
of fairness (e.g., statistical parity in this work) with utility (Menon and Williamson 2018; Dutta et al. 2019).

1

Song et al. (2019) minimize two different bounds on I(z:c)
— one is a very loose upper bound, and another uses adversarial
learning. So the adversarial guarantee is unclear or, at best weaker.
2
Moyer et al. (2018) designed their method for enforcing independence; however, we consider a modification of their method for
controlling parity, based on our Thm. 2.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7610

