The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Exploiting Learnable Joint Groups for Hand Pose Estimation
Moran Li1* , Yuan Gao1,2* , Nong Sang1
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Tencent AI Lab
moran li@hust.edu.cn, ethan.y.gao@gmail.com, nsang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2018; Yang and Yao 2019; Boukhayma, Bem, and Torr
2019), stereo RGB images (Zhang et al. 2017), to depth
maps (Moon, Yong Chang, and Mu Lee 2018; Wan et al.
2018; Ge, Ren, and Yuan 2018; Ge et al. 2018; Du et al.
2019; Xiong et al. 2019). This paper considers 3D hand pose
estimation from a single 2D RGB image, as it can be easily acquired from an ordinary RGB camera, therefore being
most widely applicable in practice.
Nevertheless, estimating 3D hand pose from a single 2D
image is ambiguous. This is because multiple 3D poses correspond to the same 2D projection as the depth information
is eliminated. Fortunately, the valid hand poses lie in a space
with much lower dimensions, which can be learned to alleviate the ambiguities in a data-driven manner by deep learning technologies. Specifically, recent deep learning methods
exploit the relationship of the hand joints/keypoints holistically to recover the valid hand poses. Recent representative
methods typically realize this idea by using a fully connected
network (FCN) on all the 2D joints to recover the 3D poses
(Zimmermann and Brox 2017; Spurr et al. 2018)
It is arguable that not all joints are (equally) related. For
example, joints that are far away from each other are less
related (i.e., less constrained by skeleton/nerves) than those
that are closed. This suggests that learning shared features
for all the joints and exploiting them by a FCN is less appropriate. More specifically, from multi-task learning (MTL)
perspective, recovering the 3D coordinates of each joint corresponds to a single task, this suggests that using shared features for less related tasks may lead to negative transfer and
therefore results in degraded performance.
The above discussion motivates us to learn different features for less related joints. This can be implemented by separating the joints into different groups, where related joints
are contained in the same group and share the same features, representing one task in MTL. However, being different from the standard MTL, the group where the related
joints should be categorized into (i.e., the task) is unknown
in 3D hand pose estimation. In this work, we learn the
groups of related joints in an end-to-end manner by introducing a novel differentiable binary joint selectors, which is
stochastically sampled from a Concrete distribution (Maddison, Mnih, and Teh 2016).
Moreover, features from different groups can be further
exploited in our method without introducing undesirable

In this paper, we propose to estimate 3D hand pose by recovering the 3D coordinates of joints in a group-wise manner,
where less-related joints are automatically categorized into
different groups and exhibit different features. This is different from the previous methods where all the joints are considered holistically and share the same feature. The benefits
of our method are illustrated by the principle of multi-task
learning (MTL), i.e., by separating less-related joints into different groups (as different tasks), our method learns different
features for each of them, therefore efficiently avoids the negative transfer (among less related tasks/groups of joints). The
key of our method is a novel binary selector that automatically selects related joints into the same group. We implement such a selector with binary values stochastically sampled from a Concrete distribution, which is constructed using Gumbel softmax on trainable parameters. This enables us
to preserve the differentiable property of the whole network.
We further exploit features from those less-related groups
by carrying out an additional feature fusing scheme among
them, to learn more discriminative features. This is realized
by implementing multiple 1x1 convolutions on the concatenated features, where each joint group contains a unique 1x1
convolution for feature fusion. The detailed ablation analysis and the extensive experiments on several benchmark
datasets demonstrate the promising performance of the proposed method over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. Besides, our method achieves top-1 among all the methods that
do not exploit the dense 3D shape labels on the most recently
released FreiHAND competition at the submission date. The
source code and models are available at https://github.com/
moranli-aca/LearnableGroups-Hand.

Introduction
3D hand pose estimation is essential to facilitate convenient human-machine interaction through touch-less sensors. Therefore, it receives increasingly interests in various
areas including computer vision, human-computer interaction, virtual/augmented reality, and robotics. The input of
3D hand pose estimation differs with the touch-less sensors, ranging from a single 2D RGB image (Zimmermann
and Brox 2017; Cai et al. 2018; Mueller et al. 2018; Spurr
* Equal contributions
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1921

