The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Towards Trustworthy Predictions from Deep Neural Networks with Fast
Adversarial Calibration
Christian Tomani,1,2 Florian Buettner1
1
Siemens AG
Technical University of Munich
christian.tomani@tum.de, buettner.florian@siemens.com
2

Abstract

In recent years, a variety of different approaches to capture
predictive uncertainty have been proposed. This includes
intrinsically uncertainty-aware networks such as Bayesian
neural networks and Deep Ensembles (Papernot and McDaniel 2018; Wen et al. 2018). Alternative approaches for
obtaining meaningful predictive uncertainties rely on postprocessing approaches such as Temperature Scaling (Guo
et al. 2017; Platt 1999)
Efforts to evaluate the quality of predictive uncertainty have
until recently been focused on in-domain calibration.Guo
et al. (2017) indicate that simple post-processing methods
are sufficient to yield calibrated predictions when samples
are drawn from the same distribution as the training data.
More recently, Ovadia et al. (2019) have presented a comprehensive evaluation of calibration under domain drift for
the most popular implementations of uncertainty-aware neural networks. They demonstrate that the quality of predictive
uncertainties, i.e. model calibration, decreases with increasing domain shift, regardless of method and conclude that
there remains significant room for improvement.
In this work, we propose an efficient yet general modelling approach for obtaining well-calibrated, trustworthy
probabilities under domain shift as well as for truly out-ofdistribution (OOD) samples. Our approach can readily be
applied to a wide range of data modalities and model architectures. More specifically, we introduce a simple loss
function to encourage high entropy on wrong predictions.
We combine this with a novel adversarial calibration loss
term that directly minimizes the calibration error using adversarial samples. We demonstrate that actively encouraging
calibration at training time results in an uncertainty-aware
neural network yielding well-calibrated predictions in the
case of any gradual domain shift, from in-domain samples
to truly out-of-domain samples. In contrast to the previously
proposed approaches assessed in (Ovadia et al. 2019), our
model maintains good calibration with increasing domain
shift. We illustrate this using 32 different types of dataset
shift and OOD scenarios not seen during training, including the recently proposed ObjectNet benchmark dataset. Our
codes are available at https://github.com/tochris/falcon.

To facilitate a wide-spread acceptance of AI systems guiding
decision making in real-world applications, trustworthiness
of deployed models is key. That is, it is crucial for predictive models to be uncertainty-aware and yield well-calibrated
(and thus trustworthy) predictions for both in-domain samples as well as under domain shift. Recent efforts to account
for predictive uncertainty include post-processing steps for
trained neural networks, Bayesian neural networks as well
as alternative non-Bayesian approaches such as ensemble approaches and evidential deep learning. Here, we propose an
efficient yet general modelling approach for obtaining wellcalibrated, trustworthy probabilities for samples obtained after a domain shift. We introduce a new training strategy combining an entropy-encouraging loss term with an adversarial calibration loss term and demonstrate that this results in
well-calibrated and technically trustworthy predictions for
a wide range of domain drifts. We comprehensively evaluate previously proposed approaches on different data modalities, a large range of data sets including sequence data, network architectures and perturbation strategies. We observe
that our modelling approach substantially outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches, yielding well-calibrated predictions under domain drift.

Introduction
To facilitate a wide-spread acceptance of AI systems guiding
decision making in real-world applications, trustworthiness
of deployed models is key. Not only in safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving or medicine (Helldin
et al. 2013; Caruana et al. 2015; Leibig et al. 2017), but
also in dynamic open world systems in industry it is crucial for predictive models to be uncertainty-aware. Only if
predictions are calibrated in the case of any gradual domain
shift, covering the entire spectrum from in-domain (”known
unknowns”) to truly out-of-domain samples (”unknown unknowns”), they can be trusted. In particular in industrial and
IoT settings, deployed models may encounter erroneous and
inconsistent inputs far away from the input domain throughout the life-cycle. In addition, the distribution of the input
data may gradually move away from the distribution of the
training data (e.g. due to wear and tear of the assets, maintenance procedures or change in customer behavior.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9886

