The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Temporal Segmentation of Fine-grained Semantic Action:
A Motion-Centered Figure Skating Dataset
Shenglan Liu1 , Aibin zhang1,* , Yunheng Li1,* ,
Jian Zhou1 , Li Xu2 , Zhuben Dong1 , Renhao Zhang1
1

Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning, 116024 China
2
Alibaba Group
liusl@dlut.edu.cn, renwei.xl@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Coarse-grained semantics. The coarse-grained TAS is
relatively easy for the existing models. However, it is difficult to meet the related applications of fine-grained semantics (Sun et al. 2015; Piergiovanni and Ryoo 2018) which is
more challenging for frame-level action classification.
Spatial characteristics. In most TAS datasets, scene, tool
and object (even more important than the action itself sometimes) play very important roles in human action recognition. However, we should pay more attention to the action
in many practical applications (Bhattacharya et al. 2020; Li
et al. 2019). Besides, the task-driven datasets cannot show
the full human body in an expected manner. Therefore, it
is difficult to extract more modal features to perform TAS
tasks.
Temporal characteristics. Generally, the action content
categories for task-driven TAS datasets are simple, and the
speed difference in distinct actions is too small. The little speed variance is difficult to cause frame-level feature
changes, which is less challenging for TAS tasks.
The issues above limit the broader research of TAS models. In order to exploit new methods on the task of motioncentered TAS, this paper proposed a new dataset named
MCFS. MCFS is composed of 271 single figure skating performance videos. The videos are taken from the 17.3 hours
competition of the 2017-2019 World Figure Skating Championships. Each clip is 30 frames per second, with a resolution of 1080 × 720 and a length of 162s to 285s. All actions
are annotated with the semantic labels on three levels (see
Fig. 1). The camera focuses on the skater to ensure that he
(she) appears in every frame during the action. Compared
with the existing datasets, MCFS has five remarkable advantages which are listed as follows.
Multi-level fine-grained semantics. All the annotations
are carried at three levels, namely set, subset and element
in this paper. Fine-grained semantics means that similar actions may have different labels because of motion-centered
characteristics in figure skating (e.g. Lutz and Flip jumps
are similar in motion aspect, but are two different jumps.).
Such a semantic hierarchy provides a distinct structure for
comprehending coarse-grained and fine-grained operations.
Multi-modal action features. Previous datasets only offer features based on RGB video content such as Flow and
I3D (Carreira and Zisserman 2017).etc., while MCFS provides extra Skeleton (Cao et al. 2017) feature which provides

Temporal Action Segmentation (TAS) has achieved great success in many fields such as exercise rehabilitation, movie
editing, etc. Currently, task-driven TAS is a central topic
in human action analysis. However, motion-centered TAS,
as an important topic, is little researched due to unavailable datasets. In order to explore more models and practical applications of motion-centered TAS, we introduce a
Motion-Centered Figure Skating (MCFS) dataset in this paper. Compared with existing temporal action segmentation
datasets, the MCFS dataset is fine-grained semantic, specialized and motion-centered. Besides, RGB-based and Skeletonbased features are provided in the MCFS dataset. Experimental results show that existing state-of-the-art methods are
difficult to achieve excellent segmentation results (including accuracy, edit and F1 score) in the MCFS dataset. This
indicates that MCFS is a challenging dataset for motioncentered TAS. The latest dataset can be downloaded at
https://shenglanliu.github.io/mcfs-dataset/.

Introduction
Temporal action segmentation (TAS) has been widely used
in sports competitions (Urban and Russell 2003), exercise rehabilitation (Lin and Kulić 2013), movie editing
(Magliano and Zacks 2011) and other fields. Technically,
TAS has been extended to many new topics, such as video
action localization (Lee, Uh, and Byun 2020) and moment retrieval (Zhang et al. 2019) etc. In recent years,
TAS has made remarkable progress on task-based video, especially in designing new temporal convolution networks
(TCN) (e.g. Encoder-Decoder TCN (ED-TCN) (Lea et al.
2017), Multi-Stage Temporal Convolutional Network (MSTCN) (Farha and Gall 2019) and Self-Supervised Temporal
Domain Adaptation (SSTDA) (Chen et al. 2020a)) which
achieve higher performance on cooking task datasets (e.g.
GTEA (Fathi, Ren, and Rehg 2011), 50Salads (Stein and
Mckenna 2013) and Breakfast (Kuehne, Arslan, and Serre
2014), etc.).
However, it can be found that the existing datasets have
three limitations for TAS research, which can be mainly
summarized as follows.
*Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2163

