The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

H Y DRA: Hypergradient Data Relevance Analysis for Interpreting
Deep Neural Networks
Yuanyuan Chen1 , Boyang Li1, 2* , Han Yu1* , Pengcheng Wu1 , and Chunyan Miao1*
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
{yuanyuan.chen, boyang.li, han.yu, pengcheng.wu, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg
*Corresponding authors
Abstract

The behaviors of deep neural networks (DNNs) are notoriously resistant to human interpretations. In this paper, we
propose Hypergradient Data Relevance Analysis, or H YDRA, which interprets the predictions made by DNNs as
effects of their training data. Existing approaches generally
estimate data contributions around the final model parameters and ignore how the training data shape the optimization trajectory. By unrolling the hypergradient of test loss
w.r.t. the weights of training data, H Y DRA assesses the contribution of training data toward test data points throughout the training trajectory. In order to accelerate computation, we remove the Hessian from the calculation and
prove that, under moderate conditions, the approximation error is bounded. Corroborating this theoretical claim, empirical results indicate the error is indeed small. In addition,
we quantitatively demonstrate that H Y DRA outperforms influence functions in accurately estimating data contribution
and detecting noisy data labels. The source code is available
at https://github.com/cyyever/aaai hydra.

Figure 1: An illustration of H Y DRA and influence functions (IF). After the removal of some training data points,
the training loss shifts from the blue curve to the red curve.
IF estimates the contribution within the convex region near
the old wT . H Y DRA tracks the influence of data removal
along the entire optimization process, possibly leading to a
different local optimum.

Introduction

The pioneering work of Koh and Liang (2017) proposes
influence functions (IF), which measure the contribution of
a training sample zi to a test sample z test as the change in the
loss of z test when the weight of training data zi is changed
marginally. This technique enables a number of applications
(e.g. Alaa and van der Schaar 2020), but suffers from two
drawbacks. First, it only measures the contribution around
the final model parameters wT and ignores the possibility
that change in the weights of training data may lead to a local
optimum different from wT with a drastically different test
loss. Second, IF relies on the inverse Hessian on the whole
training data, which is computationally expensive to approximate. Hara, Nitanda, and Maehara (2019) analyze the entire
trajectory but still rely on Hessians.
In this paper, we propose Hypergradient for Data Relevance Analysis (H Y DRA) to address the aforementioned
shortcomings. By unrolling the gradient of test loss w.r.t.
the data weights through all training steps, H Y DRA accounts for how changes in data weights shape the whole
training process. As the optimization utilizes the gradient
on the same data repeatedly, even marginal changes in the
data weights can accumulate and eventually shift the point
of convergence. Figure 1 illustrates such a scenario where

What makes neural networks do exactly what they do? This
is a crucial question that lingers in the minds of machine
learning researchers and practitioners. The underpinnings of
deep neural networks (DNNs), including non-convex objective functions, stochastic optimization, and overparameterization, may implicitly regularize the network and improve
generalization (e.g., Li and Liang 2018; Arora, Cohen, and
Hazan 2018), but also hinder the interpretation of the network behaviors and the training process. The black-box nature of DNNs can render their predictions untrustworthy in
the eyes of the general public and prohibit wide adoption.
Conversely, good interpretability can enhance the training,
debugging, and auditing of DNNs.
The focus of the current paper is to understand DNNs
by attributing their predictions to the training data. That is,
how training data influence network predictions on test data.
However, as the training data are involved in the entirety of
the complex training process, accurately capturing their influence on the final network is a challenge.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7081

