The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

BERT & Family Eat Word Salad: Experiments with Text Understanding
Ashim Gupta, Giorgi Kvernadze, Vivek Srikumar
University of Utah
{ashim, giorgi, svivek}@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the response of large models from
the BERT family to incoherent inputs that should confuse
any model that claims to understand natural language. We define simple heuristics to construct such examples. Our experiments show that state-of-the-art models consistently fail to
recognize them as ill-formed, and instead produce high confidence predictions on them. As a consequence of this phenomenon, models trained on sentences with randomly permuted word order perform close to state-of-the-art models.
To alleviate these issues, we show that if models are explicitly trained to recognize invalid inputs, they can be robust to
such attacks without a drop in performance.

Premise

In reviewing this history, it’s important
to make some crucial distinctions.

Original
Hypothesis

Making certain distinctions is
imperative in looking back on the past.
E NTAILMENT with probability 0.99

Sorted
Hypothesis

back certain distinctions imperative in
is looking making on past the .
E NTAILMENT with probability 0.97

Figure 1: An Example for Natural Language Inference from
the MNLI (-m) validation set. For the original premise and
hypothesis, RoBERTa fine-tuned model makes the correct
prediction that the premise entails the hypothesis. Alphabetically sorting the hypothesis makes it meaningless, but the
model still retains the prediction with high confidence.

Introduction
The BERT family of models (Devlin et al. 2019; Liu et al.
2019, and others) form the backbone of today’s NLP systems. At the time of writing, all eleven systems deemed to
outperform humans in the GLUE benchmark suite (Wang
et al. 2018) belong to this family. Do these models understand language? Recent work suggests otherwise. For example, Bender and Koller (2020) point out that models trained
to mimic linguistic form (i.e., language models) may be deficient in understanding the meaning conveyed by language.
In this paper, we show that such models struggle even
with the form of language by demonstrating that they force
meaning onto token sequences devoid of any. For instance,
consider the natural language inference (NLI) example in
fig. 1. A RoBERTa-based model that scores ∼ 89% on the
Multi-NLI dataset (Williams, Nangia, and Bowman 2018)
identifies that the premise entails the hypothesis. However,
when the words in the hypothesis are sorted alphabetically
(thereby rendering the sequence meaningless), the model
still makes the same prediction with high confidence. Indeed, across Multi-NLI, when the hypotheses are sorted alphabetically, the model retains the same prediction in 79%
of the cases, with a surprisingly high average confidence of
∼ 95%! We argue that a reliable model should not be insensitive to such a drastic change in word order.
We study the response of large neural models to destructive transformations: perturbations of inputs that ren-

der them meaningless. Figure 1 shows an example. We define several such transformations, all of which erase meaning from the input text and produce token sequences that are
not natural language (i.e., word salad).
We characterize the response of models to such transformations using two metrics: its ability to predict valid labels
for invalid inputs, and its confidence on these predictions.
Via experiments on three tasks from the GLUE benchmark,
we show that the labels predicted by state-of-the-art models for destructively transformed inputs bear high agreement
with the original ones. Moreover, the models are highly confident in these predictions. We also find that models trained
on meaningless examples perform comparably to the original model on unperturbed examples, despite never having encountered any well-formed training examples. Specifically, models trained on meaningless sentences constructed
by permuting the word order perform almost as well as the
state-of-the-art models. These observations suggest that, far
from actually understanding natural language, today’s stateof-the-art models have trouble even recognizing it.
Finally, we evaluate strategies to mitigate these weaknesses using regularization that makes models less confident
in their predictions, or by allowing models to reject inputs.
In summary, our contributions are1 :

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

12946

Our code is available at https://github.com/utahnlp/word-salad

