The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

KGDet: Keypoint-Guided Fashion Detection
Shenhan Qian* 1, 2 , Dongze Lian* 1 , Binqiang Zhao2 , Tong Liu2
Bohui Zhu2 , Hai Li3 , Shenghua Gao†1, 4
4

1
ShanghaiTech University 2 Alibaba Group 3 Ant Group
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{qianshh, liandz, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
{binqiang.zhao,bohui.zbh}@alibaba-inc.com
yingmu@taobao.com, tianshu.lh@antgroup.com

Abstract
Locating and classifying clothes, usually referred to as clothing detection, is a fundamental task in fashion analysis. Motivated by the strong structural characteristics of clothes, we
pursue a detection method enhanced by clothing keypoints,
which is a compact and effective representation of structures.
To incorporate the keypoint cues into clothing detection, we
design a simple yet effective Keypoint-Guided clothing Detector, named KGDet. Such a detector can fully utilize information provided by keypoints with the following two aspects: i) integrating local features around keypoints to benefit both classification and regression; ii) generating accurate
bounding boxes from keypoints. To effectively incorporate
local features , two alternative modules are proposed. One is
a multi-column keypoint-encoding-based feature aggregation
module; the other is a keypoint-selection-based feature aggregation module. With either of the above modules as a bridge,
a cascade strategy is introduced to refine detection performance progressively. Thanks to the keypoints, our KGDet obtains superior performance on the DeepFashion2 dataset and
the FLD dataset with high efficiency.

Vest



Vest

Skirt

Sling



Figure 1: Keypoints effectively describe the structure of a
garment, thus can be used to generate high-quality bounding
boxes. Meanwhile, the structural information possessed by
keypoints can help determine the class of a garment. Here,
the keypoints near the shoulders validate that the garment is
a vest rather than a sling.

Introduction

Then a question is raised: how can we incorporate the keypoint cues into clothing detection? At first glance, we can
bind clothing detection and keypoint estimation together in a
parallel manner, as is done in Mask R-CNN (He et al. 2017),
where the extracted feature from ROI-Align is used for object detection and instance segmentation. More recently, Ge
et al. (2019) propose a Match R-CNN to integrate clothing
detection, landmark regression, segmentation, and clothing
retrieval into such a multi-task learning framework. However, in these methods, information of keypoints is not fully
utilized but only used to regularize the shared subnetwork to
extract features in an implicit way, which results in marginal
performance improvement (63.3 vs. 64.0).
Unlike the above solutions, in this paper, we propose a
method of serial connection centered on keypoint and design a simple yet effective Keypoint-Guided clothing Detector, named KGDet. Such a detector can make full use of keypoint information with the following two aspects: i) integrating local features around keypoints to benefit both classification and regression; ii) generating accurate bounding boxes
from keypoints. Specifically, we design a unified framework

Recently, fashion image understanding has drawn a lot of attention (Liu et al. 2016a; Ge et al. 2019) due to its wide range
of applications, especially in online shopping scenarios. A
fundamental problem of fashion image analysis is clothing
detection, which is to locate and recognize garments efficiently and accurately. It enables many tasks such as clothing attribute analysis, outfit matching, virtual try-on, etc.
There has been much work in the field of general object
detection (Ren et al. 2015; Redmon et al. 2016; Cai and Vasconcelos 2018), while we focus on clothing detection. For
clothes, they usually have very distinct structural features,
characterized by keypoints. As shown in Figure 1, keypoints
effectively describe the structure of a garment, thus can help
to determine the bounding box and the clothing category.
Therefore, we propose to leverage the keypoints for fashion
detection.
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding author.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2449

