The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On-line Learning of Planning Domains from Sensor Data in PAL:
Scaling up to Large State Spaces
Leonardo Lamanna,1,2 Alfonso E. Gerevini, 2 Alessandro Saetti, 2
Luciano Serafini, 1 Paolo Traverso 1
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Trento, Italy
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Università degli Studi di Brescia, Italy
llamanna@fbk.eu, alfonso.gerevini@unibs.it, alessandro.saetti@unibs.it, serafini@fbk.eu, traverso@fbk.eu
2

Abstract

In many real applications, it may happen that agents do
not have a good planning domain in advance. For instance, a
robot moving packages in a building could have a model of
the map of the building with a number of flaws or relevant
missing details. In these cases, agents should be able to learn
and update their models (planning domains) while acting in
the world and observing the consequences of their actions.
This is the main purpose of the PAL algorithm (Acting
and Learning Planning) proposed in (Serafini and Traverso
2019), which learns, incrementally and on-line, a discrete
deterministic planning domain from real-value observations
of the world. Each domain state is linked to observations by
the so called perception function, which provides the likelihood of the observations when the agent is at that specific
state. At each iteration, PAL updates the set of states of the
extensional representation of a planning domain, possibly
by introducing new states for unexpected observations, and
it adjusts the transition relation and the perception function.
In order to overcome the scalability limitations of PAL,
the agent is provided with an initial “draft” planning domain
specified in PDDL (McDermott et al. 1998). This domain is
not required to be neither complete nor correct. This planning domain is used to guide the agent in the discovery of
the world. We propose a new algorithm, that learns the extensional planning domain and incrementally updates and
corrects the initial PDDL domain with additional information collected during the execution of actions.
In the proposed approach, the presence of both the extensional and the PDDL planning domain is exploited to efficiently achieve the agent’s goals through two alternative and
complementary planning algorithms: (i) a shortest-path algorithm for planning in the space of the states of the extensional model (i.e. the states already discovered by the agent),
and (ii) a PDDL planning algorithm for generating plans that
allows to discover new states, if the goal is not achievable in
the extensional model.
Experimental analysis shows that the proposed method:

We propose an approach to learn an extensional representation of a discrete deterministic planning domain from observations in a continuous space navigated by the agent actions. This is achieved through the use of a perception function providing the likelihood of a real-value observation being in a given state of the planning domain after executing
an action. The agent learns an extensional representation of
the domain (the set of states, the transitions from states to
states caused by actions) and the perception function on-line,
while it acts for accomplishing its task. In order to provide
a practical approach that can scale up to large state spaces, a
“draft” intensional (PDDL-based) model of the planning domain is used to guide the exploration of the environment and
learn the states and state transitions. The proposed approach
uses a novel algorithm to (i) construct the extensional representation of the domain by interleaving symbolic planning in
the PDDL intensional representation and search in the statetransition graph of the extensional representation; (ii) incrementally refine the intensional representation taking into account information about the actions that the agent cannot execute. An experimental analysis shows that the novel approach
can scale up to large state spaces, thus overcoming the limits
in scalability of current approaches.

Introduction
Symbolic planning techniques are based on abstract and
most often discrete representations of the world, where the
agents perform their actions, usually called planning domains. A discrete planning domain is a finite state transition
system, i.e., a finite set of states, a finite set of actions, and a
transition relation representing how actions lead from states
to new states (Ghallab, Nau, and Traverso 2004, 2016). A
planning domain can be specified either “extensionally”, by
explicitly describing each state and each transition (e.g., by a
transition matrix), or ”intensionally” by means of a planning
language, e.g., STRIPS (Fikes and Nilsson 1971) and PDDL
(McDermott et al. 1998), whose semantics is given in terms
of transition systems. In both cases, the specification of planning domains is a challenging task. A good planning domain
should abstract away the details of the world state which are
irrelevant for the achievement of the agents’ goals, keeping
only the relevant details.

• scales up to planning domains with large state spaces;
• significantly reduces the flaws in the draft PDDL planning domain, which asymptotically converges to a correct
model;
• by exploiting the combined extensional and PDDL models, it allows the agent to efficiently accomplish its tasks.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

11862

