The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Deterministic Mini-batch Sequencing for Training Deep Neural Networks
Subhankar Banerjee, Shayok Chakraborty
Department of Computer Science, Florida State University

given training set D is split into a sequence of mini-batches
{b1 , b2 , . . . bn } each of a pre-determined size k, where bt is
sampled at random from D. A loss function L(wt ) (such as
the cross-entropy loss) is defined with respect to the current
model parameters wt (at time instance t) and is designed to
operate on each mini-batch. The updated network weights,
wt+1 at time t + 1, are obtained by minimizing the loss according to SGD:

Abstract
Recent advancements in the field of deep learning have
dramatically improved the performance of machine learning models in a variety of applications, including computer
vision, text mining, speech processing and fraud detection
among others. Mini-batch gradient descent is the standard algorithm to train deep models, where mini-batches of a fixed
size are sampled randomly from the training data and passed
through the network sequentially. In this paper, we present a
novel algorithm to generate a deterministic sequence of minibatches to train a deep neural network (rather than a random
sequence). Our rationale is to select a mini-batch by minimizing the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) between the already selected mini-batches and the unselected training samples. We pose the mini-batch selection as a constrained optimization problem and derive a linear programming relaxation
to determine the sequence of mini-batches. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first research effort that uses the MMD
criterion to determine a sequence of mini-batches to train a
deep neural network. The proposed mini-batch sequencing
strategy is deterministic and independent of the underlying
network architecture and prediction task. Our extensive empirical analyses on three challenging datasets corroborate the
merit of our framework over competing baselines. We further study the performance of our framework on two other
applications besides classification (regression and semantic
segmentation) to validate its generalizability.

∂L(wt )
(1)
∂wt
where λt is the learning rate at time t. Earlier research efforts have established that the selection of the mini-batch bt
t)
that is used to compute the gradient ∂L(w
∂wt at time step t is
crucial to improving the generalization performance of the
model, motivating the development of intelligent sampling
techniques to progressively select the training mini-batches
(Joseph et al. 2019; Loshchilov and Hutter 2016). In this
paper, we propose an algorithm to generate a deterministic sequence of mini-batches to train a deep neural network.
Our rationale is to select the mini-batch bt such that the data
distribution represented by bt and the already selected minibatches, is closest to the distribution represented by the unselected training samples. In other words, the exemplar samples from the training data are selected progressively to form
the training mini-batches, which can potentially improve the
generalization performance of the deep model.
We use the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) metric
(Gretton et al. 2007; Borgwardt et al. 2006; Sriperumbudur
et al. 2010) to compute the probability distribution difference between two sets of training samples. MMD is defined
as the difference between the means of two distributions after mapping them onto a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
(RKHS). It has been successfully used in a variety of applications to compute the distribution difference between training and test data, particularly in the development of transfer learning and active learning algorithms (Chattopadhyay
et al. 2013a; Wang and Ye 2013; Chattopadhyay et al. 2012,
2013b; Venkateswara et al. 2017; Tang and Huang 2019).
We use this metric to formulate an optimization problem to
select a mini-batch B containing k samples from the set of
unselected training samples Q, such that the probability distribution difference between Q\B and P ∪ B (where P is
the set of already selected mini-batches) is minimized. Our
wt+1 = wt − λt

Introduction
Deep learning algorithms automatically learn a discriminating set of features and have depicted impressive performance in a variety of applications. Architectures such as
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) etc., have revolutionized multimedia computing and
have achieved state-of-the-art performance across a wide
range of applications, including image recognition (He et al.
2016a), object detection (Ren et al. 2017), image segmentation (Badrinarayanan, Kendall, and Cipolla 2015) and
speech recognition (Deng and Platt 2014) among others.
Conventionally, deep neural networks (DNNs) are trained
using stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where the backpropagation algorithm is used to compute the gradients. A
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6723

