The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

One-shot Graph Neural Architecture Search
with Dynamic Search Space
Yanxi Li1 , Zean Wen1 , Yunhe Wang2 , Chang Xu1
1

School of Computer Science, University of Sydney, Australia
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, China
yali0722@uni.sydney.edu.au, zwen2780@uni.sydney.edu.au,
yunhe.wang@huawei.com, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

recent years, GNNs have been demonstrated to be promising to handle graph-structured data, which have increasingly
attracted the interest of researchers.
The development of GNNs is a generalization of CNNs
from low-dimensional regular grids to high-dimensional
irregular grids (Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst
2016). There are two different categories of approaches to
defining a GNN. The spectral-based approaches (Defferrard,
Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Kipf and Welling 2016;
Bianchi et al. 2019) utilize graph Fourier transform and define graph convolutional operators in the spectral domain,
and the spatial-based approaches (Veličković et al. 2017;
Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017) define localized message passing rules to aggregate feature information between
neighboring nodes.
Architectures of popular GNNs are often manually designed, which requires tremendous prior knowledge and
intensive experiments. The automation of neural architecture design has been popular for CNNs and RNNs and is
widely known as Neural Architecture Search (NAS). There
are a few attempts of applying RL-based NAS approaches
to design GNNs. GraphNAS (Gao et al. 2020) and AGNN
(Zhou et al. 2019) propose to search for GNNs from the
spatial perspective. The message passing process consists
of several operators, typically including correlation coefficient calculation and aggregation. The type and hyperparameters for those operators are searched, and a chain-structured
network is constructed by stacking obtained message passing layers. This kind of approaches corresponds to macro
search in NAS for CNNs (Elsken, Metzen, and Hutter 2018).
GraphNAS (Gao et al. 2020) also proposes a micro search
approach. In the micro setting, hierarchical computational
graphs of fixed operations, e.g. GCN (Kipf and Welling
2016) or GAT (Veličković et al. 2017), is searched as the
basic building blocks. Such blocks are then stacked to build
a GNN.
However, there are several drawbacks to such RL-based
NAS methods. Firstly, RL-based NAS usually needs to
build, train, and evaluate various neural architectures individually from scratch, which is extremely time-consuming.
A common technique to reduce such search costs in NAS
for CNNs is parameter sharing (Pham et al. 2018). However, Zhou et al. (2019) points out that the parameter sharing
mechanism for CNNs is unstable for heterogeneous GNNs

Relying on the diverse graph convolution operations that have
emerged in recent years, graph neural networks (GNNs) are
shown to be powerful to deal with high-dimensional nonEuclidean domains, such as social networks or citation networks. Despite the tremendous human efforts been taken
to explore new graph convolution operations, there are a
few attempts to automatically search operations in GNNs.
The search space of GNNs is significantly larger than that
of CNNs, because of diverse components in the messagepassing of GNNs. This, therefore, prevents the straightforward application of classical NAS methods for GNNs. In this
work, we propose a novel dynamic one-shot search space
for multi-branch neural architectures of GNNs. The dynamic
search space maintains a subset of the large search space
along with a set of importance weights for operation candidates in the subset as the architecture parameters. After each
iteration, the subset is pruned by removing candidates with
low importance weights and is expanded with new operations.
The dynamic subsets of operation candidates are not uniform
but is individual for each edge in the computation graph of
the neural architecture, which can ensure the diversity of operations in the final architecture is as competitive as direct
search in the large search space. Our experiments of semisupervised and supervised node classification on citation networks, including Cora, Citeseer, and Pubmed, demonstrate
that our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art manually designed architectures and reaches competitive performance to existing GNN NAS approaches with up to 10 times
of speedup.

Introduction
Although standard deep feature learning methods, e.g. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), are successful in tackling grid-like structures (LeCun et al. 1998; Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), such as images, videos, and
voices, they fail to learn features on high-dimensional nonEuclidean domains, such as molecular structures, social networks, and citation networks, which are typically described
by graph structures. To learn graph features from such domains, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Gori, Monfardini,
and Scarselli 2005; Scarselli et al. 2008) have emerged. In
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8510

