The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Semantic Consistency Networks for 3D Object Detection
Wenwen Wei, Ping Wei∗ , Nanning Zheng
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
wwwei@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn, nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting 3D objects from point clouds is a significant yet
challenging issue in many applications. While most existing
approaches seek to leverage geometric information of point
clouds, few studies accommodate the inherent semantic characteristics of each point and the consistency between the geometric and semantic cues. In this work, we propose a novel
semantic consistency network (SCNet) driven by a natural
principle: the class of a predicted 3D bounding box should
be consistent with the classes of all the points inside this box.
Specifically, our SCNet consists of a feature extraction structure, a detection decision structure, and a semantic segmentation structure. In inference, the feature extraction and the
detection decision structures are used to detect 3D objects. In
training, the semantic segmentation structure is jointly trained
with the other two structures to produce more robust and
applicative model parameters. A novel semantic consistency
loss is proposed to regulate the output 3D object boxes and
the segmented points to boost the performance. Our model is
evaluated on two challenging datasets and achieves comparable results to the state-of-the-art methods.

Bed
Background

(a) Input point cloud

(b) High consistency

(c) Class inconsistency

(d) Location inconsistency

Figure 1: Illustration of the consistency between a 3D object
box and the corresponding points inside. It is natural that
the class of a correctly predicted bounding box should be
consistent with the classes of all the points inside. (a) Input
point clouds with an object bed to be detected. (b) High consistency between a bounding box and the points inside. (c)
Class inconsistency. (d) Location inconsistency.

Introduction
Detecting 3D objects from point clouds is a significant issue in numerous applications, such as autonomous driving,
domestic robots, and augmented reality. Compared with 2D
images, 3D point clouds provide more reliable geometric information. However, point clouds are usually sparse, irregular, and lacking in texture information, which makes 3D
object detection a challenging problem.
For the decent effectiveness and accessibility, neural network models have been widely used in 3D object detection, such as DSS (Song and Xiao 2016), 3DSIS (Hou,
Dai, and Niessner 2019), VoxelNet (Zhou and Tuzel 2018),
MV3D (Chen et al. 2017), BirdNet (Beltrán et al. 2018),
PointNet (Qi et al. 2017a) , and VoteNet (Qi et al. 2019).
While these studies have made remarkable progress, most of
them mainly pay attention to the geometric properties (e.g.
center, edge, and corner) of point clouds but neglect the semantic characteristics of each point and the inherent consistency between geometric and semantic cues. These factors
limit the improvement of object detection performance.

In fact, 3D object detection is closely related to semantic segmentation of point clouds since a 3D box’s geometric
attributes (size and location) and it’s class are almost determined by the points inside the box. The more consistent the
3D box’s semantic label and the points’ labels inside the 3D
box, the more accurate the 3D box is, as shown in Fig. 1
(b). On the other hand, the inconsistency, whether geometric
or semantic, between the 3D box and the 3D points would
mean incorrect 3D object detection, as shown in Fig. 1 (c)
and (d). This phenomenon suggests that if a 3D object detection model was jointly trained with a semantic segmentation
model and supervised by the consistency mechanism, the 3D
object detection performance would be improved.
Inspired by this idea, in this paper, we propose a novel
semantic consistency network (SCNet) for 3D object detection. This network contains three major parts: a feature ex-

∗

Ping Wei is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2861

