The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Humor Knowledge Enriched Transformer for
Understanding Multimodal Humor
Md Kamrul Hasan1 , Sangwu Lee 1 , Wasifur Rahman 1 , Amir Zadeh 2 ,
Rada Mihalcea 3 , Louis-Philippe Morency 2 , Ehsan Hoque 1
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, USA,
2
Language Technologies Institute, CMU, USA,
3
Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, USA
mhasan8@cs.rochester.edu, slee232@u.rochester.edu, echowdh2@ur.rochester.edu, abagherz@cs.cmu.edu,
mihalcea@umich.edu, morency@cs.cmu.edu, mehoque@cs.rochester.edu
Abstract

opportune moment, introduce a sudden twist, funny gesture or sarcastic tone to deviate from the expectation of the
story (Ramachandran 1998). Humans can naturally process
all these information subconsciously. However, building an
algorithm that can potentially do the same requires appropriate integration of all these disparate sources of information.
We propose to model humor centric features by capturing the diversity of meanings and the sentiment expressed
in each word using ConceptNet (Speer, Chin, and Havasi
2017) and the NRC VAD (Mohammad 2018) lexicon respectively. We also capture modality specific nuances for
language, acoustic, vision, and humor centric features separately. To represent the language modality, we fine-tune a
pre-trained Albert model (Lan et al. 2019). For other modalities, we train Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017) based encoders from scratch. We enrich the language modality with
humor-centric features, and then capture the cross-modality
interactions using a Bimodal Cross Attention Layer to build
a singular representation of a data instance. Since modalities often carry both complementary and supplementary information, it is crucial to model them jointly to capture
their underlying interactions. During all these phases, we
model the punchline in light of the context so that we can
accurately capture the inter-dependency between them. We
call our model Humor Knowledge enriched Transformer
(HKT). The main contributions of our paper are:

Recognizing humor from a video utterance requires understanding the verbal and non-verbal components as well as
incorporating the appropriate context and external knowledge. In this paper, we propose Humor Knowledge enriched
Transformer (HKT) that can capture the gist of a multimodal
humorous expression by integrating the preceding context
and external knowledge. We incorporate humor centric external knowledge into the model by capturing the ambiguity and sentiment present in the language. We encode all the
language, acoustic, vision, and humor centric features separately using Transformer based encoders, followed by a cross
attention layer to exchange information among them. Our
model achieves 77.36% and 79.41% accuracy in humorous
punchline detection on UR-FUNNY and MUStaRD datasets
– achieving a new state-of-the-art on both datasets with the
margin of 4.93% and 2.94% respectively. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that our model can capture interpretable, humorinducing patterns from all modalities.

Introduction
Ever wondered the difficulty associated for a computer algorithm to recognize the punchline of a joke? People who
are funny tend to be creative as well. They experiment
with words (language), gestures (vision), prosody (acoustic)
and their (mis)alignments to build up a story while crossreferencing multiple sources and appropriately delivering
the punchline. It is an important communication skill that
removes barriers in conversations, builds trust (Vartabedian
and Vartabedian 1993) and creates positive impact on mental
health (Lefcourt and Martin 2012). Humor has various styles
like sarcasm, exaggeration, irony, satire etc. Understanding
humor in everyday communication can enable machines to
adapt its behavior seamlessly while interacting with the humans, leading to a smooth and enriched user experience.
A humorous punchline is often built around background
context and external commonsense knowledge. Speakers deliberately use ambiguous and sentiment evoking words to
prime the audience to elicit a delightful laughter. They build
up expectations in the minds of their audiences and at the

• We derive humor centric features (HCF) at word level by
incorporating several humor theories and common sense
knowledge.
• We propose HKT – a transformer based model that learns
to represent a punchline in light of the background context. The model has modality specific encoders for attending to each modality and a Bimodal Cross Attention Layer
to jointly represent pairs of modality groups effectively.
• The HKT model outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines on two different multimodal datasets of humor
(Hasan et al. 2019) and sarcasm (Castro et al. 2019) detection. We perform extensive experiments to demonstrate
that humor centric features, background context and cues
from all three modalities are important to understand the
humor.

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12972

