The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Few-Shot Lifelong Learning
Pratik Mazumder* 1 , Pravendra Singh∗2 , Piyush Rai1
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kanpur, India
2
Independent Researcher, India
pratikm@cse.iitk.ac.in, pravendra1988@gmail.com, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in

Abstract

2018). New sets of classes may become available incrementally. Therefore, the model has to perform lifelong/continual
learning in order to perform well in such settings. The lifelong learning problem generally involves training a model
on a sequence of disjoint sets of classes (task) and learning a
joint classifier for all the encountered classes. This setting is
also known as the class-incremental setting of lifelong learning (He et al. 2018; Rebuffi et al. 2017; Castro et al. 2018).
Another simpler setting, known as the task-incremental setting, involves learning disjoint classifiers for each task.
In this paper, we proposed a framework for the few-shot
class-incremental learning (FSCIL) problem. The incremental nature of training makes the few-shot learning (FSL)
problem even more challenging. On the other hand, humans
can continuously learn new categories from very few samples of data. Therefore, to achieve human-like intelligence,
we need to equip deep learning models with the ability to
deal with the few-shot class-incremental learning problem.
Training the entire network on classes with very few samples will result in overfitting, which will hamper the network’s performance on test data. Additionally, since the
model will not have access to old classes when new classes
become available for training, the model will suffer from
catastrophic forgetting (French 1999) of the old classes.
Therefore, in order to solve the FSCIL problem, we have
to address the two issues of overfitting and catastrophic forgetting simultaneuously, which makes it even harder.
A common approach of preventing catastrophic forgetting is to ensure that, while training on new classes, the
model’s output logits corresponding to the older classes remain unchanged. To achieve this, many methods (Rebuffi
et al. 2017; Saihui et al. 2018; Hou et al. 2019; Castro et al.
2018) use a knowledge distillation loss (Hinton, Vinyals, and
Dean 2015). The distillation loss can be computed on a few
“replay”-ed samples from the old classes. However, the distillation loss is generally biased towards classes with more
samples and the new classes. Recently, the authors in (Tao
et al. 2020) proposed a method TOPIC to solve the few-shot
class-incremental learning problem, using a cognition-based
knowledge representation technique. TOPIC uses a neural
gas (NG) network (Thomas and Klaus 1991; Fritzke 1995)
to model the topology of feature space. While training on
new classes, it keeps the topology of NG stable and pushes
the samples of new classes to their respective NG node to

Many real-world classification problems often have classes
with very few labeled training samples. Moreover, all possible classes may not be initially available for training, and may
be given incrementally. Deep learning models need to deal
with this two-fold problem in order to perform well in reallife situations. In this paper, we propose a novel Few-Shot
Lifelong Learning (FSLL) method that enables deep learning models to perform lifelong/continual learning on few-shot
data. Our method selects very few parameters from the model
for training every new set of classes instead of training the full
model. This helps in preventing overfitting. We choose the
few parameters from the model in such a way that only the
currently unimportant parameters get selected. By keeping
the important parameters in the model intact, our approach
minimizes catastrophic forgetting. Furthermore, we minimize
the cosine similarity between the new and the old class prototypes in order to maximize their separation, thereby improving the classification performance. We also show that integrating our method with self-supervision improves the model
performance significantly. We experimentally show that our
method significantly outperforms existing methods on the
miniImageNet, CIFAR-100, and CUB-200 datasets. Specifically, we outperform the state-of-the-art method by an absolute margin of 19.27% for the CUB dataset.

Introduction
Deep learning models have successfully matched human beings in many real-world problems. As a result, the number
and diversity of applications of deep learning are increasing
at a rapid rate. However, deep learning models require training on a large amount of labeled data. Labeled data is not
always available for many real-world problems, and manually labeling data is a costly and time-consuming process.
Therefore, recent works have investigated few-shot learning
methods (Snell, Swersky, and Zemel 2017; Sung et al. 2018;
Finn, Abbeel, and Levine 2017), which involve a specialized training of models to help them perform well even for
classes with very few training samples.
Another common characteristic of real-world problems
is that all the training data may not be available initially
(Rebuffi et al. 2017; Li and Hoiem 2018; Castro et al.
* Equal contribution.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2337

