The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Elastic Consistency: A Practical Consistency Model
for Distributed Stochastic Gradient Descent
Giorgi Nadiradze,1 Ilia Markov, 1 Bapi Chatterjee, 1 Vyacheslav Kungurtsev, 2 Dan Alistarh 1
1
IST Austria
Czech Technical University in Prague
giorgi.nadiradze@ist.ac.at, ilia.markov@ist.ac.at, bapi.chatterjee@ist.ac.at, vyacheslav.kungurtsev@fel.cvut.cz,
dan.alistarh@ist.ac.at
2

Abstract

non-convex case, it will converge towards a point of zero
gradient (Ghadimi and Lan 2013). In supervised learning, f
is usually the total error of a given parameter ~x on a given
dataset D. For each sample s in D, the classification error is
encoded viaP
the loss `(s, ~x). Training minimizes the function
1
f (~x) = m
x), where m is the size of the dataset,
s∈D `(s, ~
e is an
and the gradient at a randomly chosen datapoint G
unbiased estimator of ∇f .
Due to the size of datasets, it is common to distribute the
optimization process across multiple processors. A standard
way of parallelizing SGD is to process a batch of samples in
parallel, dividing the computation of gradient updates among
processors. Assume for simplicity that each processor is allotted one sample, whose corresponding gradient it computes
with respect to the current parameter ~xt . Processors then sum
their stochastic gradients, and update their local parameters
by the resulting sum, leading to the following global iteration:

One key element behind the progress of machine learning in
recent years has been the ability to train machine learning
models in large-scale distributed shared-memory and messagepassing environments. Most of these models are trained employing variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) based
optimization. In this paper, we introduce a general consistency
condition covering communication-reduced and asynchronous
distributed SGD implementations. Our framework, called elastic consistency, decouples the system-specific aspects of the
implementation from the SGD convergence requirements, giving a general way to obtain convergence bounds for a wide
variety of distributed SGD methods used in practice. Elastic consistency can be used to re-derive or improve several
previous convergence bounds in message-passing and sharedmemory settings, but also to analyze new models and distribution schemes. In particular, we propose and analyze a new
synchronization-avoiding scheme for distributed SGD, and
show that it can be used to efficiently train deep convolutional
models for image classification.

p

~xt+1 = ~xt −

Introduction

(2)

e i is the stochastic gradient obtained at the processor i
where G
at the given step, and p is the batch size, equal to the number
of processors. Since this sum is the same at every processor,
this procedure yields the same, perfectly consistent, parameter at each processor at the end of every parallel iteration. The
Pp e i
average (1/p) i=1 G
(~xt ) is still a stochastic gradient, but
with lower variance than gradients at single samples, which
can lead to better convergence (Bubeck et al. 2015). Since
samples are now processed in parallel, the number of samples
processed per second should in theory be multiplied by p.
However, in practice, maintaining perfect consistency of
the parameter ~xt can negate the benefits of parallelization.
Keeping the parameters perfectly consistent has a communication cost: since the size of gradient updates is linear in
the size of the parameter, the resulting communication may
easily become a system bottleneck for models with millions
of parameters (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; Alistarh et al. 2017). Consistency also induces a synchronization
cost, since processors need to synchronize in a barrier-like
fashion upon each iteration update, which can occur every
few milliseconds. For this reason, there have been several proposals for relaxing the consistency requirements of SGD-like
iterations, under various system constraints. These proposals

Machine learning models can match or surpass humans on
specialized tasks such as image classification (Krizhevsky,
Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016), speech recognition (Seide et al. 2014), or complex games (Silver et al. 2016).
One key tool behind this progress is the stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) family of methods (Robbins and Monro 1951),
which are by and large the method of choice for training largescale machine learning models. Essentially, SGD can serve
to minimize a d-dimensional function f : Rd → R, assumed
to be differentiable. We commonly assume that we are given
access to (possibly noisy) gradients of this function, denoted
e Sequential SGD will start at a randomly chosen point
by G.
~x0 , say 0d , and converge towards a minimum of the function
by iterating the following procedure:
e xt )
~xt+1 = ~xt − αG(~

α X ei
G (~xt ),
p i=1

(1)

where ~xt is the current estimate of the optimum, also called
the parameter and α is the learning rate. If the function is
convex, this procedure is known to converge to the minimum of the function (Bubeck et al. 2015), whereas in the
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9037

