The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Satisfiability and Algorithms for Non-uniform Random k-SAT
Oleksii Omelchenko, Andrei A. Bulatov
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby BC, Canada
oomelche@sfu.ca, abulatov@sfu.ca

Abstract

been intensively studied for decades. Apart from algorithmic questions related to the Random SAT, much attention
has been paid to such problems as satisfiability thresholds
and the structure of the solution space. While it makes sense
to consider random instances as ‘typical’ SAT instances, in
reality it turns out that random instances tend to be much
more difficult than the instances seen in practice (Cook and
Mitchell 1996). Even rather small random formulas containing only a few hundreds variables often cannot be solved
by even the most successful SAT solvers in reasonable time,
in stark contrast with huge practical instances of millions
of variables. It is therefore an interesting research question,
what properties make practical instances amenable to SAT
solving methods.
A number of candidates have been suggested to explain
this phenomenon such as certain regularities in the instances,
low values of graph parameters associated with the instance
(say, treewidth), backdoor variables, etc. For example, it
is known that SAT solvers use restarts with great success,
while restarts help very little when solving random SAT instances. In (Li et al. 2020) they attempt to find a broad class
of SAT instances where restarts help. Another proposed condition, (Ansótegui, Bonet, and Levy 2009a,b), is the distribution of the degree (the number of occurrences) of variables
in an instance. In this paper we follow this approach and
study the Random SAT problem for a range of distributions,
as explained in detail below. Although results obtained here
and in previous research do not support the proposition that
practical problems can be thought of as instances of some
Random SAT over a nonstandard distribution, such problems seem to be of significant interest in their own rights
as they allow for representation of very diverse types of SAT
instances.
Probably the central theme in the SAT research apart from
algorithms is identifying necessary and sufficient condition
for satisfiability of formulas. Some of such conditions are
structural, e.g., so-called bicycles and contradictory paths
(Chvátal and Reed 1992; Cooper, Frieze, and Sorkin 2007)
determining the satisfiability of 2-CNFs (see more about that
in Section ). In the cases of Random SAT such satisfiability
conditions manifest themselves as the phenomenon of satisfiability threshold and phase transition.
One of the most widely studied distributions of random
SAT is the uniform model. To sample k-CNF formulas with

Solving Satisfiability is at the core of a wide range of applications from Knowledge Representation to Logic Programming
to Software and Hardware Verification. One of the models of
Satisfiability, the Random Satisfiability problem, has received
much attention in the literature both, as a useful benchmark
for SAT solvers, and as an exciting mathematical object. In
this paper we tackle a somewhat nonstandard type of Random Satisfiability, the one where instances are not chosen
uniformly from a certain class of instances, but rather from
a certain nontrivial distribution. More precisely, we use socalled Configuration Model, in which we start with a distribution of degrees (the number of occurrences) of a variable,
sample the degree of each variable and then generate a random instance with the prescribed degrees. It has been proposed previously that by properly selecting the starting distribution (to be, say, power law or lognorm) one can approximate at least some aspect of ‘industrial’ instances of SAT.
Here we suggest an algorithm that solves such problems for a
wide range of degree distributions and obtain a necessary and
a sufficient condition for the satisfiability of such formulas.

Introduction
The Satisfiability (SAT) problem is one of the classical and
most useful in practice computational problems. Solving
Satisfiability is at the core of a wide range of applications
from Knowledge Representation to Logic Programming to
Software and Hardware Verification. Although NP-complete
in general, SAT proved to be solvable in reasonable time
in a great number of applications. SAT solvers have seen a
great deal of progress over the last 3-4 decades. A number of
standard methods such as DPLL (Davis and Putnam 1960;
Davis, Logemann, and Loveland 1962), and also more advanced heuristics such as conflict analysis (Marques-Silva
and Sakallah 1999), VSIDS heuristics (Marques-Silva and
Sakallah 1999; Moskewicz et al. 2001), and others (Jarvisalo
and Biere 2012; Eén and Biere 2005) have allowed for creation of solvers capable of solving industrial scale instances
of SAT, which nowadays may include millions of variables
and clauses. Such solvers have become reliable tools in solving a wide variety of real-world computational problems.
Random SAT and its restriction, Random k-SAT, are often
seen as a model of ‘typical case’ instances of SAT, and have
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3886

