The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Joint Incentive Optimization of Customer and Merchant
in Mobile Payment Marketing
Li Yu∗ , Zhengwei Wu∗ , Tianchi Cai, Ziqi Liu,
Zhiqiang Zhang, Lihong Gu, Xiaodong Zeng, Jinjie Gu
Ant Group
{jinli.yl,zejun.wzw,tianchi.ctc,ziqiliu,lingyao.zzq,lihong.glh,xiaodong.zxd,jinjie.gujj}@antgroup.com

Abstract
In the mobile Internet era, mobile payment service becomes
the foundation of inclusive finance, which brings convenience
and security to people. Various marketing strategies are designed to encourage mobile payment activities by allocating
incentives such as coupons or commissions to customers or
merchants. We summary two significant issues. First, there
is a phenomenon of mutual influence between merchants
and customers, i.e., bipartite influence issue, thus making the
independent optimization of customers and merchants nonoptimal. Second, the redemptions of coupons are partially observed, as we can only observe that the customer redeems the
coupon or not at a specific incentive value, but cannot observe
that at other incentive value, i.e., data censorship issue. In this
paper, we propose a novel joint incentive optimization framework to address the above two issues. We propose to use a
graph neural network to represent customers and merchants
jointly by modeling the underlying bipartite influences. We
then formulate the response model under the hazard regression setting and model the hazard rate with a piecewise nonlinear function to capture the changes of responses to different incentive values. Finally, we propose a linear programming method to allocate approximated optimal incentive values to customers and merchants in real-time. Extensive offline
and online experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed approach.

1. Scan the QR-code.
2. Pay with Alipay.

4. Award Commissions.

3. Get shared incentives.

Figure 1: An illustration of the marketing strategy.

merchants to accept mobile payment services by offering
them incentives (e.g., coupons, commissions, bonus) under
specific budget constraints.
Take an example of a marketing strategy at Alipay and
Wechat Pay. We illustrate the overall marketing campaign in
Figure 1. Each merchant is assigned with a unique incentive
QR Code and is encouraged to ask their customers to scan
so that the customer can get a certain amount of incentive
(coupon). Each customer can redeem the coupon by making
proper payment, and the merchant who shares the incentive
QR Code is awarded an amount of incentive (commission).
With the incentives propagated and redeemed under such a
mechanism, the more payments customers can accomplish,
the more coupons customers can redeem, and the more commissions merchants can gain.
In practice, people may be insensitive or sensitive to incentives, so that incentive optimization of customers and
merchants is the key to maximizing mobile payment activities. For instance, the response (i.e., the probability of redeem the coupon) should remain unchanged for customers
with limited interest, no matter their incentives. For merchants with potential enthusiasm or abilities, the more commissions they can get, the more customers they can attract
to scan the QR Code.
Previous works have studied various methods (Boutilier
and Lu 2016; Beheshti-Kashi et al. 2015) for incentive optimization under a limited budget in the marketing domain.
Ito et al. (2017) solved price optimization by first forecasting
the relationships between sales and prices. Zhao et al. (2019)
proposed a general online budget allocation framework consisting of two components: forecasting models and decision
making. However, existing methods ignore the phenomenon
of mutual influence between merchants and customers, i.e.,

Introduction
Inclusive finance, which is first mentioned by the United Nations in the early 2000s, is defined as the availability and
equality of opportunities to access financial services. Recently, with the rapid development of mobile internet, the
idea of inclusive finance is gaining significant ground, helping more than a billion people access financial services with
just a mobile phone. In the mobile Internet era, mobile payment service becomes the foundation of inclusive finance,
since payment is one of the most basic financial services.
However, there still exists a large number of people who
barely use mobile payments because of unaccustomedness
or worries. To encourage mobile payment activities, one effective marketing strategy is to motivate both customers and
∗
First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this
work.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15000

