The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Fair and Efficient Allocations under Subadditive Valuations
Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury 1 , Jugal Garg 2 , Ruta Mehta 2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
braycha@mpi-inf.mpg.de, {jugal, rutameht}@illinois.edu

Abstract

Nisan 2006). Furthermore, they strictly contain submodular functions1 , which capture the notion of diminishing
marginal returns.
Among various choices, envy-freeness is the most natural fairness concept, where no agent i envies another
agent j’s bundle, i.e., partition of goods into n bundles
X1 , X2 , . . . , Xn so that for all agents i and j, we have
vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj ). However, envy-free allocation do not always exist, e.g., consider allocating a single valuable good
among two agents. Its mild relaxation envy-freeness up to
any good (EFX) (Caragiannis et al. 2016) is arguably the
most compelling notion of fairness in discrete setting, where
no agent envies other’s allocation after the removal of any
good, i.e., for all agents i and j, we have vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj \
{g}) for all g ∈ Xj . While it is not known whether an EFX
allocation always exists or not beyond the simple case of
two agents under subadditive valuations, the following relaxations exist:

We study the problem of allocating a set of indivisible goods
among agents with subadditive valuations in a fair and efficient manner. Envy-Freeness up to any good (EFX) is the
most compelling notion of fairness in the context of indivisible goods. Although the existence of EFX is not known beyond the simple case of two agents with subadditive valuations, some good approximations of EFX are known to exist,
namely 12 -EFX allocation and EFX allocations with bounded
charity.
Nash welfare (the geometric mean of agents’ valuations) is
one of the most commonly used measures of efficiency. In
case of additive valuations, an allocation that maximizes Nash
welfare also satisfies fairness properties like Envy-Free up to
one good (EF1). Although there is substantial work on approximating Nash welfare when agents have additive valuations, very little is known when agents have subadditive valuations. In this paper, we design a polynomial-time algorithm
that outputs an allocation that satisfies either of the two approximations of EFX as well as achieves an O(n) approximation to the Nash welfare. Our result also improves the current best-known approximation of O(n log n) and O(m) to
Nash welfare when agents have submodular and subadditive
valuations, respectively.
Furthermore, our technique also gives an O(n) approximation to a family of welfare measures, p-mean of valuations for
p ∈ (−∞, 1], thereby also matching asymptotically the current best approximation ratio for special cases like p = −∞
while also retaining the remarkable fairness properties.

• 21 -EFX allocation X = hX1 , X2 , . . . , Xn i where
vi (Xi ) ≥ 21 · vi (Xj \ {g}), for all g ∈ Xj (Plaut and
Roughgarden 2018). In this paper we will be referring to
a relaxed version of 12 -EFX namely, ( 12 − ε)-EFX allocation where vi (Xi ) ≥ ( 21 −ε)·vi (Xj \{g}) for all g ∈ Xj .
A ( 21 − ε)-EFX allocation can also be computed in polynomial time when agents have subadditive valuations.
• EFX allocation with bounded charity X
=
hX1 , X2 , . . . , Xn i where we do not allocate a set P
of goods (set P is donated to charity) where |P | < n
and vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (P ), for all i ∈ [n] and the partial
allocation X is EFX (Chaudhury et al. 2020). There is
also a polynomial time algorithm to find an (1 − ε)-EFX
allocation with bounded charity for general valuations for
any ε > 0 (Chaudhury et al. 2019)2 .

Introduction
Discrete fair division of resources is a fundamental problem in various multi-agent settings, where the goal is to
partition a set M of m indivisible goods among n agents
in a fair and efficient manner. Each agent i has a valuation function vi : 2M → R≥0 that quantifies the amount
of utility i derives from every subset of goods. We assume
that vi ’s are monotone, i.e., vi (A) ≤ vi (A ∪ {g}) for all
g ∈ M , normalized i.e., vi (∅) = 0 and subadditive, i.e.,
vi (A ∪ B) ≤ vi (A) + vi (B), for all A, B ⊆ M . Subadditive
functions naturally arise in practice because they capture the
notion of complement-freeness (Lehmann, Lehmann, and

Another popular (and stronger) relaxation is envyfreeness up to one good (EF1) (Budish 2011), where no
agent envies other’s allocation after the removal of some
good from the other’s bundle, i.e., vi (Xi ) ≥ vi (Xj \ {g}),
for some g ∈ Xj . Clearly, EFX implies EF1. Although
1

A function v(.) is submodular if v(A) + v(B) ≥ v(A ∪ B) +
v(A ∩ B), ∀A, B ⊆ M .
2
This is an updated version of the paper which goes beyond the
preliminary version published in SODA 2020

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5269

