The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

The Tractability of SHAP-Score-Based Explanations over Deterministic and
Decomposable Boolean Circuits
Marcelo Arenas1,2,3 , Pablo Barceló2,3 , Leopoldo Bertossi4,3 , Mikaël Monet5
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Universidad Católica de Chile
Institute for Mathematical and Computational Engineering, Universidad Católica de Chile
3
IMFD Chile
4
Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, FIC, Chile
5
Univ. Lille, Inria, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
marenas@ing.puc.cl, pbarcelo@uc.cl, leopoldo.bertossi@uai.cl, mikael.monet@inria.fr
Abstract

One natural way of providing local explanations for classification models consists in assigning numerical scores to
the feature values of an entity that has gone through the classification process. Intuitively, the higher the score of a feature value, the more relevant it should be considered. It is in
this context that the SHAP-score has been introduced (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Lundberg et al. 2020). This recent notion has rapidly gained attention and is becoming influential.
There are two properties of the SHAP-score that support its
rapid adoption. First, its definition is quite general and can
be applied to any kind of classification model. Second, the
definition of the SHAP-score is grounded on the well-known
Shapley value (Shapley 1953; Roth 1988), that has already
been used successfully in several domains of computer science; see, e.g., (Hunter and Konieczny 2010; Livshits et al.
2020; Michalak et al. 2013; Cesari et al. 2018). Thus, SHAPscores have a clear, intuitive, combinatorial meaning, and
inherit all the desirable properties of the Shapley value.
For a given classifier M , entity e and feature x,
the SHAP-score SHAP(M, e, x) intuitively represents the
importance of the feature value e(x) to the classification result M (e). In its general formulation, SHAP(M, e, x) is a
weighted average of differences of expected values of the
outcomes (c.f. Section 2 for its formal definition). Unfortunately, computing quantities that are based on the notion
of Shapley value is in general intractable. Indeed, in many
scenarios the computation turns out to be #P-hard (Faigle
and Kern 1992; Deng and Papadimitriou 1994; Livshits et al.
2020; Bertossi et al. 2020), which makes the notion difficult
to use – if not impossible – for practical purposes (Arora and
Barak 2009). Therefore, a natural question is: For what kinds
of classification models the computation of the SHAP-score
can be done efficiently? This is the subject of this paper.
In this work, we focus on classifiers working with binary
feature values (i.e., propositional features that can take the
values 0 or 1), and that return 1 (accept) or 0 (reject) for
each entity. We will call these Boolean classifiers. The second assumption that we make is that the underlying probability distribution on the population of entities is what we
call a product distribution, where each binary feature x has
a probability p(x) of being equal to 1, independently of the
other features. We note here that the restriction to binary in-

Scores based on Shapley values are widely used for providing explanations to classification results over machine learning models. A prime example of this is the influential SHAPscore, a version of the Shapley value that can help explain
the result of a learned model on a specific entity by assigning
a score to every feature. While in general computing Shapley values is a computationally intractable problem, it has recently been claimed that the SHAP-score can be computed in
polynomial time over the class of decision trees. In this paper,
we provide a proof of a stronger result over Boolean models:
the SHAP-score can be computed in polynomial time over
deterministic and decomposable Boolean circuits. Such circuits, also known as tractable Boolean circuits, generalize a
wide range of Boolean circuits and binary decision diagrams
classes, including binary decision trees, Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams (OBDDs) and Free Binary Decision Diagrams (FBDDs). We also establish the computational limits
of the notion of SHAP-score by observing that, under a mild
condition, computing it over a class of Boolean models is always polynomially as hard as the model counting problem
for that class. This implies that both determinism and decomposability are essential properties for the circuits that we consider, as removing one or the other renders the problem of
computing the SHAP-score intractable (namely, #P-hard).

1

Introduction

Explainable artificial intelligence has become an active area
of research. Central to it is the observation that artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) models cannot
always be blindly applied without being able to interpret and
explain their results. For example, when someone applies for
a loan and sees their application rejected by an algorithmic
decision-making system, the system should be able to provide an explanation for that decision. Explanations can be
global – focusing on the general input/output relation of the
model –, or local – focusing on how features affect the decision of the model for a specific input. Recent literature has
strengthened the importance of the latter by showing their
ability to provide explanations that are often overlooked by
global explanations (Molnar 2020).
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6670

