The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Extending Multi-Sense Word Embedding to Phrases and Sentences
for Unsupervised Semantic Applications
Haw-Shiuan Chang, Amol Agrawal, Andrew McCallum
CICS, University of Massachusetts Amherst
{hschang,amolagrawal,mccallum}@cs.umass.edu

The distribution of all possible co-occurring words of real property (input phrase)
in a pre-trained word embedding space

Abstract
Most unsupervised NLP models represent each word with a
single point or single region in semantic space, while the existing multi-sense word embeddings cannot represent longer
word sequences like phrases or sentences. We propose a
novel embedding method for a text sequence (a phrase or a
sentence) where each sequence is represented by a distinct
set of multi-mode codebook embeddings to capture different
semantic facets of its meaning. The codebook embeddings
can be viewed as the cluster centers which summarize the
distribution of possibly co-occurring words in a pre-trained
word embedding space. We introduce an end-to-end trainable neural model that directly predicts the set of cluster centers from the input text sequence during test time. Our experiments show that the per-sentence codebook embeddings
significantly improve the performances in unsupervised sentence similarity and extractive summarization benchmarks.
In phrase similarity experiments, we discover that the multifacet embeddings provide an interpretable semantic representation but do not outperform the single-facet baseline.

save
acquired
tax
dollars

Classic multi-sense approach: During testing,
clustering co-occurring words into centers

organization
houses

Our approach: During training, minimize
the distance between the predicted cluster
centers and the co-occurring words.
During testing, directly predict the centers

Forward pass:
Predict cluster centers

building

company

violation

necessary
Backward pass:
Update the model
using backdrop

belief

Our Transformer Model

The company acquired the real property to save tax .
Co-occurring words

Input Phrase

Figure 1: The input phrase real property is represented by
K = 5 cluster centers. The previous work discovers the
multiple senses by clustering the embedding of observed cooccurring words. Instead, our compositional model learns to
predict the embeddings of cluster centers from the sequence
of words in the input phrase so as to reconstruct the (unseen)
co-occurring distribution well.

Introduction
Collecting manually labeled data is an expensive and tedious
process for new or low-resource NLP applications. Many of
these applications require the text similarity measurement
based on the text representation learned from the raw text
without any supervision. Examples of the representation include word embedding like Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013)
or GloVe (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), sentence
embeddings like skip-thoughts (Kiros et al. 2015), contextualized word embedding like ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) and
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) without fine-tuning.
The existing work often represents a word sequence (e.g.,
a sentence or a phrase) as a single embedding. However,
when squeezing all the information into a single embedding
(e.g., by averaging the word embeddings or using CLS embedding in BERT), the representation might lose some important information of different facets in the sequence.
Inspired by the multi-sense word embeddings (Lau et al.
2012; Neelakantan et al. 2014; Athiwaratkun and Wilson
2017; Singh et al. 2020), we propose a multi-facet representation that characterizes a phrase or a sentence as a fixed

number of embeddings, where each embedding is a clustering center of the words co-occurring with the input word
sequence.
In this work, a facet refers to a mode of the co-occurring
word distribution, which might be multimodal. For example,
the multi-facet representation of real property is illustrated
in Figure 1. Real property can be observed in legal documents where it usually means real estate, while real property
can also mean a true characteristic in philosophic discussions. The previous unsupervised multi-sense embeddings
discover those senses by clustering the observed neighboring words (e.g., acquired, save, and tax) and an important
facet, a mode with high probability, could be represented by
several close cluster centers. Notice that the approaches need
to solve a distinct local clustering problem for each phrase
in contrast with the topic modeling like LDA (Blei, Ng, and
Jordan 2003), which clusters all the words in the corpus into
a global set of topics.

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6956

