The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Artificial Dummies for Urban Dataset Augmentation
Antonı́n Vobecký1 , David Hurych2 , Michal Uřičář, Patrick Pérez2 , Josef Sivic1
1

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague
2
valeo.ai
antonin.vobecky@cvut.cz, david.hurych@valeo.com, uricar.michal@gmail.com, patrick.perez@valeo.com,
josef.sivic@cvut.cz

Abstract

dress these requirements and enable a controlled augmentation of datasets for pedestrian detection in urban settings for
automotive applications. While we focus here only on training dataset augmentation as a first, crucial step, the approach
also aims at generating data for the system validation. Validation on such augmented data could complement track tests
with dummy dolls of unrealistic appearance, pose, and motion, which are the current industry standard (Fig. 1). By
analogy, we named our system DummyNet after this iconic
doll that replaces real humans.
The key challenge in automotive dataset augmentation is
to enable sufficient control over the generated distributions
via input parameters that describe important corner cases
and missing situations. In this work, we take a step in that direction and develop a method for controlled augmentation of
person datasets, where people with adjustable pose and appearance are synthesized into real urban backgrounds in various conditions. This is achieved by a new Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) architecture, coined DummyNet,
which takes as input the desired person pose, specified by
skeleton keypoints, the desired appearance, specified by an
input image, and a target background scene. See the image
synthesis diagram in Fig. 2. The output of DummyNet is the
given background scene containing the pedestrian with target pose and appearance composited into one image.
We demonstrate that augmenting training data in this way
improves person detection performance, especially in lowdata regimes where the number of real training examples
is small or when the training and target testing distributions differ (e.g., day/night). The basic assumption of matching training and testing distributions is typically not satisfied when developing real detection systems (e.g., different
country, time of day, weather, etc.). Our method allows for
adapting the model to known or estimated target (real world)
distribution via controlled augmentation of the training data.

Existing datasets for training pedestrian detectors in images
suffer from limited appearance and pose variation. The most
challenging scenarios are rarely included because they are too
difficult to capture due to safety reasons, or they are very unlikely to happen. The strict safety requirements in assisted
and autonomous driving applications call for an extra high
detection accuracy also in these rare situations. Having the
ability to generate people images in arbitrary poses, with arbitrary appearances and embedded in different background
scenes with varying illumination and weather conditions, is
a crucial component for the development and testing of such
applications. The contributions of this paper are three-fold.
First, we describe an augmentation method for the controlled
synthesis of urban scenes containing people, thus producing
rare or never-seen situations. This is achieved with a data generator (called DummyNet) with disentangled control of the
pose, the appearance, and the target background scene. Second, the proposed generator relies on novel network architecture and associated loss that takes into account the segmentation of the foreground person and its composition into the
background scene. Finally, we demonstrate that the data generated by our DummyNet improve the performance of several existing person detectors across various datasets as well
as in challenging situations, such as night-time conditions,
where only a limited amount of training data is available. In
the setup with only day-time data available, we improve the
night-time detector by 17% log-average miss rate over the
detector trained with the day-time data only.

1

Introduction

A high-quality dataset is a crucial element for every system
using statistical machine learning and should represent the
target scenarios. Usually, however, we do not have access to
such high-quality data due to limited resources for capture
and annotation or the inability to identify all the aspects of
the target use-case in advance. A key challenge is to cover all
the corner-case scenarios that might arise to train and deploy
a reliable model.
Dataset diversity is crucial for the automotive industry,
where handling highly complex situations in a wide variety
of conditions (weather, time of day, visibility, etc.) is necessary given the strict safety requirements. Our goal is to ad-

Contributions. Our contributions are three-fold: (1) we
develop an approach (DummyNet) for controlled data augmentation for person detection in automotive scenarios that
enables independent control of the person’s pose, appearance and the background scene; (2) the approach relies on
a novel architecture and associated appearance loss that
take into account the segmentation of the foreground pedestrian and its composition into the background scene. (3) we

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2692

