The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Distribution Matching for Rationalization
Yongfeng Huang2 * , Yujun Chen1 , Yulun Du1 , Zhilin Yang1
1

Recurrent AI, Beijing
Tsinghua University, Beijing
huangyf17@tsinghua.org.cn, chenyujun@rcrai.com, duyulun@rcrai.com, kimi yang@rcrai.com
2

Abstract

and the original full input text should have similar feature
and output distributions when the same classifier is applied.
By definition, rationales represent key text pieces that are
actually used for predicting the labels. The definition has
a two-folded implication. First, the rationales should have
a similar feature distribution to the input text because intermediate feature representations directly reflect how the
model processes natural language. Second, since ultimately
the probability outputs are used for classification, the rationales should have a similar output distribution to the input
text. For example, consider a review “this is a great movie”.
A well-trained sentiment classifier mainly uses the rationale
“great movie” for prediction. When the classifier is applied,
“great movie” and “this is a great movie” should have similar feature and output distributions.
However, the aforementioned prior has not been effectively leveraged in previous approaches. As a solution, we
propose a novel distribution matching approach for rationalization. In the feature space, we impose a regularization
term that minimizes the central moment discrepancy (CMD)
(Zellinger et al. 2017) between the full input features and the
rationale features. In the output space, a teacher-student distillation loss (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015) is employed
to minimize the cross entropy loss between the full input
predictions and the rationale predictions. Our approach is
a plug-and-play improvement that is applicable to different
rationalization variants.
We evaluate the proposed distribution matching approach
on widely-used rationalization benchmarks—the beer review dataset (McAuley, Leskovec, and Jurafsky 2012) and
hotel review dataset (Bao et al. 2018). We use the gametheoretic class-dependent model (Chang et al. 2019) as our
base model. Empirical results show that distribution matching substantially improves over the baseline and outperforms
all considered previous methods. It is also observed that
both feature space matching and output space matching contribute to the overall performance.
To summarize, our work makes the following four contributions:

The task of rationalization aims to extract pieces of input text
as rationales to justify neural network predictions on text classification tasks. By definition, rationales represent key text
pieces used for prediction and thus should have similar classification feature distribution compared to the original input
text. However, previous methods mainly focused on maximizing the mutual information between rationales and labels
while neglecting the relationship between rationales and input
text. To address this issue, we propose a novel rationalization method that matches the distributions of rationales and
input text in both the feature space and output space. Empirically, the proposed distribution matching approach consistently outperforms previous methods by a large margin. Our
data and code are available1 .

Introduction
In many real-world NLP applications, interpretability is an
important objective for model development because it is crucial for human users to understand, verify, and trust the
machine predictions. Among other possibilities, rationalization is a learning paradigm that extracts key text pieces as
rationales to justify and interpret model predictions (Lei,
Barzilay, and Jaakkola 2016). Specifically, Lei, Barzilay, and
Jaakkola (2016) uses a generator to selectively extract rationales from the original input, and a classifier is applied on
the rationales to predict the classification labels. This can be
viewed as a cooperative game between the generator and the
classifier to maximize the mutual information between the
rationales and the labels (Chen et al. 2018). In other words,
this is based on the desideratum that the extracted rationales
are predictive of the classification labels. Different variants of rationalization methods have been proposed under
this framework, which additionally consider other desiderata such as the dependency between labels, rationales, and
the complement of rationales (Chang et al. 2019, 2020; Yu
et al. 2019).
In this work, we argue that it is crucial to incorporate
the following desideratum into modeling—the rationales

• We analyze the rationalization framework and uncover the
issue that existing approaches neglect the relationship between rationales and input text.

* Work done during an internship at Recurrent AI
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
https://github.com/kochsnow/distribution-matchingrationality

• We propose to impose an inductive bias that rationales
13090

