The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Carbon to Diamond: An Incident Remediation Assistant System From Site
Reliability Engineers’ Conversations in Hybrid Cloud Operations
Suranjana Samanta, Ajay Gupta, Prateeti Mohapatra, Amar Prakash Azad
IBM Research, Bangalore, India
suransam@in.ibm.com, ajaygupta@in.ibm.com, pramoh01@in.ibm.com, amarazad@in.ibm.com

Abstract

do not always capture the subtle and key information used
and knowledge gained while resolving the issue. In recent
times, SREs’ discussions regarding an issue have shifted to
collaboration channels, for example, conversational channels (Calefato et al. 2020), (Stray, Moe, and Noroozi 2019).
These conversational channels contain a rich set of information exchange regarding the issue at hand, which helps in
finding the resolution of the reported issue.
This paper argues that extracting and storing useful past
knowledge from such conversations from the collaboration
channels can assist SREs to diagnose the root causes and zeroing to the specific remediation action. This paper proposes
a method to learn from SRE conversations, to enable rapid
issue resolution and build a rich database of issues, named
Issue Total View. One of the ways by which mining of such
knowledge can significantly reduce the closure time of incidents is by using information retrieval (IR) mechanisms
that matches the past conversations to a current issue. While
many research efforts have focused on the problem of general issue similarity and IR, these approaches do not generalize well to the IT operations domain, where SRE expertise is often required to determine semantic similarities. We
observed that conversational data related to IT operations
have their own set of challenges: (1) presence of hybridcloud specific terms, which are unknown to the available
pre-trained language models popularly used for various NLP
tasks and (2) semi-formal behaviour of these conversations,
which makes it important to identify the important parts of
the chat and concentrate on those for further processing.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for (i) building Issue total view database, which contains the diagnostic steps, corresponding actions and the resolutions taken to
solve the issues and creates a semi-structured way of representing the conversations for the ease of SREs for future
reference and (ii) retrieve past conversations which discuss
about a particular query issue, which can help the SREs to
check the past resolution steps taken for that particular issue.

Conversational channels are changing the landscape of hybrid cloud service management. These channels are becoming important avenues for Site Reliability Engineers (SREs)
to collaboratively work together to resolve an incident or issue. Identifying segmented conversations and extracting key
insights or artefacts from them can help engineers to improve
the efficiency of the incident remediation process by using
information retrieval mechanisms for similar incidents. However, it has been empirically observed that due to the semiformal behavior of such conversations (human language) they
are very unique in nature and also contain lot of domainspecific terms. This makes it difficult to use the standard natural language processing frameworks directly, which are popularly used in standard NLP tasks. In this paper, we build a
framework that taps into the conversational channels and uses
various learning methods to (a) understand and extract key
artefacts from conversations like diagnostic steps and resolution actions taken, and (b) present an approach to identify
past conversations about similar issues. Experimental results
on our dataset show the efficacy of our proposed method.

Introduction
In today’s hybrid cloud world, understanding why a service
fails and what incident remediation steps to perform, with
minimal downtime, are extremely challenging tasks. One of
the key roles of Site Reliability Engineers (SREs) or IT Operations engineers is to support mission-critical applications
and keep the services running. An SRE’s understanding of
an issue depends on her ability to correctly understand and
diagnose the problems from the symptoms and take the best
possible action(s) immediately to resolve the issue.
A typical issue management process begins when a critical issue is identified by monitoring systems or the reported
explicitly. The SREs analyse the IT operational data, which
include error logs, time-series metrics, and ticket records to
decide the most effective remediation actions to undertake.
Once the issue is resolved, SREs open a new ticket document
to record the resolution steps taken to resolve the problem
carried out during the investigation. It has been observed that
under time and other work pressures, SREs do not create the
ticket documents carefully, due to which these documents

Proposed Method
Figure 1 describes the framework of our proposed method.
The input to the framework is the conversation data obtained from a collaboration channel. This data contains all
the conversations together, which need to be dis-entangled.
The Conversation dis-entanglement module aims to segment

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15401

