The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

One-shot Face Reenactment Using Appearance Adaptive Normalization
Guangming Yao1∗ , Yi Yuan 1† , Tianjia Shao∗2 , Shuang Li3 , Shanqi Liu4 , Yong Liu4 , Mengmeng
Wang4 , Kun Zhou2
1
NetEase Fuxi AI Lab
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
4
Institute of Cyber-Systems and Control, Zhejiang University
2

Abstract

are utilized to modulate feature maps in the generator. In this
way, the face generator can be better aware of the appearance of the source image and effectively preserve the source
appearance.
The appearance adaptive normalization is inspired by recent adaptive normalization methods (Huang and Belongie
2017; Park et al. 2019), which perform cross-domain image
generation without retraining for a specific domain. This attribute makes adaptive normalization potentially suitable for
one-shot face reenactment, in which each identity could be
seen as a domain. However, there exists a key challenge to
apply these adaptive normalization methods to face reenactment. That is, these existing adaptive normalization methods are all designed to deal with the pixel-aligned imageto-image translation problems. For example, in (Park et al.
2019) they propose spatially-adaptive normalization for synthesizing photorealistic images given an input semantic layout. However, in the scenario of face reenactment, the source
and driving images are not pixel-aligned. Such pixel misalignment makes it difficult to optimize the adaptive normalization layers during training in existing methods. Consequently, the existing methods will yield distorted images
after reenactment, and we will show it in the experiments.
To tackle this challenge, one key insight of our work is that
instead of learning individual adaptive parameters for different adaptive normalization layers using independent architectures, we can use a unified network to learn all the adaptive parameters from the source image in a global way. The
benefit of such paradigm is, by jointly learning the adaptive
parameters, the different adaptive normalization layers can
be globally modulated rather than being modulated locally.
In this way, we can effectively optimize the adaptive normalization layers and control the feature maps of face generator to keep the source appearance. Specifically, we design
a simple but effective skip-connected network to predict the
adaptive parameters from the source image, which can explicitly promote the relations within adaptive parameters for
different adaptive normalization layers, and thus effectively
propagate the appearance information throughout the network during reenacting.
We make another key observation that, compared with
reenacting the whole faces with largely varying appearances
and expressions, reenacting the local facial components (i.e.,
eyes, nose, and mouth) is a much easier task for the network

The paper proposes a novel generative adversarial network
for one-shot face reenactment, which can animate a single
face image to a different pose-and-expression (provided by
a driving image) while keeping its original appearance. The
core of our network is a novel mechanism called appearance
adaptive normalization, which can effectively integrate the
appearance information from the input image into our face
generator by modulating the feature maps of the generator
using the learned adaptive parameters. Furthermore, we specially design a local net to reenact the local facial components (i.e., eyes, nose and mouth) first, which is a much easier task for the network to learn and can in turn provide explicit anchors to guide our face generator to learn the global
appearance and pose-and-expression. Extensive quantitative
and qualitative experiments demonstrate the significant efficacy of our model compared with prior one-shot methods.

Introduction
In this paper we seek a one-shot face reenactment network,
which can animate a single source image to a different poseand-expression (provided by a driving image) while keeping the source appearance (i.e identity). We start with the
perspective that a face image can be divided into two parts,
the pose-and-expression and the appearance, which is also
adopted by previous work (Zhang et al. 2019). In face reenactment, the transferring of pose-and-expression is relatively
easy because the training data can cover most possible poses
and expressions. The main challenge of face reenactment
is how to preserve the appearances of different identities.
This insight motivates us to design a new architecture, which
exploits a novel mechanism called the appearance adaptive
normalization, to better control the feature maps of the face
generator for the awareness of the source appearance. In
general, the appearance adaptive normalization can effectively integrate the specific appearance information from the
source image into the synthesized image, by modulating the
feature maps of the face generator. Especially, the appearance adaptive normalization learns specific adaptive parameters (i.e., mean and variance) from the source image, which
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Correspongding author
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3172

