The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Almost Linear Time Density Level Set Estimation via DBSCAN*
Hossein Esfandiari1 , Vahab Mirrokni1 , Peilin Zhong2
1

Google Research
Columbia University
{esfandiari,mirrokni}@google.com, peilin.zhong@columbia.edu
2

Abstract

Initially, Ester et al. (Ester et al. 1996) claimed that DBSCAN runs in O(n log n) time, however, Gunawan and De
Berg refuted this claim and showed that this algorithm needs
Ω(n2 ) time in the worst-case (Gunawan and de Berg 2013).
There are several attempts to improve this running time and
get closer the ideal Õ(n) worst-case running time1 . However, all of the previous results highly depend on the dimension and hence are only claimed to work well when the
dimension of the space is a small constant. For example,
in 2D it is possible to implement DBSCAN in O(n log n)
time (de Berg, Gunawan, and Roeloffzen 2017; Gunawan
and de Berg 2013). For larger dimensions the state-of-theart algorithms (Chen, Smid, and Xu 2005; Gan and Tao
2017) require O(n2−O(1/D) ) time, where D is the dimension of the space. This bound is certainly of great theoretical
value, but as D grows, it behaves similar to O(n2 ). Moreover, there are some approximation algorithms for DBSCAN
that run in O(n log n) and O(n) when the dimension is a
constant (Chen, Smid, and Xu 2005; Gan and Tao 2017).
But the running time of these algorithms explicitly depends
exponentially on the dimension, which is a drawback.
DBSCAN++ is the state-of-the-art approximation algorithm for DBSCAN that is provably faster than DBSCAN,
while interestingly, provides higher quality solutions than
DBSCAN in practice (Jang and Jiang 2018). The analysis of
DBSCAN++ is based on a standard parameter in level-set
analyses called β-regularity2 . Specifically, they show that it
2β
is possible to approximate DBSCAN in O(n2− 2β+D ) time.
In addition to this, DBSCAN++ can be used to estimate the
λ-density level set with near-optimal Hausdorff distance.
Our main result in this paper is to provide a provable Õ(n)time approximation algorithm for DBSCAN. The algorithm
has two main components: The first part is a near linear time
core point set construction based on a novel grid density
estimation method which unlike previous work avoids knearest neighbor search which is a bottleneck in previous
work. The second part is a graph construction component in
which we apply locality sensitive hashing to construct the
clusters. Moreover, our algorithm can be used to estimate the
λ-density level set with near-optimal Hausdorff distance in

In this work we focus on designing a fast algorithm for λdensity level set estimation via DBSCAN clustering. Previous work (Jiang ICML’17, and Jang and Jiang ICML’19)
shows that under some natural assumptions DBSCAN and
its variant DBSCAN++ can be used to estimate the λ-density
level set with near-optimal Hausdorff distance, i.e., with rate
e −1/(2β+D) ). However, to achieve this near-optimal rate,
O(n
the current fastest DBSCAN algorithm needs near quadratic
running time. This running time is not practical for large
datasets. Usually when we are working with large datasets
we desire linear or almost linear time algorithms. With this
motivation, in this work, we present a modified DBSCAN algorithm with near optimal Hausdorff distance for density level
e
set estimation with O(n)
running time. In our empirical study,
we show that our algorithm provides significant speedup over
the previous algorithms, while achieving comparable solution
quality.

Introduction
Density-based clustering is one of the core problems in data
science with a wide range of applications in machine learning, computer vision, and medical imaging among others.
Intuitively, in density-based clustering, we have a set of n
points in a space and we want to cluster these points by
separating the connected dense parts of the space. The celebrated DBSCAN (Ester et al. 1996) is one of the most popular
methods for density-based clustering. DBSCAN has been implemented in several data mining tool kits (Team et al. 2013;
Hall et al. 2009; Pedregosa et al. 2011; Schubert et al. 2015)
and has been successfully used in many applications.
Day after day we are collecting more data and hence have
larger datasets to deal with. To the extent that many popular
polynomial-time algorithms that we have inherited from the
past are not applicable to such massive datasets. For example,
an algorithm with a quadratic running time is infeasible when
we are dealing with millions of points, let alone hundreds of
millions of points. As a result, in the context of large scale
algorithm design, it is often desired to have an almost linear
time algorithm.
* All authors contribute equally.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
2

7349

We use Õ(f (n)) to denote O(f (n) · log f (n)).
See Assumtion 7 and the corresponding section for a definition.

