The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Spatio-Temporal Difference Descriptor for Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
Chongyang Ding,1 Kai Liu,1 Jari Korhonen,2 Evgeny Belyaev3
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
International Laboratory Computer Technologies, ITMO University
dingcy@stu.xidian.edu.cn, kailiu@mail.xidian.edu.cn, jari.t.korhonen@ieee.org, eabelyaev@itmo.ru
2

Abstract

of the graph structure of skeleton data. GCNs structure the
human skeleton as a graph whose vertices and edges represent body joints and natural connections between these body
joints, to capture the joint dependencies of spatial and temporal domains. They use the convolution operation to obtain different weights for different neighbor subsets, indicating the influence of different subsets on the current body
joint. However, these methods merely explore the spatiotemporal dependencies of body joints to model the skeleton
sequences and cannot reflect the intra-frame differences and
inter-frame dynamics information, thus lacking the ability to
identify the inherent spatio-temporal differences of human
skeletons.

In skeletal representation, intra-frame differences between
body joints, as well as inter-frame dynamics between body
skeletons contain discriminative information for action recognition. Conventional methods for modeling human skeleton
sequences generally depend on motion trajectory and body
joint dependency information, thus lacking the ability to identify the inherent differences of human skeletons. In this paper, we propose a spatio-temporal difference descriptor based
on a directional convolution architecture that enables us to
learn the spatio-temporal differences and contextual dependencies between different body joints simultaneously. The
overall model is built on a deep symmetric positive definite
(SPD) metric learning architecture designed to learn discriminative manifold features with the well-designed non-linear
mapping operation. Experiments on several action datasets
show that our proposed method achieves up to 3% accuracy
improvement over state-of-the-art methods.

Motivated by this observation, we introduce a secondorder spatio-temporal descriptor based on our proposed
directional convolution operation to address the lacking
of spatio-temporal differences. Different from GCNs, the
spatio-temporal descriptor is defined as a covariance-like descriptor extracted from the intrinsic attributes of the skeleton data, consisting of spatial difference matrix and temporal dynamic matrix. The directional convolution is first proposed in this paper to learn the joint dependencies of human skeletons. For a specific body joint, we allocate different directional weights to the neighboring joints located
in different directions to aggregate to a new joint. Thus, a
new human skeleton will be generated when the convolution
is conducted on all body joints, containing the dependency
information between adjacent joints in the original skeleton. The spatial difference matrix is introduced to learn the
unique static pattern of a skeleton, allowing us to distinguish
the current skeleton from the other skeletons to model the
intra-frame differences. In addition, the temporal dynamic
matrix is proposed to extract the temporal motion dynamics between adjacent frames for better temporal modeling.
It is computed from the joint displacement information between current frame and the next frame to model the interframe dynamics (Wang et al. 2016; Zhao, Xiong, and Lin
2018). In order to measure the joint dependency information
and spatio-temporal differences simultaneously, the spatial
difference and temporal dynamic matrices are designed to
be the aggregation of original convolutional features and
second-order statistical features extracted from the convolutional features, which are actually SPD matrices residing on
the Riemannian symmetric space. Then, a novel non-linear

Introduction
Human action recognition has become a challenging and active topic in video understanding in recent years. With the
growing popularity of depth sensors, video formats based on
three-dimensional depth maps are widely used in addition to
the two-dimensional RGB videos. Previous biological study
(Johansson 1973) suggests that human behavior can be represented as the motion of a human skeleton, which is structured as an articulated system of body parts, making it robust
to the variations of viewpoint and location. In addition, recent pose estimation algorithm (Cao et al. 2017) can extract
and gain human skeleton data from both the RGB videos and
depth maps, making it possible to design a general skeletonbased framework for human action recognition. Therefore,
skeleton-based action recognition has drawn more and more
attention in recent years.
Recently, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have
been proposed and applied in many tasks (Niepert, Ahmed,
and Kutzkov 2016; Atwood and Towsley 2016; Hamilton,
Ying, and Leskovec 2017). GCNs generalize traditional convolution operation to graphs of different structure, and it has
shown excellent performance for action recognition (Li et al.
2018; Yan, Xiong, and Lin 2018; Si et al. 2019) on account
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1227

