The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Self-Supervised Sketch-to-Image Synthesis
Bingchen Liu12 , Yizhe Zhu2 , Kunpeng Song12 , Ahmed Elgammal12
1

Playform - Artrendex Inc., USA
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
{bingchen.liu, yizhe.zhu, kungpeng.song}@rutgers.edu, elgammal@artrendex.com
2

Abstract

Sketch-to-image synthesis is one important task under
the image-to-image (i2i) translation (Isola et al. 2017; Liu,
Breuel, and Kautz 2017; Zhu et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2019)
category, which benefits a lot from recent year’s advances
in generative models (Kingma and Welling 2013; Goodfellow et al. 2014). Unlike general i2i tasks, exemplar-based
s2i is challenging in several aspects: 1) The sketch domain
contains limited information to synthesize images with rich
content; especially, real-world sketches have lines that are
randomly deformed and differ a lot from the edges in the
desired RGB-images. 2) The referential style image usually
has a big content difference to the sketch, to avoid contentinterference from the style image, the model has to disentangle the content and style information from both inputs effectively. 3) Datasets with paired sketches and RGB-images are
rare, even for unpaired sketches that are in the same content
domain as the RGB dataset are hard to collect.
Existing works mostly derive their customized attention
modules (Vaswani et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2019), which
learn to map the style cues from the referential image to the
spatial locations in the sketch, to tackle the first two challenges, and leverage a cycle-consistent (Zhu et al. 2017) or
back-tracing (Liu, Breuel, and Kautz 2017) framework to
enforce the style and content faithfulness to the respective
inputs. However, the derived attention modules and the required supporting models for consistency-checking significantly increase the training cost and limit them to work on
low resolution (2562 ) images. Moreover, due to the lack of
training data, previous methods either work around edgemaps rather than free-hand sketches or on datasets with limited samples, restricting their practicality on image domains
with more complicated style and content variance.
Aiming to break the bottleneck on datasets with reliable matched sketches and RGB-images, we propose a dedicated image domain-transfer (Gatys et al. 2016; Huang et al.
2017) model. The model synthesizes multiple paired freehand sketches for each image in large RGB datasets. Benefit from the paired data, we then show that a simple Autoencoder (AE) (Kramer 1991; Vincent et al. 2010) equipped
with self-supervision (Feng, Xu, and Tao 2019; Kolesnikov,
Zhai, and Beyer 2019; He et al. 2020) exhibits exceptional
performance in disentangling the content and style information and synthesizing faithful images. As a result, we abandon commonly-used strategies such as cycle-consistent loss

Imagining a colored realistic image from an arbitrary drawn
sketch is one of human capabilities that we eager machines
to mimic. Unlike previous methods that either require the
sketch-image pairs or utilize low-quantity detected edges as
sketches, we study the exemplar-based sketch-to-image (s2i)
synthesis task in a self-supervised learning manner, eliminating the necessity of the paired sketch data. To this end,
we first propose an unsupervised method to efficiently synthesize line-sketches for general RGB-only datasets. With
the synthetic paired-data, we then present a self-supervised
Auto-Encoder (AE) to decouple the content/style features
from sketches and RGB-images, and synthesize images both
content-faithful to the sketches and style-consistent to the
RGB-images. While prior works employ either the cycleconsistence loss or dedicated attentional modules to enforce
the content/style fidelity, we show AE’s superior performance
with pure self-supervisions. To further improve the synthesis quality in high resolution, we also leverage an adversarial
network to refine the details of synthetic images. Extensive
experiments on 10242 resolution demonstrate a new state-ofart-art performance of the proposed model on CelebA-HQ
and Wiki-Art datasets. Moreover, with the proposed sketch
generator, the model shows a promising performance on style
mixing and style transfer, which require synthesized images
being both style-consistent and semantically meaningful.

Introduction
Exemplar-based sketch-to-image (s2i) synthesis has received active studies recently (Liu, Yu, and Yu 2019; Zhang
et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2020b; Liu, Song, and Elgammal 2020)
for its great potential in assisting human creative works
(Elgammal et al. 2017; Kim et al. 2018; Elgammal et al.
2018). Given a referential image that defines the style, an s2i
model synthesizes an image from an input sketch with consistent coloring and textures to the reference style image. A
high-quality s2i model can help reduce repetitive works in
animation, filming, and video game story-boarding. It can
also help in sketch-based image recognition and retrieval.
Moreover, since the model generates images that are styleconsistent to the referential images, it has great potential in
style-transfer and style harmonization, therefore impacting
the human artistic creation processes.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2073

