The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Automatic Generation of Flexible Plans via Diverse Temporal Planning
Yotam Amitai, Ayal Taitler, Erez Karpas
Technion Israel Institute of Technology
yotama@campus.technion.ac.il, {ataitler, karpase}@technion.ac.il

Abstract

cated to the human every time replanning occurs. Another
approach, on the other extreme, is to account for all possible
uncertainty and come up with a contingent plan (e.g., (Hoffmann and Brafman 2005)), which dictates what must occur in response to any possible uncertain outcome or disturbance. Alas, offline contingent planning is a computationally
challenging problem, and this approach does not scale well.
We advocate taking a middle-ground approach between the
two aforementioned options by using flexible plans with
choices. Specifically, we advocate using Temporal Planning
Networks (Kim, Williams, and Abramson 2001), referred to
as TPNs, to address some of the uncertainty.
TPNs were originally designed to control robotic space
explorers. More recently, they have been demonstrated in the
context of human-robot teamwork in an airplane manufacturing scenario (Burke et al. 2014), and in controlling microUAVs (Timmons et al. 2015). The Pike executive (Levine
and Williams 2018), which was used in both demonstrations
mentioned above, executes TPNs by making choices for the
robots, while monitoring execution and dispatching actions
at the appropriate times. While the effectiveness of Pike and
TPNs has been shown, there is little use of them in the field,
mostly due to the complexity of their construction. So far,
generating a TPN was only possible by manually encoding
them with the help of a domain expert. Although it is possible to compile a control program written in the Reactive
Model Planning Language (RMPL) (Ingham, Ragno, and
Williams 2001) into a TPN, the control program itself must
still be manually written, leaving us right where we started.
In this paper, we describe the first method for the automatic generation of a TPN, given a specification of a temporal planning problem in standard PDDL 2.1 (Fox and Long
2003). This work focuses on generating TPNs and leaves
advocating their efficiency (compared to contingent planning or replanning methods for instance) to other papers. In
this work we assume deterministic dynamics and propose a
method for dealing with uncertainty in decision-space.
We describe an approach based on merging diverse plans.
Unfortunately, none of the existing diverse planners (Bryce
2014; Nguyen et al. 2012; Srivastava et al. 2007; Katz and
Sohrabi 2019) are capable of handling temporal planning,
so we first establish and describe the first diverse temporal
planner, based on adapting the top-k based diverse planner
(Katz and Sohrabi 2019) to the temporal setting. Next, we

Robots operating in the real world must deal with uncertainty,
be it due to working with humans who are unpredictable,
or simply because they must operate in a dynamic environment. Ignoring the uncertainty is dangerous, while accounting for all possible outcomes is often computationally infeasible. One approach, which lies between ignoring the uncertainty completely and addressing it completely is using flexible plans with choice, formulated as Temporal Planning Networks (TPNs). This method has been successfully demonstrated to work in human-robot teamwork using the Pike executive, an online executive that unifies intent recognition and
plan adaptation. However, one of the main challenges to using
Pike is the need to manually specify the TPN. In this paper,
we address this challenge by describing a technique for automatically synthesizing a TPN which covers multiple possible
executions for a given temporal planning problem specified
in PDDL 2.1. Our approach starts by using a diverse planner
to generate multiple plans, and then merges them into a single
TPN. As there were no available diverse planners for temporal planning, we first present a novel method for adapting an
existing diverse planning method, based on top-k planning,
to the temporal setting. We then describe how merging diverse plans into a single TPN is performed using constraint
optimization. Finally, an empirical evaluation on a set of IPC
benchmarks shows that our approach scales well, and generates TPNs which can generalize the set of plans they are
generated from.

Introduction
Operating in the real world necessitates dealing with uncertainty at some degree, be that it stems from a dynamic environment, or even simply from the need to work alongside a
human counterpart. Several approaches to dealing with this
uncertainty exist in the literature. One common approach is
to “determinize and replan” (Yoon, Fern, and Givan 2007),
that is, come up with a single plan which might solve the
problem, start executing it, and if anything goes wrong — replan. Although this approach often works, it preforms poorly
on problems which are “probabilistically interesting” (Little
and Thiebaux 2007), such as problems with avoidable deadends. This is even more problematic in the case of humanrobot teamwork, as the new plan will need to be communiCopyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6049

