The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

On Continuous Local BDD-Based Search for Hybrid SAT Solving*
Anastasios Kyrillidis, Moshe Vardi, Zhiwei Zhang
Rice University, 6100 Main Street, Houston, TX, USA
{anastasios, vardi, zhiwei}@rice.edu

Abstract

Davis, Logemann, and Loveland 1962). Examples of highly
efficient complete SAT solvers include Chaff (Moskewicz
et al. 2001), MiniSat (Eén and Sörensson 2003), PicoSAT
(Biere 2008), Lingeling 1 , Glucose (Audemard and Simon
2014), and machine learning-enhanced MapleSAT (Liang
2018). Overall, CDCL-based SAT solvers constitute a huge
success for SAT problems, and have been dominating in the
research of SAT solving.
Discrete local search (DLS) methods are used in incomplete SAT solvers. The number of unsatisfied constraints is
often regarded as the objective function. DLS algorithms include greedy local search (GSAT) (Selman, Levesque, and
Mitchell 1992) and random walk GSAT (WSAT) (Selman,
Kautz, and Cohen 1999). Several efficient variants of GSAT
and WSAT have been proposed, such as NSAT (McAllester,
Selman, and Kautz 1997), Novelty+ (Hoos and Stützle
2000), SAPS (Hutter, Tompkins, and Hoos 2002), ProbSAT
(Balint and Schöning 2012), and CCAnr (Cai, Luo, and Su
2015). While practical DLS solvers could be slower than
CDCL solvers, they are useful for solving certain classes of
instances, e.g., hard random 3-CNF and MaxSAT (Selman,
Levesque, and Mitchell 1992).
Continuous local search (CLS) algorithms are much less
studied in SAT community, compared with CDCL and DLS
methods. In (Kamath et al. 1990), the SAT problem is regarded as an integer linear programming (ILP) problem and
is solved by interior point method after relaxing the problem to linear programming (LP). Another work (Jun Gu
1994) converts SAT into an unconstrained global minimization problem and applies coordinate descent. Those methods, however, are only able to solve relatively easy random CNF instances and fail to provide interesting theoretical guarantees regarding rounding and convergence.
Non-CNF constraints are playing important roles in
computer science and other engineering areas, e.g., XOR
constraints in cryptography (Bogdanov, Khovratovich, and
Rechberger 2011), as well as Pseudo-Boolean constraints
and Not-all-equal (NAE) constraints in discrete optimization (Costa et al. 2009; Dinur, Regev, and Smyth 2005). The
combination of different types of constraints enhances the
expressive power of Boolean formulas. Nevertheless, com-

We explore the potential of continuous local search (CLS)
in SAT solving by proposing a novel approach for finding
a solution of a hybrid system of Boolean constraints. The
algorithm is based on CLS combined with belief propagation on binary decision diagrams (BDDs). Our framework
accepts all Boolean constraints that admit compact BDDs, including symmetric Boolean constraints and small-coefficient
pseudo-Boolean constraints as interesting families. We propose a novel algorithm for efficiently computing the gradient
needed by CLS. We study the capabilities and limitations of
our versatile CLS solver, GradSAT, by applying it on many
benchmark instances. The experimental results indicate that
GradSAT can be a useful addition to the portfolio of existing SAT and MaxSAT solvers for solving Boolean satisfiability and optimization problems.

Introduction
Constraint-satisfaction problems (CSPs) are fundamental in
mathematics, physics, and computer science. The Boolean
SATisfiability problem (SAT) is a paradigmatic class of
CSPs, where each variable takes value from the binary set
{True, False}. Solving SAT efficiently is of utmost significance in computer science, both from a theoretical and a
practical perspective. As a special case of SAT, formulas in
conjunctive normal form (CNFs) are a conjunction (anding) of disjunctions (or-ing) of literals. Despite the NPcompleteness of CNF-SAT, there has been dramatic progress
on the engineering side of CNF-SAT solvers (Vardi 2014).
SAT solvers can be classified into complete and incomplete ones: a complete SAT solver will return a solution if
there exists one or prove unsatisfiability if no solution exists, while an incomplete algorithm is not guaranteed to find
a satisfying assignment nor can it prove unsatisfiability.
Most modern complete SAT solvers are based on the
the Conflict-Driven Clause Learning (CDCL) algorithm introduced in GRASP (Marques-Silva and Sakallah 1999),
an evolution of the backtracking Davis-Putnam-LogemannLoveland (DPLL) algorithm (Davis and Putnam 1960;
* The author list has been sorted alphabetically by last name;
this should not be used to determine the extent of authors’ contributions. Corresponding author: Zhiwei Zhang.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A. Biere, Lingeling , Plingeling , PicoSAT and PrecoSAT at
SAT Race 2010

3841

