The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

AUG S PLICING: Synchronized Behavior Detection in Streaming Tensors
Jiabao Zhang1 , Shenghua Liu1 # , Wenting Hou2 , Siddharth Bhatia3 ,
Huawei Shen1 , Wenjian Yu4 # , Xueqi Cheng1
1

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing InnovSharing Co.Ltd
3
National University of Singapore
4
Dept. Computer Science & Tech., Tsinghua University
{zhangjiabao,liushenghua,shenhuawei,cxq}@ict.ac.cn, siddharth@comp.nus.edu.sg, yu-wj@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract

Let such time-stamped tuples be entries of a tensor with
multiple dimensions, such as user, object, and time (Figure 1a). Note that we call each dimension as a mode like (Lu,
Plataniotis, and Venetsanopoulos 2013), and a two-mode tensor is a matrix. Since tensors allow us to consider additional
information especially the time, the densest block (subtensor)
of interest can identify the most synchronized behavior in
time-stamped tuples (Jiang et al. 2015; Shah et al. 2015; Shin
et al. 2017a).
In such a streaming tensor, the attribute size of time mode
is augmented over time as shown in Figure 1a. Other modes
such as user and object can also be augmented when an
unseen user or object is observed. Nowadays, dense subtensor
detection methods for streaming tensors are essential. This
is because it is much easier than in the past to collect large
datasets with the advance of technology. Not only is the
size of real data very large, but also the rate at which it
arrives is high (Akoglu, Tong, and Koutra 2015). For example,
Facebook users generate billions of posts every day, billions
of credit card transactions are performed each day, and so
on. As such, whole data may be too large to fit in memory
or even on a disk. On the other hand, we can think of this
kind of data generation as streaming tensors as mentioned
above. Thus, the methods which can update their estimations
efficiently when the tensor changes over time are essential for
dense subtensor detection problem. However, many existing
works on dense subtensor detection were designed for static
tensors given in a batch (Shin, Hooi, and Faloutsos 2016;
Shin et al. 2017a; Yikun et al. 2019) and we refer to them
as batch algorithms. Although these batch algorithms are
near-linear with the size of tuples (i.e. non-zero entries) in
a tensor, re-running the algorithms at every time step for a
streaming tensor can result in memory overload when we
meet huge size datasets and quadratic time complexity. This
causes limited scalability in a streaming setting due to the
repeated computation on past tuples (Teng 2016). As for the
state-of-the-art streaming algorithm, D ENSE S TREAM (Shin
et al. 2017b), maintained a fine-grained order (i.e. D-order)
to search for the densest subtensor. The order is updated for
every single new tuple, limiting the detection speed.
Therefore we propose AUG S PLICING, a fast and incremental algorithm to approximate the up-to-date dense blocks
in streaming tensors. Without re-running batch algorithms,
our heuristic algorithm based on the splicing condition re-

How can we track synchronized behavior in a stream of timestamped tuples, such as mobile devices installing and uninstalling applications in the lockstep, to boost their ranks in
the app store? We model such tuples as entries in a streaming
tensor, which augments attribute sizes in its modes over time.
Synchronized behavior tends to form dense blocks (i.e. subtensors) in such a tensor, signaling anomalous behavior, or
interesting communities. However, existing dense block detection methods are either based on a static tensor, or lack
an efficient algorithm in a streaming setting. Therefore, we
propose a fast streaming algorithm, AUG S PLICING, which can
detect the top dense blocks by incrementally splicing the previous detection with the incoming ones in new tuples, avoiding
re-runs over all the history data at every tracking time step.
AUG S PLICING is based on a splicing condition that guides the
algorithm (Section 4). Compared to the state-of-the-art methods, our method is (1) effective to detect fraudulent behavior
in installing data of real-world apps and find a synchronized
group of students with interesting features in campus Wi-Fi
data; (2) robust with splicing theory for dense block detection;
(3) streaming and faster than the existing streaming algorithm,
with closely comparable accuracy.

1

Introduction

Given a stream of time-stamped tuples (a1 , a2 , · · · , an , t),
how can we spot the most synchronized behavior up to now
in real-time?
Such a problem has many real applications. In online review sites such as Yelp, let a1 be a user, a2 be a restaurant,
a3 be a rating score, and t be the rating time. The most synchronized rating behavior of high scores indicates the most
suspicious review fraud (Hooi et al. 2016; Jiang et al. 2014).
In application logs, a1 , a2 , a3 , and t can represent a mobile device, an app, installing time, and uninstalling time
respectively. Highly synchronous installation and uninstallation from a group of devices can reveal the most suspicious
behavior of boosting target apps’ ranks in an app store. In
terms of pattern discovery, synchronous connections and disconnections to the Wi-Fi access point (AP) in campus Wi-Fi
connection logs can discover students that have the same
classes of interest.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
# Corresponding authors

4653

