The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Weakly Supervised Deep Hyperspherical Quantization for Image Retrieval
Jinpeng Wang1,2 * , Bin Chen1 * † , Qiang Zhang3 , Zaiqiao Meng4 , Shangsong Liang2† , Shutao Xia1
1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
3
University College London
4
University of Cambridge
wjp20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, cb17@tsinghua.org.cn, qiang.zhang.16@ucl.ac.uk,
zm324@cam.ac.uk, liangshangsong@gmail.com, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Image

Deep quantization methods have shown high efficiency on
large-scale image retrieval. However, current models heavily
rely on ground-truth information, hindering the application
of quantization in label-hungry scenarios. A more realistic
demand is to learn from inexhaustible uploaded images that
are associated with informal tags provided by amateur users.
Though such sketchy tags do not obviously reveal the labels,
they actually contain useful semantic information for supervising deep quantization. To this end, we propose WeaklySupervised Deep Hyperspherical Quantization (WSDHQ),
which is the first work to learn deep quantization from weakly
tagged images. Specifically, 1) we use word embeddings to
represent the tags and enhance their semantic information
based on a tag correlation graph. 2) To better preserve semantic information in quantization codes and reduce quantization
error, we jointly learn semantics-preserving embeddings and
supervised quantizer on hypersphere by employing a welldesigned fusion layer and tailor-made loss functions. Extensive experiments show that WSDHQ can achieve state-of-art
performance on weakly-supervised compact coding.

We attempt to use weak tags
instead of ground-truth labels
to supervise quantization learning…
Various Semantic Information
Weak Semantics of a Single Tag

Tags

#friends #cute #nature #kitty #kiss
#friendship #cat #wildlife #pair
#kisses #deer #fawn #bambi #smooch

Labels

Tag Sparsity

animal grass

!

Figure 1: An example from NUS-WIDE dataset to illustrate
the problem of weakly supervised quantization using tags.

centroid. Since the pairwise distances between data points
are pre-computed by inter-centroid distances and stored in a
lookup table, the search speed is accelerated.
Recently, deep learning has been integrated into hash
models and yields superior performance over the shallow
methods (Zhao et al. 2015; Huang, Chen, and Pan 2019; Jin
et al. 2020). Empirically, deep quantization methods have
more powerful representation capability than deep binary
hashing methods for ANN search (Cao et al. 2016, 2017; Liu
et al. 2018; Chen and Cheung 2019; Yuan et al. 2020). Nevertheless, there are two concerns about existing deep quantization methods. 1) Data hunger: existing deep quantization
methods heavily rely on high-quality supervision. However,
despite the advent of large-scale annotated datasets such as
ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), the lack of well-labeled data
in specific domains remains a critical bottleneck of deep
learning. Collecting massive data with exact labels is usually labor-intensive and expensive, which hinders the deployment of deep quantization methods in practical largescale applications, e.g. search engines and social media. 2)
High norm variance of deep features: deep networks often
produce representation vectors with relatively high variance
on the norm, which adversely degrades the quality of quantization (Wu et al. 2017; Eghbali and Tahvildari 2019).
To overcome the heavy dependence of manually annotated data, we consider taking the freely available web images with impure tags as training data, and study the novel

With the explosive growth of media data on the web,
many retrieval tasks need to handle large-scale and highdimensional data. Due to high computational efficiency and
low memory overhead, learning to hash (Wang et al. 2018),
as a technique in Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN)
search, has been applied in many applications. Briefly, the
goal of hashing is to transform high-dimensional data into
compact binary codes while preserving semantic information. Based on the ways of measuring distance between encoded data, hashing methods can be roughly categorized into
two types. 1) Binary hashing (Gionis et al. 1999; Salakhutdinov and Hinton 2009) transforms high-dimensional data
into hash codes in Hamming space such that distances are
computed with fast bitwise operators. 2) Quantization (Jegou, Douze, and Schmid 2010; Ge et al. 2013; Babenko and
Lempitsky 2014; Zhang, Du, and Wang 2014; Yang, Chen,
and Xia 2020) divides high-dimensional data space into disjoint cells and approximately represents each point by its cell
* Equal contribution.
†

Corresponding authors.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2755

