The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Learning Game-Theoretic Models of Multiagent Trajectories
Using Implicit Layers
Philipp Geiger, Christoph-Nikolas Straehle
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
philipp.w.geiger@de.bosch.com, christoph-nikolas.straehle@de.bosch.com

Abstract

settings – lies in classic game-theoretic solution concepts
like the Nash equilibrium (NE) notoriously suffering from
computational intractability. As one way to overcome this,
we build on local NE (Ratliff, Burden, and Sastry 2013,
2016). We combine this with a specific class of games –
(continuous) potential games (Monderer and Shapley 1996)
– for which local NE usually coincide with local optima
of a single objective function, simplifying search. Another
challenge lies in combining game theory with neural nets
in a way that makes the overall model still efficiently trainable by gradient-based methods. To address this, we build
on implicit layers (Amos and Kolter 2017; Bai, Kolter, and
Koltun 2019). Implicit layers specify the functional relation
between a layer’s input and its output not in closed form, but
only implicitly, usually via an equation. Nonetheless they
allow to get exact gradients by “differentiating through” the
equation, based on the implicit function theorem.

For prediction of interacting agents’ trajectories, we propose
an end-to-end trainable architecture that hybridizes neural
nets with game-theoretic reasoning, has interpretable intermediate representations, and transfers to downstream decision making. It uses a net that reveals preferences from the
agents’ past joint trajectory, and a differentiable implicit layer
that maps these preferences to local Nash equilibria, forming
the modes of the predicted future trajectory. Additionally, it
learns an equilibrium refinement concept. For tractability, we
introduce a new class of continuous potential games and an
equilibrium-separating partition of the action space. We provide theoretical results for explicit gradients and soundness.
In experiments, we evaluate our approach on two real-world
data sets, where we predict highway drivers’ merging trajectories, and on a simple decision-making transfer task.

1

Introduction

Prediction of interacting agents’ trajectories has recently
been advanced by flexible, tractable, multi-modal datadriven approaches. But it remains a challenge to use them
for safety-critical domains with additional verification and
decision-making transfer requirements, like automated driving or mobile robots in interaction with humans. Towards
addressing this challenge, the following seem sensible intermediate goals: (1) incorporation of well-understood principles, prior knowledge and reasoning of the multiagent domain, allowing to generalize well and to transfer to robust
downstream decision making; (2) interpretability of models’
latent variables, allowing for verification beyond just testing
the final output; (3) theoretical analysis of soundness.
In this paper, we take a step towards addressing multiagent trajectory prediction including these intermediate
goals, while trying to keep as much as possible of the practical strength of data-driven approaches. For this, we hybridize neural learning with game-theoretic reasoning – because game theory provides well-established explanations of
agents’ behavior based on the principle of instrumental rationality, i.e., viewing agents as utility maximizers. Roughly
speaking, we “fit a game to the observed trajectory data”.
Along this hybrid direction one major obstacle – and a
general reason why game theory often remains in abstract

Main contributions and outline. We propose a modular architecture that outputs a multi-modal prediction of interacting agents’ joint trajectory (where modes are interpretable as local Nash equilibria), from their past trajectory as input (Sec. 3). The architecture is depicted in Fig. 1,
alongside the motivating example of highway drivers’ merging trajectories. It builds on the following components:
• a tractable, differentiable game solver implicit layer
(Sec. 3.1) with explicit gradient formula, mapping game parameters to local Nash equilibria (Thm. 1). It is based on a
new class of continuous-action trajectory games that allow
to encode prior knowledge on agents’ preferences (Def. 4).
We prove that they are potential games (Lem. 1). And it
builds on an equilibrium-separating concave partition of the
action space that we introduce to ensure tractability (Def. 5).
• Furthermore, the architecture contains a neural net that
reveals the agents’ preferences from their past, and a net that
learns an equilibrium refinement concept (Sec. 3.2).
This architecture forms a model class where certain latent
representations have clear game-theoretic interpretations
and certain layers encode game-theoretic principles that
help induction (also towards strategically-robust decisionmaking). At the same time, it has neural net-based capacity
for learning, and is end-to-end trainable with analytic gradient formula. Furthermore:

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4950

