The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Empirical Regularization for Synthetic Sentence Pairs in Unsupervised Neural
Machine Translation
Xi Ai, Bin Fang
College of Computer Science,Chongqing University
barid.x.ai@gmail.com, fb@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract

et al. 2019) or MLM (masked language modeling) encourages a model to find multilingual properties (Wu and Dredze
2020; Karthikeyan et al. 2020; Pires, Schlinger, and Garrette
2019) by inputting multilingual corpora. Thus, XLM (Lample et al. 2018b), MASS (Song et al. 2019), BART (Lewis
et al. 2020) and mBART (Liu et al. 2020) are proposed to
adapt MLM for UNMT in pre-training and training, hence
encouraging UNMT to build a robustly multilingual space
upon shared layers/weights. The robustly multilingual space
eventually and implicitly provides cross-lingual knowledge.
Although a large body of the previous study shows the
significance of pre-training, we are aware that the quality
of the synthetic sentence pairs is not guaranteed. Compared
to NMT, which leverages the synthetic sentence pairs for
further improvement through back-translation, the synthetic
sentence pairs significantly provide cross-lingual knowledge
to UNMT, facilitating training in a pseudo NMT scenario.
Meanwhile, NMT generates the synthetic sentence pairs by
typically reusing a trained translation model in finetuning,
whereas UNMT generates the synthetic sentence pairs in
a zero-shot (Johnson et al. 2017) style or a few-shot style
(Brown et al. 2020), which only pre-trains the model on
monolingual corpora at the most.
In this work, to guarantee the quality of the synthetic sentence pairs, we tackle the challenge with pure neural settings. Concretely, we present regularization models to regularize the synthetic sentence pairs. In this way, UNMT can
be jointly trained with the new objective of regularization.
Intuitively, the regularization should have three properties:
1) Low-cost : it should be very simple to be implemented
with a little additional cost in time because training UNMT
is time-consuming; 2) Data free: the model does not need
additional data to regularize the synthetic sentence pairs; 3)
Efficient decoding: the method should not hurt the efficiency
of decoding. To explore this idea, we have three main works:

UNMT tackles translation on monolingual corpora in two required languages. Since there is no explicitly cross-lingual
signal, pre-training and synthetic sentence pairs are significant to the success of UNMT. In this work, we empirically
study the core training procedure of UNMT to analyze the
synthetic sentence pairs obtained from back-translation. We
introduce new losses to UNMT to regularize the synthetic
sentence pairs by training the UNMT objective and the regularization objective jointly. Our comprehensive experiments
support that our method can generally improve the performance of currently successful models on three similar pairs
{F rench, German, Romanian} ↔ English and one dissimilar pair Russian ↔ English with acceptably additional cost.

Introduction
UNMT (unsupervised neural machine translation) leverages language modeling, e.g., denoising language modeling
(Hill, Cho, and Korhonen 2016; Dai and Le 2015; Lample et al. 2018a; Artetxe et al. 2018), to both the two required languages, learning to reconstruct sentences in the
two languages. The idea is, language knowledge can facilitate UNMT to decompose representation for required languages, and such language knowledge can be transferred and
eventually help UNMT to translate fluently due to shared
layers/weights. Given the nature of translation, although
shared layers/weights are employed to work as a pivot language, some weak cross-lingual signals are expected at the
very least. Therefore, to train UNMT for a true translation
task without violating the constraint of using nothing but
monolingual corpora, back-translation (Sennrich, Haddow,
and Birch 2016a) is jointly used in training. Significantly,
this on-the-fly back-translation generates synthetic sentence
pairs to provide synthetic supervision for training.
(Artetxe, Labaka, and Agirre 2016; Zhang et al. 2017;
Artetxe, Labaka, and Agirre 2017, 2018; Lample et al.
2018b) first observe that the recently successful UBWE (unsupervised bilingual word embeddings) can provide UNMT
required word-level cross-lingual knowledge in the initialization. On the other hand, the objective of BERT (Devlin

• We present a method to regularize the shared semantics
of a synthetic sentence pair, regardless of word semantics
somewhat. This method adds a new loss to UNMT based
on the high-level meaning of the sentence.
• We empirically study the regularization word-wise. Concretely, instead of regularizing the shared semantic between the two sentences from a synthetic sentence pair,
we present a method to regularize similar/close words in

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

12471

