The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Attention-based Multi-Level Fusion Network for Light Field Depth Estimation
Jiaxin Chen,1,2 Shuo Zhang,1,2,3∗ Youfang Lin1,2,3,4
1

School of Computer and Information Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing, China
3
CAAC Key Laboratory of Intelligent Passenger Service of Civil Aviation, Beijing, China
4
Key Laboratory of Transport Industry of Big Data Appalication Technologies for Comprehensive Transport, Beijing, China
{chenjiaxin, zhangshuo,yflin}@bjtu.edu.cn
Abstract

Straehle, and Goldluecke 2014; Zhang et al. 2016) or the focusness in focal stack (Lin et al. 2015; Tao et al. 2013) for
depth estimation. However, since the local depth estimation
is sensitive to occlusion, noise and texture-less regions, further complex optimization methods (Wanner, Straehle, and
Goldluecke 2014; Wang, Efros, and Ramamoorthi 2015) are
necessary in order to obtain smooth depth maps. Moreover,
these methods also suffer from high computational cost due
to the discretization of depth space.
Recently, some learning-based methods (Shin et al. 2018;
Luo et al. 2017) have been introduced for depth estimation
in LFs. Similar to traditional approaches, some (Luo et al.
2017; Feng et al. 2018) are designed by learning the slope of
lines in EPIs, while others (Shi, Jiang, and Guillemot 2019;
Guo et al. 2020) directly explore the correspondences among
all views in LFs. Since LFs provide a wealth of viewing angle information, how to select suitable views for matching
calculation in different regions becomes an important issue.
However, most of these methods choose to directly fuse all
features together (Shin et al. 2018) or according to one simple attention for the whole image (Yu-Ju et al. 2020). Therefore, some matching errors in complex areas with occlusions
and less textures are introduced when performing depth estimation.
In this work, we introduce a multi-level fusion network
based on attentions for LF depth estimation. We consider
four directions (0◦ , 90◦ , 45◦ and 135◦ ) of LFs and group
them into four branches. Combining with the four-branch
structure, two different feature fusion methods are proposed:

Depth estimation from Light Field (LF) images is a crucial
basis for LF related applications. Since multiple views with
abundant information are available, how to effectively fuse
features of these views is a key point for accurate LF depth
estimation. In this paper, we propose a novel attention-based
multi-level fusion network. Combining with the four-branch
structure, we design intra-branch fusion strategy and interbranch fusion strategy to hierarchically fuse effective features
from different views. By introducing the attention mechanism, features of views with less occlusions and richer textures are selected inside and between these branches to provide more effective information for depth estimation. The
depth maps are finally estimated after further aggregation.
Experimental results show the proposed method achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both quantitative and qualitative evaluation, which also ranks first in the commonly used
HCI 4D Light Field Benchmark.

Introduction
Light Fields (LFs) (Adelson and Bergen 1991) record light
in different directions and describe scenes with more rich
information than traditional images. Lytro (Ng 2018) and
Raytrix (Perwaß and Wietzke 2018) are successful instances
of commercial LF cameras, which capture scenes from different directions in one shot by placing the micro-lens array (Ng et al. 2005a) in front of the imaging sensor. As one
crucial step, depth estimation provides the structure information and is used for various researches, such as digital
refocusing (Ng et al. 2005b), image segmentation (Wanner,
Straehle, and Goldluecke 2013), view synthesis (Jin et al.
2020), saliency detection (Li et al. 2014) and super resolution (Zhang, Lin, and Sheng 2019).
In order to estimate accurate depth (or equal to disparity) information, lots of traditional approaches have been
proposed. Based on the photo-consistency of views in LFs,
some methods (Jeon et al. 2015; Williem, Park, and Lee
2017; Sheng et al. 2017) are designed by constructing cost
volumes based on traditional stereo matching. Due to the
narrow baseline of LFs, other approaches analyze specific
linear structures in Epipolar Plane Images (EPIs) (Wanner,

• The intra-branch feature fusion based on channel attention, in which features of views that contain less occlusions are selected within one branch.
• The inter-branch feature fusion based on branch attention,
in which features between branches are further fused by
choosing branches that have less occlusions and richer
textures.
With further feature extraction and cost aggregation, the final depth maps are generated. Experimental results on both
synthetic and real-world datasets show the proposed method
recovers more accurate estimated depth maps than other
state-of-the-art methods. The proposed feature fusion strategies are also proved that are effective to improve the depth
estimation results, especially in occlusion boundaries. The

∗

Corresponding author: zhangshuo@bjtu.edu.cn
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1009

