The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Practical and Rigorous Uncertainty Bounds for Gaussian Process Regression
Christian Fiedler,1, 2, 3 Carsten W. Scherer,2 Sebastian Trimpe 1, 3
1

Intelligent Control Systems Group, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2
Mathematical Systems Theory, University of Stuttgart
3
Institute for Data Science in Mechanical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University
christian.fiedler@dsme.rwth-aachen.de, carsten.scherer@imng.uni-stuttgart.de, trimpe@dsme.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract

Theorem 2), they turn out to be very conservative and difficult to evaluate numerically in practice and are, hence, replaced by heuristics. That is, instead of bounds obtained
from theory, much smaller ones are assumed, sometimes
without any practical justification, cf. Related Work for
more discussion. Unfortunately, using heuristic approximations leads to a breakdown of the theoretical guarantees of
these control approaches, as already observed for example
in (Lederer, Umlauft, and Hirche 2019). Furthermore, when
deriving theoretical guarantees based on frequentist results
like (Srinivas et al. 2010, Theorem 6) or (Chowdhury and
Gopalan 2017, Theorem 2), model misspecifications (like
wrong hyperparameters of the underlying GPR model or approximations such as the usage of sparse GPs) are ignored.
Since model misspecifications are to be expected in any realistic setting, the validity of such theoretical guarantees based
on idealized assumptions is unclear.
In summary, rigorous and practical frequentist uncertainty
bounds for GPR are currently not available. By practical
we mean that concrete, not excessively conservative numerical bounds can be computed based on reasonable and
established assumptions and that these are robust against
model misspecifications at least to some extent. We note
that such bounds are of independent interest, for example,
for Bayesian Optimization (Shahriari et al. 2015). In this
work, we improve previous frequentist uncertainty bounds
for GPR leading to practical, yet theoretically sound results. In particular, our bounds can be directly used in algorithms and are sharp enough to avoid the use of unjustified heuristics. Furthermore, we provide robustness results
that can handle moderate model misspecifications. Numerical experiments support our theoretical findings and illustrate the practical use of the bounds.

Gaussian Process Regression is a popular nonparametric regression method based on Bayesian principles that provides
uncertainty estimates for its predictions. However, these estimates are of a Bayesian nature, whereas for some important
applications, like learning-based control with safety guarantees, frequentist uncertainty bounds are required. Although
such rigorous bounds are available for Gaussian Processes,
they are too conservative to be useful in applications. This
often leads practitioners to replacing these bounds by heuristics, thus breaking all theoretical guarantees. To address this
problem, we introduce new uncertainty bounds that are rigorous, yet practically useful at the same time. In particular, the
bounds can be explicitly evaluated and are much less conservative than state of the art results. Furthermore, we show that
certain model misspecifications lead to only graceful degradation. We demonstrate these advantages and the usefulness
of our results for learning-based control with numerical examples.

Introduction
Gaussian Processes Regression (GPR) is an established
and successful nonparametric regression method based on
Bayesian principles (Rasmussen and Williams 2006) which
has recently become popular in learning-based control (Liu
et al. 2018; Kocijan 2016). In this context, safety and performance guarantees are important aspects (Åström and Murray 2010; Skogestad and Postlethwaite 2007). In fact, the
lack of rigorous guarantees has been identified as one of the
major obstacles preventing the usage of learning-based control methodologies in safety-critical areas like autonomous
driving, human-robot interaction or medical devices, see e.g.
(Berkenkamp 2019). One approach to tackle this challenge
is to use the posterior variance of GPR to derive frequentist
uncertainty bounds and combine these with robust control
methods that can deal with the remaining uncertainty. This
strategy has been successfully applied in a number of works
that also provide control-theoretical guarantees, cf. Section
Bayesian and Frequentist Bounds.
These approaches rely on rigorous frequentist uncertainty
bounds for GPR. Although such results are available (Srinivas et al. 2010, Theorem 6), (Chowdhury and Gopalan 2017,

Background
Gaussian Process Regression and Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Spaces
We briefly recall the basics of GPR, for more details we
refer to (Rasmussen and Williams 2006). A Gaussian Process (GP) over an (input or index) set D is a collection
of random variables, such that any finite subset is normally distributed. A GP f is uniquely determined by its
mean function m(x) = E[f (x)] and covariance function

Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7439

