The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Intrinsic Certified Robustness of Bagging against Data Poisoning Attacks
Jinyuan Jia, Xiaoyu Cao, Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University
{jinyuan.jia, xiaoyu.cao, neil.gong}@duke.edu

Abstract

Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Rosenfeld et al.
2020) have been proposed in the literature. Most of these
defenses (Cretu et al. 2008; Barreno et al. 2010; Suciu et al.
2018; Tran, Li, and Madry 2018; Feng et al. 2014; Jagielski
et al. 2018) achieve empirical robustness against certain data
poisoning attacks and are often broken by strong adaptive
attacks. To end the cat-and-mouse game between attackers
and defenders, certified defenses (Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019;
Wang et al. 2020; Rosenfeld et al. 2020) were proposed. We
say a learning algorithm is certifiably robust against data poisoning attacks if it can learn a classifier that provably predicts
the same label for a testing example when the number of
poisoned training examples is bounded. For instance, (Ma,
Zhu, and Hsu 2019) showed that a classifier trained with differential privacy certifies robustness against data poisoning
attacks. (Wang et al. 2020) and (Rosenfeld et al. 2020) leveraged randomized smoothing (Cao and Gong 2017; Cohen,
Rosenfeld, and Kolter 2019), which was originally designed
to certify robustness against adversarial examples, to certify
robustness against data poisoning attacks that modify labels
and/or features of existing training examples.
However, these certified defenses suffer from two major
limitations. First, they are only applicable to limited scenarios, i.e., (Ma, Zhu, and Hsu 2019) is limited to learning
algorithms that can be differentially private, while (Wang
et al. 2020) and (Rosenfeld et al. 2020) are limited to data
poisoning attacks that only modify existing training examples.
Second, their certified robustness guarantees are loose, meaning that a learning algorithm is certifiably more robust than
their guarantees indicate. We note that (Steinhardt, Koh, and
Liang 2017) derives an approximate upper bound of the loss
function for data poisoning attacks. However, their method
cannot certify that the learnt model predicts the same label
for a testing example.
We aim to address these limitations in this work. Our approach is based on a well-known ensemble learning method
called Bootstrap Aggregating (bagging) (Breiman 1996).
Given a training dataset, we create a random subsample with
k training examples sampled from the training dataset uniformly at random with replacement. Moreover, we use a
deterministic or randomized base learning algorithm to learn
a base classifier on the subsample. Due to the randomness in
sampling the subsample and the (randomized) base learning
algorithm, the label predicted for a testing example x by the

In a data poisoning attack, an attacker modifies, deletes, and/or
inserts some training examples to corrupt the learnt machine
learning model. Bootstrap Aggregating (bagging) is a wellknown ensemble learning method, which trains multiple base
models on random subsamples of a training dataset using a
base learning algorithm and uses majority vote to predict labels
of testing examples. We prove the intrinsic certified robustness
of bagging against data poisoning attacks. Specifically, we
show that bagging with an arbitrary base learning algorithm
provably predicts the same label for a testing example when
the number of modified, deleted, and/or inserted training examples is bounded by a threshold. Moreover, we show that our derived threshold is tight if no assumptions on the base learning
algorithm are made. We evaluate our method on MNIST and
CIFAR10. For instance, our method achieves a certified accuracy of 91.1% on MNIST when arbitrarily modifying, deleting,
and/or inserting 100 training examples. Code is available at:
https://github.com/jjy1994/BaggingCertifyDataPoisoning.

Introduction
Machine learning models trained on user-provided data are
vulnerable to data poisoning attacks (Nelson et al. 2008;
Biggio, Nelson, and Laskov 2012; Xiao et al. 2015; Li et al.
2016; Steinhardt, Koh, and Liang 2017; Shafahi et al. 2018),
in which malicious users carefully poison (i.e., modify, delete,
and/or insert) some training examples such that the learnt
model is corrupted and makes predictions for testing examples as an attacker desires. In particular, the corrupted model
predicts incorrect labels for a large fraction of testing examples indiscriminately (i.e., a large testing error rate) or for
some attacker-chosen testing examples. Unlike adversarial
examples (Szegedy et al. 2014; Carlini and Wagner 2017),
which carefully perturb each testing example such that a
model predicts an incorrect label for the perturbed testing
example, data poisoning attacks corrupt the model such that
it predicts incorrect labels for many clean testing examples.
Like adversarial examples, data poisoning attacks pose severe
security threats to machine learning systems.
To mitigate data poisoning attacks, various defenses (Cretu
et al. 2008; Barreno et al. 2010; Suciu et al. 2018; Tran, Li,
and Madry 2018; Feng et al. 2014; Jagielski et al. 2018;
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7961

