The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

OPQ: Compressing Deep Neural Networks with One-shot Pruning-Quantization
Peng Hu1, 2 , Xi Peng2 , Hongyuan Zhu1 , Mohamed M. Sabry Aly3 , Jie Lin1,∗
1

Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
2
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{penghu.ml, pengx.gm, hongyuanzhu.cn}@gmail.com; msabry@ntu.edu.sg; lin-j@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract

2020). Therefore, DNN model compression without accuracy loss has gradually become a hot research topic.
Network pruning is one of the popular compression techniques, by removing redundant weight parameters to slim
the DNN models without losing any performance, e.g., finegrained weight pruning (Guo, Yao, and Chen 2016), filter
pruning (Luo, Wu, and Lin 2017), etc. One key problem for
weight pruning is to determine which neuron is deletable.
Recently, the lottery ticket hypothesis (Frankle and Carbin
2019) proves that the removable neurons can be directly determined by the pre-trained model only, without updating
the pruning masks during finetuning (a.k.a., one-shot weight
pruning). Obviously, it is promising to explore whether this
one-shot mechanism generalizes to other compression techniques, e.g., one-shot quantization. Like one-shot pruning,
one-shot quantization is expected to support finetuning the
quantized model without updating the quantizers derived
from the pre-trained model.
Network quantization opts to represent weight parameters using fewer bits instead of 32-bit full precision (FP32),
leading to reduced memory footprint and computation cost
while maintaining accuracy as much as possible. Quantization could be roughly classified as layer-wise (He and Cheng
2018; Wang et al. 2019) and channel-wise (Krishnamoorthi
2018) methods. For layer-wise quantization, the weights of
each layer are quantized by a common layer-specific quantizer. Conversely, for channel-wise quantization, each channel of a layer has its own channel-specific quantizer, i.e.,
multiple different channel-specific quantizers are required
for a layer as illustrated in Figure 1a. With comparable accuracy, the fine-grained channel-wise quantization usually
achieves a higher compression rate than the coarse-grained
layer-wise quantization, while at the expense of extra overhead introduced (i.e., channel-wise codebooks, etc.) which
in turn increases the difficulty for hardware implementation (Nagel et al. 2019; Cai et al. 2020).
To further maximize the compression rate, it is desirable to simultaneously conduct pruning and quantization on
the DNN models (Wang et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2020a).
However, the pruning-quantization strategy is more complex than either pruning or quantization alone. In other
words, it is almost impossible for manually tuning the pruning ratios and quantization codebooks at fine-grained levels. To address this issue, recent methods adopt certain

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) usually are overparameterized and have millions of weight parameters, it is challenging to deploy these large DNN models on resourceconstrained hardware platforms, e.g., smartphones. Numerous network compression methods such as pruning and quantization are proposed to reduce the model size significantly,
of which the key is to find suitable compression allocation
(e.g., pruning sparsity and quantization codebook) of each
layer. Existing solutions obtain the compression allocation in
an iterative/manual fashion while finetuning the compressed
model, thus suffering from the efficiency issue. Different
from the prior art, we propose a novel One-shot PruningQuantization (OPQ) in this paper, which analytically solves
the compression allocation with pre-trained weight parameters only. During finetuning, the compression module is fixed
and only weight parameters are updated. To our knowledge,
OPQ is the first work that reveals pre-trained model is sufficient for solving pruning and quantization simultaneously,
without any complex iterative/manual optimization at the
finetuning stage. Furthermore, we propose a unified channelwise quantization method that enforces all channels of each
layer to share a common codebook, which leads to low bitrate allocation without introducing extra overhead brought by
traditional channel-wise quantization. Comprehensive experiments on ImageNet with AlexNet/MobileNet-V1/ResNet-50
show that our method improves accuracy and training efficiency while obtains significantly higher compression rates
compared to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
achieved great success in various applications, such as image
classification (He et al. 2016; Li et al. 2020) and object detection (He et al. 2017). However, the massive computation
and memory cost hinder their deployment on lots of popular resource-constraint devices, e.g., mobile platform (Han,
Mao, and Dally 2016; Li, Dong, and Wang 2019). The wellknown over-parameterization of DNNs shows the theoretical basis to build lightweight versions of these large models (Zhang and Stadie 2020; Yang et al. 2020b; Li et al.
∗

Corresponding author: Jie Lin.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7780

