The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Hierarchical Relational Inference
Aleksandar Stanić, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Jürgen Schmidhuber
Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, USI, SUPSI
Lugano, Switzerland
{aleksandar, sjoerd, juergen}@idsia.ch

Groundtruth

Abstract
Common-sense physical reasoning in the real world requires
learning about the interactions of objects and their dynamics. The notion of an abstract object, however, encompasses
a wide variety of physical objects that differ greatly in terms
of the complex behaviors they support. To address this, we
propose a novel approach to physical reasoning that models
objects as hierarchies of parts that may locally behave separately, but also act more globally as a single whole. Unlike
prior approaches, our method learns in an unsupervised fashion directly from raw visual images to discover objects, parts,
and their relations. It explicitly distinguishes multiple levels
of abstraction and improves over a strong baseline at modeling synthetic and real-world videos.

1

HRI

NRI

LSTM

Figure 1: HRI outperforms baselines at modeling interacting
objects that are coupled via hierarchically organized springs.

complex physical interactions in the environment into pairwise interactions between objects, modelled efficiently by
Graph Networks (Battaglia et al. 2018). Here the representation of each object is updated at each time step by propagating ‘messages’ through the corresponding interaction graph.
While recent approaches (specifically) address the challenge
of learning object representations from raw visual data (Greff, van Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2017; Kosiorek et al.
2018; van Steenkiste et al. 2018; Burgess et al. 2019; Greff
et al. 2019) and of dynamically inferring relationships between objects (van Steenkiste et al. 2018; Kipf et al. 2018;
Goyal et al. 2019; Veerapaneni et al. 2019), reasoning about
the dynamics and interactions of complex objects remains
difficult without incorporating additional structure. On the
other hand, approaches that consider part-based representations of objects and hierarchical interaction graphs lack the
capacity to learn from raw images and dynamically infer relationships (Mrowca et al. 2018; Lingelbach et al. 2020).
Here we propose Hierarchical Relational Inference
(HRI), a novel approach to common-sense physical reasoning capable of learning to discover objects, parts, and
their relations, directly from raw visual images in an unsupervised fashion. HRI extends Neural Relational Inference (NRI) (Kipf et al. 2018), which infers relations between objects and models their dynamics while assuming
access to their state (e.g., obtained from a physics simulator). HRI improves upon NRI in two regards. Firstly, it considers part-based representations of objects and infers hierarchical interaction graphs to simplify modeling the dynamics (and interactions) of more complex objects. This necessitates a more efficient message-passing approach that leverages the hierarchical structure, which we will also introduce.
Secondly, it provides a mechanism for applying NRI (and

Introduction

Common-sense physical reasoning in the real world involves making predictions from complex high-dimensional
observations. Humans somehow discover and represent abstract objects to compactly describe complex visual scenes
in terms of ‘building blocks’ that can be processed separately (Spelke and Kinzler 2007). They model the world
by reasoning about dynamics of high-level objects such as
footballs and football players and the consequences of their
interactions. It is natural to expect that artificial agents operating in the real world will benefit from a similar approach (Lake, Salakhutdinov, and Tenenbaum 2015; Greff,
van Steenkiste, and Schmidhuber 2020).
Real world objects vary greatly in terms of their properties. This complicates modelling their dynamics. Some have
deformable shapes, e.g., clothes, or consist of parts that support a variety of complex behaviors, e.g., arms and fingers of
a human body. Many objects can be viewed as a hierarchy of
parts that locally behave somewhat independently, but also
act more globally as a single whole (Mrowca et al. 2018;
Lingelbach et al. 2020). This suggests to simplify models of
object dynamics by explicitly distinguishing multiple levels
of abstraction, separating hierarchical sources of influence.
Prior approaches to common-sense physical reasoning explicitly consider objects and relations at a representational
level, e.g., (Chang et al. 2017; Battaglia et al. 2016; van
Steenkiste et al. 2018; Kipf et al. 2018). They decompose
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

9730

