The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Circles are like Ellipses, or Ellipses are like Circles? Measuring the Degree of
Asymmetry of Static and Contextual Word Embeddings and the Implications to
Representation Learning
Wei Zhang 1 , Murray Campbell 1 , Yang Yu* 2 , Sadhana Kumaravel 1
1

IBM Research AI
2
Google
zhangwei@us.ibm.com, mcam@us.ibm.com, yangyuai@google.com, sadhana.kumaravel1@ibm.com
Abstract

Popular
static
word
representations
such
as
word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) lie in Euclidean space
and are evaluated against symmetric judgments. Such a
measure does not expose the geometry of word relations,
e.g., asymmetry. For example, “ellipses are like circles”
is much more natural than “circles are like ellipses”. An
acceptable representation may exhibit such a property.
Tversky (1977) proposed a similarity measure that encodes asymmetry. It assumes each word is a feature set,
and asymmetry manifests when the common features of two
words take different proportions in their respective feature
sets, i.e., a difference of the likelihoods P (a|b) and P (b|a)
for a word pair (a,b). In this regard, the degree of correlation
between asymmetry from humans and a word embedding
may indicate the feature-encoding quality of the embedding.
Word evocation experiment devised by neurologist Sigmund Freud around the 1910s was to obtain such word directional relationship, where a word called cue is shown to a

participant who is asked to “evoke” another word called target freely. 1 The experiment is usually conducted on many
participants for many cue words. The data produced from
the group of people exhibit a collective nature of word relatedness. The P (a|b) and P (b|a) can be obtained from such
data to obtain an asymmetry ratio (Griffiths, Steyvers, and
Tenenbaum 2007) that resonates with the theory of Tversky
(1977) and Resnik (1995). Large scale evocation datasets
had been created to study the psychological aspects of language. We are interested in three of them; the Edinburgh Association Thesaurus (Kiss et al. 1973), Florida Association
Norms (Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber 2004) and Small
World of Words (De Deyne et al. 2019) Those three datasets
have thousands of cue words each and all publicly available.
We use them to derive the human asymmetry judgments and
see how well embedding-derived asymmetry measure aligns
with this data.
Evocation data was rarely explored in the Computational
Linguistics community, except that Griffiths, Steyvers, and
Tenenbaum (2007) derived from the Florida Association
Norms an asymmetry ratio for a pair of words to measure the directionality of word relations in topic models, and Nematzadeh, Meylan, and Griffiths (2017) used it
for word embedding. In this paper, we conduct a larger
scale study using three datasets, on both static embedding
(word2vec) (Mikolov et al. 2013), GloVe (Pennington,
Socher, and Manning 2014), fasttext (Mikolov et al. 2018))
and contextual embedding such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2018). We hope the study could help us better understand
the geometry of word representations and inspire us to improve text representation learning.
To obtain P (a|b) for static embedding, we leverage vector
space geometry with projection and soft-max similar to (Nematzadeh, Meylan, and Griffiths 2017; Levy and Goldberg
2014; Arora et al. 2016); For contextual embedding such as
BERT we can not use this method because the embedding
varies by context. Thus, we use a Bayesian method to estimate word conditional distribution from thousands of contexts using BERT as a language model. In so doing, we can
probe the word relatedness in the dynamic embedding space
in a principled way.

* work done while with IBM
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
A clip from A Dangerous Method describing Sigmund Freud’s
experiment https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lblzHkoNn3Q

Human judgments of word similarity have been a popular
method of evaluating the quality of word embedding. But it
fails to measure the geometry properties such as asymmetry.
For example, it is more natural to say “Ellipses are like Circles” than “Circles are like Ellipses”. Such asymmetry has
been observed from the word evocation experiment, where
one word is used to recall another. This association data have
been understudied for measuring embedding quality. In this
paper, we use three well-known evocation datasets for the
purpose and study both static embedding as well as contextual
embedding, such as BERT. To fight for the dynamic nature of
BERT embedding, we probe BERT’s conditional probabilities as a language model, using a large number of Wikipedia
contexts to derive a theoretically justifiable Bayesian asymmetry score. The result shows that the asymmetry judgment
and similarity judgments disagree, and asymmetry judgment
aligns with its strong performance on “extrinsic evaluations”.
This is the first time we can show contextual embeddings’s
strength on intrinsic evaluation, and the asymmetry judgment
provides a new perspective to evaluate contextual embedding
and new insights for representation learning.

Introduction

14472

