The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Projection-free Online Learning in Dynamic Environments
Yuanyu Wan, Bo Xue, Lijun Zhang∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{wanyy, xueb, zhanglj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract

ent scenarios, which can be divided into projection-based algorithms (Zinkevich 2003; Hazan, Agarwal, and Kale 2007;
Shalev-Shwartz and Singer 2007) and projection-free algorithms (Hazan and Kale 2012; Hazan 2016; Garber and
Hazan 2016). Specifically, projection-based algorithms such
as online gradient descent (OGD) (Zinkevich 2003) and
regularized follow the leader (RFTL) (Shalev-Shwartz and
Singer 2007; Hazan 2016) perform one projection step in
each round, which could be computationally expensive for
high-dimensional problems with complicated constraints. In
contrast, projection-free algorithms such as online conditional gradient (OCG) (Hazan and Kale 2012; Hazan 2016)
and its variants replace the projection step with one linear
optimization step, which can be carried out efficiently and
have received ever-increasing attention (Zhang et al. 2017b;
Chen et al. 2018; Chen, Zhang, and Karbasi 2019; Wan, Tu,
and Zhang 2020; Wan and Zhang 2021).
Although the static regret has been extensively studied
for projection-based and projection-free algorithms, it is not
suitable to measure the performance of the learner in dynamic environments, where the best decision may frequently
change. To address this limitation, recent advances in OCO
focused on dynamic regret which measures the performance
of the learner against a sequence of local minimizers
T
T
X
X
RD = R(x∗1 , · · · , x∗T ) =
ft (xt ) −
ft (x∗t ) (1)

To efficiently solve high-dimensional problems with complicated constraints, projection-free online learning has received ever-increasing research interest. However, previous
studies either focused on static regret that is not suitable
for dynamic environments, or only established the dynamic regret bound under the smoothness of losses. In this paper, without the condition of the smoothness, we propose
a novel projection-free
√ online algorithm, and achieve an
1/3
O(max{T 2/3 VT , T })√dynamic regret bound for convex
functions and an O(max{ T VT log T , log T }) dynamic regret bound for strongly convex functions, where T is the
time horizon and VT denotes the variation of loss functions.
Specifically, we first improve an existing projection-free algorithm called online conditional gradient (OCG) to enjoy small dynamic regret bounds with the prior knowledge of VT . To
work with unknowable VT , we maintain multiple instances of
the improved OCG that can handle different functional variations, and combine them with a meta-algorithm that can track
the best one. Experimental results validate the efficiency and
effectiveness of our algorithm.

Introduction
Online convex optimization (OCO) is a powerful framework
for online learning, which enjoys both computational efficiency and theoretical guarantees (Shalev-Shwartz 2011).
According to the protocol of OCO, it is a repeated game between a learner and an adversary. In each round t, the learner
first chooses a decision xt ∈ K, where K is a convex decision set. Then, the adversary reveals a convex loss function
ft (x) : K → R, and the learner suffers a loss ft (xt ). To
measure the performance of the learner, the static regret with
respect to the best fixed decision is commonly used, which
is defined as
RS = R(T ) =

T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈K

T
X

t=1

t=1

where x∗t ∈ argminx∈K ft (x) is a local minimizer, and
proposed many projection-based algorithms for minimizing
the dynamic regret (Besbes, Gur, and Zeevi 2015; Jadbabaie
et al. 2015; Mokhtari et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2016; Zhang
et al. 2018; Zhang, Lu, and Yang 2020; Zhang 2020).
Due to the arbitrary fluctuation in the loss functions, it
is impossible to achieve a sub-linear dynamic regret bound
unless introducing some conditions on the comparator sequence or the function sequence (Jadbabaie et al. 2015). A
common condition introduced by previous studies (Besbes,
Gur, and Zeevi 2015; Zhang et al. 2018) is that the functional
variation defined as
T
X
VT =
max |ft (x) − ft−1 (x)|

ft (x)

t=1

where T is the total number of rounds.
Over the past decades, various online algorithms have
been put forward to minimize the static regret under differ∗

t=2

Lijun Zhang is the corresponding author.
Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

x∈K

is sub-linear in T . If the value of VT is not small than
1 and given, Besbes, Gur, and Zeevi (2015) achieved an
10067

