The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Necessarily Optimal One-Sided Matchings
Hadi Hosseini,1 Vijay Menon,2 Nisarg Shah,3 Sujoy Sikdar 4
1

College of Information Sciences and Technology, Penn State University
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
4
Department of Computer Science, Binghamton University
hadi@psu.edu, vijay.menon@uwaterloo.ca, nisarg@cs.toronto.edu, ssikdar@binghamton.edu
2

Abstract

What form of economic efficiency might one want for a
matching? Luckily, decades of research in matching theory
offers two prominent desiderata: Pareto optimality (Shapley
and Scarf 1974; Cirillo 2012) and rank-maximality (Irving
2003; Irving et al. 2006). Informally, Pareto optimality requires that no other matching be able to make some agents
better off without making any agent worse off. Despite its
wide use, Pareto optimality may be a weak guarantee in
many practical settings. Hence, a stronger guarantee called
rank-maximality is often used in practical applications such
as assigning papers to referees (Garg et al. 2010), assigning rented resources to customers (Abraham et al. 2006),
and assigning students to schools (Abraham 2009). Informally, rank-maximality requires matching as many agents
to their top choice as possible, subject to that matching as
many agents to their second choice as possible, and so on.
The study of these axioms, along with axioms of fairness
and incentive-compatibility, has led to the design of elegant
rules such as random priority and probabilistic serial (Bogomolnaia and Moulin 2001; Che and Kojima 2010), which
have been made easily accessible by not-for-profit endeavors such as MatchU.ai (www.matchu.ai). However, in many
real-life situations, one rarely has access to complete preferences which can simply be fed to these rules. More often
than not, the problem at hand is to come up with a desirable
matching of agents to objects with only partial information
about agents’ preferences. While the role of partial preferences has been well-explored in the sister problem known as
two-sided matching (Rastegari et al. 2013; Liu et al. 2014),
in which agents are matched to other agents (for example
matching roommates, kidney donors to patients, or men to
women), it has been significantly understudied for one-sided
matching. This is the primary focus of our work. In particular, we consider the following three research questions.
Given partial preferences, can we efficiently check if
a given matching is NPO or NRM? Can we efficiently
check if an NPO or NRM matching exists (and if so,
find one)? How much online elicitation of preferences
is needed to find an NPO or NRM matching?

We study the classical problem of matching n agents to n
objects, where the agents have ranked preferences over the
objects. We focus on two popular desiderata from the matching literature: Pareto optimality and rank-maximality. Instead
of asking the agents to report their complete preferences,
our goal is to learn a desirable matching from partial preferences, specifically a matching that is necessarily Pareto optimal (NPO) or necessarily rank-maximal (NRM) under any
completion of the partial preferences. We focus on the topk model in which agents reveal a prefix of their preference
rankings. We design efficient algorithms to check if a given
matching is NPO or NRM, and to check whether such a
matching exists given top-k partial preferences. We also study
online algorithms for eliciting partial preferences adaptively,
and prove bounds on their competitive ratio.

1

Introduction

Resource allocation is a fundamental problem in artificial
intelligence and multi-agent systems. One particular type
of resource allocation deals with assigning a number of indivisible objects to agents according to their preferences.
These problems have given rise to a wide array of research
in economics (Moulin 2004) and theoretical computer science (Manlove 2013).
The focus of our work is the special case of allocating n objects to n agents (so each agent is matched to a
single object), which models many real-world applications
(see, e.g., (Hylland and Zeckhauser 1979; Abdulkadiroğlu
and Sönmez 1999)). For instance, imagine allocating office
spaces to faculty members in a building. Instead of asking
each faculty member to report a full preference ranking over
the available offices, the department head may ask them to
reveal their top choices, and then, if need be, she may ask
individual faculty members to reveal their next best choices,
and so on. The goal is to come up with a matching that necessarily satisfies some form of “economic efficiency” while
asking as few queries as possible. That is, it must satisfy the
economic efficiency property regardless of the parts of the
preferences that were not elicited, because otherwise some
faculty may find the final matching undesirable.

Our Results
We study the next-best query model which allows, in each
query, asking one agent to reveal her next best choice. Partial preferences elicited under this model are referred to as

Copyright c 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5481

