The Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-21)

Preventing Repeated Real World AI Failures by Cataloging Incidents:
The AI Incident Database
Sean McGregor
XPRIZE Foundation, Partnership on AI,* Syntiant Corp.
7555 Irvine Center Dr., Suite 200
Irvine, California 92618
iaai21@seanbmcgregor.com
Abstract
Mature industrial sectors (e.g., aviation) collect their real
world failures in incident databases to inform safety improvements. Intelligent systems currently cause real world harms
without a collective memory of their failings. As a result,
companies repeatedly make the same mistakes in the design,
development, and deployment of intelligent systems. A collection of intelligent system failures experienced in the real
world (i.e., incidents) is needed to ensure intelligent systems
benefit people and society. The AI Incident Database is an
incident collection initiated by an industrial/non-profit cooperative to enable AI incident avoidance and mitigation. The
database supports a variety of research and development use
cases with faceted and full text search on more than 1,000
incident reports archived to date.

Introduction
Figure 1: The US National Transportation Safety Board’s
(NTSB’s) database shown above indexes incident and accident timelines, location, meteorology, severity, aircraft, operators, and phase of flight as facets. The reports also have a
full text narrative that is searchable. Upon completion of an
investigation, the report is indexed alongside the case record
within the database (Federal Aviation Administration 2020).

Governments, corporations, and individuals are increasingly
deploying intelligent systems to safety-critical problem areas, including transportation (NTSB 2017) and law enforcement (Dressel and Farid 2018), as well as challenging social
system domains such as recruiting (Dastin 2018). Failures
of these systems pose serious risks to life and wellbeing, but
even good-intentioned intelligent system developers fail to
imagine what can go wrong when their systems are deployed
in the real world. Worse, the artificial intelligence system
community has no formal systems whereby practitioners can
discover and learn from the mistakes of the past. Individuals
in technology (Olsson 2019; Lutz 2020), legal practice (Hall
2020), and reputation management (Pownall 2020) now collect artificial intelligence failure history on Google Docs and
GitHub. While these are admirable efforts, a person checking for problems matching their technology or problem domain will need to page through lists of links to find ones
of potential relevance. Existing lists are difficult to use in
development, are not comprehensive archives, and are representative of individual viewpoints of artificial intelligence
(AI) failures in the real world.

Avoiding repeated AI failures requires making past failures known to AI practitioners. Therefore, we introduce a
systematized collection of incidents where intelligent systems have caused safety, fairness, or other real world problems. The AI Incident Database (AIID) answers the question, “what can go wrong when someone deploys this system”?
The contributions of this work are three fold. We provide
infrastructure supporting best practices within the artificial
intelligence industry, a dataset of more than one thousand
incident reports, and an architecture for building research
products on the growing collection of incidents. We begin
by exploring incident databases in other fields of practice
before introducing the system architecture of the AIID. We
then wrap up with a few concluding remarks.

* Representing the XPRIZE Foundation as a Partnership on AI
non-profit partner.
Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

15458

