A Generic Visualization Approach for
Convolutional Neural Networks
Supplementary Material
Ahmed Taha, Xitong Yang, Abhinav Shrivastava, and Larry Davis
University of Maryland, College Park

S1

Extended Related Work

Classification networks learn class-logits ∈ RNc . The number of logits is equal to
the number of classes Nc . There is a clear one-to-one mapping between classes
and logits. This mapping is vital for class-activation mapping (CAM) and GradCAM approaches because their visualizations rely on the weights or gradients
of a particular logit. In contrast, retrieval networks learn a feature embedding
∈ Rd . The output dimensionality does not equal the number of classes. Thus,
there is no one-to-one mapping between classes and output dimensions. This
lack of mapping is why CAM and Grad-CAM suffer on retrieval networks. To
highlight this limitation, we train a retrieval network with various ranking losses.
The following paragraphs review the two ranking losses employed in the main
paper.
Retrieval networks learn a feature embedding where objects within the same
class are closer than objects from different classes. To learn this feature embedding, a retrieval network is trained with ranking losses such as contrastive,
triplet, and N-pair losses.
In the main paper, we employ triplet loss [6] for its simplicity and efficiency.
Equation S1 shows the triplet loss formulation
T L(a, p, n) = [(D(bac , bpc) − D(bac , bnc) + m)]+ ,

(S1)

where [•]+ = max(0, •) is the hinge function and m is the margin between different classes in the feature embedding. b•c and D(, ) are the embedding and the
Euclidean distance functions, respectively. This formulation attracts an anchor
image a of a specific class closer to a positive image p from the same class than
it is to a negative image n.
We leverage the semi-hard sampling [6] strategy. In semi-hard negative sampling, instead of picking the hardest positive-negative samples, all anchor-positive
pairs and their corresponding semi-hard negatives are considered. Semi-hard negatives are further away from the anchor than the positive exemplar, yet within
the banned margin m as shown in Figure S1.
The performance of triplet loss relies heavily on the sampling strategy because every anchor sample is paired with a single negative sample. N-pair loss

