Improving Deep Video Compression
by Resolution-Adaptive Flow Coding
Zhihao Hu1 , Zhenghao Chen2 , Dong Xu2 , Guo Lu3(B) , Wanli Ouyang2 ,
and Shuhang Gu2
1

College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, China
sdluguo@gmail.com
2

Abstract. In the learning based video compression approaches, it is an
essential issue to compress pixel-level optical ﬂow maps by developing
new motion vector (MV) encoders. In this work, we propose a new framework called Resolution-adaptive Flow Coding (RaFC) to eﬀectively compress the ﬂow maps globally and locally, in which we use multi-resolution
representations instead of single-resolution representations for both the
input ﬂow maps and the output motion features of the MV encoder.
To handle complex or simple motion patterns globally, our frame-level
scheme RaFC-frame automatically decides the optimal ﬂow map resolution for each video frame. To cope diﬀerent types of motion patterns
locally, our block-level scheme called RaFC-block can also select the optimal resolution for each local block of motion features. In addition, the
rate-distortion criterion is applied to both RaFC-frame and RaFC-block
and select the optimal motion coding mode for eﬀective ﬂow coding.
Comprehensive experiments on four benchmark datasets HEVC, VTL,
UVG and MCL-JCV clearly demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our overall
RaFC framework after combing RaFC-frame and RaFC-block for video
compression.

1

Introduction

There is increasing demand for new video compression systems to eﬀectively
reduce redundancy in video sequences. The conventional video compression systems are based on hand-designed modules such as block based motion estimation
and Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT). Taking advantage of large-scale training datasets and powerful nonlinear modeling capacity of deep neural networks,
Z. Hu and Z. Chen—First two authors contributed equally.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 12) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 193–209, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_12

