Adaptive Computationally Efficient Network for
Monocular 3D Hand Pose Estimation
(Supplementary Material)
Zhipeng Fan1 , Jun Liu2? , and Yao Wang1
1

Tandon School of Engineering, New York University, Brooklyn NY, USA
{zf606, yw523}@nyu.edu
2
Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of
Technology and Design, Singapore
jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

1

Implementation details

We employ Hourglass network as the base pose encoder. For the coarse pose
encoder, we set the number of channels to 32 for both the STB dataset and the
FPHA dataset. The coarse pose encoder works at the resolution of 64 × 64 and
128 × 128 for STB and FPHA, respectively, which greatly reduce the amount
of computation. We introduce two separate models with different complexities
since the poses in STB are more stable and therefore are less challenging compared to FPHA. For the fine pose encoders, we use 64 channels and the input
resolution is 256 × 256 on both datasets, which is the typical setting of the original Hourglass module. For both pose encoders, we only use one stack instead
of multiple ones, as stacking multiple hourglass modules only brings marginal
accuracy improvement while almost doubles the computational cost.
Based on the original Hourglass module, we further directly estimate the 3D
coordinates of the hand joints from the summation of intermediate feature maps
and the 2D heatmaps Ht , as illustrated in Fig. 2(a) (from the main manuscript).
Specifically, we apply 1×1 convolution to map the feature maps and heatmaps to
the same dimension to facilitate the summation. The down-sampled feature maps
before the Hourglass modules are also skip-connected to the summation, which
helps to recover the information from earlier layers and ease the learning process.
The combined feature maps are fed into four consecutive convolution layers with
stride 2 followed by batch normalization. The down-sampled feature maps are
then input into 2 linear layers to directly regress the 3D coordinates, which are
parameterized following [1, 2]. We generate the ground truth 2D heatmaps Ht
with std = 1.
During training, we anneal the temperature τ from 5 to 0.5 with a factor of
0.9 for each epoch, which yields good performance empirically. We set the weight
term δ of the activation regularization of the fine pose encoder in Eq. (13) to 10
during training.
?

Corresponding author.

