Diﬀerentiable Joint Pruning and
Quantization for Hardware Eﬃciency
Ying Wang1(B) , Yadong Lu2 , and Tijmen Blankevoort3
1

Qualcomm AI Research, San Diego, California, USA
yinwan@qti.qualcomm.com
2
University of California, Irvine, USA
yadongl1@uci.edu
3
Qualcomm AI Research, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
tijmen@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract. We present a diﬀerentiable joint pruning and quantization (DJPQ) scheme. We frame neural network compression as a joint
gradient-based optimization problem, trading oﬀ between model pruning
and quantization automatically for hardware eﬃciency. DJPQ incorporates variational information bottleneck based structured pruning and
mixed-bit precision quantization into a single diﬀerentiable loss function. In contrast to previous works which consider pruning and quantization separately, our method enables users to ﬁnd the optimal trade-oﬀ
between both in a single training procedure. To utilize the method for
more eﬃcient hardware inference, we extend DJPQ to integrate structured pruning with power-of-two bit-restricted quantization. We show
that DJPQ signiﬁcantly reduces the number of Bit-Operations (BOPs)
for several networks while maintaining the top-1 accuracy of original
ﬂoating-point models (e.g., 53× BOPs reduction in ResNet18 on ImageNet, 43× in MobileNetV2). Compared to the conventional two-stage
approach, which optimizes pruning and quantization independently, our
scheme outperforms in terms of both accuracy and BOPs. Even when
considering bit-restricted quantization, DJPQ achieves larger compression ratios and better accuracy than the two-stage approach.
Keywords: Joint optimization · Model compression · Mixed
precision · Bit-restriction · Variational information bottleneck ·
Quantization

1

Introduction

There has been an increasing interest in the deep learning community to neural network model compression, driven by the need to deploy large deep neural
networks (DNNs) onto resource-constrained mobile or edge devices. So far, pruning and quantization are two of the most successful techniques in compressing
Y. Lu—Work done during internship at Qualcomm AI Research.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 259–277, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_16

