Supplementary Material

1

Overview

This document provides additional technical details and more visualization results. Specifically, we first describe the details of the network architecture for the
experiments in Sec. 2. Then we discuss the details of the proposed GAN-based
point cloud generation model in Sec. 3. Furthermore, we show more visual and
quantitative results of our method in Sec. 4. Finally, in Sec. 5, we present more
visualization results compared with PointFlow [7].

2

Network Architecture

For the generator, the structure is illustrated in Fig. 2. We generate four resolutions (256, 512, 1024, and 2048) of point clouds from a 128-dimensional latent
vector created by the normal distribution N (0, 0.2). Specifically, we stack 4 deconvolution networks (DECONV Networks) to generate multi-resolution feature
maps. Each deconvolution network has two branches: one for capturing global
information and one for bilateral interpolation. For bilateral interpolation, the
detailed structure is shown in Fig. 1.The output size of 4 deconvolution networks
are 256×32, 512×64, 1024×128, and 2018×256, respectively. It is important to
note that our four deconvolution networks are not shared for four resolutions. To
generate the coordinates of 3D point clouds, after each deconvolution network,
we use Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) with neuron sizes of 512, 256, 64, and
3, respectively. After MLPs, we use T anh as the activation function to generate
the final 3D coordinates.
For the discriminator, in Fig. 3, we adopt four PointNet-like [5] networks as
our discriminators. Specifically, we modify the network to accommodate different
resolutions. In the experiments, we found that too many convolution layers are
harmful for low-resolution point clouds. Besides, for different resolutions, the
discriminators are not shared.

3

Training of the Proposed PDGN

We employ the same training strategy in Goodfellow et al. [2] to train the generator and discriminator. We alternate between one step for optimizing the discriminator and one step for optimizing the generator to train our method. We
did not use any more tricks in our training. We adopt Adam [3] with the learning
rate 10−4 for both generator and discriminator. In the experiments, we observe
that the proposed model is easy to train and stable during training. This may
be due to the generation strategy, which can progressively generate point clouds from the low resolution to the high resolution. In our progressive generator,

