Fairness by Learning Orthogonal
Disentangled Representations
Mhd Hasan Sarhan1,2(B) , Nassir Navab1,3 , Abouzar Eslami1 ,
and Shadi Albarqouni1,4
1

Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany
hasan.sarhan@tum.de
2
Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Munich, Germany
3
Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA
4
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract. Learning discriminative powerful representations is a crucial step for machine learning systems. Introducing invariance against
arbitrary nuisance or sensitive attributes while performing well on speciﬁc tasks is an important problem in representation learning. This is
mostly approached by purging the sensitive information from learned
representations. In this paper, we propose a novel disentanglement approach to invariant representation problem. We disentangle the meaningful and sensitive representations by enforcing orthogonality constraints as
a proxy for independence. We explicitly enforce the meaningful representation to be agnostic to sensitive information by entropy maximization.
The proposed approach is evaluated on ﬁve publicly available datasets
and compared with state of the art methods for learning fairness and
invariance achieving the state of the art performance on three datasets
and comparable performance on the rest. Further, we perform an ablative
study to evaluate the eﬀect of each component.
Keywords: Representation learning · Disentangled representation ·
Fairness in machine learning

1

Introduction

Learning representations that are useful for downstream tasks yet robust against
arbitrary nuisance factors is a challenging problem. Automated systems powered
by machine learning techniques are corner stones for decision support systems
such as granting loans, advertising, and medical diagnostics. Deep neural networks learn powerful representations that encapsulate the extracted variations in
the data. Since these networks learn from historical data, they are prone to represent the past biases and the learnt representations might contain information
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 44) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 746–761, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_44

