Crowdsampling the Plenoptic Function
Zhengqi Li(B) , Wenqi Xian, Abe Davis, and Noah Snavely
Cornell Tech, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA
zl548@cornell.edu

Abstract. Many popular tourist landmarks are captured in a multitude
of online, public photos. These photos represent a sparse and unstructured sampling of the plenoptic function for a particular scene. In this
paper, we present a new approach to novel view synthesis under timevarying illumination from such data. Our approach builds on the recent
multi-plane image (MPI) format for representing local light ﬁelds under
ﬁxed viewing conditions. We introduce a new DeepMPI representation,
motivated by observations on the sparsity structure of the plenoptic function, that allows for real-time synthesis of photorealistic views that are
continuous in both space and across changes in lighting. Our method can
synthesize the same compelling parallax and view-dependent eﬀects as
previous MPI methods, while simultaneously interpolating along changes
in reﬂectance and illumination with time. We show how to learn a model
of these eﬀects in an unsupervised way from an unstructured collection of photos without temporal registration, demonstrating signiﬁcant
improvements over recent work in neural rendering. More information
can be found at crowdsampling.io.

1

Introduction

There is a thought experiment that goes something like this:
Imagine a ‘camera’ with no optics or image sensor of any kind. Rather, it
consists only of a box equipped with GPS, a radio for Internet access, a
button for ‘taking pictures’, and a screen for displaying those pictures. When
a user presses its button, the box searches the Internet for photos tagged with
its current location, and from these selects a best match to display on the
screen.

This thought experiment is perhaps best understood in the context of popular
tourist attractions, of which one can often ﬁnd countless images posted online
(Fig. 1, second row). When pointed at such an attraction, one can imagine our
box producing images very similar to those of a real camera, forcing us to consider
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 178–196, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_11

