Square Attack: a query-efficient black-box
adversarial attack via random search
Maksym Andriushchenko∗1 , Francesco Croce∗2 ,
Nicolas Flammarion1 , and Matthias Hein2
1

2

EPFL
University of Tübingen

Abstract. We propose the Square Attack, a score-based black-box l2 and l∞ -adversarial attack that does not rely on local gradient information and thus is not affected by gradient masking. Square Attack is
based on a randomized search scheme which selects localized squareshaped updates at random positions so that at each iteration the perturbation is situated approximately at the boundary of the feasible set.
Our method is significantly more query efficient and achieves a higher
success rate compared to the state-of-the-art methods, especially in the
untargeted setting. In particular, on ImageNet we improve the average
query efficiency in the untargeted setting for various deep networks by
a factor of at least 1.8 and up to 3 compared to the recent state-ofthe-art l∞ -attack of Al-Dujaili & O’Reilly (2020). Moreover, although
our attack is black-box, it can also outperform gradient-based white-box
attacks on the standard benchmarks achieving a new state-of-the-art
in terms of the success rate. The code of our attack is available at
https://github.com/max-andr/square-attack.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples are of particular concern when it comes to applications
of machine learning which are safety-critical. Many defenses against adversarial
examples have been proposed [26,62,45,5,37,1,7] but with limited success, as new
more powerful attacks could break many of them [12,4,40,14,63]. In particular,
gradient obfuscation or masking [4,40] is often the reason why seemingly robust
models turn out to be non-robust in the end. Gradient-based attacks are most
often affected by this phenomenon (white-box attacks but also black-box attacks
based on finite difference approximations [40]). Thus it is important to have
attacks which are based on different principles. Black-box attacks have recently
become more popular [41,9,51] as their attack strategies are quite different from
the ones employed for adversarial training, where often PGD-type attacks [37]
are used. However, a big weakness currently is that these black-box attacks need
to query the classifier too many times before they find adversarial examples, and
their success rate is sometimes significantly lower than that of white-box attacks.
∗

Equal contribution.

