Neural Voice Puppetry: Audio-Driven
Facial Reenactment
Justus Thies1(B) , Mohamed Elgharib2 , Ayush Tewari2 , Christian Theobalt2 ,
and Matthias Nießner1
1

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
justus.thies@tum.de
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrücken, Germany

Abstract. We present Neural Voice Puppetry, a novel approach for
audio-driven facial video synthesis (Video, Code and Demo: https://
justusthies.github.io/posts/neural-voice-puppetry/). Given an audio
sequence of a source person or digital assistant, we generate a photorealistic output video of a target person that is in sync with the audio
of the source input. This audio-driven facial reenactment is driven by a
deep neural network that employs a latent 3D face model space. Through
the underlying 3D representation, the model inherently learns temporal
stability while we leverage neural rendering to generate photo-realistic
output frames. Our approach generalizes across diﬀerent people, allowing
us to synthesize videos of a target actor with the voice of any unknown
source actor or even synthetic voices that can be generated utilizing standard text-to-speech approaches. Neural Voice Puppetry has a variety of
use-cases, including audio-driven video avatars, video dubbing, and textdriven video synthesis of a talking head. We demonstrate the capabilities
of our method in a series of audio- and text-based puppetry examples,
including comparisons to state-of-the-art techniques and a user study.

1

Introduction

In the recent years, speech-based interaction with computers made signiﬁcant
progress. Digital voice assistants are now ubiquitous due to their integration into
many commodity devices such as smartphone, tvs, cars, etc.; even companies use
more and more machine learning techniques to drive service bots that interact
with their customers. These virtual agents aim for a user-friendly man-machine
interface while keeping maintenance costs low. However, a signiﬁcant challenge
is to appeal to humans by delivering information through a medium that is most
comfortable to them. While speech-based interaction is already very successful,
such as shown in virtual assistants like Siri, Alexa, Google, etc., the visual counterpart is largely missing. This comes to no surprise given that a user would also
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 42) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 716–731, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_42

