Supplementary Material – Weakly-supervised
3D Shape Completion in the Wild
Jiayuan Gu1,2 , Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 , Sivabalan Manivasagam1,4 , Wenyuan Zeng1,4 ,
Zihao Wang1 , Yuwen Xiong1,4 , Hao Su2 , and Raquel Urtasun1,4
1

Uber Advanced Technologies Group
University of California, San Diego
{jigu, haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu
3
Massachusetts Institute of Techonology
4
University of Toronto
{wichiu, manivasagam, wenyuan, yuwen, urtasun}@uber.com
2

1

Overview

This supplementary material provides more detailed and thorough analysis of
our weakly-supervised approach for 3D shape completion. We hope readers can
gain more insights into our approach. Sec 2 presents ablation studies to analyze
our design. We report the results of partial point cloud registration on ShapeNet
in Sec 3, to show more quantitative comparison. Moreover, we showcase an experiment where the model is fine-tuned on another category in the wild during
inference in Sec 4. Sec 6 shows more visual comparison on both synthetic and
real LiDAR datasets. Last but not least, the sensitivity to initialization is investigated in Sec 7.

2

Ablation studies

For ablation studies, we investigate several factors: 1) the shape-projectionmatching-observation term, 2) the hindsight loss. Table 1 shows the quantitative results on ShapeNet. It is observed that: 1) Without the shape-projectionmatching-observation term, the chamfer distance and precision increase while
the coverage decreases. It shows the effectiveness of our proposed projection approach, and verifies that the observation-matching-shape term only is not enough
as it can not force the generated shape to be close to the observation. On our
3D vehicle dataset, the shape-projection-matching-observation term decreases
the precision but increases the coverage, which results in the chamfer distance
similar to that without it. However, the loss term can improve visual results.
2) Without the hindsight loss, the network is vulnerable to local minima, and
performs worse.
In addition, we investigate the relation between the performance and the
number of views during training. Table 2 shows results on our 3D vehicle dataset,
w.r.t numbers of views. With the same number of instances in a batch, the more
the number of views, the better the performance is. We select 4 views per instance
as a trade-off between the performance and the computation.

