A Differentiable Recurrent Surface for
Asynchronous Event-Based Data
Supplementary Material
Marco Cannici, Marco Ciccone, Andrea Romanoni, and Matteo Matteucci
Politecnico di Milano, Italy
{marco.cannici,marco.ciccone,andrea.romanoni,matteo.matteucci}@polimi.it

1

Implementation

The Matrix-LSTM feature extraction process can be implemented efficiently by
means of two order-aware reshape operations. These two operations, namely
groupByPixel and groupByTime, allow event streams to be split based on the
pixel location and temporal bin. After being reshaped, the input is ready to be
processed by a single LSTM network, implementing parameter sharing across
all pixel locations and temporal windows. In the following we give a detailed
overview of the two reshape operators.
1.1

GroupByPixel

This operation translates from event-sequences to pixel-sequences. Let X be a
(x,y)
tensor of shape N × Tmax × F , representing the features fn,i of a batch of
N samples, where Tmax is the length of the longest sequence in the batch. We
define the groupByPixel mapping on X as an order-aware reshape operation that
(x,y)
rearranges the events into a tensor of pixel-sequences of shape P × Tmax × F
(x,y)
(x,y)
and P is the number
where Tmax is the length of the longest pixel sequence En
of active pixels (i.e., having at least one event) in the batch, which equals N ·H ·W
(x,y)
only in the worst case. Pixel-sequences shorter than Tmax are padded with zero
events to be processed in parallel.
The tensor thus obtained is then processed by the LSTM cell that treats
samples in the first dimension independently, effectively implementing parameter
sharing and applying the transformation in parallel over all the pixels. The LSTM
output tensor, which has the same shape of the input one, is then sampled by
(x,y)
taking the output corresponding to the last event in each pixel-sequence En ,
ignoring values computed on padded values, and the obtained values are then
used to populate the dense representation. To improve efficiency, for each pixel(x,y)
sequence En , groupByPixel keeps also track of the original spatial position
(x, y), the index of the sample inside the batch and the length of the pixel(x,y)
sequence Tn , namely the index of the last event before padding. Given this set
of indexes, the densification step can be performed as a simple slicing operation.
See Figure 1 for visual clues. groupByPixel is implemented as a custom CUDA

