Spatial-Adaptive Network for Single
Image Denoising
Meng Chang, Qi Li(B) , Huajun Feng, and Zhihai Xu
State Key Lab for Modern Optical Instruments, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China
{changm,liqi,fenghj,xuzh}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract. Previous works have shown that convolutional neural networks can achieve good performance in image denoising tasks. However,
limited by the local rigid convolutional operation, these methods lead
to oversmoothing artifacts. A deeper network structure could alleviate
these problems, but at the cost of additional computational overhead. In
this paper, we propose a novel spatial-adaptive denoising network (SADNet) for eﬃcient single image blind noise removal. To adapt to changes
in spatial textures and edges, we design a residual spatial-adaptive block.
Deformable convolution is introduced to sample the spatially related features for weighting. An encoder-decoder structure with a context block
is introduced to capture multiscale information. By conducting noise
removal from coarse to ﬁne, a high-quality noise-free image is obtained.
We apply our method to both synthetic and real noisy image datasets.
The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art denoising methods both quantitatively and visually.
Keywords: Image denoising · Image restoration · Image processing

1

Introduction

Image denoising is an important task in computer vision. During image acquisition, noise is often unavoidable due to imaging environment and equipment
limitations. Therefore, noise removal is an essential step, not only for visual
quality but also for other computer vision tasks. Image denoising has a long
history, and many methods have been proposed. Many of the early model-based
methods found natural image priors and then applied optimization algorithms
to solve the model iteratively [2,23,30,41]. However, these methods are time
consuming and cannot eﬀectively remove noise. With the rise of deep learning,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been applied to image denoising
tasks and have achieved high-quality results.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 171–187, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_11

