Solving the Blind Perspective-n-Point
Problem End-to-End with Robust
Diﬀerentiable Geometric Optimization
Dylan Campbell(B) , Liu Liu, and Stephen Gould
Australian National University, Australian Centre for Robotic Vision,
Canberra, Australia
{dylan.campbell,liu.liu,stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
Abstract. Blind Perspective-n-Point (PnP) is the problem of estimating the position and orientation of a camera relative to a scene, given
2D image points and 3D scene points, without prior knowledge of the
2D–3D correspondences. Solving for pose and correspondences simultaneously is extremely challenging since the search space is very large.
Fortunately it is a coupled problem: the pose can be found easily given
the correspondences and vice versa. Existing approaches assume that
noisy correspondences are provided, that a good pose prior is available,
or that the problem size is small. We instead propose the ﬁrst fully endto-end trainable network for solving the blind PnP problem eﬃciently
and globally, that is, without the need for pose priors. We make use
of recent results in diﬀerentiating optimization problems to incorporate
geometric model ﬁtting into an end-to-end learning framework, including Sinkhorn, RANSAC and PnP algorithms. Our proposed approach
signiﬁcantly outperforms other methods on synthetic and real data.
Keywords: Camera pose estimation · PnP · Implicit diﬀerentiation

1

Introduction

The blind Perspective-n-Point (PnP) problem [35] aims to estimate the camera
pose from which a set of 2D points were viewed, relative to an unordered 3D
point-set. Speciﬁcally, the task is to ﬁnd the rotation and translation that aligns
a set of 2D bearing vectors with a set of 3D points, without knowledge of the
true 2D–3D correspondences. The camera intrinsic parameters are assumed to
be known, which allows 2D points to be expressed as bearing vectors. While
a fundamental technique for many computer vision and robotic applications,
including augmented reality and visual localization, it remains a challenging
problem that has not as yet been satisfactorily solved.
D. Campbell and L. Liu—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 15) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 244–261, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_15

