Entropy Minimisation Framework for
Event-based Vision Model Estimation Supplementary Material
Urbano Miguel Nunes and Yiannis Demiris
Personal Robotics Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Imperial College London, London, UK {um.nunes, y.demiris}@imperial.ac.uk

1

Practical Considerations

The current implementation is designed to favour usability and scalability, rather
than performance due to developmental reasons. Our framework converges on
average in 4-5 line-searches for rotational motion estimation considering 20000
events. These values may be different by running the code provided since the
initial conditions are far from the optimum. The time cost of evaluating the approximate entropy function and corresponding derivatives is ∼15ms and ∼25ms,
respectively, on a single-threaded 3.7Ghz CPU. For comparison, our implementation of the Variance cost function [1] and corresponding derivatives takes ∼12ms
and ∼21ms to be evaluated in the same settings, respectively. The framework is
highly parallelisable and further speed-ups can be achieved. This includes the exact entropy, which can also achieve competitive computational costs for specific
problems where a few ∼ 1000 of events are processed.

2

Additional Results on Optical Flow Estimation

Fig. 9 presents additional plots regarding optical flow estimation using the proposed framework. The optical flow is estimated between two consecutive frames
of the poster translation sequence [2]. In Fig. 9c, we show the original events,
that were produced by the motion between the frames, projected onto the IWE
without motion compensation. The resulting image is blurry exhibiting low contrast. By estimating the optical flow model parameters, if we project the modelled events onto the IWE, we get a sharper image with higher contrast. Similar
results are obtained using the Contrast Maximisation (CMax) framework [1].
Distinctively, however, our framework does not directly optimise the contrast
measure of the IWE. Instead, it minimises the dispersion of the modelled events
in the feature space. Additionally, the measure profiles of the exact functions and
respective approximations in function of the optical flow parameters are almost
identical.

