Content Adaptive and Error Propagation
Aware Deep Video Compression
Guo Lu1,2 , Chunlei Cai2 , Xiaoyun Zhang2 , Li Chen2(B) , Wanli Ouyang3 ,
Dong Xu3 , and Zhiyong Gao2
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
hilichen@sjtu.edu.cn
3
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia
2

Abstract. Recently, learning based video compression methods attract
increasing attention. However, the previous works suﬀer from error propagation due to the accumulation of reconstructed error in inter predictive coding. Meanwhile, the previous learning based video codecs are also
not adaptive to diﬀerent video contents. To address these two problems,
we propose a content adaptive and error propagation aware video compression system. Speciﬁcally, our method employs a joint training strategy by considering the compression performance of multiple consecutive
frames instead of a single frame. Based on the learned long-term temporal information, our approach eﬀectively alleviates error propagation
in reconstructed frames. More importantly, instead of using the handcrafted coding modes in the traditional compression systems, we design
an online encoder updating scheme in our system. The proposed approach updates the parameters for encoder according to the rate-distortion
criterion but keeps the decoder unchanged in the inference stage. Therefore, the encoder is adaptive to diﬀerent video contents and achieves better compression performance by reducing the domain gap between the
training and testing datasets. Our method is simple yet eﬀective and outperforms the state-of-the-art learning based video codecs on benchmark
datasets without increasing the model size or decreasing the decoding
speed.

1

Introduction

With the increasing amount of video content, it is a huge challenge to store
and transmit videos. In literature, a large number of algorithms [30,39] have
G. Lu and C. Cai—Authors contributed equally.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 27) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 456–472, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_27

