STEm-Seg: Supplementary Material
Ali Athar*1 , Sabarinath Mahadevan*1 , Aljos̆a Os̆ep2 , Laura Leal-Taixé2 , and
Bastian Leibe1
1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany
{athar,mahadevan,leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de
2
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{aljosa.osep,leal.taixe}@tum.de

Abstract. In this supplementary, we provide:
– A short explanation of the Lovàsz Hinge Loss, used for training our
network (Sec. I.),
– implementation and training details for our method (Sec. II.),
– explanation and training details for several baselines, evaluated in
our experimental section (Sec. III. and VI.),
– and finally, additional qualitative results on three different datasets
(Sec. VII.).

I.

Loss Function

As explained in Sec. 3.1 of the paper, we use a loss function that is a linear
combination of three components:
Ltotal = Lemb + Lsmooth + Lcenter ,

(1)

here Lsmooth is the variance smoothness loss, which ensures that the network
outputs uniform variance values for every object instance. For example, if the
network outputs the set of variances V j for the j th instance in a video clip, then
the variance smoothness loss for this set of variances is denoted by Ljsmooth and
is computed as:
X
1
2
(v − v̄) ,
Ljsmooth =
|V j |
v∈V j

where v̄ is the mean of the variances in V j . Likewise, the loss can be computed
for all object instances in the video clip and averaged. No loss is applied to the
variances output for background pixels.
Lcenter is a regression loss, which ensures that pixels belonging to a foreground
object instance have probability values in the instance center heat map H that
match the probability obtained by applying Eq. 2 (main text) to the embedding
vector at that pixel location.
Lemb is the embedding loss, and is computed using the Lovàsz extension of
the hinge loss for binary segmentation, as explained below.
The Lovàsz Hinge Loss: We use the Lovàsz Hinge Loss [1] to train the
embeddings output by our network (Lemb ). It is a convex surrogate of the Jaccard

