VisualEchoes: Spatial Image Representation
Learning through Echolocation
(Supplementary Materials)
Ruohan Gao1,3 , Changan Chen1,3 , Ziad Al-Halah1 ,
Carl Schissler2 , Kristen Grauman1,3
1

The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Facebook Reality Lab, 3 Facebook AI Research
{rhgao,changan,ziad,grauman}@cs.utexas.edu, carl.schissler@fb.com

The supplementary materials for [3] consist of:
A. Qualitative results on monocular depth prediction.
B. Qualitative results on surface normal estimation.
C. More qualitative results on visual navigation.
D. More qualitative results from the case study of spatial cues in echoes.
E. t-SNE embedding of echoes
F. Ablation study.
G. Low-shot experiments varying the amount of training data.
H. Comparing to state-of-the-art on monocular depth prediction.
I. Network/Dataset/Implementation details.

A

Qualitative results on monocular depth prediction

Fig. 1 shows example results on monocular depth prediction as described in
Sec. 3.4 in the main paper. Using our pre-trained VisualEchoes network as
initialization leads to more accurate depth prediction results compared to no pretraining, demonstrating the usefulness of the learned spatial features. Although
the features are learned in the Replica environments, they transfer well to do
depth predictions in these photos from NYU-V2. For example, while the model
trained from scratch cannot well predict the depth values for the side walls of
the first and the last examples, our model with enhanced spatial knowledge can
make predictions that better match the ground-truth.

B

Qualitative results on surface normal estimation

The surface normal is a unit norm 3-dimensional vector (x, y, z) at each pixel
location. Following [6], the surface normals are clustered into 40 clusters through
k-means and surface normal estimation is formulated as a 40-way classification
task. Fig. 2 shows example results on surface normal estimation of color-coded
surface normals of the 40 classes. Using our pre-trained VisualEchoes network
as initialization leads to more accurate surface normal estimation compared to

