Is Sharing of Egocentric Video Giving Away Your
Biometric Signature?
Daksh Thapar1 , Aditya Nigam1 , and Chetan Arora2
1

Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, Mandi, India
d18033@students.iitmandi.ac.in, aditya@iitmandi.ac.in
2
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
chetan@cse.iitd.ac.in

1

Datasets Used

In this section we have described all the datasets used in the proposed work. In order to
perform first person recognition, two publically available datasets FPSI and EVPR have
been used along with our indigenous dataset.
1.1

Datasets for first-person recognition

First Person Social Interactions dataset (FPSI) [1]: FPSI is a publicly available
dataset consisting of video captured by 6 people wearing cameras mounted on their hat,
and spending their day at Disney World Resort in Orlando, Florida. We have used only
walking sequences from this dataset, where the gait profile of the wearer is reflected in
the observed optical flow in the video. Further, we have tested in the unseen sequence
mode where morning videos have been used for training and evening ones for testing.
Egocentric Video Photographer Recognition dataset (EVPR) [2]: It consists of videos
of 32 subjects taken for egocentric first-person recognition. The data is made using two
different cameras. In our experiments, we use videos captured from one of the cameras
for training while the remaining videos have been used for testing.
Our Dataset ((IITMD-WFP): To validate our technique in multiple scenarios, we have
created a new dataset of our own as well. The dataset consists of 3.1 hours of videos
captured by 31 different subjects. The videos have been taken on two different days
for each subject, introducing variability in the dataset. To maintain testing in unseen
sequence settings, we have used the videos from one of the days for training and other for
testing. To introduce further variability in the scene, we have captured in two scenarios:
indoor and outdoor. The dataset is broken down into three parts: (1) (DB-01) The dataset
collected indoor. (2) (DB-02) The dataset collected outdoor. (3) (DB-03) The combined
indoor and outdoor dataset. To make sure that the network does not rely on the scenespecific optical flow, we have captured video for each subject in a similar scenario.
For both the indoor and outdoor datasets, the path taken by each of the subjects was
predefined and fixed, and the videos were captured using the SJCAM 4000 camera.
For experimenting in a much larger scenario, we also test our system with a combined
dataset, merging all the above datasets. We refer to this as DB-04, which consists of

