Mining Cross-Image Semantics
for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Guolei Sun1 , Wenguan Wang1(B) , Jifeng Dai2,3 , and Luc Van Gool1
1

ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com
2
Sensetime Research, Science Park, Hong Kong
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
https://github.com/GuoleiSun/MCIS wsss

Abstract. This paper studies the problem of learning semantic segmentation from image-level supervision only. Current popular solutions
leverage object localization maps from classiﬁers as supervision signals,
and struggle to make the localization maps capture more complete object
content. Rather than previous eﬀorts that primarily focus on intra-image
information, we address the value of cross-image semantic relations for
comprehensive object pattern mining. To achieve this, two neural coattentions are incorporated into the classiﬁer to complimentarily capture
cross-image semantic similarities and diﬀerences. In particular, given a
pair of training images, one co-attention enforces the classiﬁer to recognize the common semantics from co-attentive objects, while the other
one, called contrastive co-attention, drives the classiﬁer to identify the
unshared semantics from the rest, uncommon objects. This helps the classiﬁer discover more object patterns and better ground semantics in image
regions. In addition to boosting object pattern learning, the co-attention
can leverage context from other related images to improve localization
map inference, hence eventually beneﬁting semantic segmentation learning. More essentially, our algorithm provides a uniﬁed framework that
handles well diﬀerent WSSS settings, i.e., learning WSSS with (1) precise
image-level supervision only, (2) extra simple single-label data, and (3)
extra noisy web data. It sets new state-of-the-arts on all these settings,
demonstrating well its eﬃcacy and generalizability.
Keywords: Semantic segmentation · Weakly supervised learning

1

Introduction

Recently, modern deep learning based semantic segmentation models [6,7],
trained with massive manually labeled data, achieve far better performance than
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 21) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 347–365, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_21

