Conditional Convolutions for Instance
Segmentation
Zhi Tian, Chunhua Shen(B) , and Hao Chen
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract. We propose a simple yet eﬀective instance segmentation
framework, termed CondInst (conditional convolutions for instance segmentation). Top-performing instance segmentation methods such as
Mask R-CNN rely on ROI operations (typically ROIPool or ROIAlign)
to obtain the ﬁnal instance masks. In contrast, we propose to solve
instance segmentation from a new perspective. Instead of using instancewise ROIs as inputs to a network of ﬁxed weights, we employ dynamic
instance-aware networks, conditioned on instances. CondInst enjoys two
advantages: (1) Instance segmentation is solved by a fully convolutional
network, eliminating the need for ROI cropping and feature alignment.
(2) Due to the much improved capacity of dynamically-generated conditional convolutions, the mask head can be very compact (e.g., 3 conv.
layers, each having only 8 channels), leading to signiﬁcantly faster inference. We demonstrate a simpler instance segmentation method that can
achieve improved performance in both accuracy and inference speed. On
the COCO dataset, we outperform a few recent methods including welltuned Mask R-CNN baselines, without longer training schedules needed.
Code is available: https://git.io/AdelaiDet.
Keywords: Conditional convolutions · Instance segmentation

1

Introduction

Instance segmentation is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision,
which requires an algorithm to predict a per-pixel mask with a category label
for each instance of interest in an image. Despite a few works being proposed
recently, the dominant framework for instance segmentation is still the two-stage
method Mask R-CNN [15], which casts instance segmentation into a two-stage
detection-and-segmentation task. Mask R-CNN ﬁrst employs an object detector Faster R-CNN to predict a bounding-box for each instance. Then for each
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 17) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 282–298, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_17

