Simultaneous Detection and Tracking with Motion
Modelling for Multiple Object Tracking
(Supplementary Material)
ShiJie Sun1 , Naveed Akhtar2 , XiangYu Song3 , HuanSheng Song1 , Ajmal Mian2 , and
Mubarak Shah4
1

Chang’an University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
{shijieSun,hshsong}@chd.edu.cn
2
University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, WA, Australia
{naveed.akhtar,ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au
3
Deakin University, RWaurn Ponds, Victoria 3216, Melbourne, Australia
xiangyu.song@deakin.edu.au
4
University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, America
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

A

Public Source Code & Dataset

Along with the submitted manuscript, we provide the source code of the proposed
DMM-Net and publish the proposed Omni-MOT dataset. We also provide our implementation to generate more videos similar to the proposed dataset using the CARLA
simulator [3]. Below, the links are provided for anonymous repositories for the sake of
the review process. The links will be made public after the acceptance. (Click on the
highlighted text to open the URL).
– DMM-Net is the source code of DMM-Net. It also contains the training and testing
script for both UA-DETRAC [10] and Omni-MOT dataset, and instructions for
reproducing the result of our methods.
– Omni-MOT Dataset provides the link to the dataset along with the related description.
– Omni-MOT Script is the source code for generating the Omni-MOT dataset and
extending it. It includes the script for recording the MOT data and playing the
recorded dataset.

B

Videos for Dataset and Further Results

We provide the following videos for the review process. These and further videos will
also be made public after the acceptance:
– Omni-MOT dataset videos illustrates different scenes, camera viewpoints and weather
conditions used in the generated large-scale realistic dataset.
– Further results on Omni-MOT illustrates more tracking results on the proposed
dataset.
– Further results on UA-DETRAC show tracking results on a representative scene
from the UA-DETRAC challenge.

