Partially-Shared Variational
Auto-encoders for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation with Target Shift
Ryuhei Takahashi1 , Atsushi Hashimoto2(B) , Motoharu Sonogashira1 ,
and Masaaki Iiyama1
1
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
{sonogashira,iiyama}@mm.media.kyoto-u.ac.jp
2
OMRON SINIC X Corp., Tokyo, Japan
atsushi.hashimoto@sinicx.com

Abstract. Target shift, the diﬀerent label distributions of source and
target domains, is an important problem for practical use of unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA); as we do not know labels in target domain
datasets, we cannot ensure an identical label distribution between the two
domains. Despite this inaccessibility, modern UDA methods commonly
try to match the shape of the feature distributions over the domains while
projecting the features to labels by a common classiﬁer. This implicitly
assumes the identical label distribution. To overcome this problem, we
propose a method that generates a pseudo pair by domain conversion
where the label is preserved identically even trained with target-shifted
datasets. A pair-wise metric learning enables to align feature over the
domains without matching the shape of distributions. We conducted two
experiments: one is a regression of pose-estimation, where label distribution is continuous and the target shift problem can seriously degrade
the quality of UDA. The other is digit classiﬁcation task where we can
systematically control the distribution diﬀerence. The code and dataset
are available at https://github.com/iiyama-lab/PS-VAEs.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is one of the most studied topics in
recent years. One attractive application of UDA is adaptation from computer
graphic (CG) data to sensor-observed data. By constructing a CG-rendering
system, we can easily obtain a large amount of supervised data with diversity for training. Because a model straightforwardly trained on CG-rendered
dataset hardly works with real observation, training a model with both CGrendered dataset (source domain) and unsupervised real observation dataset
(target domain) by UDA is a necessary but promised approach.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 1–17, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_1

