Why do These Match? Explaining the Behavior
of Image Similarity Models Supplementary
Bryan A. Plummer1 , Mariya I. Vasileva2 , Vitali Petsiuk1 , Kate Saenko1,3 , and
David Forsyth2
1

Boston University, Boston MA 02215, USA
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana IL 61801, USA
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge MA 02142, USA
{bplum,vpetsiuk,saenko}@bu.edu {mvasile2,daf}@illinois.edu

2

1

Candidate Salience Map Generator Descriptions

In this section we provide additional details about each of the candidate saliency
map generation methods used in our paper. We split these approaches into two
groups: methods which analyze behavior solely through input manipulation (described in Section 1.1) and those which use an optimization procedure to learn
some parameters in combination with input manipulation (described in Section 1.2). Please see Section 3.2 of our paper for a description of how these
methods are adapted to our task. We also provide a runtime comparison of each
approach in Table 1. A qualitative comparison between saliency map generators
on the Polyvore Outfits and AwA datasets is provided in Figures 1 and 2.
1.1

Saliency Maps by Input Manipulation

A straightforward approach to producing a saliency map is to manipulate the
input image by removing image regions and measuring the effect this has on
the similarity score. If a large drop in similarity is measured, then the region
must be important to this decision. If almost no change was measured, then
the model considers the image region irrelevant. The saliency map is generated
from this approach by averaging the similarity scores for each pixel location
over all instances where it was removed from the input. The challenge then is
to determine how to manipulate the input image to discover these important
regions.
Sliding Window [7]. The first approach to removing regions of an image we
shall discuss is a sliding window, where regions are sampled regularly across an
image. There is a direct tradeoff, however, with how densely frames are sampled
and the computational time it takes to do a forward pass through the network for
each manipulated image. If frames are not densely sampled to enable an efficient
solution, then it wouldn’t be able to localize important regions accurately. If
regions are too densely sampled then removing them might not make enough
of a difference in the similarity score to take measurements accurately. When
manipulating the inputs of the reference image, we apply 625 occlusion windows

