Motion Capture from Internet Videos
Junting Dong1 , Qing Shuai1 , Yuanqing Zhang1 , Xian Liu1 , Xiaowei Zhou1 ,
and Hujun Bao1,2(B)
1

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
bao@cad.zju.edu.cn

Abstract. Recent advances in image-based human pose estimation
make it possible to capture 3D human motion from a single RGB video.
However, the inherent depth ambiguity and self-occlusion in a single view
prohibit the recovery of as high-quality motion as multi-view reconstruction. While multi-view videos are not common, the videos of a celebrity
performing a speciﬁc action are usually abundant on the Internet. Even
if these videos were recorded at diﬀerent time instances, they would
encode the same motion characteristics of the person. Therefore, we propose to capture human motion by jointly analyzing these Internet videos
instead of using single videos separately. However, this new task poses
many new challenges that cannot be addressed by existing methods,
as the videos are unsynchronized, the camera viewpoints are unknown,
the background scenes are diﬀerent, and the human motions are not
exactly the same among videos. To address these challenges, we propose
a novel optimization-based framework and experimentally demonstrate
its ability to recover much more precise and detailed motion from multiple videos, compared against monocular motion capture methods.
Keywords: Motion capture · Human pose estimation

1

Introduction

Human motion capture (MoCap) is a core technology in a variety of applications
such as movie production, video game development, sports analysis and interactive entertainment. While there have been some commercial solutions to MoCap,
e.g., optical MoCap systems like Vicon, these systems are for professionals but
not commodities. The systems are expensive and hard to calibrate. More importantly, the performers need to present in the studio to perform actions, which
makes it impossible to collect large-scale motion data for a large population.
For example, producing an animated avatar of a celebrity needs to invite the
person to the MoCap studio, which is not always feasible especially for amateur
productions.
J. Dong and Q. Shuai—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 13) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 210–227, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_13

