In-Home Daily-Life Captioning Using
Radio Signals
Lijie Fan, Tianhong Li(B) , Yuan Yuan, and Dina Katabi
MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
tianhong@mit.edu

Abstract. This paper aims to caption daily life – i.e., to create a textual description of people’s activities and interactions with objects in
their homes. Addressing this problem requires novel methods beyond
traditional video captioning, as most people would have privacy concerns about deploying cameras throughout their homes. We introduce
RF-Diary, a new model for captioning daily life by analyzing the privacypreserving radio signal in the home with the home’s ﬂoormap. RF-Diary
can further observe and caption people’s life through walls and occlusions and in dark settings. In designing RF-Diary, we exploit the ability
of radio signals to capture people’s 3D dynamics, and use the ﬂoormap
to help the model learn people’s interactions with objects. We also use
a multi-modal feature alignment training scheme that leverages existing video-based captioning datasets to improve the performance of our
radio-based captioning model. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that RF-Diary generates accurate captions under visible conditions. It also sustains its good performance in dark or occluded settings, where video-based captioning approaches fail to generate meaningful captions.(For more information, please visit our project webpage:
http://rf-diary.csail.mit.edu)

1

Introduction

Captioning is an important task in computer vision and natural language processing; it typically generates language descriptions of visual inputs such as
images or videos [3,10,17,23,25,27,29,33,35–38]. This paper focuses on in-home
daily-life captioning, that is, creating a system that observes people at home,
and automatically generates a transcript of their everyday life. Such a system
would help older people to age-in-place. Older people may have memory problems and some of them suﬀer from Alzheimer’s. They may forget whether they
took their medications, brushed their teeth, slept enough, woke up at night, ate
L. Fan, T. Li—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 105–123, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_7

