Semi-supervised Segmentation Based
on Error-Correcting Supervision
Robert Mendel1(B) , Luis Antonio de Souza Jr.2 , David Rauber1 ,
João Paulo Papa3 , and Christoph Palm1
1

Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
{robert1.mendel,david.rauber,christoph.palm}@oth-regensburg.de
2
Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil
luis.souza@dc.ufscar.br
3
São Paulo State University, Bauru, Brazil
papa@fc.unesp.br

Abstract. Pixel-level classiﬁcation is an essential part of computer
vision. For learning from labeled data, many powerful deep learning models have been developed recently. In this work, we augment such supervised segmentation models by allowing them to learn from unlabeled
data. Our semi-supervised approach, termed Error-Correcting Supervision, leverages a collaborative strategy. Apart from the supervised training on the labeled data, the segmentation network is judged by an additional network. The secondary correction network learns on the labeled
data to optimally spot correct predictions, as well as to amend incorrect
ones. As auxiliary regularization term, the corrector directly inﬂuences
the supervised training of the segmentation network. On unlabeled data,
the output of the correction network is essential to create a proxy for
the unknown truth. The corrector’s output is combined with the segmentation network’s prediction to form the new target. We propose a
loss function that incorporates both the pseudo-labels as well as the predictive certainty of the correction network. Our approach can easily be
added to supervised segmentation models. We show consistent improvements over a supervised baseline on experiments on both the Pascal VOC
2012 and the Cityscapes datasets with varying amounts of labeled data.

1

Introduction

One factor that led to the reemergence of neural networks as an active topic of
research is the availability of large datasets to researchers today. Starting with
Krizhevsky et al. [20] signiﬁcantly improving the classiﬁcation accuracy on the
ImageNet dataset [6], and the many impressive results in the domains of vision,
natural language processing, and control that followed, neural networks have
proven to be an incredibly eﬀective tool, when enough labeled data is available.
Large amounts of labeled data is already accessible for generic object detection
tasks or can be gathered if enough resources are on-hand to cope with such a
process. However, in some computer vision domains, the availability still poses
a problem.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 141–157, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_9

