Deformable Style Transfer:
Supplementary Material

Implementation Details
To produce DST results with Gatys, we initialized the output image as the content image resized to have a long side of 256 pixels. During the optimization, we
updated the parameters 100 times with a learning rate of 1 with L-BFGS, following the authors’ implementation settings. Since the content and style loss terms
and the deformation loss term have vastly different magnitudes, we scaled down
the content loss and the style loss by 1/50000 and 1/100000, respectively. We
also scaled down the deformation parameter gradients by 1/1000000 to update
them at a much smaller rate.
To produce DST results with STROTSS, we followed the authors’ implementation settings and optimized the output image at multiple scales, starting
from a low-resolution image scaled to have a long side of 64 pixels. The output
image was initialized as the bottom level of a Laplacian pyramid of the content
image added to the mean color of the style image. During the optimization, instead of optimizing the pixels directly, we optimized the Laplacian pyramid of
the image for faster convergence, in addition to the deformation parameters θ.
At each scale, we used the output of the previous scale as the initial image, used
bilinear upsampling to increase the resolution, and halved the content weight α
that controls the relative importance of content preservation to stylization. We
produced the stylized images in the main paper at three scales, starting from
content weight α = 32. At each scale, we made 350 updates of the parameters
using stochastic gradient descent with a learning rate of 0.2. More details can
be found in our published code: https://github.com/sunniesuhyoung/DST.

Human Evaluation
As described in Section 5.2 of the main paper, we conducted a human evaluation
study using Amazon Mechanical Turk on a set of 75 diverse style/content pairs.
We show the evaluation interfaces in Supplementary Figures 1 and 2.

Image Credits
Figure 1
1. Schoeller, Martin: ‘Meryl Streep’. (2018), http://www.artnet.com/artists/martinschoeller/meryl-streep-from-the-series-portraits-a-iuZXKIjNqXY2M9v6ih-p1A2

