Combining Implicit Function Learning
and Parametric Models for 3D Human
Reconstruction
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1(B) , Cristian Sminchisescu2 , Christian Theobalt1 ,
and Gerard Pons-Moll1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrucken, Germany
{bbhatnag,theobalt,gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
Google Research, New York, USA
sminchisescu@google.com

Abstract. Implicit functions represented as deep learning approximations are powerful for reconstructing 3D surfaces. However, they can
only produce static surfaces that are not controllable, which provides
limited ability to modify the resulting model by editing its pose or shape
parameters. Nevertheless, such features are essential in building ﬂexible
models for both computer graphics and computer vision. In this work,
we present methodology that combines detail-rich implicit functions and
parametric representations in order to reconstruct 3D models of people
that remain controllable and accurate even in the presence of clothing.
Given sparse 3D point clouds sampled on the surface of a dressed person, we use an Implicit Part Network (IP-Net) to jointly predict the
outer 3D surface of the dressed person, the inner body surface, and the
semantic correspondences to a parametric body model. We subsequently
use correspondences to ﬁt the body model to our inner surface and then
non-rigidly deform it (under a parametric body + displacement model)
to the outer surface in order to capture garment, face and hair detail. In
quantitative and qualitative experiments with both full body data and
hand scans we show that the proposed methodology generalizes, and is
eﬀective even given incomplete point clouds collected from single-view
depth images. Our models and code will be publicly released (http://
virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/ipnet).
Keywords: 3D human reconstruction · Implicit reconstruction ·
Parametric modelling

1

Introduction

The sensing technology for capturing unstructured 3D point clouds is becoming ubiquitous and more accurate, thus opening avenues for extracting detailed
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 19) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 311–329, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_19

