[Supplementary Document] Vectorizing World
Buildings: Planar Graph Reconstruction by
Primitive Detection and Relationship Inference
Nelson Nauata and Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada
{nnauata,furukawa}@sfu.ca

The supplementary document provides 1) more statistics on our benchmark;
2) implementation details of primitive detection networks; 3) the complete mathematical specification of our Integer Programming (IP) formulation; and 4) additional experimental results.

1

Benchmark statistics

Figure 1 shows histograms of training and testing samples against different numbers of corners, edges, and regions.

2

Implementation details of primitive detectors

Standard neural architectures are used for the primitive detection: Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) for corners [2], Dilated Residual Networks (DRN) [4]
for edges, and Mask-RCNN [1] for regions.
Corner detection: In our corner detection pipeline, we borrow an existing
architecture [2]. Our Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) divides the image in
a Hb × Wb grid, where each cell is responsible for predicting a confidence score
cconf and (x, y) coordinates of a corner residing within a bin. The corner network
proposal head is trained using binary cross-entropy loss at each output cell in the
grid. Similarly to [2], we utilize a Google’s Inception-v2 model [3] for encoding
the input image. We train the network with a learning rate of 0.001 (decay ratio
γ = 0.1 every each 5 epochs) using ADAM optimizer for 16 epochs and utilize
only corners with cconf ≥ 0.2, batch size is set to 1. Our output grid size is
120 × 120 of 256-dimensional features which are regressed to the output of the
network.
Edge detection: We utilize the DRN-D-105 architecture [4]. Given an input
RGB image I (256×256), we obtain for each building an edge segmentation mask
by optimizing a binary cross-entropy loss for each cell in the final feature map
at the end of the network. We fine-tune the pre-trained DRN-D-105 architecture
with learning rate equal to 0.0001 for 40 epochs and batch size set to 8.
Region detection: We utilize the official code release for Mask-RCNN [1] for
performing instance region segmentation. We train the network utilizing regions

