1

Supplementary Materials
1

Network Architectures

The architectures of the encoders with respect to different size of images are
described in Table 1, Table 2 and Table 3. The ResBlocks used in the encoders
are presented in Fig. 1. Table 4 and Table 5 show the architecture of the critic
and the discriminator, respectively. The critic and the discriminator both consist
of three fully-connected layers. The discriminator shares some layers with the
encoder to reduce computations, i.e., the input X in Table 5 is a flatten vector
created by the encoder. For the encoder in Table 1, X is the output of the
last convolutional layer, while for the encoders in Table 2 and Table 3, X is
the output of the second last ResBlock. The slopes of lReLU functions for all
architectures are set to 0.2.

2

Data Augmentation

The data augmentation adopted in DCCS includes four commonly used approaches:
(1) Random cropping: randomly crop a rectangular region whose aspect ratio
and area are randomly sampled in the range of [3/4, 4/3] and [40%, 100%],
respectively, and then resize the cropped region to the original image size.
(2) Random horizontal flipping: flip the image horizontally with 50% probability.
(3) Color jittering: scale brightness, contrast and saturation with coefficients
uniformly drawn from [0.6, 1.4], while scale hue with coefficients uniformly
drawn from [0.875, 1.125].
(4) Channel shuffling: randomly shuffle the RGB channels of the image.
Random cropping and color jittering are employed for all datasets. Following [5],
random horizontal flipping is used for all datasets except MNIST due to the
direction sensitive nature of the digits. Channel shuffling is applied to color
images before graying. Note that channel shuffling can also change the brightness
of the grayscale images because the RGB channels are summed with different
weights for graying.

3

βAug Configuration

As previously stated, a small βAug cannot disentangle the style information well,
while a large βAug may lead the clusters to overlap by generating high confidence
of the overlapping part of two clusters. Therefore, we propose an applicable way
for βAug configuration by visualizing the t-SNE figure of the latent representation. As shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2c, with βAug being set to 2 for FashionMNIST and 4 for CIFAR-10, the clusters are well separated. However, the clusters start to overlap after increasing βAug to 3 for Fashion-MNIST (Fig. 2b) or 5

