Cross-Domain Cascaded Deep Translation
Oren Katzir1(B) , Dani Lischinski2 , and Daniel Cohen-Or1
1

Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel
orenkatzir@mail.tau.ac.il
2
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract. In recent years we have witnessed tremendous progress in
unpaired image-to-image translation, propelled by the emergence of
DNNs and adversarial training strategies. However, most existing methods focus on transfer of style and appearance, rather than on shape translation. The latter task is challenging, due to its intricate non-local nature,
which calls for additional supervision. We mitigate this by descending
the deep layers of a pre-trained network, where the deep features contain more semantics, and applying the translation between these deep
features. Our translation is performed in a cascaded, deep-to-shallow,
fashion, along the deep feature hierarchy: we ﬁrst translate between the
deepest layers that encode the higher-level semantic content of the image,
proceeding to translate the shallower layers, conditioned on the deeper
ones. We further demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of using pre-trained deep
features in the context of unconditioned image generation. Our code and
trained models will be made publicly available.
Keywords: Unpaired image-to-image translation · Image generation

1

Introduction

In recent years, neural networks have signiﬁcantly advanced generative image
modeling. With the emergence of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9],
image-to-image translation methods have dramatically progressed, revolutionizing applications such as inpainting [41], super resolution [34], domain adaptation [11], and more. In particular, there have been intriguing advances in
the setting of unpaired image-to-image translation through the use of cycleconsistency [39,43], as well as other approaches [3,15,20,25]. However, most
existing methods acknowledge the diﬃculty in translating shapes from one
domain to another, as this might entail drastic geometric deformations. Consider, for example, translating between elephants and giraﬀes, where one would
expect the neck of an elephant to be extended, while the elephant’s head should
shrink. The challenge is compounded by the fact that, even within the same
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 40) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 673–689, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_40

