Margin-Mix: Semi–Supervised Learning for Face
Expression Recognition
Corneliu Florea1[0000−0001−9754−6795] , Mihai Badea1 , Laura Florea1 ,
Andrei Racoviteanu1 , and Constantin Vertan1
Image Processing and Analysis Laboratory, Unversity Politehnica of Bucharest
{corneliu.florea; mihai sorin.badea; laura.florea;
andrei.racoviteanu; constantin.vertan }@upb.ro

1

Domain comparison: object recognition vs face
expression recognition

In the main paper, we emphasized that face expression recognition (FER) domain is more compact than the object recognition domain. More precisely, FER
has smaller inter class variance.
Given the original dimensionality of the two domains (32 × 32 × 3 = 3072 for
CIFAR images and respectively 48 × 48 = 2304 for FER+ images), to our best
knowledge there is no universally accepted technique to visualize the distribution
of the points in the original space.
In this material, we propose some approaches widely used to visualize the
original spaces and to provide an intuition about our proposal.
1.1

Low dimensionality in the CNN embedding space

In this case, for the convolutional neural network (CNN), we use the smaller
AlexNet [2]. There, on the last layer before the prediction, we impose a dimensionality of 2 instead of the standard 4096. Instead of the WideResNet,
the AlexNet type of network is able to accept such a modification with a dramatic change in performance (which nevertheless is smaller). In this scenario,
the network was trained in purely supervised manner with the large margin loss.
The distribution of the training points from the two domains, illustrated by the
FER+ and CIFAR examples can be seen in figure 1.
One may easily note that data in the FER domain is more tightly clustered
and in the first epochs, the clusters are overlapping no matter the classes. As
epoch progress and the networks are adjusted for better separation, one may
see that CIFAR corresponding become more distinct, while the FER are less so.
Thus we argue that the difference in the distribution of points requires different
strategy.
1.2

Visualization using t-SNE

Another popular technique for visualization high dimensional data is t-SNE [4].
In this case, we have considered the original architecture with full 4096 dimensionality and employed t-SNE for visualization of data structure with respect

