Extract and Merge: Superpixel
Segmentation with Regional Attributes
Jianqiao An1,2 , Yucheng Shi1,2 , Yahong Han1,2,3(B) , Meijun Sun1 ,
and Qi Tian4
1

College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{anjianqiao,yucheng,yahong,sunmeijun}@tju.edu.cn
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract. For a certain object in an image, the relationship between
its central region and the peripheral region is not well utilized in existing superpixel segmentation methods. In this work, we propose the concept of regional attribute, which indicates the location of a certain
region in the object. Based on the regional attributes, we propose a
novel superpixel method called Extract and Merge (EAM). In the
extracting stage, we design square windows with a side length of a power
of two, named power-window, to extract regional attributes by calculating boundary clearness of objects in the window. The larger windows
are for the central regions and the smaller ones correspond to the peripheral regions. In the merging stage, power-windows are merged according
to the deﬁned attraction between them. Speciﬁcally, we build a graph
model and propose an eﬃcient method to make the large windows merge
the small ones strategically, regarding power-windows as vertices and the
adjacencies between them as edges. We demonstrate that our superpixels
have ﬁne boundaries and are superior to the respective state-of-the-art
algorithms on multiple benchmarks.
Keywords: Superpixel · Power-window · Boundary clearness · Graph
model

1

Introduction

Superpixel segmentation is to divide an image into several fragments without
intersecting, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The major advantage of using superpixels is
computational eﬃciency. It can be a helpful pre-process of numerous computervision tasks such as image semantic segmentation [5,12], object detection [14,17],
salient object detection [18,21], tracking [19] etc. Some work in the ﬁeld of deep
learning that speciﬁcally utilizes the features of the superpixels has also been
proposed in recent years. SPN [8] employs superpixel segmentation as a pooling
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 155–170, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_10

