Learning to Learn Parameterized
Classification Networks for Scalable
Input Images
Duo Li1,2 , Anbang Yao2(B) , and Qifeng Chen1(B)
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong
duo.li@connect.ust.hk, cqf@ust.hk
2
Intel Labs, Beijing, China
anbang.yao@intel.com

Abstract. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) do not have a predictable recognition behavior with respect to the input resolution change.
This prevents the feasibility of deployment on diﬀerent input image resolutions for a speciﬁc model. To achieve eﬃcient and ﬂexible image classiﬁcation at runtime, we employ meta learners to generate convolutional
weights of main networks for various input scales and maintain privatized Batch Normalization layers per scale. For improved training performance, we further utilize knowledge distillation on the ﬂy over model
predictions based on diﬀerent input resolutions. The learned meta network could dynamically parameterize main networks to act on input
images of arbitrary size with consistently better accuracy compared to
individually trained models. Extensive experiments on the ImageNet
demonstrate that our method achieves an improved accuracy-eﬃciency
trade-oﬀ during the adaptive inference process. By switching executable
input resolutions, our method could satisfy the requirement of fast adaption in diﬀerent resource-constrained environments. Code and models are
available at https://github.com/d-li14/SAN.
Keywords: Eﬃcient neural networks · Visual classiﬁcation · Scale
deviation · Meta learning · Knowledge Distillation

1

Introduction

Although CNNs have demonstrated their dominant power in a wide array of computer vision tasks, their accuracy does not scale up and down with respect to the
corresponding input resolution change. Typically, modern CNNs are constructed
by stacking convolutional modules in the body, a Global Average Pooling (GAP)
D. Li–Intern at Intel Labs China.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 19–35, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_2

