Supplementary Material of Motion-Excited
Sampler: Video Adversarial Attack with Sparked
Prior
Hu Zhang1 , Linchao Zhu1 , Yi Zhu2 , and Yi Yang1
1

ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, NSW
2
Amazon Web Services
Hu.Zhang-1@student.uts.edu.au; zhulinchao7@gmail.com;
yzaws@amazon.com; Yi.Yang@uts.edu.au

A

Implementation details

In terms of the accumulated motion vector, we follow the setting in [5] and
set each interval T within a video to 12 frames. There is no overlap between
two adjacent intervals. For each interval, we generate one accumulated motion
map. In adversarial attacking, we impose noises on original video frames which
are normalized to [0,1]. The modified videos are processed via standard ‘mean’
and ‘std’ normalization before inputting to the black-box model for gradient
estimation. Each iteration consumes three queries that two queries for ∆ in
Algorithm 1 and one to determine whether the updated video xt is successful in
attacking. In the untargeted attack setting, we set the query limit to 60,000 and
the maximal iteration for updating adversarial video is 20,000. In the targeted
attack setting, we set the query limit to 200,000 and the maximal iteration is
66,667 (200,000/3).
In Algorithm 1, the interval t for sampling new motion maps is 10, δ for
adjusting the magnitude of loss variation is 0.1,  for approximation is 0.1. In
Algorithm 2, learning rate η for updating estimated gradient gt is 0.1 and learning rate h for updating adversarial video xt is 0.025.

B

Attack transferability on flow stream

In this section, we investigate the attack transferability of generated adversarial
video on motion stream. We first train an optical flow model on original videos.
We then extract new optical flows from adversarial videos generated in our attack
and evaluate the performance of obtained flow model on new flows. We measure
the attack transferability of our adversarial video in terms of recognition accuracy. In the experiment, we train the optical flow model on Something-Something
V2, where motion information is especially important for accurate recognition.
The above table shows that using flow extracted from original videos achieves
40.59% recognition accuracy. However, for the new flow extracted from our generated adversarial video, its recognition accuracy goes down to 12.35%. This
result clearly demonstrates that our adversarial perturbation designed for RGB
stream can be transferred to attack the flow model.

