Multi-task Curriculum Framework
for Open-Set Semi-supervised Learning
Qing Yu1(B) , Daiki Ikami1,2 , Go Irie2 , and Kiyoharu Aizawa1
1

The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Japan
{yu,ikami,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
NTT Corporation, Chiyoda, Japan
goirie@ieee.org

Abstract. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been proposed to leverage unlabeled data for training powerful models when only limited
labeled data is available. While existing SSL methods assume that samples in the labeled and unlabeled data share the classes of their samples,
we address a more complex novel scenario named open-set SSL, where
out-of-distribution (OOD) samples are contained in unlabeled data.
Instead of training an OOD detector and SSL separately, we propose a
multi-task curriculum learning framework. First, to detect the OOD samples in unlabeled data, we estimate the probability of the sample belonging to OOD. We use a joint optimization framework, which updates
the network parameters and the OOD score alternately. Simultaneously,
to achieve high performance on the classiﬁcation of in-distribution (ID)
data, we select ID samples in unlabeled data having small OOD scores,
and use these data with labeled data for training the deep neural networks to classify ID samples in a semi-supervised manner. We conduct
several experiments, and our method achieves state-of-the-art results by
successfully eliminating the eﬀect of OOD samples.
Keywords: Semi-supervised learning · Out-of-distribution detection ·
Multi-task learning

1

Introduction

After several breakthroughs in deep learning methods, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have achieved impressive results and even outperformed humans on
various machine perception tasks such as image classiﬁcation [8,26], face recognition [18], and natural language processing [6] with large-scale, annotated training samples. However, creating these large datasets is typically time-consuming
and expensive.
To solve this problem, semi-supervised learning (SSL) is proposed to leverage unlabeled data to improve the performance of a model when only limited
labeled data is available. SSL is able to train large, powerful models when labeling
data is expensive or inconvenient. There is a diverse collection of approaches to
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 438–454, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_26

