Towards Precise Completion of Deformable
Shapes Supplementary Material
Oshri Halimi?1 , Ido Imanuel?1 , Or Litany2 , Giovanni Trappolini3 ,
Emanuele Rodolà3 , Leonidas Guibas2 , and Ron Kimmel1
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
2
Stanford University
3
Sapienza University of Rome

In this supplementary we provide:
1. Further analysis of our network design
− An ablation experiment demonstrating the improved reconstruction over
a fixed template due to the full shape Q in Section 1.1.
− Robustness analysis of our trained network in Section 1.2.
− An experiment exploring the network operation under different types of
projections, resulting from elevated viewpoints, in Section 1.3
2. Additional visualizations of the network reconstructions in Section 2.
3. Visualizations of the dense correspondence results from the partial shape to
the full shape in Section 3.

1

Analysis

1.1

Comparison with a fixed template baseline

As described in the main manuscript, in order to predict the completion of a
partial shape P , our method requires a full reference shape Q of the same subject
in an arbitrary pose. We motivate this setting by a requirement for a completion
that is faithful to the subject shape. This is different from previous completion
methods which can only approximate or hallucinate missing details. Here we
support this claim experimentally, by comparing with a baseline that uses a fixed
template. Specifically, instead of providing a full shape Q of the same subject
as the partial shape P , we provide a fixed template T for all inputs. With this
modification, the ablation network is trained with the triplets {(Pn , T, Rn )}N
n=1 ,
where N is the size of the training set. At inference time, we use the same
template T to make a prediction for a given input part P . We chose the template
to be the first subject from the FAUST Projections dataset, in its null pose
as shown in Figure 1. Both the original and the fixed-template networks were
trained on the FAUST Projections training set, with identical parameters and
for the same number of epochs, as described in Section 3.6 in the paper. Table 1
summarizes the prediction errors of both methods, Figure 3 compares the partial
correspondence results and Figure 2 shows visual comparison. The results clearly
?

equal contribution

