Supplementary Material: SideInfNet: A Deep
Neural Network for Semi-Automatic Semantic
Segmentation with Side Information
Jing Yu Koh1? , Duc Thanh Nguyen2 , Quang-Trung Truong1 , Sai-Kit Yeung3 ,
and Alexander Binder1
1

Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
Deakin University, Australia
3
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we provide implementation
details of our SideInfNet in Section 1. We present ablation experiments
conducted to ascertain the effectiveness of our method in Section 2,
in which we compare against existing fusion methods by implementing
our model with the same baseline segmentation network. Computational
analysis of our method is performed in Section 3. We present additional
qualitative evaluations of our method and prior works in three case studies in Section 4.

1

Implementation Details

In this section, we detail the settings used to train our proposed SideInfNet in
various case studies. All models of our SideInfNet were implemented in PyTorch
v1.2 [6].
1.1

General Settings

The domain-dependent feature extractor of our proposed SideInfNet is built
based on the Deeplab-ResNet [2] model. In our implementation, we optimized
the Deeplab-ResNet using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a momentum
of 0.9. The Deeplab-ResNet receives input an image of size H × W pixels and
produces a conv2 3 layer output of approximately size H4 × W
4 . Therefore, our
maxpool layer uses a kernel size of 6 and a stride of 4 to achieve the desired size.
For processing side information, we used a single fully-connected layer that
mapped input vectors to a 64-dimensional space. As shown in Section 2, this
setting (i.e., 64 dimensions for side information) balanced both the accuracy and
computational cost and worked well in all case studies. We also experimented
with deeper multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) and non-linear activation functions,
but found no improvement from these settings.
?

Currently an AI Resident at Google.

