Supplementary

A

Experimental Setup

In this part, we want to provide some additional details regarding our experimental setup, which allow a deeper understanding into our experimental setup.
A.1

Detailed Dataset Overview

In Table 4, we give an overview over the number of images in our used data
(sub)sets. The Cityscapes dataset has 2,975 labeled training images on which
we train the semantic segmentation part of our network. As we do not optimize
our hyperparameters for the semantic segmentation and thereby do not use the
validation set during training, our evaluation on this dataset is conducted on the
official validation set containing 500 labeled images.
While we always train the segmentation part of our model on the Cityscapes
dataset, the depth part of the network is trained on various splits of the KITTI
dataset. The split of the KITTI dataset, which is most frequently used to compare depth estimation models, is the Eigen split [2], containing 697 images for
testing. While the number of test images is constant throughout recent approaches, the number of training and validation images has been redefined by
[12] to exclude static scenes. We also compare our method on the Benchmark
split [10], which contains 500 test images with labels, which are only available
on an evaluation server.
Finally, we train and evaluate on the KITTI split [4], whose test set are the
official 200 training images from the KITTI 2015 Stereo dataset [8]. This test
set has the advantage that it has available labels for both depth and semantic
segmentation, which makes it suitable to observe the benefits of multi-task training for depth and semantic segmentation. While the Cityscapes validation set in
principle also provides labels for both tasks, here the depth labels are obtained by
a classical model-based algorithm, while the depth labels of the KITTI dataset
are physical measurements from a LiDAR sensor and thereby better suited for
evaluating a depth estimation model. Also, as our depth estimation training requires a preceding and a succeeding frame, the number of training images differs
slightly from the original definition.
A.2

Definition of the DC Object Classes

Also, we defined the DC object classes as all classes belonging to the human
and vehicle categories inside the Cityscapes dataset [1] which contains in total
19 labeled classes. More specifically, that means that we consider the person,
rider, car, truck, bus, train, motorcycle and bicycle class as DC object classes,
as they are often observed as moving inside an image sequence. Opposed to that

