Towards Streaming Perception
Mengtian Li1(B) , Yu-Xiong Wang1,2 , and Deva Ramanan1,3
1

CMU, Pittsburgh, USA
mtli@cs.cmu.edu
2
UIUC, Urbana, USA
3
Argo AI, Pittsburgh, USA
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/ mengtial/proj/streaming

Abstract. Embodied perception refers to the ability of an autonomous
agent to perceive its environment so that it can (re)act. The responsiveness of the agent is largely governed by latency of its processing pipeline.
While past work has studied the algorithmic trade-oﬀ between latency
and accuracy, there has not been a clear metric to compare diﬀerent
methods along the Pareto optimal latency-accuracy curve. We point out
a discrepancy between standard oﬄine evaluation and real-time applications: by the time an algorithm ﬁnishes processing a particular image
frame, the surrounding world has changed. To these ends, we present an
approach that coherently integrates latency and accuracy into a single
metric for real-time online perception, which we refer to as “streaming
accuracy”. The key insight behind this metric is to jointly evaluate the
output of the entire perception stack at every time instant, forcing the
stack to consider the amount of streaming data that should be ignored
while computation is occurring. More broadly, building upon this metric,
we introduce a meta-benchmark that systematically converts any image
understanding task into a streaming perception task. We focus on the
illustrative tasks of object detection and instance segmentation in urban
video streams, and contribute a novel dataset with high-quality and
temporally-dense annotations. Our proposed solutions and their empirical analysis demonstrate a number of surprising conclusions: (1) there
exists an optimal “sweet spot” that maximizes streaming accuracy along
the Pareto optimal latency-accuracy curve, (2) asynchronous tracking
and future forecasting naturally emerge as internal representations that
enable streaming image understanding, and (3) dynamic scheduling can
be used to overcome temporal aliasing, yielding the paradoxical result
that latency is sometimes minimized by sitting idle and “doing nothing”.

1

Introduction

Embodied perception refers to the ability of an autonomous agent to perceive its
environment so that it can (re)act. A crucial quantity governing the responsiveness of the agent is its reaction time. Practical applications, such as self-driving
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 28) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 473–488, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_28

