Generative Low-Bitwidth Data Free
Quantization
Shoukai Xu1,2 , Haokun Li1 , Bohan Zhuang3 , Jing Liu1 , Jiezhang Cao1 ,
Chuangrun Liang1 , and Mingkui Tan1(B)
1
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{sexsk,selihaokun,seliujing,secaojiezhang,selcr}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn
2
PengCheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
bohan.zhuang@monash.edu

Abstract. Neural network quantization is an eﬀective way to compress
deep models and improve their execution latency and energy eﬃciency,
so that they can be deployed on mobile or embedded devices. Existing
quantization methods require original data for calibration or ﬁne-tuning
to get better performance. However, in many real-world scenarios, the
data may not be available due to conﬁdential or private issues, thereby
making existing quantization methods not applicable. Moreover, due to
the absence of original data, the recently developed generative adversarial networks (GANs) cannot be applied to generate data. Although
the full-precision model may contain rich data information, such information alone is hard to exploit for recovering the original data or generating new meaningful data. In this paper, we investigate a simple-yeteﬀective method called Generative Low-bitwidth Data Free Quantization
(GDFQ) to remove the data dependence burden. Speciﬁcally, we propose a knowledge matching generator to produce meaningful fake data
by exploiting classiﬁcation boundary knowledge and distribution information in the pre-trained model. With the help of generated data, we
can quantize a model by learning knowledge from the pre-trained model.
Extensive experiments on three data sets demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of
our method. More critically, our method achieves much higher accuracy
on 4-bit quantization than the existing data free quantization method.
Code is available at https://github.com/xushoukai/GDFQ.
Keywords: Data free compression · Low-bitwidth quantization ·
Knowledge matching generator

S. Xu, H. Li and B. Zhuang—Authors Contributed Equally.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 1–17, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_1

