Synthesis and Completion of Facades
from Satellite Imagery
Xiaowei Zhang(B) , Christopher May, and Daniel Aliaga
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
{zhan2597,may5,aliaga}@purdue.edu

Abstract. Automatic satellite-based reconstruction enables large and
widespread creation of urban areas. However, satellite imagery is often
noisy and incomplete, and is not suitable for reconstructing detailed
building facades. We present a machine learning-based inverse procedural modeling method to automatically create synthetic facades from
satellite imagery. Our key observation is that building facades exhibit
regular, grid-like structures. Hence, we can overcome the low-resolution,
noisy, and partial building data obtained from satellite imagery by synthesizing the underlying facade layout. Our method infers regular facade
details from satellite-based image-fragments of a building, and applies
them to occluded or under-sampled parts of the building, resulting in
plausible, crisp facades. Using urban areas from six cities, we compare our
approach to several state-of-the-art image completion/in-ﬁlling methods
and our approach consistently creates better facade images.
Keywords: Image synthesis and completion · Inverse procedural
modeling · Satellite imagery

1

Introduction

Urban inverse procedural modeling is beneﬁcial for many simulation, training,
and entertainment applications. Using satellite data enables large scale, potentially global reconstructions. However, satellite data is challenging to work with
due to limitations in resolution, noise, complex camera models, partial coverage,
and occlusions. These aspects hinder high quality urban reconstruction.
Our key observation is that buildings in dense urban areas typically exhibit
a regular, grid-like facade structure. We exploit this observation via a machine
learning-based inverse procedural modeling approach to determine procedural
parameters for a number of facade grammars in the presence of incomplete data.
The grammars are then applied to the faces of reconstructed 3D building models
during a facade completion phase. This methodology signiﬁcantly improves the
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 34) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 573–588, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_34

