18

8

B. Deng et al.

Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge Hugues Hoppe, Paul Lalonde, Erwin Coumans,
Angjoo Kanazawa, Alec Jacobson, David Levine, and Christopher Batty for the
insightful discussions. Gerard Pons-Moll is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - 409792180. Andrea Tagliasacchi is funded by NSERC Discovery grant RGPIN-2016-05786„ NSERC Collaborative Research and Development grant CRDPJ 537560-18, and NSERC Research Tool Instruments RTI-16-2018.

9

Supplementary material

9.1

Additional discussion on tracking techniques

In dense real-time tracking applications [44,41,52,53] there are examples of articulated models that use hybrid representations. Similarly to our work, they also
provide constant-time occupancy queries without the need for acceleration data
structures. However, these shape models consist of simple rigid primitives, or
use an artist-designed template. In contrast, we learn a deformable shape model
from data, and allow users to query the pose-corrected occupancy anywhere in
space. In more detail:
– Schmidt et al. [44]: relies on a discretization of the SDF on grids and/or primitives to answer distance queries, only models piecewise rigid parts (compare
our rigid (R) variant), and requires the construction of the parts SDF before
tracking – a process that relies on user interaction.
– Tkach et al. [54]: the quality of approximation produced by our method is
vastly superior to that achieved by sphere-meshes. Further, similarly to [44],
the template is specified manually.
– Taylor et al. [52]: similarly to [44], the tracking template is specified manually, and the technique requires a mixture of mesh-based closest point queries
and implicit function queries.
– Thiery et al. [53]: the approximation quality argument is analogous to that
of [54], while to construct such models one need a consistently meshed motion
sequence – an extremely stringent requirement in practice.
9.2

Ablation studies

Please see the animated results of reconstruction and tracking in the supplementary video. Please see the details of the dataset in the supplementary
data split files. Note that, except Figure 9 where we use AMASS/Transitions
due to its diversity of poses, we adopt AMASS/DFaust for all the other studies.
Also note that due to computational limitations, we evaluate on one motion sequence only in Figure 10. We select a sequence that has a median reconstruction
performance as a representative example.

