Online Invariance Selection for Local
Feature Descriptors
Rémi Pautrat1 , Viktor Larsson1(B) , Martin R. Oswald1 , and Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
{remi.pautrat,vlarsson}@inf.ethz.ch
2
Microsoft MR & AI, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract. To be invariant, or not to be invariant: that is the question
formulated in this work about local descriptors. A limitation of current
feature descriptors is the trade-oﬀ between generalization and discriminative power: more invariance means less informative descriptors. We
propose to overcome this limitation with a disentanglement of invariance
in local descriptors and with an online selection of the most appropriate invariance given the context. Our framework (https://github.com/
rpautrat/LISRD) consists in a joint learning of multiple local descriptors
with diﬀerent levels of invariance and of meta descriptors encoding the
regional variations of an image. The similarity of these meta descriptors across images is used to select the right invariance when matching
the local descriptors. Our approach, named Local Invariance Selection
at Runtime for Descriptors (LISRD), enables descriptors to adapt to
adverse changes in images, while remaining discriminative when invariance is not required. We demonstrate that our method can boost the performance of current descriptors and outperforms state-of-the-art descriptors in several matching tasks, when evaluated on challenging datasets
with day-night illumination as well as viewpoint changes.
Keywords: Local descriptors · Invariance · Visual localization

1

Introduction

Sparse features detection and description is at the root of many computer vision
tasks: Structure-from-Motion (SfM), Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM), image retrieval, tracking, etc. They oﬀer a compact representation in
terms of memory storage and allow for eﬃcient image matching, and are thus well
suited for large-scale applications [14,35,36]. These features should however be
able to cope with real world conditions such as day-night changes [44], seasonal
variations [34] and matching across large baselines [40].
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 42) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 707–724, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_42

