Supplementary Material of Hierarchical
Dynamic Filtering Network for RGB-D Salient
Object Detection
Youwei Pang1 , Lihe Zhang1? , Xiaoqi Zhao1 , and Huchuan Lu1,2
1

Dalian University of Technology, China
{lartpang, zxq}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory

In Table 2 of the original paper, we show the weighted average results of each
model in terms of six metrics. In Sec. 1 and Sec 2 of this document, we respectively list the results of these models across different datasets.
This supplementary document is organized as follows:
– More details about the performance contributed by different components in
the proposed HDFNet.
– More detailed comparisons of RGB SOD models with the HEL and without
the HEL.

1

Ablation Study

Tab. 1 shows the performance improvement contributed by different components.
Note that Model 2, 4 and 6 without the DDPM directly combine the features of
dense transport layer into the decoder by element-wise addition instead of using
convolution operation of Model 3, 5, 7.
The experiments in Tab 1 are divided into different groups:
1. Model 2 vs. Model 3: Effectiveness of DDPM using only depth features
to compute dynamic filters.
2. Model 4 vs. Model 5: Effectiveness of DDPM using only RGB features to
compute dynamic filters.
3. Model 6 vs. Model 7 vs. Model 8: Effectiveness of DDPM using twomodality features to compute dynamic filters.
4. Model 9 vs. Model 10 vs. Model 11 vs. Model 12: Effectiveness of three
components in the HEL (Le , Lf and Lb ) and the overall HEL.

2

Effectiveness of the HEL

Tab 2 shows the performance gains of the proposed loss function in some recent
RGB saliency models [3,15,10,1]. Here, “AveMetric” still denotes the weighted
average results on all datasets and is consistent with the data in Table 2 of
the original paper. It is worth noting that there are some differences in our
experimental settings for these models. 1) R3Net [3]: We use ResNeXt-101 [16]
?

Corresponding author: zhanglihe@dlut.edu.cn

