Supplementary Materials:
Improving Face Recognition by Clustering
Unlabeled Faces in the Wild
Aruni RoyChowdhury1? , Xiang Yu2 , Kihyuk Sohn2?? ,
Erik Learned-Miller1 , and Manmohan Chandraker2
1

University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
NEC Labs America

We include some additional experimental details and discussions here that
could not be included in the main paper due to space constraints:
– The overview of approaches on improving face recognition (Sec. 1)
– The diversity in datasets (Sec. 2)
– Discussion on the motivation of our choice to model the label noise (Sec. 3)
– The effect of the γ hyper-parameter on our proposed uncertainty weighted
loss (Sec. 4)
– Details and baselines for overlapping identity separation (Sec. 5)
– Visualization of clustering errors and their correspondence to uncertainty
scores (Sec. 6)
– Detailed descriptions of the evaluation benchmarks (Sec. 7)
– Implementation details including training settings for the clustering module
and the deep face networks (Sec. 8)

1

Overview

The main submission empirically illustrated the use of unlabeled faces to improve
fully-supervised face recognition systems. From the literature, one major direction
to boost performance is via supervised training, i.e. , leverage various network
structures such as VGG Face [15], ResNet [5] and SE-Net [7], or investigating
effective objective functions, i.e. , triplet loss [13], Cosine Loss [17], by constraining
the feature lying on a hypersphere [12], or further combine the two [3].
Our paper advocates another direction: leverage larger amounts of unlabeled
training data in a semi-supervised manner. These two axes lead to orthogonal
developments – more data is likely to improve the next generation of better face
architectures and losses. Moreover, tasks such as automatic adaptation of a model
to a new scene or condition will benefit from being able to learn from unlabeled
faces. There are several use cases for such adaptation: e.g., a particular ethnicity
may not have a large labeled dataset but have many unlabeled faces available.
In general, deployed models would be able to leverage a continuous stream of
unlabeled data to adapt to specific operational conditions.
?
??

Now at Amazon, work done prior to joining.
Now at Google, work done prior to joining.

