Supplemental - We Have So Much In Common:
Modeling Semantic Relational Set Abstractions
in Videos
Alex Andonian*1 , Camilo Fosco*1 , Mathew Monfort1 , Allen Lee1 , Rogerio
Feris2 , Carl Vondrick3 , and Aude Oliva1
1

1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
3
Columbia University

Introduction

In this document, we provide more details about the human experiments performed for this paper. We additionally show ablation experiments, qualitative
results and quantitative comparisons to further motivate our model.

2

The VidRank and Odd One Out games

As explained in Section 3.1, we created the VidRank game to measure human
performance on the Set Completion task. We built a web-based UI to show a
set of 2 to 4 reference videos along 5 query videos. The user was tasked to
rank the query videos according to how close they were to the general concept
represented by the reference videos. Figure 1 shows an example question from
our game. Quality was ensured through “vigilance” questions, where one query
was either obviously similar to the references (same class and similar visual
properties) or drastically different. We positioned three vigilance rounds per set
of 10 questions, and discarded data from users that failed more than one.
To obtain human performance for the Odd One Out task, we created the
Odd One Out game using a similar UI, where users were tasked with finding the
video that did not belong to the set. We showed users sets of 3-5 videos, and
allowed them to select the suspected outlier. We again positioned “vigilance”
rounds, where one video was clearly dissimilar to the rest (all videos shared the
same action class while the odd one out was selected from a dissimilar class).
To obtain the baselines presented in the main paper, we collected human
responses from our two games through Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). We
obtained 400 human responses for each task and dataset, ensuring that at least
20 participants attempted each question. We validated the coherence of the
responses by computing split-half consistency curves. These curves are produced
by separating the users into two groups, calculating scores inside each group
separately, and correlating the resulting values. It is a measure of agreement
between participants, and a rank correlation of 0.7 or higher generally indicates

