Multimodal Memorability: Modeling
Eﬀects of Semantics and Decay on Video
Memorability
Anelise Newman(B) , Camilo Fosco, Vincent Casser, Allen Lee,
Barry McNamara, and Aude Oliva
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
aonewman@mit.edu, anelisenewman@gmail.com

Abstract. A key capability of an intelligent system is deciding when
events from past experience must be remembered and when they can
be forgotten. Towards this goal, we develop a predictive model of human
visual event memory and how those memories decay over time. We introduce Memento10k, a new, dynamic video memorability dataset containing human annotations at diﬀerent viewing delays. Based on our ﬁndings we propose a new mathematical formulation of memorability decay,
resulting in a model that is able to produce the ﬁrst quantitative estimation of how a video decays in memory over time. In contrast with
previous work, our model can predict the probability that a video will
be remembered at an arbitrary delay. Importantly, our approach combines visual and semantic information (in the form of textual captions)
to fully represent the meaning of events. Our experiments on two video
memorability benchmarks, including Memento10k, show that our model
signiﬁcantly improves upon the best prior approach (by 12% on average).
Keywords: Memorability estimation · Memorability decay ·
Multimodal video understanding

1

Introduction

Deciding which moments from past experience to remember and which ones to
discard is a key capability of an intelligent system. The human brain is optimized
to remember what it deems to be important and forget what is uninteresting
or redundant. Thus, human memorability is a useful measure of what content
is interesting and likely to be retained by a human viewer. If a system can
A. Newman and C. Fosco—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 14) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 223–240, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_14

