Supplementary Material for “Contact and Human Dynamics
from Monocular Video”
Davis Rempe1,2

Leonidas J. Guibas1
Ruben Villegas2
1

1

Aaron Hertzmann2
Jimei Yang2

Bryan Russell2

Stanford University
2
Adobe Research

Introduction

This document includes additional details and results omitted from the main paper. Additionally, we urge the
reader to view the supplementary video to fully appreciate the quality of 3D human motions produced by our
method. We offer additional details of our methods in Sections 2, 3, 4, and 5, followed by additional evaluation
details and experimental results in 6.

2

Contact Estimation Details

In this section we describe details of our contact estimation network and the new synthetic dataset used for
training. Please refer to Section 3.2 of the main paper for the primary discussion.

2.1

Synthetic Dataset

Our synthetic dataset was rendered using Blender1 and includes 13 characters performing 65 different motion
capture sequences retargeted to each character taken from www.mixamo.com. Each motion is recorded from 2
camera viewpoints resulting in 1690 videos and 101k frames of data. The motions include: samba, swing, and
salsa dancing, boxing, football, and baseball actions, walking, and idle poses. Videos are rendered at 1280x720
with motion blur, and are 2 seconds long at 30 fps. Example frames from the dataset are shown in Figure 1. In
addition to RGB frames, at each timestep the dataset includes 2D OpenPose [1] detections, the 3D pose in the
form of the character’s skeleton (skeletons are different for each character, and pose is provided in a .bvh motion
capture file), foot contact labels for the heel and toe base of each foot as described in the main paper, and camera
parameters.
For each video, many parameters are randomized. The camera is placed at a uniform random distance in
[4.5, 7.5] and Gaussian random height with µ = 0.9, and σ = 0.3 but clamped to be in [0.3, 1.75], all in meters.
The camera is placed at a random angle within 90 degrees offset from the front of the character but always looks
at roughly character hip height. The camera does not move during the video. Floor texture is randomly chosen
from solid colors and 26 other textures with various wood, grass, tile, metal, and carpet. Four lights in the scene
are randomly toggled on and off, given random energies, and randomly offset from default positions, resulting in
many shadow variations across videos.
1 https://www.blender.org/

1

