Supplementary Material for
Convolutional Occupancy Networks
Songyou Peng1,2 Michael Niemeyer2,3 Lars Mescheder2,4?
Marc Pollefeys1,5 Andreas Geiger2,3
1

ETH Zurich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
3
University of Tübingen 4 Amazon, Tübingen 5 Microsoft

In this supplementary document, we first give a detailed overview of our
architectures and baseline implementations in Section 1. We then discuss our
training procedure for both object- and scene-level reconstruction in Section 2.
In Section 3, we describe the generation of the synthetic indoor scene dataset.
Detailed definitions for all three evaluation metrics are then provided in Section 4.
Additional quantitative and qualitative results for all ShapeNet classes can be
found in Section 5. Finally, we provide implementation details of our fullyconvolutional model and more qualitative results on the Matterport3D dataset
in Section 6.

1

Network Architectures

In this section, we provide a detailed description of our network architectures as
well as the implementation of our PointConv baseline.
Point Cloud Encoder: We first use a fully-connected layer followed by a fullyconnected ResNet [5] block to map the three-dimensional input point coordinates
into the feature space. Next, unlike PointNet [12] which pools over all points to
acquire a global feature, we perform the pooling operation locally. Depending
on the defined plane/volume feature maps, we perform max-pooling only over
the features falling into the same pixel/voxel cell. The locally pooled features are
concatenated with the features before pooling, and then fed into the next ResNet
block. We use 5 of these ResNet blocks with intermediate pooling to obtain the
final point-wise features.
Voxel Encoder: Given an occupancy grid as input, we use a single 3D convolutional layer with convolution kernel size 3 × 3 × 3 to extract voxel-wise features
with dimension of 32.
U-Net: We use a U-Net [14,4] to process the plane or volume features. We
follow [14] and adapt a modified implementation from [6] for our 2D variants.
For our 3D variant, we adapt the 3D U-Net [4] implementation from [16]. We set
the input and output feature dimensions to 32. Note that we choose the depth
of the U-Net such that the receptive field is equal or larger than the size of the
feature plane or volume. For example, when considering a 3D feature volume of
323 or a 2D feature plane of 1282 , the depth is set to 3 or 5, respectively.
?

This work was done prior to joining Amazon.

