View-Invariant Probabilistic Embedding for
Human Pose
Supplementary Materials
Jennifer J. Sun1 , Jiaping Zhao2 , Liang-Chieh Chen2 , Florian Schroff2 ,
Hartwig Adam2 , and Ting Liu2
1

California Institute of Technology
jjsun@caltech.edu
2
Google Research
{jiapingz,lcchen,fschroff,hadam,liuti}@google.com

In this document, we cover the details of the implementation and experiments for our work. We also provide additional ablation studies and analysis.
Specifically, we have:
• Section 1 describes how we decide the NP-MPJPE threshold based on
its effect on visual pose similarity.
• Section 2 provides additional implementation details on model training,
keypoint definition and normalization, downstream task experiment setup,
etc.
• Section 3 provides additional ablation studies, including the effect of key
hyperparameters, ordered embedding variance visualizations, and embedding
space visualization.
• Section 4 provides additional quantitative pose retrieval result comparisons with image-based EpipolarPose model [5] for view-invariant pose
retrieval.
• Section 5 provides additional qualitative pose retrieval results.
• Section 6 describes the qualitative video alignment experiment. Please
refer to https://drive.google.com/open?id=1kTc_UT0Eq0H2ZBgfEoh8qEJMFBouC-Wv for the video
synchronization results.

1

Visualization of 3D Visual Similarity

The 3D pose space is continuous, and we use the NP-MPJPE as a proxy to quantify visual similarity between pose pairs. Fig. 1 shows pairs of 3D pose keypoints
with their corresponding NP-MPJPE, where each row depicts a different NPMPJPE range. This plot demonstrates the effect of choosing different κ, which
controls matching threshold between 3D poses. If we choose κ = 0.05, then only
the first row in Fig. 1 would be considered matching, and the rest of the rows are
non-matching. Our current value of κ = 0.10 corresponds to using the first two
rows as matching pairs and the rest of the rows as non-matching ones. By loosening κ, poses with greater differences will be considered as matching, as shown
by different rows in Fig. 1. We note that pairs in rows 3 and 4 shows significant
visual differences compared with the first two rows. We further investigate the
effects of different κ during training and evaluation in Section 3.

