Supplementary Material
DH3D: Deep Hierarchical 3D Descriptors for
Robust Large-Scale 6DoF Relocalization
Juan Du1? , Rui Wang1,2? , and Daniel Cremers1,2
1

Technical University of Munich
2
Artisense
{duj, wangr, cremers}@in.tum.de

1

Overview

Despite the significant progresses in deep learning, one issue we are commonly
facing is that reproducibility is not guaranteed by all the papers. In this respect,
in addition to releasing our code, we provide in this supplementary document
the remaining technical aspects and some insights we have gathered during the
development. We hope this can help the other researchers in this field.
In the first part, we show more detailed results of our keypoint repeatability on the ETH dataset and on the point clouds generated by Stereo DSO on
Oxford RobotCar (referred to as StereoDSO-Oxford), which we omitted in the
main paper due to space limitation. We also provide more qualitative registration results on Oxford RobotCar and StereoDSO-Oxford, including some failure
cases. The second part provides results revealing the influence of using different
operators for global aggregation, where we see that although there exist several
ways, attention based NetVLAD layer is so far the best choice. Some qualitative
results on global retrieval are attached afterwards. The third part is dedicated to
presenting all the technical details left over from the main paper, including (1)
structures of sub-networks, (2) training data preparation, (3) two-phase training
of the local and global networks, (4) generation of the Stereo DSO point clouds,
and (5) details on the weak supervision used in the ablation study in the main
paper.

2

Additional Results on Local Feature

2.1

Keypoint Repeatability

We use the same method as in the main paper to evaluate keypoint repeatability on ETH and StereoDSO-Oxford, except that now we choose 0.3m as the
threshold distance for the ETH dataset to determine whether a point is repeatable. For all the detectors, 512 and 1024 keypoints are respectively extracted for
StereoDSO-Oxford and ETH. The results are shown in Fig. 1.
?

Authors contributed equally.

