A Cordial Sync: Going Beyond Marginal Policies
for Multi-Agent Embodied Tasks
Supplementary Material
Unnat Jain1? , Luca Weihs2? , Eric Kolve2 , Ali Farhadi3 ,
Svetlana Lazebnik1 , Aniruddha Kembhavi2,3 , and Alexander Schwing1
1

2

A

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
Allen Institute for AI
University of Washington

Supplementary Material

This supplementary material provides:
A.1 The conditions for a collection of actions to be considered coordinated.
A.2 An example showing that standard independent multi-agent action sampling
makes it impossible to, even in principle, obtain an optimal joint policy.
A.3 Training details including hyperparameter choices, hardware configurations,
and reward structure. We also discuss our upgrades to AI2-THOR.
A.4 Additional discussion, tables, and plots regarding our quantitative results.
A.5 Additional discussion, tables, and plots of our qualitative results including a
description of our supplementary video (https://youtu.be/I_Evs5Bol6k)
as well as an in-depth quantitative evaluation of communication learned by
our agents.
A.1

Action restrictions

We now comprehensively describe the restrictions defining when actions taken
by agents are globally consistent with one another. In the following we will, for
readability, focus on the two agent setting. All conditions defined here easily
generalize to any number of agents. Recall the sets ANAV , AMWO , AMO , and
ARO defined in Sec.. We call these sets the modalities of action. Two actions
a1 , a2 ∈ A are said to be of the same modality if they both are an element of the
same modality of action. Let a1 and a2 be the actions chosen by the two agents.
Below we describe the conditions when a1 and a2 are considered coordinated. If
the agents’ actions are uncoordinated, both actions fail and no action is taken
for time t. These conditions are summarized in Fig. 2a.
Same action modality. A first necessary, but not sufficient, condition for successful coordination is that the agents agree on the modality of action to perform. Namely, both a1 and a2 are of the same action modality. Notice the block
diagonal structure in Fig. 2a.
?

denotes equal contribution by UJ and LW

