Supplementary Material - Deep Material
Recognition in Light-Fields via Disentanglement
of Spatial and Angular Information
Bichuan Guo1[0000−0001−8475−427X] , Jiangtao Wen1 , and Yuxing Han2
1

2

Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
gbc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

In this supplementary material we provide (1) more technical details about
angular registration and some visualizations of its effect; (2) the detailed network
architecture of our proposed angular feature extractors angular-4 and angularS, as well as an analysis of the angular rotational invariance property; (3) more
visual results similar to Sec. 5.4 in the main paper.

S.1

Angular registration

We provide more details on the implementation of the proposed angular registration algorithm (Sec. 4.2), as well as some visual examples to demonstrate its
performance.
S.1.1

Implementation

The discrete Fourier transform of a sub-view is computed via the 2D fast Fourier
transform fft2 [S7 ]. Many fft2 software implementations put the zero-frequency
component in the low-order corner of the spectrum [S1 , S2 ]. In this case, we
need to shift the zero-frequency component to the center of the spectrum, this
can be done by calling fftshift in MATLAB or numpy [S3 ].
Since the phase of the cross power spectrum arg S is periodic, the median
filter must take this periodicity into account. For a set containing phase data
A = {θ1 , θ2 , ..., θn }, the circular median [S4 ] of A is defined as
med[A] = argmin
θi ∈A

n
X

kθi − θj kc ,

(S1)

j=1

where we compute the circular distance kθkc of an angle θ by first converting θ
to the range [−π, π), then taking its absolute value. The median filter replaces a
pixel p with the circular median of all pixels that are within a radius of 3 pixel
units centered at p, in Euclidean distance.
Since we have shifted the zero-frequency component to the center of the
spectrum, we can regress arg Sξ on (ξ/S − 0.5) without an intercept, this leaves
only one coefficient (the slope) to be determined.

