Supplementary Material: Graph convolutional
networks for learning with few clean and many
noisy labels
Ahmet Iscen1 , Giorgos Tolias2 , Yannis Avrithis3 , Ondřej Chum2 , and Cordelia
Schmid1
1

2

A

Google Research
VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Inria, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRISA

The role of base classes

The proposed method is applicable with any given feature extractor. Herein, we describe the learning of the feature extractor on a set of base classes according to a
standard few-shot learning setup and benchmark [12]. Then, we describe the extended
classifiers to the union of all classes, i.e. base classes and novel classes, which are the
ones used in Section 5.

A.1

Representation learning on base classes

We are given a set XB ⇢ X of examples, each having a clean label in a set of base classes
CB with |CB | = KB . Base classes CB are disjoint from C, which are also known as novel
classes. These data are used to learn a feature representation, i.e. a feature extractor
g✓ , by learning a KB -way base-class classifier for unseen data in X . The parameters ✓
of the feature extractor and WB of the classifier are jointly learned by minimizing the
cross entropy loss
LB (CB , XB ; ✓, WB ) =

X

c2CB

1 X
log( (sŴB> ĝ✓ (x))c ).
|XBc |
c

(1)

x2XB

The learned feature extractor parameters ✓ and the learned scale parameter s are used
by our method as described Sections 4 and 5.

A.2

Classification on all classes

The classifier parameters WB are used, combined with classifier parameters W learned
as described in Section 5, for classification on all classes CA = C [ CB .

Class prototypes. The concatenated parameter matrix WA = [WB , W ] is used for
KA -way prediction on all (base and novel) classes by ⇡✓,WA , where KA = K + KB . WB
is learned according to LB (CB , XB ; ✓, WB ) (1), while W is learned according to (5).
Cosine classifier learning. Prediction on all classes is made as in the previous case,
but W is learned according to (6).
Deep network fine-tuning. We now assume that base class examples are accessible
too and, given all examples XA = XB [ XE , we jointly learn the parameters ✓ of the

