Towards causal benchmarking of bias in face analysis algorithms

19

Towards causal benchmarking of bias in face analysis
algorithms
G. Balakrishnan∗, ‡, Y. Xiong‡, W. Xia‡, P. Perona†, ‡
∗ Massachusetts Institute of Technology
†California Institute of Technology
‡ Amazon Web Services
Supplementary material to ECCV2020 paper
Extended version available on arXiv: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.06570

A

Face Attribute Annotation in Synthetic Images

The face images used in our experiments are synthetic, and therefore there is no
real person behind each image. Thus, there is no intrinsic ground truth for face
attributes such as gender, hair length, and skin tone. Such attributes are instead
established by human annotators. We clarify here what we mean when we talk
about face attributes in the absence of a physical ground truth.
Many attributes have both intrinsic and extrinsic manifestations. For example, “emotion” may be studied at three levels [3]: an unconscious physiological
state, conscious self-perception (feelings), and emotional display (e.g. facial expression) [12]. These quantities are intrinsic to a person’s or an animal’s body
and are not directly accessible to a machine. By contrast, an extrinsic description,
i.e., the report by an onlooker of his/her perception, are more easily accessible,
and this is what the machine is trained to predict.
Since we are using synthetic images, it should be clear that we are not attempting to access the intrinsic state of a person: there is no person, and there
is no intrinsic gender, ethnicity, age or emotion. However, perception of such
attributes is possible. This is the same way that onlookers instinctively classify
the Venus of Milo as “female” and Michelangelo’s David as “male,” despite the
fact that they are idealized marble representations, rather than real people.
Thus, when we refer to the “age” or “gender” or any other attribute that
is computed by a face analysis system from a picture, what we mean is the
algorithm’s prediction of a casual observer’s report of their perception of the
outwards display of that attribute. This is a bit of a mouthful, and that’s why we
use the abbreviated expression of “attribute,” “age” or “gender.” The attributes
we measure from human observers are reports of subjective perceptions. However, as we find in Sec. 3.3, these measurements are consistent and reproducible
across different observers, and so we consider statistics of such reports as objective quantities.
In our study, we discretize continuous face attributes. We have used six classes
of age and skin tone, five of hair length, facial expression and gender, etc. (see
Figs. 13 and 15). This choice was made to conform with the literature, e.g.,
the Fitzpatrick scale of skin tone [17], and to accommodate the abilities of nonexpert casual observers, the “common person,” whose perception we rely on in
our experiments. We make no claim to have the perfect discretization scheme;
other discretization choices may be better suited in different contexts.

