Supplementary Material:
Large Scale Holistic Video Understanding
Ali Diba1,5? , Mohsen Fayyaz2,? , Vivek Sharma3,? ,
Manohar Paluri, Jürgen Gall2 , Rainer Stiefelhagen3 , Luc Van Gool1,4,5
1

KU Leuven, 2 University of Bonn,3 KIT, Karlsruhe, 4 ETH Zürich, 5 Sensifai
{firstname.lastname}@kuleuven.be, {lastname}@iai.uni-bonn.de,
{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu, Balamanohar@gmail.com

Appendix: This document provides supplementary material as mentioned
in the main paper.

A

HVU Dataset

A.1

Human Annotation Details

The row machine generated annotations consist almost 8K labels. The initial
stage of human verification on validation set resulted in 4378 labels. And the final stage of complete human verification/modification process ended up in 3142
labels. In human annotation process, 80 new labels are added by human annotators.
In specific for the HVU human verification task, we employed three different
teams (Team-A, Team-B and Team-C) of 55 human annotators. Team-A works
on the taxonomy of the dataset. This team builds the taxonomy based on the
visual meaning and definition of the tags obtained from APIs prediction. TeamB and Team-C are the verification teams and perform four tasks. The tasks they
performs are: (a) verify the tags of videos by watching each video and flag false
tags; (b) review the tags by watching the videos of each tag and flag the wrong
videos; (c) add tags to the videos if some tags are missing; and (d) they suggest
modification on tags such as, renaming or merging.
To make sure both Team-B and Team-C have a clear understanding of the
tags and the corresponding videos, we ask them to use the provided tags definition from Team-A. For the aforementioned four tasks, Team-B goes through all
the videos and provides the first round of clean annotations. Followed by this,
Team-C reviews the annotations from Team-B to guarantee an accurate and
cleaner version of annotations. Finally, Team-A reviews the suggestions provided from tasks (c) and (d) and apply them to the dataset. The verification
process takes ∼100 seconds on average per video clip for a trained worker. It
took about 8500 person-hours to firstly clean the machine-generated tags and
remove errors and secondly add any possible missing labels from the dictionary.
By incorporating the machine generated tags and human annotation, the HVU
?

Ali Diba, Mohsen Fayyaz and Vivek Sharma contributed equally to this work and
listed in alphabetical order.

