Single-Shot Neural Relighting and SVBRDF
Estimation: Supplementary Material
Shen Sang1,2 and Manmohan Chandraker1
1

University of California, San Diego
2
ByteDance Research

Our supplementary material includes further experiments and details that establish good generalization to real data for the proposed method, as follows:
– More reconstruction and relighting results on synthetic and real data (Sec. 1).
– Further examples demonstrating that the proposed method achieves relighting
close to ground truth, on real data (Sec. 2).
– Comparisons on real data to prior state-of-the-art [5] in single-image shape
and SVBRDF estimation (Sec. 3).
– Comparisons of our single-image normal estimation on real data, with stateof-the-art photometric stereo method of [3] that uses 96 images (Sec. 4).
– Further results, ablation studies, implementation details and explanation of
the accompanying video (Secs. 5-9).

1

More examples on synthetic and real images

We include synthetic data to validate our method in Figure 1. In Figure 2, we
include more real examples as a supplementary to Figures 3 and 4 in our main
paper, to demonstrate that our method can generalize to real images although it
is trained on a synthetic dataset.

2

Relighting comparisons against real data ground truth

We include examples for comparison of our neural relighting results and groundtruth in Figure 3. As mentioned in the main paper, we capture these ground-truth
images using a gantry with a cellphone flash light attached to it. The specularities
and shadows in these examples demonstrate that our method can produce singleimage relighting close to the ground-truth on real data.

3

Further comparisons with prior state-of-the-art [5]

We qualitatively compare our shape and SVBRDF estimation performance on
several real data examples, against the state-of-the-art method of [5] using its
publicly available code. The results are shown in Figures 4 and 5. In each case,
the image is acquired using a mobile phone camera with the flash enabled, under
an unknown, arbitrary environment map. While ground truth is not available for

