Learning Disentangled Feature
Representation for Hybrid-Distorted
Image Restoration
Xin Li , Xin Jin, Jianxin Lin, Sen Liu , Yaojun Wu , Tao Yu , Wei Zhou,
and Zhibo Chen(B)
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in Geo-Spatial Information Processing
and Application System, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei 230027, China
{lixin666,jinxustc,linjx,yaojunwu,yutao666,weichou}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
elsen@iat.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract. Hybrid-distorted image restoration (HD-IR) is dedicated
to restore real distorted image that is degraded by multiple distortions. Existing HD-IR approaches usually ignore the inherent interference among hybrid distortions which compromises the restoration performance. To decompose such interference, we introduce the concept of
Disentangled Feature Learning to achieve the feature-level divide-andconquer of hybrid distortions. Speciﬁcally, we propose the feature disentanglement module (FDM) to distribute feature representations of different distortions into diﬀerent channels by revising gain-control-based
normalization. We also propose a feature aggregation module (FAM)
with channel-wise attention to adaptively ﬁlter out the distortion representations and aggregate useful content information from diﬀerent channels for the construction of raw image. The eﬀectiveness of the proposed
scheme is veriﬁed by visualizing the correlation matrix of features and
channel responses of diﬀerent distortions. Extensive experimental results
also prove superior performance of our approach compared with the latest HD-IR schemes.
Keywords: Hybird-distorted image restoration · Feature
disentanglement · Feature aggregation

1

Introduction

Nowadays, Image restoration techniques have been applied in various ﬁelds,
including streaming media, photo processing, video surveillance, and cloud storage, etc. In the process of image acquisition and transmission, raw images
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 19) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 313–329, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_19

