Representation Learning on
Visual-Symbolic Graphs for Video
Understanding
Eﬀrosyni Mavroudi(B) , Benjamı́n Béjar Haro , and René Vidal
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA
{emavrou1,bbejar,rvidal}@jhu.edu

Abstract. Events in natural videos typically arise from spatio-temporal
interactions between actors and objects and involve multiple co-occurring
activities and object classes. To capture this rich visual and semantic
context, we propose using two graphs: (1) an attributed spatio-temporal
visual graph whose nodes correspond to actors and objects and whose
edges encode diﬀerent types of interactions, and (2) a symbolic graph
that models semantic relationships. We further propose a graph neural
network for reﬁning the representations of actors, objects and their interactions on the resulting hybrid graph. Our model goes beyond current
approaches that assume nodes and edges are of the same type, operate
on graphs with ﬁxed edge weights and do not use a symbolic graph. In
particular, our framework: a) has specialized attention-based message
functions for diﬀerent node and edge types; b) uses visual edge features;
c) integrates visual evidence with label relationships; and d) performs
global reasoning in the semantic space. Experiments on challenging video
understanding tasks, such as temporal action localization on the Charades dataset, show that the proposed method leads to state-of-the-art
performance.

1

Introduction

The ﬁeld of video understanding has been moving towards increasing levels of
complexity, from classifying a single action in short videos to detecting multiple complex activities performed by multiple actors interacting with objects in
untrimmed videos. Therefore, there is a need to develop algorithms that can eﬀectively model spatio-temporal visual and semantic context. One way of capturing
such context is to use graph-based modeling, which has a rich history in computer
vision. Traditional graph-based approaches to video understanding, e.g., using
probabilistic graphical models [26,27,58,68], focused mainly on modeling context
at the level of symbols rather than visual signals or representations. However,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 71–90, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_5

