Manifold Projection for Adversarial
Defense on Face Recognition
Jianli Zhou1,2 , Chao Liang1,2(B) , and Jun Chen1,2
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
cliang@whu.edu.cn
2
Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
Beijing, Hubei Province, China

Abstract. Although deep convolutional neural network based face
recognition system has achieved remarkable success, it is susceptible
to adversarial images: carefully constructed imperceptible perturbations
can easily mislead deep neural networks. A recent study has shown that
in addition to regular oﬀ-manifold adversarial images, there are also
adversarial images on the manifold. In this paper, we propose Adversarial Variational AutoEncoder (A-VAE), a novel framework to tackle
both types of attacks. We hypothesize that both oﬀ-manifold and onmanifold attacks move the image away from the high probability region
of image manifold. We utilize variational autoencoder (VAE) to estimate
the lower bound of the log-likelihood of image and explore to project the
input images back into the high probability regions of image manifold
again. At inference time, our model synthesizes multiple similar realizations of a given image by random sampling, then the nearest neighbor
of the given image is selected as the ﬁnal input of the face recognition
model. As a preprocessing operation, our method is attack-agnostic and
can adapt to a wide range of resolutions. The experimental results on
LFW demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art defense success rate against conventional oﬀ-manifold attacks such as FGSM, PGD,
and C&W under both grey-box and white-box settings, and even onmanifold attack.
Keywords: Face recognition · Adversarial defense

1

Introduction

As one of the most popular real-world applications of computer vision tasks,
such as multimedia analysis and surveillance [48], face recognition has been
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 18) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 288–305, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_18

