Reducing Language Biases in Visual Question
Answering with Visually-Grounded Question
Encoder
Gouthaman KV and Anurag Mittal
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
{gkv,amittal}@cse.iitm.ac.in

Supplementary Material
Performance of the VGQE-only model
The question representation from the VGQE contains visual information too.
To understand whether only such visual information in the question is enough
for better performance or if we need further interactions with the image, we
experiment as follows. We directly predict the answer from the VGQE output
without looking at the image again. We got an overall accuracy of 44.46 on the
VQA-CPv2. From this experiment, we infer that using only the visual information from the visually-grounded question may not be sufficient for questions that
require specific object-level interactions from the scene, besides only the visual
information. E.g., questions like, ”What is the person next to the car doing?”,
”How many are riding bicycles?”, etc. Hence, further interactions between the
question and various objects from the image are required for improved performance.
Implementation details
Feature extraction: In all our experiments, we use the fixed-sized (36) objectlevel image features provided by [2] as V (dv = 2048). These features are obtained from Faster-RCNN [12] trained on Visual Genome [7], with ResNet-101 [5]
as the backbone. We did not fine-tune the image features. We use the pretrained Glove [10] word-embeddings (trained on “Common Crawl”) to extract
the object-label and question word features (dw = 300). If the object-label contains two words, we take the sum of the word-embeddings of the individual
words as the word-embedding vector. We use a similar question pre-processing
as in [4], such as lower-case transformation, removing punctuation, etc. If a question word is not there in the Glove word embedding vocabulary, we use the word
embedding of its synonym or other words that give the same meaning.
Model parameters: Inside VGQE, we use a Bi-directional GRU with a hidden
state dimension of 1024 as the RNN cell. We use the fine-tuned question word
embedding dimension, d = 512. In the BLOCK fusion, we use a similar setting

