Representative-Discriminative Learning
for Open-Set Land Cover Classification
of Satellite Imagery
Razieh Kaviani Baghbaderani1 , Ying Qu1(B) , Hairong Qi1 , and Craig Stutts2
1

The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
{rkavian1,yqu3,hqi}@utk.edu
2
Applied Research Associates, Raleigh, NC, USA
cstutts@ara.com

Abstract. Land cover classiﬁcation of satellite imagery is an important
step toward analyzing the Earth’s surface. Existing models assume a
closed-set setting where both the training and testing classes belong to
the same label set. However, due to the unique characteristics of satellite imagery with extremely vast area of versatile cover materials, the
training data are bound to be non-representative. In this paper, we
study the problem of open-set land cover classiﬁcation that identiﬁes
the samples belonging to unknown classes during testing, while maintaining performance on known classes. Although inherently a classiﬁcation problem, both representative and discriminative aspects of data
need to be exploited in order to better distinguish unknown classes from
known. We propose a representative-discriminative open-set recognition
(RDOSR) framework, which 1) projects data from the raw image space
to the embedding feature space that facilitates diﬀerentiating similar
classes, and further 2) enhances both the representative and discriminative capacity through transformation to a so-called abundance space.
Experiments on multiple satellite benchmarks demonstrate eﬀectiveness
of the proposed method. We also show the generality of the proposed
approach by achieving promising results on open-set classiﬁcation tasks
using RGB images.
Keywords: Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation · Open-set recognition

1

Introduction

Recent advancements in computer vision, especially the advent of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN), have signiﬁcantly improved the performance of image
classiﬁcation [1–3], detection [4,5], and segmentation [6,7] tasks, enabling their
deployment in many diﬀerent ﬁelds. One of such ﬁeld of applications is satellite
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 1–17, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_1

