Unsupervised Learning of Object Landmarks
through Conditional Image Generation

Tomas Jakab1∗

Ankush Gupta1∗

Hakan Bilen2

1

Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{tomj,ankush,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Andrea Vedaldi1

2

School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
hbilen@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a method for learning landmark detectors for visual objects (such as
the eyes and the nose in a face) without any manual supervision. We cast this as the
problem of generating images that combine the appearance of the object as seen in
a first example image with the geometry of the object as seen in a second example
image, where the two examples differ by a viewpoint change and/or an object
deformation. In order to factorize appearance and geometry, we introduce a tight
bottleneck in the geometry-extraction process that selects and distils geometryrelated features. Compared to standard image generation problems, which often
use generative adversarial networks, our generation task is conditioned on both
appearance and geometry and thus is significantly less ambiguous, to the point
that adopting a simple perceptual loss formulation is sufficient. We demonstrate
that our approach can learn object landmarks from synthetic image deformations
or videos, all without manual supervision, while outperforming state-of-the-art
unsupervised landmark detectors. We further show that our method is applicable to
a large variety of datasets — faces, people, 3D objects, and digits — without any
modifications.

1

Introduction

There is a growing interest in developing machine learning methods that have little or no dependence
on manual supervision. In this paper, we consider in particular the problem of learning, without
external annotations, detectors for the landmarks of object categories, such as the nose, the eyes, and
the mouth of a face, or the hands, shoulders, and head of a human body.
Our approach learns landmarks by looking at images of deformable objects that differ by acquisition
time and/or viewpoint. Such pairs may be extracted from video sequences or can be generated by
randomly perturbing still images. Videos have been used before for self-supervision, often in the
context of future frame prediction, where the goal is to generate future video frames by observing
one or more past frames. A key difficulty in such approaches is the high degree of ambiguity that
exists in predicting the motion of objects from past observations. In order to eliminate this ambiguity,
we propose instead to condition generation on two images, a source (past) image and a target (future)
image. The goal of the learned model is to reproduce the target image, given the source and target
images as input. Clearly, without further constraints, this task is trivial. Thus, we pass the target
through a tight bottleneck meant to distil the geometry of the object (fig. 1). We do so by constraining
the resulting representation to encode spatial locations, as may be obtained by an object landmark
detector. The source image and the encoded target image are then passed to a generator network
which reconstructs the target. Minimising the reconstruction error encourages the model to learn
landmark-like representations because landmarks can be used to encode the geometry of the object,
∗

equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

