Learning to Generate Customized
Dynamic 3D Facial Expressions
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias(B) , Jiali Zheng, Stylianos Ploumpis,
Giorgos Bouritsas, Evangelos Ververas, and Stefanos Zafeiriou
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK
{r.potamias,jiali.zheng18,s.ploumpis,g.bouritsas,e.ververas16,
s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract. Recent advances in deep learning have signiﬁcantly pushed
the state-of-the-art in photorealistic video animation given a single
image. In this paper, we extrapolate those advances to the 3D domain,
by studying 3D image-to-video translation with a particular focus on
4D facial expressions. Although 3D facial generative models have been
widely explored during the past years, 4D animation remains relatively
unexplored. To this end, in this study we employ a deep mesh encoderdecoder like architecture to synthesize realistic high resolution facial
expressions by using a single neutral frame along with an expression identiﬁcation. In addition, processing 3D meshes remains a non-trivial task
compared to data that live on grid-like structures, such as images. Given
the recent progress in mesh processing with graph convolutions, we make
use of a recently introduced learnable operator which acts directly on the
mesh structure by taking advantage of local vertex orderings. In order to
generalize to 4D facial expressions across subjects, we trained our model
using a high resolution dataset with 4D scans of six facial expressions
from 180 subjects. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach
preserves the subject’s identity information even for unseen subjects and
generates high quality expressions. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst study tackling the problem of 4D facial expression synthesis.
Keywords: Expression generation · Facial animation · 4D synthesis ·
4DFAB · Graph neural networks

1

Introduction

Recently, facial animation has received attention from the industrial graphics,
gaming and ﬁlming communities. Face is capable to impart a wide range of
information not only about the subject’s emotional state but also about the
tension of the moment in general. An engaged and crucial task is 3D avatar
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 17) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 278–294, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_17

