Neural Design Network: Graphic Layout
Generation with Constraints
Supplementary Material
Hsin-Ying Lee?2 , Lu Jiang1 , Irfan Essa1,4 ,
Phuong B Le , Haifeng Gong1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2,3 , Weilong Yang1
1

1

1

2

3

4

Google Research
Yonsei University

University of California, Merced
Georgia Institute of Technology

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first describe the graph convolution network
we used in this work. Second, we further illustrate the training process of the
relation prediction module. Third, we present the detailed configurations of the
proposed framework. Finally, we show additional results.

2

Graph Convolution Network

Our graph convolution network takes as inputs features of nodes and edges, and
outputs the updated features. Given as input a graph G = (O, E) with vectors
of objects foi ∈ RDin , where i = 1 ∼ |O|, and vectors of relations fri ∈ RDin ,
where i = 1 ∼ |E|, we aim to output the updated vectors fo0 i ∈ RDout and
fr0 i ∈ RDout , where Din and Dout are dimension of input and output vectors,
respectively. The graph convolution kernel consists of three functions gs , gp , and
go to deal with features of subject, predicate, and object, respectively. These
function take as input a triple (foi , frk , foj ) for an edge and outputs updated
vectors. For relations, the updated vectors is obtained directly from gp :
fr0 k = {gp (foi , frk , foj ) : (oi , rk , oj ) ∈ E}.

(1)

For objects, since an object may be involved in multiple relationships, the updated vectors should take all participated edges into consideration. We use a
symmetric pooling function p to take as input a set of vectors and output a
single vector. Concretely, for oi , the feature sets for oi as subject, the feature
sets for oi as object, and the final updated vectors can be formulated as:
Fis = {gs (foi , frk , foj ) : (oi , rk , oj ) ∈ E}
Fio = {go (foj , frk , foi ) : (oj , rk , oi ) ∈ E}
fo0 i = p(Fis , Fio ).
Figure 1 illustrates an example for a single graph convolution layer.
?

Work done during their internship at Google Research.

(2)

