Modeling Artistic Workflows for Image
Generation and Editing
Supplementary Materials
Hung-Yu Tseng1 , Matthew Fisher2 , Jingwan Lu2 , Yijun Li2 , Vladimir Kim2 ,
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
1

1

University of California, Merced

2

Adobe Research

Overview

In this supplementary material, we first present the implementation details for
each component of the proposed framework. Second, we complement the experiment details. Third, we visualize the learning-based regularization. Fourth,
we show visual examples illustrating the failure cases of the proposed method.
Finally, we present more qualitative results to complement the paper.

2

Implementation Details

We implement our framework with PyTorch [12]. The details for each component
are described as follows.
Workflow inference. The hyper-parameter λ1 in Equation 5 of the paper is
assigned to be 10. We use the Adam optimizer [8] with the learning rate of
2×10−4 and batch size of 8 for optimizing the model. We first train each network
separately with 450, 000 iterations, then jointly train all the networks in the
workflow inference module with 450, 000 iterations.
Artwork generation. We set the hyper-parameter λc in Equation 3 of the
paper to be 1. Similar to the training for the workflow inference module, we use
the Adam optimizer [8] with the learning rate of 2 × 10−4 and batch size of 8.
We train each network separately with 1, 200, 000 iterations, then jointly train
all the networks in the artwork generation module with 600, 000 iterations. We
adopt the objectives in the BicycleGAN [14] approach for training the artwork
generation module, as described in Equation 3 in the paper. More specifically,
the loss Lbicycle
in Equation 3 is formulated as
i
Lbicycle
= LGAN
+ λ1 L1 + λlatent Llatent + λKL LKL ,
i
i

(1)

where LGAN
is the hinge version of GAN loss [3], L1 is the `1 loss between the
i
generated and ground-truth images, Llatent is the latent regression loss between
the predicted and input latent representations, and LKL is the KL divergence loss
on the latent representations. Following the setting in the BicycleGAN scheme,
we respectively assign the hyper-parameters λ1 , λlatent , and λKL to be 10, 0.5,

