Jointly De-Biasing Face Recognition
and Demographic Attribute Estimation
Sixue Gong(B) , Xiaoming Liu, and Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA
{gongsixu,liuxm,jain}@msu.edu

Abstract. We address the problem of bias in automated face recognition and demographic attribute estimation algorithms, where errors
are lower on certain cohorts belonging to speciﬁc demographic groups.
We present a novel de-biasing adversarial network (DebFace) that learns
to extract disentangled feature representations for both unbiased face
recognition and demographics estimation. The proposed network consists
of one identity classiﬁer and three demographic classiﬁers (for gender,
age, and race) that are trained to distinguish identity and demographic
attributes, respectively. Adversarial learning is adopted to minimize correlation among feature factors so as to abate bias inﬂuence from other
factors. We also design a new scheme to combine demographics with identity features to strengthen robustness of face representation in diﬀerent
demographic groups. The experimental results show that our approach is
able to reduce bias in face recognition as well as demographics estimation
while achieving state-of-the-art performance.
Keywords: Bias · Feature disentanglement · Face recognition ·
Fairness

1

Introduction

Automated face recognition has achieved remarkable success with the rapid
developments of deep learning algorithms. Despite the improvement in the accuracy of face recognition, one topic is of signiﬁcance. Does a face recognition system perform equally well in diﬀerent demographic groups? In fact, it has been
observed that many face recognition systems have lower performance in certain
demographic groups than others [23,29,42]. Such face recognition systems are
said to be biased in terms of demographics.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 20) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 330–347, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_20

