Two-Stream Consensus Network for
Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action
Localization: Supplementary Material
Yuanhao Zhai1 , Le Wang1? , Wei Tang2 , Qilin Zhang3 , Junsong Yuan4 , and
Gang Hua5
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
3
HERE Technologies, Chicago, IL, USA
4
State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA
5
Wormpex AI Research, Bellevue, WA, USA
2

In this supplementary material, we first provide more implementation details
of the proposed Two-Stream Consensus Network (TSCN). Then additional
experimental results are provided to further analyze the efficacy of the proposed
pseudo ground truth.

1

More Implementation Details

We have exploited two network backbones, i.e., UntrimmedNet [4] and I3D [2], to
extract features from RGB frames and optical flow. Following respective standard
pipeline [4, 2], we use the original FPS of a video and a fixed FPS of 25 for
UntrimmedNet and I3D, respectively. The optical flow is estimated via the TV-L1
algorithm [6].
We use a set of temporal convolutional layers to transform the original features
to a set of new features. Specifically, we use 1 hidden layer for the THUMOS14
dataset [3] and 3 hidden layers for the ActivityNet datasets [1]. Each hidden
layer consists of 1024 convolutional kernels with a temporal kernel size of 3 and
a stride of 1. Zero padding is used to retain the dimensions of temporal location
outputs. Group Normalization [5] with a group size of 32 and ReLU are used
between any two consecutive hidden layers. A dropout layer with a dropout rate
of 0.7 is added before the classification layer.

2

More Experiements

We conduct additional ablation studies to analyze the efficacy of the proposed
pseudo ground truth. The set of ablation studies is also conducted on the testing
set of the THUMOS14 dataset with UntrimmedNet features.
Ablation Study on the Fusion Parameter β. β is an important hyperparameter controlling the relative importance between the RGB stream and the
flow stream at late fusion, and thus influences the quality of the pseudo ground
?

Corresponding author.

