Adversarial Generative Grammars
for Human Activity Prediction
A. J. Piergiovanni1(B) , Anelia Angelova1 , Alexander Toshev1 ,
and Michael S. Ryoo1,2
1

Robotics at Google, Mountain View, USA
ajpiergi@google.com, anelia@google.com, toshev@google.com, mryoo@google.com
2
Stony Brook University, New York, USA

Abstract. In this paper we propose an adversarial generative grammar
model for future prediction. The objective is to learn a model that explicitly captures temporal dependencies, providing a capability to forecast
multiple, distinct future activities. Our adversarial grammar is designed
so that it can learn stochastic production rules from the data distribution, jointly with its latent non-terminal representations. Being able
to select multiple production rules during inference leads to diﬀerent
predicted outcomes, thus eﬃciently modeling many plausible futures.
The adversarial generative grammar is evaluated on the Charades, MultiTHUMOS, Human3.6M, and 50 Salads datasets and on two activity
prediction tasks: future 3D human pose prediction and future activity
prediction. The proposed adversarial grammar outperforms the stateof-the-art approaches, being able to predict much more accurately and
further in the future, than prior work. Code will be open sourced.

1

Introduction

Future prediction in videos is one of the most challenging visual tasks. Accurately
predicting future activities or human pose has many important applications,
e.g., in video analytics and robot action planning. Prediction is particularly
hard because it is not a deterministic process as multiple potential ‘futures’ are
possible, especially for predicting real-valued output vectors with non-unimodal
distribution. Given these challenges, we address the important question of how
the sequential dependencies in the data should be modeled and how multiple
possible long-term future outcomes can be predicted at any given time.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 30) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 507–523, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_30

