Supplementary Materials – Perceive, Predict,
and Plan: Safe Motion Planning Through
Interpretable Semantic Representations
1,2

Mengye Ren

Abbas Sadat?1 , Sergio Casas?1,2 ,
, Xinyu Wu1 , Pranaab Dhawan1 , Raquel Urtasun1,2

Uber ATG1 , University of Toronto2
{asadat, sergio.casas, mren3, xinyuw, pdhawan, urtasun}@uber.com

In this supplementary material, we present the trajectory parameterization
and sampling procedure in more details. Additionally, we give an overview of
all the planning cost-functions. Further details about training our models are
included as well as more qualitative results.

1

Trajectory Parametrization and Sampling

The output of the planner is a trajectory that consists of a sequence of bicycle
model states τ = pt , pt = (x, y, θ, v, κ, a), where (x, y) is the position of the
center of the rear axle of the vehicle, θ is the heading, v and a are the forward
velocity and acceleration, and κ is the curvature of the vehicle path which can
be converted to steering angle. Candidate trajectories can be generated by sampling various curvature and acceleration values and using the kinematic bicycle
model to obtain the other states (position, heading, velocity) [1]. However, this
approach will be very inefficient as most of the sampled trajectories will not
exhibit proper lane-based driving. Therefore we adopt an alternative approach
which uses the lanes structures to generate higher quality trajectories. Specifically, we sample trajectories in Frenet Frame of the driving-path of the desired
lane [2], i.e. instead of kinematic bicycle-model state, we use longitudinal position
and lateral offset (and their higher order derivatives) relative to a driving-path
to represent a trajectory. Figure 1 demonstrates such parametrization, where r is
the driving path parametrized by arc-length s, s(t) is the longitudinal position of
the vehicle parametrized by time t, and d(s) is the lateral offset from the drivingpath parametrized by arc-length s. Each pair of s(t) and d(s) can describe a
bicycle model trajectory. Specifically, the Frenet state defined as [s, ṡ, s̈, d, d0 , d00 ]
˙ := ∂ ,
can be transformed to bicycle model state (x, y, θ, v, κ, a) [2]. Note that (.)
∂t
∂
and (.)0 := ∂s
denote the derivatives with respect to time and arc-length.
Our trajectory sampling procedure is as follows: we first sample a set of
longitudinal trajectories that convert various velocity profiles such as stopping,
accelerating to a specific-velocity, maintaining the current velocity. Then, for
each longitudinal trajectory, we sample lateral trajectories that include maneuvers such as nudging, changing-lane, and following the driving-path. Combining
?

Denotes equal contribution

