Supplemental Material:
Connecting Vision and Language with
Localized Narratives
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Jasper Uijlings, Soravit Changpinyo,
Radu Soricut, and Vittorio Ferrari
Google Research

This supplemental material is organized as follows:
Section 1 presents a demonstration of application of Localized Narratives for
image generation. The user describes the image they want by means of a
Localized Narrative and the method generates an image that matches the
description.
Section 2 provides additional qualitative examples for the controlled image
captioning application.
Section 3 provides an additional quantitative plot of the localization accuracy
of the mouse trace in Localized Narratives for Open Images. It was suppressed from the main paper due to space limitations.
Section 4 provides additional technical details on the framework that we use
for controlled image captioning.

1

Image Generation

Generating an image conditioned on a semantic segmentation map is a wellstudied application [4, 5, 7, 10]. However, while such segmentation maps give control over the image to be synthesized, they do not provide a natural interface
for the user. In this section, we show how we can use labelled mouse traces to
generate images. This opens up a new and intuitive way for the user to provide
guidance to the image generation process.
We start from SPADE [7], which is an existing, state-of-the-art framework
for generating images conditioned on a pixel-wise segmentation map. We use
their publicly available model that is pre-trained on COCO-stuff [2, 6], which
features 182 semantic classes, including object and background classes (stuff).
At test time, the model takes as input a segmentation map where pixels are
labeled with these classes, and generates an image. In this section we exploit
Localized Narratives as a natural interface for producing these segmentation
maps efficiently, as the user can specify both the location and class label of the
desired image elements at the same time, and can intuitively specify elements in
their order of importance.
Localized Narrative to Semantic Segmentation Map. For this application we need to convert the labelled traces into an appropriate segmentation
map. We found that scene elements should have a realistic shape for SPADE to

