Supplementary Material:
Efficient Neighbourhood Consensus Networks via
Submanifold Sparse Convolutions
Anonymous ECCV submission
Paper ID 909

In this supplementary material we present additional qualitative results on
the HPatches Sequences (Sec. 1), InLoc (Sec. 2) and Aachen Day-Night (Sec. 3)
benchmarks, and insights about the way Sparse-NCNet operates (Sec. 4).

1

HPatches Sequences benchmark

Mean matching accuracy. The Mean Matching Accuracy (MMA) metric is used
in the HPatches Sequences benchmark to assess the fraction of correct matches
under different tolerance thresholds. It is computed in the following way:

PN
A
B

i=1 1>0 t − kTH (pi ) − pi k
A B N
MMA {(pi , pi )}i=1 ; t =
,
(1)
N
B N
A
where {(pA
i , pi )}i=1 is the set of matches to be evaluated, TH (pi ) is the warped
A
point pi using the ground-truth homography H, 1>0 is the indicator function
for positive numbers, and t is the chosen tolerance threshold (in pixels).

Additional qualitative results are presented in Figures 1 and 2. We compare
the MMA of Sparse-NCNet with the state-of-the-art methods SuperPoint [1],
D2-Net [2] and R2D2 [5], which are trainable methods for joint detection and
description on local features. The correctly matched points are shown in green,
while the incorrectly matched ones are shown in red, for a threshold value t = 3
pixels. For the proposed Sparse-NCNet, results are presented for two different
numbers of matches, 2000 and 6000. Results show that our method produces
the largest fraction of correct matches, even when considering as many as 6000
correspondences. In particular, note that our method is able to produce a large
amount of correct correspondences even under strong illumination changes, as
shown in Fig. 2. Furthermore, note that the nature of the correspondences
produced by Sparse-NCNet is different from those of local feature methods.
While local feature methods can only produce correspondences on the detected
points, which are the local extrema of a particular feature detection function,
our method produces densely packed sets of correspondences. This results from
Sparse-NCNet’s propagation of information in local neighbourhoods, as discussed
in Sec. 4 of this supplementary material.

