Cross-Attention in Coupled Unmixing
Nets for Unsupervised Hyperspectral
Super-Resolution
Jing Yao1,2,4 , Danfeng Hong2(B) , Jocelyn Chanussot3 , Deyu Meng1,5 ,
Xiaoxiang Zhu2,4 , and Zongben Xu1
1

School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
jasonyao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,{dymeng,zbxu}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2
Remote Sensing Technology Institute, German Aerospace Center,
Weßling, Germany
{danfeng.hong,xiaoxiang.zhu}@dlr.de
3
University Grenoble Alpes, INRIA, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, Grenoble, France
jocelyn.chanussot@grenoble-inp.fr
4
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
5
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macao, China

Abstract. The recent advancement of deep learning techniques has
made great progress on hyperspectral image super-resolution (HSI-SR).
Yet the development of unsupervised deep networks remains challenging
for this task. To this end, we propose a novel coupled unmixing network
with a cross-attention mechanism, CUCaNet for short, to enhance the
spatial resolution of HSI by means of higher-spatial-resolution multispectral image (MSI). Inspired by coupled spectral unmixing, a two-stream
convolutional autoencoder framework is taken as backbone to jointly
decompose MS and HS data into a spectrally meaningful basis and corresponding coeﬃcients. CUCaNet is capable of adaptively learning spectral
and spatial response functions from HS-MS correspondences by enforcing reasonable consistency assumptions on the networks. Moreover, a
cross-attention module is devised to yield more eﬀective spatial-spectral
information transfer in networks. Extensive experiments are conducted
on three widely-used HS-MS datasets in comparison with state-of-theart HSI-SR models, demonstrating the superiority of the CUCaNet in
the HSI-SR application. Furthermore, the codes and datasets are made
available at: https://github.com/danfenghong/ECCV2020 CUCaNet.
Keywords: Coupled unmixing · Cross-attention · Deep learning ·
Hyperspectral super-resolution · Multispectral · Unsupervised

1

Introduction

Recent advances in hyperspectral (HS) imaging technology have enabled the
availability of enormous HS images (HSIs) with a densely sampled spectrum
Danfeng Hong — Corresponding author.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 208–224, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_13

