On Diverse Asynchronous Activity
Anticipation
He Zhao(B) and Richard P. Wildes
York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
{zhufl,wildes}@cse.yorku.ca

Abstract. We investigate the joint anticipation of long-term activity
labels and their corresponding times with the aim of improving both the
naturalness and diversity of predictions. We address these matters using
Conditional Adversarial Generative Networks for Discrete Sequences.
Central to our approach is a reexamination of the unavoidable sample
quality vs. diversity tradeoﬀ of the recently emerged Gumbel-Softmax
relaxation based GAN on discrete data. In particular, we ameliorate this
trade-oﬀ with a simple but eﬀective sample distance regularizer. Moreover, we provide a uniﬁed approach to inference of activity labels and
their times so that a single integrated optimization succeeds for both.
With this novel approach in hand, we demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of
the resulting discrete sequential GAN on multimodal activity anticipation. We evaluate the approach on three standard datasets and show
that it outperforms previous approaches in terms of both accuracy and
diversity, thereby yielding a new state-of-the-art in activity anticipation.

1

Introduction

Activity anticipation has drawn considerable recent attention and has evolved
from relatively simple next frame prediction to more challenging asynchronous
sequences of activities and times that occur further into the future [34,35]. One
particular characteristic of activities, uncertainty, is also gaining consideration
[1,37]. For example, given certain starting procedures of preparing a meal in a
kitchen, initial actions take egg, butter pan can be followed by crack egg, fry egg
for a fried egg breakfast, or alternatively spoon flour, pour milk, etc. for a pancake breakfast, as well as many other possibilities as in Fig. 1. Indeed, not only
the activities, but also the durations can vary (e.g. cooking time diﬀers between
soft and hard boiled eggs). This phenomenon, referred to as diversity in prediction, is one of the core abilities of the human prediction system, while it is much
less well captured in contemporary computer vision.
Recent eﬀorts on increasing diversity have concentrated on generative models.
GANs [13] are especially notable for generating near realistic (i.e. high quality)
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 46) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 781–799, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_46

