Model-Agnostic Boundary-Adversarial
Sampling for Test-Time Generalization
in Few-Shot Learning
Jaekyeom Kim(B) , Hyoungseok Kim, and Gunhee Kim
Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{jaekyeom,harry2636,gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
http://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/mabas

Abstract. Few-shot learning is an important research problem that
tackles one of the greatest challenges of machine learning: learning a new
task from a limited amount of labeled data. We propose a model-agnostic
method that improves the test-time performance of any few-shot learning
models with no additional training, and thus is free from the trainingtest domain gap. Based on only the few support samples in a meta-test
task, our method generates the samples adversarial to the base few-shot
classiﬁer’s boundaries and ﬁne-tunes its embedding function in the direction that increases the classiﬁcation margins of the adversarial samples.
Consequently, the embedding space becomes denser around the labeled
samples which makes the classiﬁer robust to query samples. Experimenting on miniImageNet, CIFAR-FS, and FC100, we demonstrate that our
method brings signiﬁcant performance improvement to three diﬀerent
base methods with various properties, and achieves the state-of-the-art
performance in a number of few-shot learning tasks.
Keywords: Few-shot learning · Meta-learning · Adversarial learning

1

Introduction

One of the greatest challenges for machine intelligence to meet human intelligence
is the ability to quickly adapt to novel tasks. Humans learn how to solve new
tasks with only a small amount of training, by taking advantage of the prior
information they have learned for lives. Few-shot learning [11,28] is a research
problem to make the most of knowledge gained during training to deal with
novel tasks with a limited number of labeled samples. Its core diﬃculty lies in
the data deﬁciency for novel tasks.
In the few-shot learning problem, the base classes in training and novel classes
in test are disjoint. The test phase consists of multiple tasks where each contains
a small labeled support set and an unlabeled query set. The goal of each task
is to predict the labels of the query data based on the support data. The metalearning scheme [12,36], which forms batches of tasks for the training as well,
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 599–617, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_35

