Supplementary Material for DELTAS: Depth
Estimation by Learning Triangulation And
densification of Sparse points
Ayan Sinha1 , Zak Murez1 , James Bartolozzi∗ , Vijay Badrinarayanan2∗ , and
Andrew Rabinovich3∗
1

1

Magic Leap Inc., CA, USA {asinha,zmurez}@magicleap.com
*Work done at Magic Leap bartolozzij@gmail.com
2
Wayve.ai, London, UK vijay@wayve.ai
3
InsideIQ Inc., CA, USA andrew@insideiq.team

Ablation Studies

We first analyze the sparse triangulated points output from our network and
perform ablation studies on our critical hyper-parameters and its influence on
the depth estimation performance of our trained model, i.e., we only investigate
the parameter values at inference time.
Sparse Depth Analysis: We first validate the need to triangulate points in
a differentiable manner as opposed to directly using sparse points output by a
standard SLAM systems for the task of dense depth estimation. Table 1 lists
the performance of sparse and dense depth estimations using COLMAP. We see
that the sparse depth is of very poor quality, and the dense depth calculated
by COLMAP is able to reduce the performance gap due to additional post
processing steps like block matching etc. However, the best performance is that
of using sparse map predicted by COLMAP as input to a sparse-to-dense depth
estimation network, illustrating the power of deep networks. The sparse-to-dense
network is identical to the network structure described in the main manuscript
minus the triangulation module, and the descriptor and detector heads. Note
that the performance of sparse-to-dense network is significantly worse than that
of our approach end-to-end approach described in the main manuscript. Table 2
shows the performance of the sparse depth output by the triangulation module.
We see that the performance is significantly better than that of sparse points
output by COLMAP, and robust accross different ratios of interest points and
random points. This indicates that the network learns context around a point
to circumvent the hardness of triangulating non-interest points.
Number of Points: We first study the influence of the number of sampled
points in the target image on the final depth estimation. In Table 3 we see that
the performance of our approach is fairly robust in the range of 256 to 512 points.
Performance slightly degrades for more than 512 points. Unsurprisingly, the
performance significantly degrades when no triangulated points are considered

