Guessing State Tracking for Visual
Dialogue
Wei Pang and Xiaojie Wang(B)
Center for Intelligence Science and Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{pangweitf,xjwang}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract. The Guesser is a task of visual grounding in GuessWhat?!
like visual dialogue. It locates the target object in an image supposed
by an Oracle oneself over a question-answer based dialogue between a
Questioner and the Oracle. Most existing guessers make one and only
one guess after receiving all question-answer pairs in a dialogue with the
predeﬁned number of rounds. This paper proposes a guessing state for
the Guesser, and regards guess as a process with change of guessing state
through a dialogue. A guessing state tracking based guess model is therefore proposed. The guessing state is deﬁned as a distribution on objects
in the image. With that in hand, two loss functions are deﬁned as supervisions to guide the guessing state in model training. Early supervision
brings supervision to Guesser at early rounds, and incremental supervision brings monotonicity to the guessing state. Experimental results on
GuessWhat?! dataset show that our model signiﬁcantly outperforms previous models, achieves new state-of-the-art, especially the success rate of
guessing 83.3% is approaching the human-level accuracy of 84.4%.
Keywords: Visual dialogue · Visual grounding · Guessing state
tracking · GuessWhat?!

1

Introduction

Visual dialogue has received increasing attention in recent years. It involves both
vision and language processing and interactions between them in a continuous
conversation and brings some new challenging problems. Some diﬀerent tasks
of visual dialogue have been proposed, such as Visual Dialog [5], GuessWhat?!
[20], GuessWhich [4], and MNIST Dialog [11,14,28]. Among them, GuessWhat?!
is a typical object-guessing game played between a Questioner and an Oracle.
Given an image including several objects, the goal of the Questioner is to locate
the target object supposed by the Oracle oneself at the beginning of a game by
asking a series of yes/no questions. The Questioner, therefore, has two sub-tasks:
one is Question Generator (QGen) that asks questions to the Oracle, the other
is Guesser that identiﬁes the target object in the image based on the generated
dialogue between the QGen and Oracle. The Oracle answers questions with yes
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 683–698, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_40

