Context-Gated Convolution
– Supplementary Material
Xudong Lin1? , Lin Ma2 , Wei Liu2 , and Shih-Fu Chang1
1

Columbia University
{xudong.lin, shih.fu.chang}@columbia.edu
2
Tencent AI Lab
forest.linma@gmail.com
wl2223@columbia.edu

A

Appendix

A.1

Analysis of the Gate

To further validate that our CGC uses context information of the target objects
to guide the convolution process, we calculate the average modulated kernel (in
the last CGC of the model) for images of each class in the validation set. Then we
calculate inter-class L−2 distance between every two average modulated kernels,
i.e., class centers, and the intra-class L − 2 distance (mean distance to the class
center) for each class. As is shown in Fig. 1, we visualize the difference matrix
between inter-class distances and intra-class distances. In more than 93.99% of
the cases, the inter-class distance is larger than the corresponding intra-class
distance, which indicates that there are clear clusters of these modulated kernels
and the clusters are aligned very well with the classes.
This observation strongly supports that our CGC successfully extracts classspecific context information and effectively modulates the convolution kernel
to extract representative features. Meanwhile, the intra-class variance of the
modulated kernels indicates that our CGC dynamically modulates convolution
kernels according to different input contexts.
A.2

Details of training settings on ImageNet and CIFAR-10

For the default setting on ImageNet, we use 224 × 224 random resized cropping
and random horizontal flipping for data augmentation. Then we standardize the
data with mean and variance per channel. We use a traditional cross-entropy
loss to train all the networks with a batch size of 256 on 8 GPUs by SGD, a
weight decay of 0.0001, and a momentum of 0.9 for 100 epochs. We start from
a learning rate of 0.1 and decrease it by a factor of 10 every 30 epochs. The
last normalization layers in the module are zero-initialized to make the gates
start from constants. All the extra layers in Context-Gated Convolution have a
learning rate ten times smaller than convolutional kernels.
?

This work was done when Xudong Lin interned at Tencent AI Lab.

