Full-Time Monocular Road Detection Using
Zero-Distribution Prior of Angle of Polarization
Supplementary Material
Ning Li1 , Yongqiang Zhao1 , Quan Pan1 , Seong G. Kong2 , and Jonathan
Cheung-Wai Chan3
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, China
2
Sejong University, Seoul, 05006, South Korea
3
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, 1050, Belgium

This supplementary material contains the following details that we could not
include in the main paper due to space restrictions. Sec. 1: Background introduction of DoFP polarization imaging and Stokes parameters. Sec. 2: Detailed
proof of sign of S1 . Sec. 3: Statistical analysis of difference of DoP. Sec. 4: More
experiment results.

1

Background

A polarization imaging system collects polarization information in different orientations. Various types of existing polarization imagers include division of time,
division of amplitude, division of aperture, and division of focal plane (DoFP)
[8]. DoFP polarimeter has received much attention due to its integrated sample structure and the ability of capturing polarization information in real time.
DoFP polarimeters capture images using a micro-polarizer array (MPA) image
sensor as shown in Fig. 1. Each pixel takes the polarized light at only one of four
orientations, e.g. 0, 45, 90, and 135 degrees. Missing polarization components at
neighboring pixels need to be estimated, or interpolated, since the instantaneous
field of view (IFoV) [5] errors will become significant. This polarization interpolation process is called polarization demosaicking (PDM). So, it generates four
polarization images after the PDM on the input DoFP image.
A DoFP polarimeter with the structure in Fig. 1 to capture intensity and
polarization information of a scene is essentially an intensity-based method. The
four recovered full resolution intensity measurements Iφ (x) (the light wave filtered by micro linear polarizer oriented at φ = 0◦ , 45◦ , 90◦ , 135◦ ) after PDM are
necessary and sufficient to compute the polarization parameters as follows [4]
S0 (x) = 0.5 (I0 (x) + I45 (x) + I90 (x) + I135 (x))
S1 (x) = I0 (x) − I90 (x)
S2 (x) = I45 (x) − I135 (x)

(1)

where S0 , S1 and S2 are known as the first three Stokes parameters, and x is
pixel position. S0 is the total intensity of the light. The parameters S1 and S2

