BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language
recognition using mouthing cues
APPENDIX
Samuel Albanie1? , Gül Varol1? , Liliane Momeni1 , Triantafyllos Afouras1 ,
Joon Son Chung1,2 , Neil Fox3 , and Andrew Zisserman1
1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
2
Naver Corporation, Seoul, South Korea
3
Deafness Cognition and Language Research Centre, University College London, UK
{albanie,gul,liliane,afourast,joon,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk;
neil.fox@ucl.ac.uk

This document provides additional results (Section A), details about the
video pose distillation model (Section B), and about the BSL-1K dataset (Section C).

A

Additional Results

In this section, we present complementary results to the main paper. Section A.1
provides a qualitative analysis. Additional experiments investigate the search
window size for mouthing (Section A.2), the number of frames for sign recognition (Section A.3), the effect of masking the mouth at test time (Section A.4),
ensembling part-specific models (Section A.5), the transfer to co-articulated
datasets (Section A.6), and the baselines using other cues (Section A.7).
A.1

Qualitative analysis

We provide a video on our project page1 to illustrate the automatically annotated training samples in our BSL-1K dataset, as well as the results of our sign
recognition model on the manually verified test set. Figures A.1 and A.2 present
some of these results. In Figure A.1, we provide training samples localised using mouthing cues. In Figure A.2, we provide test samples classified by our I3D
model trained on the automatic annotations.
A.2

Size of the search window for visual keyword spotting

We investigate the influence of varying the extent of the temporal window around
a given subtitle during the visual keyword spotting phase of dataset collection.
For this experiment, we run the visual keyword spotting model with different
search window sizes (centring these windows on the subtitle locations), and train
?
1

Equal contribution
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsl1k/

