Appendix

This supplementary material is organized as follows: in section A, we provide
a brief description of an other approach to take into account self similarities in
sparse models. In Section B, we provide implementation details that are useful to reproduce the results of our paper (note that the code is also provided).
In Section C, we present additional quantitative results that were not included
in the main paper for space limitation reasons; we notably provide the SSIM
quality metric [16] for grayscale, color, and demosaicking experiments; the SSIM
score is sometimes more meaningful than PSNR (note that the conclusions presented in the main paper remain unchanged, except for grey image denoising,
where our method becomes either closer or better than NLRN, whereas it was
slightly behind in PSNR); we also present ablation studies and provide additional
baselines for demosaicking and denoising. Section D is devoted to the proof of
Proposition 1, and finally in Section E, we present additional qualitative results
(which require zooming on a computer screen). Finally, in section F we included
Visualizations of parameters learned by our model to provide better intuition
regarding our approach.

A

Centralised Sparse Representation

A different approach to take into account self similarities in sparse models is
the CSR approach of [4]. This approach is easier to turn into a differentiable
algorithm than the LSSC method, but we have empirically observed that it does
not perform as well. Nevertheless, we believe it to be conceptually interesting,
and we provide a brief description below. The idea consists of regularizing each
code αi with the function
Ψi (αi ) = kαi k1 + γkαi − β i k1 ,

(1)

where β i is obtained by a weighted average of prevous codes. Specifically, given
(k)
some codes αi obtained at iteration k and a similarity matrix Σ, we compute
(k)

βi
(k)

=

X Σ ij
(k)
P
αj ,
Σ
il
l
j

(2)
(k+1)

and the weights β i are used in (1) in order to compute the codes αi
.
Note that the original CSR method of [4] uses similarities of the form Σ ij =
exp − 2σ1 2 kWαi − Wαj k22 , but other similarities functions may be used.
Even though [4] does not use a proximal gradient descent method to solve
the problem regularized with (1), the next proposition shows that it admits a
closed form, which is a key to turn CSR into a differentiable algorithm. To the
best of our knowledge, this expression is new; its proof is given in the appendix.

