Forgetting Outside the Box: Scrubbing
Deep Networks of Information Accessible
from Input-Output Observations
Aditya Golatkar(B) , Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, USA
{aditya29,achille,soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract. We describe a procedure for removing dependency on a
cohort of training data from a trained deep network that improves upon
and generalizes previous methods to diﬀerent readout functions, and can
be extended to ensure forgetting in the ﬁnal activations of the network.
We introduce a new bound on how much information can be extracted
per query about the forgotten cohort from a black-box network for which
only the input-output behavior is observed. The proposed forgetting procedure has a deterministic part derived from the diﬀerential equations
of a linearized version of the model, and a stochastic part that ensures
information destruction by adding noise tailored to the geometry of the
loss landscape. We exploit the connections between the ﬁnal activations
and weight dynamics of a DNN inspired by Neural Tangent Kernels to
compute the information in the ﬁnal activations.
Keywords: Forgetting · Data removal · Neural tangent kernel ·
Information theory

1

Introduction

We study the problem of removing information pertaining to a given set of data
points from the weights of a trained network. After removal, a potential attacker
should not be able to recover information about the forgotten cohort. We consider both the cases in which the attacker has full access to the weights of the
trained model, and the less-studied case where the attacker can only query the
model by observing some input data and the corresponding output, for instance
through a web Application Programming Interface (API). We show that we
can quantify the maximum amount of information that an attacker can extract
from observing inputs and outputs (black-box attack), as well as from direct
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 23) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 383–398, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_23

