Unselfie: Translating Selfies to Neutral-pose
Portraits in the Wild – Supplementary Material

In this supplementary material, we provide additional results, more visual
comparisons with prior art and implementation details.

A

Results of using off-the-shelf inpainting network for
background

In Fig. S1, we provide side-by-side result comparisons of our original pipeline
and a slightly modified pipeline using off-the-shelf inpainting network [8] to
fill the dis-occluded background holes before feeding the inpainted background
(Ibg in Figure 6 of the main paper) into our composition stage. In particular,
during inference, we use the pre-trained inpainting network to inpaint the holes
H = Hself ie (marked in black in second column of Fig. S1). Then we apply
a matting algorithm [6] to the retrieved neural-pose portrait to create a new
hole H = Hneutral (third column of Fig. S1) before feeding it together with the
coordinate inpainting result (If g in Figure 6 of the main paper) as input to
our composition network. In Fig. S1, the fourth column shows the result of our
original pipeline and the fifth column shows the result of our modified pipeline
leveraging the inpainting network.
Theoretically, using a separate inpainting network to handle the background
separately allows us to harvest the latest advances in image inpainting and focus
our composition module exclusively on the synthesis of foreground details and
foreground-background transitions. However, there are pros and cons in practice.
Pros: the pretrained inpainting network can help reduce the artifacts in the
background holes and near the foreground boundaries. For example, in the top
row of Fig. S1, the structure of the door on the right side of the image is better
synthesized. In the top and middle rows, the artifacts near the arms are also
reduced. Cons: occasionally the inpainting network could introduce small artifacts
near the foreground boundary. For example, in the bottom row, the inpainting
network introduced some grey regions on top of the girl’s right shoulder.

B

More comparisons

Here, we provide more comparisons between our approach and prior approaches,
including VUNET [2]. Ours is the result from our original pipeline where we
manually picked the best one out of results using our top-5 retrieved poses. Ours
w/ inpainted BG uses off-the-shelf inpainting network as described above.
VUNET produces many artifacts in both body and background regions.

