– Supplementary Material –
QuEST: Quantized Embedding Space
for Transferring Knowledge
Himalaya Jain1 , Spyros Gidaris1 , Nikos Komodakis2,3 , Patrick Pérez1 , and
Matthieu Cord1,4
1

A

Valeo.ai

2

University of Crete

3

LIGM

4

Sorbonne University

On using cosine similarity in assignment predictor

In the assignment predictor we use cosine similarity to predict the K-dimensional
(h,w)
(h,w)
soft-assignment vector pS
from the feature vector fS
(Eq. 5). The reason
for choosing this similarity measure over the Euclidean distance is that the former
L2-normalizes the features and the visual word weights, which we observed
to lead to better behavior. We believe that this is due to the fact that the
L2-normalization acts as a regularizer for the weights of the visual words in
the assignment predictor in case of unbalanced k-means clusters: without the
L2-normalization, more frequent teacher-words would lead to bigger weight
magnitudes for the corresponding student-words. Also, with cosine similarity, it
is easier to control the peakiness of the predicted word distribution since the
range of its output values is fixed and a priori known (i.e., between -1 and 1).

B

Implementation details for vector quantization

In our quantization-based distillation method we use k-means to learn the visual
teacher-words vocabulary V . Here we provide implementation details regarding
how we apply the k-means clustering algorithm.
k-means implementation. For k-means, we use the implementation provided by the publicly available FAISS [3] library.
Applying k-means on ImageNet. The training set of ImageNet is quite
large (i.e., it has around 1.28M images). Therefore, when evaluating our distillation
method on it, to learn efficiently the visual teacher-words vocabulary V , we apply
k-means only to a randomly sampled subset of 0.2M images from this set. Given
the spatial size of feature maps, this subset provides a sufficiently large corpus of
vectors to learn a vocabulary of size K = 4096, as we use in our experiments.
Applying k-means on CIFAR-100 and CIFAR-10. For CIFAR-100 and
CIFAR-10 experiments, we apply k-means to the entire training sets.

