Sep-Stereo: Visually Guided Stereophonic
Audio Generation by Associating Source
Separation
Hang Zhou(B) , Xudong Xu, Dahua Lin, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China
zhouhang@link.cuhk.edu.hk,
{xx018,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk,
xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk,
zwliu.hust@gmail.com

Abstract. Stereophonic audio is an indispensable ingredient to enhance
human auditory experience. Recent research has explored the usage of
visual information as guidance to generate binaural or ambisonic audio
from mono ones with stereo supervision. However, this fully supervised
paradigm suﬀers from an inherent drawback: the recording of stereophonic audio usually requires delicate devices that are expensive for
wide accessibility. To overcome this challenge, we propose to leverage
the vastly available mono data to facilitate the generation of stereophonic
audio. Our key observation is that the task of visually indicated audio
separation also maps independent audios to their corresponding visual
positions, which shares a similar objective with stereophonic audio generation. We integrate both stereo generation and source separation into
a uniﬁed framework, Sep-Stereo, by considering source separation as
a particular type of audio spatialization. Speciﬁcally, a novel associative pyramid network architecture is carefully designed for audio-visual
feature fusion. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework
can improve the stereophonic audio generation results while performing
accurate sound separation with a shared backbone (Code, models and
demo video are available at https://hangz-nju-cuhk.github.io/projects/
Sep-Stereo.).

1

Introduction

Sight and sound are both crucial components of human perceptions. Sensory
information around us is inherently multi-modal, mixed with both pixels and
H. Zhou and X. Xu—Equal Contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 52–69, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_4

