Supplementary Material of “RobustFusion:
Human Volumetric Capture with Data-driven
Visual Cues using a RGBD Camera”
Zhuo Su1∗ , Lan Xu1,2∗ , Zerong Zheng1 , Tao Yu1 , Yebin Liu1 , and Lu Fang1†
1

2

1

Tsinghua University
ShanghaiTech University

More Experiment

In this section, we provide more experiment to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our RobustFusion system, including the comparisons to other RGB or RGBD
based off-line methods as well as the evaluation using a sequence from another
public dataset.
Comparison with RGB-based off-line methods. Recall that in our model
completion stage, a data-driven implicit occupancy network is utilized to generate the water-tight initial geometry model. For further evaluation, we compare
our RobustFusion against the state-of-the-art per-frame pixel-aligned implicit
approaches PIFu [2] and PIFuHD [3]. Fig. 1 illustrates the qualitative results
on various frames with challenging fast motions. Note that these RGB-based
approaches suffer from complicated poses and depth ambiguity. In contrast, our
approach achieves significantly better and temporally-coherent geometry reconstruction results especially for challenging human motions, with the inherent
advantage of performance capture and the aid of various visual priors.
Comparison with RGBD-based off-line methods. For the comparison to
RGBD-based methods, we utilize the Poisson reconstruction [1] to blend the
tracked initial model and current depth input for each live frame. Note that for
fair comparison, we use the tracking pose parameters from our method in this
per-frame Poisson reconstruction baseline. As shown in Fig. 2, such per-frame
Poisson reconstruction suffers from severe noise from the raw depth input and
cannot recover fine geometry details. In contrast, the proposed RobustFusion
based on an effective fusion strategy can handle challenging motions and recover
temporally-coherent geometry details. Furthermore, we compare to the variation using Poisson reconstruction to blend the partial TSDF and the learned
complete mesh in our model completion stage. For fair comparison, the Poisson reconstruction is applied after the same aligning the partial geometry and
the learned complete mesh. As illustrated in Fig. 3, without inherent seamless
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

