Supplementary Material: Improving Query
Efficiency of Black-box Adversarial Attack

1,2,4,†

Yong Jiang

Yang Bai1,4,? , Yuyuan Zeng2,4,? ,
, Yisen Wang3,† , Shu-Tao Xia2,4 , and Weiwei Guo5

1
Tsinghua Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
PCL Research Center of Networks and Communications, Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
vivo AI Lab
2

A

The Structure of ANP in NP-Attack

Here, we show the detailed structure of the pre-trained ANP [15, 27] model on
CIFAR10 [17].

B

More Optimization Options of NP-Attack

Here we show the details of the other two optimization options, NP-Attack-Z
and NP-Attack-RZ.
NP-Attack-Z In this case, we fix r and optimize on the distribution of z, in
order to sample z with adversary. Under the guidance of score outputs in each
query, to be simplified, we just optimize the predictive mean µ, keeping σ fixed.
The optimization of our NP-Attack is inherited from NES [31], which could
enhance query efficiency compared with those vector-wise gradient estimation
strategies. Omitting the fixed r while inheriting Decoder g from the pre-trained
NP, the estimated loss function in our NP-Attack could be considered as L =
EN (z|µ,σ2 ) l(g(z)). The optimization of µ is implemented by adding some random
Gaussian noises and further using NES to estimate the gradient. Those added
Gaussian noises are of the same variance with z in pre-trained NP. The reason
comes as that a same variance could keep z of a simpler representation for
variance after adjustment in each iteration, which benefits the optimization later.
The optimization function could be computed as: µt+1 ← µt − η∇µ L |µt , where
η denotes a learning rate. To guarantee such optimization being more accurate,
in practice the optimization is over a mini-batch of sample size b, which means
?
†

Equal contribution. ({y-bai17, zengyy19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn)
Corresponding authors: Yisen Wang (eewangyisen@gmail.com) and Yong Jiang
(jiangy@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

