Adversarial Data Augmentation
via Deformation Statistics
Sahin Olut1(B) , Zhengyang Shen1 , Zhenlin Xu1 , Samuel Gerber2 ,
and Marc Niethammer1
1
UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
{olut,zyshen,zhenlinx,mn}@cs.unc.edu
2
Kitware Inc., New York, USA
samuel.gerber@kitware.com

Abstract. Deep learning models have been successful in computer
vision and medical image analysis. However, training these models frequently requires large labeled image sets whose creation is often very
time and labor intensive, for example, in the context of 3D segmentations. Approaches capable of training deep segmentation networks with
a limited number of labeled samples are therefore highly desirable. Data
augmentation or semi-supervised approaches are commonly used to cope
with limited labeled training data. However, the augmentation strategies
for many existing approaches are either hand-engineered or require computationally demanding searches. To that end, we explore an augmentation strategy which builds statistical deformation models from unlabeled
data via principal component analysis and uses the resulting statistical
deformation space to augment the labeled training samples. Speciﬁcally,
we obtain transformations via deep registration models. This allows for
an intuitive control over plausible deformation magnitudes via the statistical model and, if combined with an appropriate deformation model,
yields spatially regular transformations. To optimally augment a dataset
we use an adversarial strategy integrated into our statistical deformation
model. We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of our approach for the segmentation of knee cartilage from 3D magnetic resonance images. We show
favorable performance to state-of-the-art augmentation approaches.
Keywords: Data augmentation · Image registration · Segmentation

Image segmentation is an important task in computer vision and medical image
analysis, for example, to localize objects of interest or to plan treatments and
surgeries. Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve state-of-the art segmentation
performance in these domains [19,20,44]. However, training DNNs typically
relies on large datasets with labeled structures of interest. In many cases, and for
medical segmentation problems in particular, labeled training data is scarce, as
obtaining manual segmentations is costly and requires expertise [35]. To allow for
training of well-performing DNNs from a limited number of segmentations, various data augmentation strategies have been proposed [24]. Augmentation stratec
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 643–659, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_38

