18

Z. Ren et al.

Appendix
In this document, we provide:
– An extensive study on the LVIS [18] dataset where UFO2 learns to detect
more than 1k di↵erent objects without bounding box annotation (Sec. A),
which demonstrates the generalizability and applicability of UFO2
– Details regarding the annotation policies mentioned in Sec. 5.4 ‘Budgetaware Omni-supervised Detection’ of the main paper
– Additional visualizations of the simulated partial labels
– Additional qualitative results on COCO (complementary to main paper Sec. 5.2)

A

Extensions: Learning to Detect Everything

In this section we show that without any architecture changes UFO2 can be
generalized to detect any objects given image-level tags. Hence we follow [21]
and refer to this setting as ‘learning to detect everything.’
Specifically, we aim to detect objects from the LVIS [18] dataset: it contains 1239 categories and we only use tags as annotation. We use COCO*† with
boxes and train UFO2 on it first. Our model achieves 32.7%AP and 52.3%AP50 on minival. We then jointly fine-tune this model using tags from LVIS and
boxes from COCO*. The final model performs comparably on minival (31.6%AP,
50.1%AP-50) and also decent on LVIS validation of over 1k classes (3.5%AP,
6.3%AP-50 where a supervised model achieves 8.6%AP, 14.8%AP-50). To the
best of our knowledge, no numbers have been reported on this dataset using
weak labels. Our results are also not directly comparable to strongly supervised
results [18] as we don’t use the bounding box annotation on LVIS.
Qualitative results are shown in Fig. 6. We observe that UFO2 is able to
detect objects accurately even though no bounding box supervision is used for
the new classes (e.g., short pants, street light, parking meter, frisbee, etc.).
Specifically, UFO2 can (1) detect spatially adjacent or even clustered instances
with great recall (e.g., goose, cow, zebra, gira↵e); (2) recognize some obscure or
hard objects (e.g., wet suite, short pants, knee pad); (3) localize di↵erent objects
with tight and accurate bounding boxes. Importantly, note that we don’t need
to change the architecture of UFO2 at all to integrate both boxes and tags as
supervision.

B

Annotation Policies

To study budget-aware omni-supervised object detection, we defined the following policies: 80%B, 50%B, 20%B motivated by the following findings: (1) among the
three partial labels (tags, points, and scribbles), labeling of points (88.7 s/img;
see Sec. 5.4 in the main paper) is roughly as efficient as annotating tags (80
†

COCO*: because LVIS is a subset of COCO-115, we construct COCO* by taking COCO-115
images excluded from LVIS.

