Blind Face Restoration via Deep Multi-scale
Component Dictionaries
(Supplementary Material)
In the supplemental materials, we first give the analyses about running
times in Section A. Then, some feature visualizations including dictionaries and
confidence score are provided in Section B. Results of additional variant of our
DFDNet about the cluster is analyzed in Section C. The network architecture of
our DFDNet is presented in details in Section D. More restoration results on realworld low-quality images are demonstrated in Section E. Section F demonstrates
more visual results on ×4 and ×8. Finally, the visual results of DFDNet variants
are shown in Section G.

A

Running Time

It takes nearly 2 days to generate the four scale dictionaries with 256 clusters and
33 ms (including 1 ms for facial landmark detection by Dlib [4]) for DFDNet to
handle a 256×256 image in inference phase, which is comparable with GFRNet [5]
(31 ms) and faster than GWAINet [1] (94 ms).

B

Feature Visualization

In this section, we conduct two visual experiments to show what the features
represent. For the first one, we visualize the conducted dictionary clusters. To
achieve this goal, we fix the parameters of VggFace model and only update the
input noise by minimizing the distance between the network output and each
cluster, which is inspired from the neural style transfer task [2]. Some visual
results from scale-1 dictionary are shown in Fig. A. We can observe that each
cluster has different texture, shape (open or close) and pose, which nearly covers
the most common face structure.

(a) right eye

(b) left eye

(c) nose

(d) mouth

Figure A: Feature visualization of our conducted component dictionaries on scale-1.

For the second one, we visualize the confidence map for the same image with
different degradation level. We synthesize two degraded images with slight and
severe degradation. Visualization of the confidence score on scale-1 is shown in
Fig. B. It can be seen that when the degradation is severe, the confidence values
are high, indicating that more features should come from the selected cluster,
and vice versa. The confidence score can well learn the differences between the
input and selected cluster, and thereby adaptively fuse the dictionary features to
the images with different degradation level.

