Supplementary material:
Component Divide-and-Conquer for
Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Pengxu Wei1 , Ziwei Xie1 , Hannan Lu2 , Zongyuan Zhan1 ,
Qixiang Ye3 , Wangmeng Zuo2 , and Liang Lin?1,4
1

Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
DarkMatter AI
weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn xiezw5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn hannanlu@hit.edu.cn
zhanzy178@gmail.com qxye@ucas.ac.cn wmzuo@hit.edu.cn linliang@ieee.org
2

In this supplementary material, we provide more details about our released
real-world dataset, the extraction of the component guidance mask, and additional visualization results.

1

DRealSR Dataset

Image Collection. In this paper, we follow the pinehole camera model and
zoom DSLR cameras to capture a group of LR and HR images. Specifically,
firstly we annotate each camera for different scaling factors to consistently obtain
each group of HR-LR pairs. We fix cameras on a tripod, adjust camera positions
to capture the corresponding regions in a calibration board shown in Fig.1,
and record the focal length for ×1∼×4 scaling factors. When collecting images,
we zoom cameras according to the annotated focal lengths and use Bluetooth
remote controller to capture images. Exposure and white balance are set to the
automatic mode.
Image Alignment. There are some factors that invite image misalignment between HR and LR. For example, the camera zoom makes it necessary to
crop LR to algin the contents of HR; lens distortion aggravates this misalignment issue. Nevertheless, these are nearly unavoidable due to complex imaging
conditions. Considering the great difficulty of image alignment between HR and
LR, to build a well-prepared real-world SR dataset for evaluation, we mainly
resort to the mature image registration method and repeated examination with
algorithms and manual selection.
Specifically, we employ SIFT method for image registration to crop LR images to match the content of HR images globally. Then we crop the whole images into patches, select informative patches with their mean and variance, and
manually select blurry patches which might result from the depth of field. We
conduct image registration for these patches again for local image alignment.
?

Corresponding Author

