One-Shot Unsupervised Cross-Domain
Detection
Antonio D’Innocente1,3 , Francesco Cappio Borlino2 , Silvia Bucci2,3(B) ,
Barbara Caputo2,3 , and Tatiana Tommasi2,3
1

Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
dinnocente@diag.uniroma1.it
2
Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy
{francesco.cappio,silvia.bucci,barbara.caputo,tatiana.tommasi}@polito.it
3
Italian Institute of Technology, Turin, Italy
Abstract. Despite impressive progress in object detection over the last
years, it is still an open challenge to reliably detect objects across visual
domains. All current approaches access a sizable amount of target data
at training time. This is a heavy assumption, as often it is not possible
to anticipate the domain where a detector will be used, nor to access it
in advance for data acquisition. Consider for instance the task of monitoring image feeds from social media: as every image is uploaded by a diﬀerent
user it belongs to a diﬀerent target domain that is impossible to foresee during training. Our work addresses this setting, presenting an object detection algorithm able to perform unsupervised adaptation across domains
by using only one target sample, seen at test time. We introduce a multitask architecture that one-shot adapts to any incoming sample by iteratively solving a self-supervised task on it. We further enhance this auxiliary
adaptation with cross-task pseudo-labeling. A thorough benchmark analysis against the most recent cross-domain detection methods and a detailed
ablation study show the advantage of our approach.
Keywords: Object detection · Cross-domain analysis ·
Self-supervision

1

Introduction

Social media feed us every day with an unprecedented amount of visual data.
Images are uploaded by various actors, from corporations to political parties, institutions, entrepreneurs and private citizens, with roughly 102 M unique
images shared everyday on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. For the sake of
freedom of expression, control over their content is limited, and their vast majority is uploaded without any textual description of their content. Their sheer
magnitude makes it imperative to use algorithms to monitor and make sense of
them, ﬁnding the right balance between protecting the privacy of citizens and
their right of expression, and tracking fake news (often associated with malicious
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 43) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 732–748, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_43

