Edge-Aware Graph Representation
Learning and Reasoning for Face Parsing
Gusi Te1 , Yinglu Liu2 , Wei Hu1(B) , Hailin Shi2 , and Tao Mei2
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
{tegusi,forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn
2
JD AI Research, Beijing, China
{liuyinglu1,shihailin,tmei}@jd.com

Abstract. Face parsing infers a pixel-wise label to each facial component, which has drawn much attention recently. Previous methods have
shown their eﬃciency in face parsing, which however overlook the correlation among diﬀerent face regions. The correlation is a critical clue
about the facial appearance, pose, expression, etc., and should be taken
into account for face parsing. To this end, we propose to model and
reason the region-wise relations by learning graph representations, and
leverage the edge information between regions for optimized abstraction.
Speciﬁcally, we encode a facial image onto a global graph representation where a collection of pixels (“regions”) with similar features are
projected to each vertex. Our model learns and reasons over relations
between the regions by propagating information across vertices on the
graph. Furthermore, we incorporate the edge information to aggregate
the pixel-wise features onto vertices, which emphasizes on the features
around edges for ﬁne segmentation along edges. The ﬁnally learned graph
representation is projected back to pixel grids for parsing. Experiments
demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the
widely used Helen dataset, and also exhibits the superior performance on
the large-scale CelebAMask-HQ and LaPa dataset. The code is available
at https://github.com/tegusi/EAGRNet.
Keywords: Face parsing · Graph representation · Attention
mechanism · Graph reasoning

1

Introduction

Face parsing assigns a pixel-wise label to each semantic component, such as facial
skin, eyes, mouth and nose, which is a particular task in semantic segmentation.
It has been applied in a variety of scenarios such as face understanding, editing,
synthesis, and animation [1–3].
W. Hu—This work was in collaboration with JD AI Research during Gusi Te’s internship there.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 258–274, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_16

