Suppressing Mislabeled Data
via Grouping and Self-attention
Xiaojiang Peng1,2 , Kai Wang1,2 , Zhaoyang Zeng3 , Qing Li4 , Jianfei Yang5 ,
and Yu Qiao1,2(B)
1
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine
Intelligence-Synergy Systems, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China
yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics for Society,
Shenzhen, China
3
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4
Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China
5
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore

Abstract. Deep networks achieve excellent results on large-scale clean
data but degrade signiﬁcantly when learning from noisy labels. To suppressing the impact of mislabeled data, this paper proposes a conceptually simple yet eﬃcient training block, termed as Attentive Feature
Mixup (AFM), which allows paying more attention to clean samples and
less to mislabeled ones via sample interactions in small groups. Specifically, this plug-and-play AFM ﬁrst leverages a group-to-attend module
to construct groups and assign attention weights for group-wise samples,
and then uses a mixup module with the attention weights to interpolate
massive noisy-suppressed samples. The AFM has several appealing beneﬁts for noise-robust deep learning. (i) It does not rely on any assumptions
and extra clean subset. (ii) With massive interpolations, the ratio of useless samples is reduced dramatically compared to the original noisy ratio.
(iii) It jointly optimizes the interpolation weights with classiﬁers, suppressing the inﬂuence of mislabeled data via low attention weights. (iv)
It partially inherits the vicinal risk minimization of mixup to alleviate
over-ﬁtting while improves it by sampling fewer feature-target vectors
around mislabeled data from the mixup vicinal distribution. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that AFM yields state-of-the-art results on two
challenging real-world noisy datasets: Food101N and Clothing1M.
Keywords: Noisy-labeled data · Mixup · Noisy-robust learning

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in various tasks, particularly in supervised learning tasks on large-scale image recognition challenges, such as ImageNet [6] and COCO [21]. One key factor that
X. Peng, K. Wang and Z. Zeng—Equally-contributed ﬁrst authors.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 786–802, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_46

