Lifespan Age Transformation Synthesis
Supplementary Material
Roy Or-El1 , Soumyadip Sengupta1 , Ohad Fried2 ,
Eli Shechtman3 , and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1
1

University of Washington

2

Stanford University

1

Ethics and Bias Statement

1.1

Intended Use

3

Adobe Research

– This algorithm is designed to hallucinate the aging process and produce an
approximation of a person’s appearance throughout his/her/their lifespan.
– The main use cases of this method are for art and entertainment purposes
(CGI effects, Camera filters, etc.). This method might also be useful for more
critical applications, e.g. approximating the appearance of missing people.
However, we would like to stress that as a non perfect data-driven method,
results might be inaccurate and biased. The output of our method should
be critically analyzed by a trained professional, and not be treated as an
absolute ground truth.
– The results of this method should not be used as grounds for detention/arrest of a person or as any other form of legal evidence
under any circumstances.
1.2

Algorithm and Data Bias

We have devoted considerable efforts in our algorithm design to preserve the
identity of the person in the input image, and to minimize the influence of the
inherent dataset biases on the results. These measures include:
1. Designing the identity encoder architecture to preserve the local structures
of the input image.
2. Including training losses that were designed to maintain the person’s identity.
– Latent Identity loss: encourages identity features that are consistent
across ages.
– Cycle loss: drives the network to reproduce the original image from any
aged output.
– Self-reconstruction loss: makes the network learn to reconstruct the input
when the target age class is the same as the source age class.
3. The FFHQ dataset contains gender imbalance within age classes. To prevent
introducing these biases in the output, e.g. producing male facial features
for females or vice versa, we have trained two separate models, one for males
and one for females. The decision of which model to apply is left for the

