GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule
Converge to a Local Nash Equilibrium

Martin Heusel

Hubert Ramsauer

Thomas Unterthiner

Bernhard Nessler

Sepp Hochreiter
LIT AI Lab & Institute of Bioinformatics,
Johannes Kepler University Linz
A-4040 Linz, Austria
{mhe,ramsauer,unterthiner,nessler,hochreit}@bioinf.jku.at

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) excel at creating realistic images with
complex models for which maximum likelihood is infeasible. However, the convergence of GAN training has still not been proved. We propose a two time-scale
update rule (TTUR) for training GANs with stochastic gradient descent on arbitrary GAN loss functions. TTUR has an individual learning rate for both the
discriminator and the generator. Using the theory of stochastic approximation, we
prove that the TTUR converges under mild assumptions to a stationary local Nash
equilibrium. The convergence carries over to the popular Adam optimization, for
which we prove that it follows the dynamics of a heavy ball with friction and thus
prefers flat minima in the objective landscape. For the evaluation of the performance of GANs at image generation, we introduce the ‘Fréchet Inception Distance”
(FID) which captures the similarity of generated images to real ones better than
the Inception Score. In experiments, TTUR improves learning for DCGANs and
Improved Wasserstein GANs (WGAN-GP) outperforming conventional GAN training on CelebA, CIFAR-10, SVHN, LSUN Bedrooms, and the One Billion Word
Benchmark.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16] have achieved outstanding results in generating realistic
images [42, 31, 25, 1, 4] and producing text [21]. GANs can learn complex generative models for
which maximum likelihood or a variational approximations are infeasible. Instead of the likelihood,
a discriminator network serves as objective for the generative model, that is, the generator. GAN
learning is a game between the generator, which constructs synthetic data from random variables,
and the discriminator, which separates synthetic data from real world data. The generator’s goal is
to construct data in such a way that the discriminator cannot tell them apart from real world data.
Thus, the discriminator tries to minimize the synthetic-real discrimination error while the generator
tries to maximize this error. Since training GANs is a game and its solution is a Nash equilibrium,
gradient descent may fail to converge [44, 16, 18]. Only local Nash equilibria are found, because
gradient descent is a local optimization method. If there exists a local neighborhood around a point
in parameter space where neither the generator nor the discriminator can unilaterally decrease their
respective losses, then we call this point a local Nash equilibrium.
To characterize the convergence properties of training general GANs is still an open challenge [17, 18].
For special GAN variants, convergence can be proved under certain assumptions [34, 20, 46]. A
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

