Supplementary Material for “MINI-Net:
Multiple Instance Ranking Network for Video
Highlight Detection”
Fa-Ting Hong1,4,5 , Xuanteng Huang1 , Wei-Hong Li3 , and Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,5 ?
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
VICO Group, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
4
Pazhou Lab
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of
Education, China
{hongft3,huangxt57}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, w.h.li@ed.ac.uk, wszheng@ieee.org

1

Implementation Details

In this work, we implement the proposed method in Pytorch, using SGD as
optimizer. The learning rate is initialized as 0.005 and scaled by a factor of 0.7
every 20 epochs. Additionally, we set the weight decay and momentum as 0.0005
and 0.9, respectively, for all experiments. During the training, to be more likely
to sample the positive instance, we take the videos that are shorter than τ in the
interest event as positive videos and videos that are longer than τ in non-interest
events as negative videos, inspired by [5], and we set τ as 60. We set  as 1 and
the bag size as 60. We show that our method is not too much sensitive to τ
and the bag size by reporting results of using various value for τ and the bag
size in supplemental experiments. To form each bag, we simply break a video
up uniformly into 1-second segments and randomly sample a bag size number
of segments. If the total number of segments in the video is less than the bag
size, we repeat the sampling. We follow the standard evaluation metric in [5], i.e.,
the mean average precision is reported to measure the performance of all of the
methods on YouTube Highlights dataset, and top-5 mean average precision for
TVSum dataset and CoSum dataset. We adopt the C3D network [3] pretrained
on Kinetics [1] to extract a 512-dimensional feature as vision feature for each
segment, and the VGGish model [4] pretrained on AudioSet [2] for extracting a
128-dimensional feature as audio feature.

2

More Detail about Datasets

- TVSum consists of 50 videos grouped by 10 categories (5 videos per category),
including changing a Vehicle Tire (VT), getting a Vehicle Unstuck (VU), Grooming an Animal (GA), Making a Sandwich (MS), ParKour (PK), PaRade (PR),
?

Corresponding author

