Supplementary materials for
Reversing the cycle: self-supervised deep stereo
through enhanced monocular distillation
Filippo Aleotti?1 , Fabio Tosi?1 , Li Zhang??2 ,
Matteo Poggi1 , and Stefano Mattoccia1
1

1

University of Bologna, Viale del Risorgimento 2, Bologna, Italy
2
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China

Extended Quantitative Comparison

In this section, we report more quantitative comparisons with self-supervised
state-of-the-art frameworks on both non-occluded (Noc) and all (All ) regions on
the KITTI 2015 training set, as well more detailed cross-validation on DrivingStereo. Both are reported in a more compact form in the main paper for the
sake of space.
Table 1 is provided as a complement to Table 5 in the main paper to allow an
exhaustive evaluation. It further confirms that stereo networks trained with our
proxies notably outperform existing approaches. It is worth to notice how our
models achieve a lower percentage of errors (D1) compared to strategies using
raw LiDAR measurements or deploying stereo videos at training time [11].
Table 2 reports iResNet [9] and GWCNet [5] experiments across KITTI (K)
and DrivingStereo (DS) datasets, as complement to Table 4 in the main paper.
In general, GWCNet and iResNet confirm the trend observed with StereoDepth
and PSMNet, with GWCNet resulting slightly more effective when transferred
from K to DS and vice-versa.

2

Configuration details

Traditional Stereo Methods. Here, we report details concerning both
SGM [6] and WILD [14] used as traditional stereo matchers. For the SGM [6]
algorithm, we compute initial matching costs applying a 9 × 7 census transform
and using the Hamming distance on pixel vectors. We set parameters P 1 and P 2
to 7 and 17, respectively. The cost aggregation step has been performed along 8
independent paths, while the disparity range is set to [0, 192].
For WILD [14], we adopt the publicly available code provided by the authors.
Differently from the original settings used in [14], we apply a few modifications.
In particular, we select a different combination of traditional confidence measures
from [10] to retain highly accurate points from the block matching algorithm.
?
??

Joint first authorship
Work done while at University of Bologna.

