Inertial Safety from Structured Light: Supplementary Technical Report
Sizhuo Ma and Mohit Gupta1
1

University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison WI 53706, USA
{sizhuoma,mohitg}@cs.wisc.edu

In this report, we provide technical details, analysis and experimental results that are not included in the
main paper due to space constraints. Please refer to the supplementary video as well for the experimental
results on video sequences.

1

Dependence of Accuracy on Scene and Imaging Parameters

In this section, we study the dependence of the accuracy of the estimated ISM on various parameters,
including properties of the scene (albedo frequency, depth variation frequency, amount of depth change
between frames), as well as properties of the structured light system (frequency of the sinusoid pattern,
baseline). To give a quantitative comparison between different configurations, we report the mean relative
error of the disparity change ∆Υ, which is defined as
n

e=

di − ∆Υi
1 X ∆Υ
,
n i=1
∆Υi

(1)

di is the estimated disparity change, and ∆Υi
where i is the pixel index, n is the total number of pixels, ∆Υ
is the ground truth. Notice that we don’t report the error of the ISM directly. This is because the ISM
fb
SE is related to disparity change ∆Υ by SE = ∆Υ
, where f is the focal length and b is the baseline. Since
∆Υ appears in the denominator, for a small ∆Υ, a small error in ∆Υ may result in a large error in SE . As
a result, errors at pixels with small ∆Υ will skew the overal mean error, making the comparison between
different scenarios difficult. Therefore, we report the relative error of ∆Υ estimates. Since SE is inversely
proportional to ∆Υ, this error metric is also an estimate of the relative error in SE .

1.1

Scene Albedo Frequency vs. Pattern Frequency

Recall that in Eq. 6 of the main paper, the structured light imaging model is given as
i(u, v, t) = α(u, v, t)P (c) + β(u, v, t)

(2)

where (u, v, t) is the spatial-temporal pixel index, P (c) is the corresponding column in the projector pattern.
α is the reflectance term that captures various radiometric factors including distance fall-off, foreshortening,
BRDF and scene albedo. β is the ambient term that also depends on ambient light.
The proposed ISM algorithm assumes α and β varies smoothly along each row (along the orthogonal
direction of oriented filters if they are used). When this assumption is violated but the high frequency
component of scene texture has relatively low strength, the method can still recover the ISM but with some
artifacts. For example, in Fig. 2 of the main paper, the recovered ISM is not spatially smooth, especially
near the object boundaries. When the scene texture contains high power in high frequency components, the
method may fail, as shown in Fig. 1. The scene consists of a single plane with a bisinusoidal albedo. We

1

