Unsupervised Sketch to Photo Synthesis
Runtao Liu1 , Qian Yu1,2(B) , and Stella X. Yu1
1

UC Berkeley/ICSI, Berkeley, USA
qianyu@buaa.edu.cn
2
Beihang University,
Xueyuan Rd. No. 37, Haidian District, Beijing, China

Abstract. Humans can envision a realistic photo given a free-hand
sketch that is not only spatially imprecise and geometrically distorted
but also without colors and visual details. We study unsupervised sketch
to photo synthesis for the ﬁrst time, learning from unpaired sketch and
photo data where the target photo for a sketch is unknown during training. Existing works only deal with either style diﬀerence or spatial deformation alone, synthesizing photos from edge-aligned line drawings or
transforming shapes within the same modality, e.g., color images.
Our insight is to decompose the unsupervised sketch to photo synthesis task into two stages of translation: First shape translation from
sketches to grayscale photos and then content enrichment from grayscale
to color photos. We also incorporate a self-supervised denoising objective and an attention module to handle abstraction and style variations
that are speciﬁc to sketches. Our synthesis is sketch-faithful and photorealistic, enabling sketch-based image retrieval and automatic sketch generation that captures human visual perception beyond the edge map of
a photo.

1

Introduction

Sketches, i.e., rapidly executed freehand drawings, make an intuitive and powerful visual expression (Fig. 1). There is much research on sketch recognition [7,35],
sketch parsing [26,27], and sketch-based image or video retrieval [21,28,36]. We
study how to imagine a realistic photo given a sketch that is spatially imprecise
and missing colorful details, by learning from unpaired sketches and photos.
Sketch to photo synthesis is challenging for three reasons.
1) Sketches of objects often do not match their shapes in photos, since
sketches commonly drawn by amateurs have large spatial and geometrical distortion. Translating a sketch to a photo thus requires shape rectiﬁcation. However,
it is not trivial to rectify shape distortion in a sketch, as line strokes are only
R. Liu and Q. Yu—equal contribution. http://sketch.icsi.berkeley.edu.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58580-8 3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12348, pp. 36–52, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58580-8_3

