DeepHandMesh: A Weakly-Supervised
Deep Encoder-Decoder Framework
for High-Fidelity Hand Mesh Modeling
Gyeongsik Moon1 , Takaaki Shiratori2 , and Kyoung Mu Lee1(B)
1

ECE & ASRI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{mks0601,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh, USA
tshiratori@fb.com

Abstract. Human hands play a central role in interacting with other
people and objects. For realistic replication of such hand motions,
high-ﬁdelity hand meshes have to be reconstructed. In this study,
we ﬁrstly propose DeepHandMesh, a weakly-supervised deep encoderdecoder framework for high-ﬁdelity hand mesh modeling. We design our
system to be trained in an end-to-end and weakly-supervised manner;
therefore, it does not require groundtruth meshes. Instead, it relies on
weaker supervisions such as 3D joint coordinates and multi-view depth
maps, which are easier to get than groundtruth meshes and do not dependent on the mesh topology. Although the proposed DeepHandMesh is
trained in a weakly-supervised way, it provides signiﬁcantly more realistic hand mesh than previous fully-supervised hand models. Our newly
introduced penetration avoidance loss further improves results by replicating physical interaction between hand parts. Finally, we demonstrate
that our system can also be applied successfully to the 3D hand mesh
estimation from general images. Our hand model, dataset, and codes are
publicly available(https://mks0601.github.io/DeepHandMesh/).

1

Introduction

Social interactions are vital to humans: every day, we spend a large amount of
time on interactions and communications with other people. While facial motion
and speech play a central role in communication, important non-verbal information is also communicated via body motion, especially hand and ﬁnger motion,
to emphasize our speech, clarify our ideas, and convey emotions. Modeling and
replicating detailed hand geometry and motion is essential to enrich experience
in various applications, including remote communications in virtual/augmented
reality and digital storytelling such as movies and video games.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 26) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 440–455, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_26

