Temporal Aggregate Representations
for Long-Range Video Understanding
Fadime Sener1,2(B) , Dipika Singhania2 , and Angela Yao2
1

University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
sener@cs.uni-bonn.de
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
{dipika16,ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract. Future prediction, especially in long-range videos, requires
reasoning from current and past observations. In this work, we address
questions of temporal extent, scaling, and level of semantic abstraction
with a ﬂexible multi-granular temporal aggregation framework. We show
that it is possible to achieve state of the art in both next action and
dense anticipation with simple techniques such as max-pooling and attention. To demonstrate the anticipation capabilities of our model, we conduct experiments on Breakfast, 50Salads, and EPIC-Kitchens datasets,
where we achieve state-of-the-art results. With minimal modiﬁcations,
our model can also be extended for video segmentation and action
recognition.
Keywords: Action anticipation · Temporal aggregation

1

Introduction

We tackle long-range video understanding, speciﬁcally anticipating not-yet
observed but upcoming actions. When developing intelligent systems, one needs
not only to recognize what is currently taking place – but also predict what will
happen next. Anticipating human actions is essential for applications such as
smart surveillance, autonomous driving, and assistive robotics.
While action anticipation is a niche (albeit rapidly growing) area, the key
issues that arise are germane to long-range video understanding as a whole.
How should temporal or sequential relationships be modelled? What temporal
extent of information and context needs to be processed? At what temporal
scale should they be derived, and how much semantic abstraction is required?
The answers to these questions are not only entangled with each other but also
depend very much on the videos being analyzed. Here, one needs to distinguish
between clipped actions, e.g. of UCF101 [32], versus the multiple actions in
long video streams, e.g. of the Breakfast [18]. In the former, the actions and
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 10) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 154–171, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_10

