Weakly-Supervised Action Localization
with Expectation-Maximization
Multi-Instance Learning
Zhekun Luo1 , Devin Guillory1 , Baifeng Shi2 , Wei Ke3 , Fang Wan4 ,
Trevor Darrell1 , and Huijuan Xu1(B)
1

University of California, Berkeley, USA
{zhekun luo,dguillory,trevordarrell,huijuan}@eecs.berkeley.edu
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
bfshi@pku.edu.cn
3
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
weik@andrew.cmu.edu
4
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
wanfang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract. Weakly-supervised action localization requires training a
model to localize the action segments in the video given only video level
action label. It can be solved under the Multiple Instance Learning (MIL)
framework, where a bag (video) contains multiple instances (action segments). Since only the bag’s label is known, the main challenge is assigning which key instances within the bag to trigger the bag’s label. Most
previous models use attention-based approaches applying attentions to
generate the bag’s representation from instances, and then train it via the
bag’s classiﬁcation. These models, however, implicitly violate the MIL
assumption that instances in negative bags should be uniformly negative. In this work, we explicitly model the key instances assignment as
a hidden variable and adopt an Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework. We derive two pseudo-label generation schemes to model the E and
M process and iteratively optimize the likelihood lower bound. We show
that our EM-MIL approach more accurately models both the learning
objective and the MIL assumptions. It achieves state-of-the-art performance on two standard benchmarks, THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.2.
Keywords: Weakly-supervised learning · Action localization ·
Multiple instance learning

1

Introduction

As the growth of video content accelerates, it becomes increasingly necessary to
improve video understanding ability with less annotation eﬀort. Since videos can
contain a large number of frames, the cost of identifying the exact start and end
frames of each action is high (frame-level) in comparison to just labeling what
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 729–745, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_43

