URIE: Universal Image Enhancement
for Visual Recognition in the Wild
— Supplementary Material —
Taeyoung Son1 Juwon Kang1 Namyup Kim1 Sunghyun Cho2 Suha Kwak2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
2
Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
POSTECH, Pohang, Korea
{ty.son, gjw0917, namyup, s.cho, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

This supplementary material presents experimental results omitted from the
main paper due to the space limit. Sec. 1 empirically justifies the combination
of Batch Normalization (BN) [2] and Instance Normalization (IN) [4] in our
Selective Enhancement Module (SEM). In Sec. 2, we verify the impact of the
large-scale learning in terms of performance and universality of URIE by examining the same models trained with smaller datasets. Also, Sec. 3 explains why it
is not straightforward to compare URIE with existing image restoration models
in our setting for robust visual recognition, and Sec. 4 analyzes image restoration
performance of URIE. Finally, Sec. 5 presents more qualitative results of object
detection and semantic segmentation on the distorted PASCAL VOC datasets.

1

Ablation Study Regarding Different Normalizations

The two enhancement steps in SEM have different normalization operations,
IN and BN. This section demonstrates that the combination of IN and BN
comes with benefits due to their complementary roles in image enhancement.
To this end, we design two variants of URIE, URIE-BN and URIE-IN, and
compare them with the original one. Specifically, in URIE-BN all normalization
operations are BN, and in URIE-IN those are all implemented as IN. For a fair
comparison, the two models are trained in the same setting with URIE.
The three models are evaluated in terms of recognition performance on distorted images by following the protocol in the main paper. Tab. 1, 2, 3, and 4
summarize their performance on the four different recognition tasks. These results show that using only one of the normalization operations degrades the final
recognition performance noticeably in almost all settings. To investigate the effect of IN and BN in more detail, we measure the performance of the three models
per distortion type on the distorted CUB dataset. As shown in Fig. 1, URIE-BN
and URIE-IN exhibit clearly different tendencies. URIE-IN works better than
URIE-BN for noise-type distortions while URIE-BN dominates URIE-IN when
images are corrupted by blur-type distortions or adverse weathers. On the other
hand, URIE adopting both of IN and BN performs best for most of the distortion
types. These results justify our assumption that the two different normalization
operations are complementary to each other.

