SNE-RoadSeg: Incorporating Surface
Normal Information into Semantic
Segmentation for Accurate Freespace
Detection
Rui Fan1 , Hengli Wang2 , Peide Cai2 , and Ming Liu2(B)
1

UC San Diego, La Jolla, USA
rui.fan@ieee.org
2
HKUST Robotics Institute, Hong Kong, China
{hwangdf,peide.cai,eelium}@ust.hk
Abstract. Freespace detection is an essential component of visual perception for self-driving cars. The recent eﬀorts made in data-fusion convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have signiﬁcantly improved semantic
driving scene segmentation. Freespace can be hypothesized as a ground
plane, on which the points have similar surface normals. Hence, in this
paper, we ﬁrst introduce a novel module, named surface normal estimator (SNE), which can infer surface normal information from dense
depth/disparity images with high accuracy and eﬃciency. Furthermore,
we propose a data-fusion CNN architecture, referred to as RoadSeg,
which can extract and fuse features from both RGB images and the
inferred surface normal information for accurate freespace detection. For
research purposes, we publish a large-scale synthetic freespace detection dataset, named Ready-to-Drive (R2D) road dataset, collected under
diﬀerent illumination and weather conditions. The experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed SNE module can beneﬁt all the stateof-the-art CNNs for freespace detection, and our SNE-RoadSeg achieves
the best overall performance among diﬀerent datasets.
Keywords: Freespace detection · Self-driving cars · Data-fusion
CNN · Semantic driving scene segmentation · Surface normal

Source Code, Dataset and Demo Video:
https://sites.google.com/view/sne-roadseg/home

1

Introduction

Autonomous cars are a regular feature in science ﬁction ﬁlms and series, but
thanks to the rise of artiﬁcial intelligence, the fantasy of picking up one such
R. Fan and H. Wang—These authors contributed equally to this work and are therefore
joint ﬁrst authors.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 21) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 340–356, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_21

