Improving Semantic Segmentation via
Decoupled Body and Edge Supervision
Supplementary
Xiangtai Li1 ? , Xia Li1,4 , Li Zhang2 , Guangliang Cheng3 ?? , Jianping Shi3 ,
Zhouchen Lin1 , Shaohua Tan1 , and Yunhai Tong1 ??
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
2
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
SenseTime Research
4
Zhejiang Lab

We will give more detailed results on Cityscapes in this supplemental material.

1

More Experimental Details

More implementation details on the edge supervision: As discussed in
the paper, we use the edge supervision for two purposes: one for edge prediction
and one for edge hardest pixel mining. For edge prediction, we use binary edge
map generated from the category label map as the ground-truth, and add extra
weights by counting the reciprocal of positive and negative pixels to balance the
binary cross-entropy loss. For edge hardest pixel mining, we set K = 0.1 based
on the input resolution due to the various sizes in different datasets. Since our
method requires a fine-grained edge from the ground truth mask, we only use
the fine-annotated set.
More implementation details on related methods: For SPN [1], we use the
authors’ original Pytorch code [1] and append it after the FCN output to replace
our proposed Body Generation module. For DCN [2], we use the implementation
of mmdetction repo [3] and replace our Body Generation module with two DCN
operators. Note that both supervisions and the edge preservation module are
kept untouched. For G-SCNN [4], we port the author’s open sourced code [4]
into our framework with extra shape stream and dual-task loss on the FCN.
Ablation study on component design in body generation (BG). Here
we carry out more detailed explorations on our BG design. We adopt the same
setting shown in the experiment part. Table 1(a) shows that depth-wise conv
works better than bilinear and is also slightly better than naive conv with less
computation. Table 1(b) shows that naive bilinear upsampling works better than
deconvolution and nearest neighbor during upsampling. Table 1(c) shows that
two successive strided-conv with total stride 4 works the best while larger stride
leads to degradation due to the loss of details.
?
??

Work done while at SenseTime. Email: lxtpku@pku.edu.cn
Correspond to: chengguangliang@sensetime.com, yhtong@pku.edu.cn

