Polarized Optical-Flow Gyroscope
Masada Tzabari(B) and Yoav Y. Schechner
Viterbi Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology,
32000 Haifa, Israel
masada.tz@campus.technion.ac.il, yoav@ee.technion.ac.il
http://www.ee.technion.ac.il/~yoav

Abstract. We merge by generalization two principles of passive optical sensing of motion. One is common spatially resolved imaging, where
motion induces temporal readout changes at high-contrast spatial features, as used in traditional optical-ﬂow. The other is the polarization
compass, where axial rotation induces temporal readout changes due to
the change of incoming polarization angle, relative to the camera frame.
The latter has traditionally been modeled for uniform objects. This
merger generalizes the brightness constancy assumption and opticalﬂow, to handle polarization. It also generalizes the polarization compass
concept to handle arbitrarily textured objects. This way, scene regions
having partial polarization contribute to motion estimation, irrespective
of their texture and non-uniformity. As an application, we derive and
demonstrate passive sensing of diﬀerential ego-rotation around the camera optical axis.
Keywords: Low level vision · Self-calibration · Bio-inspired

1

Introduction

Spatio-temporal image intensity variations indicate motion by low-level vision.
This is the optical-flow principle. Image-based sensing makes several assumptions. First, the object must have signiﬁcant spatial contrast of intensity (see
Fig. 1). If the scene is nearly uniform, motion estimation is ill-conditioned. Second, spatial resolution should be high, for better conditioning of motion sensing.
Third, optical-ﬂow is generally derived assuming brightness constancy, i.e, the
radiance of observed features is time invariant. Moreover, consider sensing egorotation around the camera optical axis. The visual signal useful for this is at the
periphery of the ﬁeld of view. The closer pixels are to the image center (Fig. 1),
the less they contribute to image-based sensing of ego-rotation. There, temporal
diﬀerential variations of intensity tend to null.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 22) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 363–381, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_22

