Appendices

A

Gender-based Metric: Contextual Representation

As one of our gender-based metrics from Section 5.1, we look into the contexts
that each gender tends to be featured in, and with COCO as an example
(Fig. 8), can see that images with females tend to be more indoors in scenes
like shopping and dining and with object groups like furniture, accessory,
and appliance. On the other hand, males tend to be in more outdoors scenes
like sports fields and water, ice, snow, and with object groups like sports
and vehicle. These trends reflect gender stereotypes in many societies and can
propagate into the models. While there is work on algorithmically intervening to
break these associations, there are often too many proxy features to robustly do
so. Thus it is useful to intervene at the dataset creation stage.

B

Validating Distance as a Proxy for Interaction

In Section 5.1, Instance Counts and Distances, we make the claim that we can
use distance between a person and an object as a proxy for if the person, p,
is actually interacting with the object, o, as opposed to just appearing in the
same image with it. This allows us to get more meaningful insight as to how
genders may be interacting with objects di↵erently. The distance measure we
p and o centers
p
define is dist = distance between
, which is a relative measure within
areap ⇤areao
each object class because it makes the assumption that all people are the same
size, and all instances of an object are the same size. To validate the claim we are
making, we look at the SpatialSense dataset [67]; specifically, at 6 objects that
we hope to be somewhat representative of the di↵erent ways people interact with
objects: ball, book, car, dog, guitar, and table. These objects were picked
over ones such as wall or floor, in which it is more ambiguous what counts as
an interaction. We then hand-labeled the images where this object cooccurs with
a human as “yes” or “no” based on whether the person of interest is interacting
with the object or not. We pick the threshold by optimizing for mean per class
accuracy, where every distance below it as classified as a “yes” interaction and
every distance above it as a “no” interaction. The threshold is picked based on
the same data that the accuracy is reported for.
As can be seen in Table 4, for all 6 categories the mean of the distances when
someone is interacting with an object is lower than that of when someone is
not. This matches our claim that distance, although imperfect, can serve as a
proxy for interaction. From looking at the visualization of the distribution of the
distances in Fig. 9, we can see that for certain objects like ball and table, which
also have the lowest mean per class accuracy, there is more overlap between the
distances for “yes” interactions and “no” interactions. Intuitively, this makes
some sense, because a ball is an object that can be interacted with both from a

