Adaptive Text Recognition Through
Visual Matching
Chuhan Zhang1(B) , Ankush Gupta2 , and Andrew Zisserman1
1

Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
{czhang,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
2
DeepMind, London, UK
ankushgupta@google.com

Abstract. This work addresses the problems of generalization and ﬂexibility for text recognition in documents. We introduce a new model that
exploits the repetitive nature of characters in languages, and decouples
the visual decoding and linguistic modelling stages through intermediate
representations in the form of similarity maps. By doing this, we turn
text recognition into a visual matching problem, thereby achieving generalization in appearance and ﬂexibility in classes.
We evaluate the model on both synthetic and real datasets across different languages and alphabets, and show that it can handle challenges
that traditional architectures are unable to solve without expensive retraining, including: (i) it can change the number of classes simply by
changing the exemplars; and (ii) it can generalize to novel languages and
characters (not in the training data) simply by providing a new glyph
exemplar set. In essence, it is able to carry out one-shot sequence recognition. We also demonstrate that the model can generalize to unseen
fonts without requiring new exemplars from them.
Code, data, and model checkpoints are available at: http://www.
robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/FontAdaptor20/.
Keywords: Text recognition · Sequence recognition · Similarity maps

1

Introduction

Our objective in this work is generalization and flexibility in text recognition.
Modern text recognition methods [2,7,23,32] achieve excellent performance in
many cases, but generalization to unseen data, i.e., novel fonts and new languages, either requires large amounts of data for primary training or expensive
ﬁne-tuning for each new case.
The text recognition problem is to map an image of a line of text x into the
corresponding sequence of characters y = (y1 , y2 , . . . , yk ), where k is the length of
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_4) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 51–67, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_4

