Stereo Event-Based Particle Tracking
Velocimetry for 3D Fluid Flow
Reconstruction
Yuanhao Wang(B) , Ramzi Idoughi, and Wolfgang Heidrich
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{yuanhao.wang,ramzi.idoughi,wolfgang.heidrich}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract. Existing Particle Imaging Velocimetry techniques require the
use of high-speed cameras to reconstruct time-resolved ﬂuid ﬂows. These
cameras provide high-resolution images at high frame rates, which generates bandwidth and memory issues. By capturing only changes in the
brightness with a very low latency and at low data rate, event-based cameras have the ability to tackle such issues. In this paper, we present a
new framework that retrieves dense 3D measurements of the ﬂuid velocity ﬁeld using a pair of event-based cameras. First, we track particles
inside the two event sequences in order to estimate their 2D velocity in
the two sequences of images. A stereo-matching step is then performed to
retrieve their 3D positions. These intermediate outputs are incorporated
into an optimization framework that also includes physically plausible
regularizers, in order to retrieve the 3D velocity ﬁeld. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real data demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our
approach.
Keywords: Fluid imaging · Event-based camera · Particle Imaging
Velocimetry · Stereo-PTV · Optimization

1

Introduction

Fluid imaging is a topic of interest for several scientiﬁc and engineering areas like
ﬂuid dynamic, combustion, biology, computer vision and graphics. The capture of
the 3D ﬂuid ﬂow is a common requirement to characterize the ﬂuid and its motion
regardless the application domain. Despite the large number of contributions
to this ﬁeld, retrieving a 3D dense measurement of the velocity vector over
the ﬂuid remains a challenging task. Diﬀerent techniques have been proposed
to capture and measure the ﬂuid motion. The most commonly used approach
involves introducing tracers such as dye, smoke, or particles into the studied ﬂuid.
Then by tracking the advected motion of the tracers, the ﬂuid ﬂows are retrieved.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 36–53, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_3

