End-to-End Object Detection
with Transformers
Nicolas Carion1,2(B) , Francisco Massa2 , Gabriel Synnaeve2 ,
Nicolas Usunier2 , Alexander Kirillov2 , and Sergey Zagoruyko2
1
Paris Dauphine University, Paris, France
{alcinos,fmassa,gab,usunier,akirillov}@fb.com
2
Facebook AI, Menlo Park, USA
szagoruyko@fb.com

Abstract. We present a new method that views object detection as a
direct set prediction problem. Our approach streamlines the detection
pipeline, eﬀectively removing the need for many hand-designed components like a non-maximum suppression procedure or anchor generation that explicitly encode our prior knowledge about the task. The
main ingredients of the new framework, called DEtection TRansformer
or DETR, are a set-based global loss that forces unique predictions
via bipartite matching, and a transformer encoder-decoder architecture.
Given a ﬁxed small set of learned object queries, DETR reasons about
the relations of the objects and the global image context to directly output the ﬁnal set of predictions in parallel. The new model is conceptually
simple and does not require a specialized library, unlike many other modern detectors. DETR demonstrates accuracy and run-time performance
on par with the well-established and highly-optimized Faster R-CNN
baseline on the challenging COCO object detection dataset. Moreover,
DETR can be easily generalized to produce panoptic segmentation in a
uniﬁed manner. We show that it signiﬁcantly outperforms competitive
baselines. Training code and pretrained models are available at https://
github.com/facebookresearch/detr.

1

Introduction

The goal of object detection is to predict a set of bounding boxes and category
labels for each object of interest. Modern detectors address this set prediction
task in an indirect way, by deﬁning surrogate regression and classiﬁcation problems on a large set of proposals [5,36], anchors [22], or window centers [45,52].
Their performances are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by postprocessing steps to collapse near-duplicate predictions, by the design of the anchor sets and by the
heuristics that assign target boxes to anchors [51]. To simplify these pipelines,
we propose a direct set prediction approach to bypass the surrogate tasks. This
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 13) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 213–229, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_13

