1

1

Appendix

1.1

Implementation details

Convolutional geometric matcher. To extract the feature maps, we apply
five times one standard convolution layer followed by a 2-strided convolution
layer which downsamples the maps. The depth of the feature maps at each
scale is (16,32,64,128,256). The correlation map is then computed and feeds a
regression network composed of two 2-strided convolution layers, two standard
convolution layers and one final fully connected layer predicting a vector θ ∈ R50 .
We use batch normalization [3] and relu activation. The parameters of the two
feature maps extractors are not shared.
Siamese U-net generator. We use the same encoder architecture as in
the convolutional geometric matcher, but we store the feature maps at each
scale. The decoder has an architecture symmetric to the encoder. There are five
times one standard convolution layer followed by a 2-strided deconvolution layer
which upsamples the feature maps. After a deconvolution, the feature maps are
concatenated with the feature maps passed through the skip connections. In the
generator, we use instance normalization, which shows better results for image
and texture generation [7], with relu activation.
Discriminator. We adopt the fully convolutional discriminator from Pix-2Pix [4], but with five downsampling layers instead of three in the original version.
Each of it is composed of: 2-strided convolution, batch normalization, leaky relu,
1-strided convolution, batch normalization, leaky relu.
Adversarial loss. We use the relativistic formulation of the adversarial loss
[5]. In this formulation, the discriminator is trained to predict that real images
are more real than synthesized ones, rather than trained to predict that real
images are real and synthesized images are synthesized. We also use gradient
penalty on the discriminator.
Optimization. We use the Adam optimizer [6] with β1 = 0.5, β2 = 0.999,
a learning rate of 10e−3 and a batch size of 8. Also, we use λp = λL1 = λw =
λadv = 1.
Hardware. We use a NVIDIA Tesla V100 with 16GB of RAM. The training
takes around 2 days for T-WUTON, and around 3 days for S-WUTON. For
inference, S-WUTON processes ∼77 frames per second.

1.2

More results from S-WUTON

We show more results from S-WUTON model in Fig. 1. It shows the abilities of
our model to preserve complex cloth patterns (stripes, text or textures) and body
details. It is robust across a wide range of human pose. On the antepenultimate
column, we show a common failure case of our method, when sleeves of the
source person are too large.

