Weakly-Supervised Cell Tracking via
Backward-and-Forward Propagation
Kazuya Nishimura1(B) , Junya Hayashida1 , Chenyang Wang2 ,
Dai Fei Elmer Ker2 , and Ryoma Bise1
1

Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
{kazuya.nishimura,bise}@human.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong

Abstract. We propose a weakly-supervised cell tracking method that
can train a convolutional neural network (CNN) by using only the annotation of “cell detection” (i.e., the coordinates of cell positions) without
association information, in which cell positions can be easily obtained by
nuclear staining. First, we train co-detection CNN that detects cells in
successive frames by using weak-labels. Our key assumption is that codetection CNN implicitly learns association in addition to detection. To
obtain the association, we propose a backward-and-forward propagation
method that analyzes the correspondence of cell positions in the outputs of co-detection CNN. Experiments demonstrated that the proposed
method can associate cells by analyzing co-detection CNN. Even though
the method uses only weak supervision, the performance of our method
was almost the same as the state-of-the-art supervised method. Code is
publicly available in https://github.com/naivete5656/WSCTBFP.
Keywords: Cell tracking · Weakly-supervised learning · Multi-object
tracking · Cell detection · Tracking · Weakly-supervised tracking

1

Introduction

Cell behavior analysis plays an important role in biology and medicine. To create quantitative cell-behavior metrics, cells are often captured with time-lapse
images by using phase-contrast microscopy, which is a non-invasive imaging technique, and then hundreds of cells over thousands of frames are tracked in populations. However, it is time-consuming to track a large number of cells manually.
Thus, automatic cell tracking is required.
Cell tracking in phase-contrast microscopy has several diﬃculties compared
with general object tracking. First, cells have similar appearances and their
shapes may be severely deformed. Second, cells often touch each other and have
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 104–121, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_7

