Orientation-Aware Vehicle
Re-Identification with Semantics-Guided
Part Attention Network
Tsai-Shien Chen1,2 , Chih-Ting Liu1,2 , Chih-Wei Wu1,2 ,
and Shao-Yi Chien1,2(B)
1

Graduate Institute of Electronic Engineering,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
{tschen,jackieliu,cwwu}@media.ee.ntu.edu.tw, sychien@ntu.edu.tw
2
NTU IoX Center, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

Abstract. Vehicle re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) focuses on matching images
of the same vehicle across diﬀerent cameras. It is fundamentally challenging because diﬀerences between vehicles are sometimes subtle. While
several studies incorporate spatial-attention mechanisms to help vehicle
re-ID, they often require expensive keypoint labels or suﬀer from noisy
attention mask if not trained with expensive labels. In this work, we propose a dedicated Semantics-guided Part Attention Network (SPAN) to
robustly predict part attention masks for diﬀerent views of vehicles given
only image-level semantic labels during training. With the help of part
attention masks, we can extract discriminative features in each part separately. Then we introduce Co-occurrence Part-attentive Distance Metric
(CPDM) which places greater emphasis on co-occurrence vehicle parts
when evaluating the feature distance of two images. Extensive experiments validate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method and show that
our framework outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
Keywords: Vehicle re-identiﬁcation · Spatial attention ·
Semantics-guided learning · Visibility-aware features

1

Introduction

Vehicle re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) aims to match vehicle images in a camera network. Recently, this task has drawn increasing attention due to practical applications such as urban surveillance and traﬃc ﬂow analysis. While deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have shown remarkable performance in vehicle
re-ID over the years [22,23,33], various challenges still hinder the performance
of vehicle re-ID. One of them is that a vehicle captured from diﬀerent viewpoints usually has dramatically diﬀerent visual appearances. On the other hand,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 20) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 330–346, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_20

