Collaborative Learning of Gesture Recognition
and 3D Hand Pose Estimation with Multi-Order
Feature Analysis: Supplementary Material
Siyuan Yang1,2 , Jun Liu3? , Shijian Lu4 , Meng Hwa Er2 , and Alex C. Kot2
1

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore
3
Information Systems Technology and Design Pillar, Singapore University of
Technology and Design, Singapore
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore
siyuan005@e.ntu.edu.sg, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg, {shijian.Lu, emher,
eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

In this supplementary document, we will provide materials not included in
the main paper due to space constraints. Firstly, Section 1 provides more detail
of our proposed network structures. Next, Section 2 elaborates descriptions of
Figure 2 in the main paper, and more details of our design choices for each
component. Finally, Section 3 analyzes the abilities of our proposed multi-order
module for capturing slow-fast motion.

1

Network Architecture

Figure 1 illustrates the iteration procedure of our proposed collaborative learning strategy. We show the framework with two iterations, and more pairs of Pose
Sub-Network and Gesture Sub-Network can be stacked with the increase of iterations. Additionally, some details of Pose Sub-network and Gesture Sub-network
are shown here for better understanding the whole framework. (More details of
Gesture Sub-network can also be found in Figure 2 and 3 of the main paper.)

2

More details of Figure 2 in the main paper

The Gesture Subnet in Fig. 1 is a concise version of Figure 2 in the main paper.
The operation flow of Figure 2 can be described as follow:
1) First, the Zero-Order Features are fed to the multi-order multi-stream feature analysis module as input. Then we use the Zero-Order Features of adjacent
frames to calculate the First-Order Features (Velocity Features) and SecondOrder Features (Acceleration Features). We then apply Slow-Fast Feature Analysis on these features, which extracts the information of both slowly-moving and
?

Corresponding author.

