Supplementary Material:
Event-based Asynchronous
Sparse Convolutional Networks
Nico Messikommer∗ , Daniel Gehrig? , Antonio Loquercio, and
Davide Scaramuzza
Dept. Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and
Dept. of Neuroinformatics, Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich

1

Supplementary Material

In the supplementary material, references which point to the main manuscript
will be referenced with a leading ”M-”. In Sec. 1.1 we describe an efficient recursive method for computing the rulebook Rk,n in Eq. (M-7) and present the asynchronous propagation of changes through events in algorithmic form in Tab. 1.
In Sec. 1.2 we present a proof of the equivalence of network outputs using asynchronous and synchronous networks. In Sec. 1.3 we present additional details
about the input representations and FLOP calculations used in the experiments
in Sec. M-4. In Sec. 1.4 we present a sensitivity analysis where we vary the number of events used for training and justify our choice of 25’000 events for all
experiments. Finally, in Sec. 1.5 we show additional qualitative object detection
results.
1.1

Efficient Rulebook Update

At each layer the rulebook Rk,n and receptive field Fn are
Fn = {i − k|i ∈ Fn−1 and k ∈ Kn−1 if i − k ∈ At }
Rk,n = {(i, i − k)|i ∈ Fn−1 if i − k ∈ At }.
At the input these are initialized as Rk,0 = ∅ and F0 = {u0i }. The propagation
of these two data structures is illustrated in Fig. M-2. We observe that at each
layer the rulebook and receptive field can be computed by reusing the data from
the previous layer. We can do this by decomposing the receptive field into a
frontier set fn (Fig. M-2 (a) magenta sites)and visited state set Fn (Fig. M-2
(a) green sites). At each layer Fn = fn ∪ Fn . To efficiently update both Fn and
Rk,n at each layer we only consider the rules that are added due to inputs in
the frontier set (Fig. M-2 (a), magenta lines). These can be appended to the
existing rulebook. In addition, the receptive field Fn can be updated similarly,
by adding new update sites reached from the frontier set. This greatly reduces
the sites that need to be considered in the computation of Rk,n and Fn in Eqs.
(M-6) and (M-7).
?

Equal contribution

