Large-scale Pretraining for Visual Dialog:
A Simple State-of-the-Art Baseline
(Supplementary)
Vishvak Murahari1
1

Dhruv Batra1,2

Devi Parikh1,2

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Abhishek Das1Ñ2

Facebook AI Research

{vishvak.murahari,dbatra,parikh,abhshkdz}@gatech.edu

1

Negative Results

To encourage the model to learn sentence level semantics, we tried a pretraining strategy which we refer to as the inconsistency loss. During pretraining, we
randomly select answers at 3 different rounds and replace them randomly with
one of the 100 answer options at those rounds. Similar to the masked language
modeling loss, at each token, we predict the probability of the token being “inconsistent” in the dialog history and we assume that all the tokens in the randomly
selected answer option are “inconsistent”. We also only consider dialog sequences
which have at least 6 rounds for creating samples. This is to make sure that
the model has enough context to make accurate predictions. We hoped that this
loss would encourage the model to capture sentence level semantics as the model
would need to figure out which sentences fit in together in a dialog sequence.
A pitfall in this setting is that some of the 100 answer options at each round are
often similar to the GT answer or are generic responses (e.g. “yes”, “no”, “maybe”,
etc.). Thus, there is a chance that swapping the GT answer with a randomly
selected answer option might lead to a consistent dialog sequence. We instead try
to create a new sample by randomly selecting a round and reordering/jumbling
the answers at that round and the answers at the preceding and the following
rounds. We hope that jumbling the order of answers would lead to an inconsistent
dialog sequence. We call this variant “inconsistency loss (jumbled)”.
We cannot use the batch of data used to calculate the NSP and MLM loss to
calculate the inconsistency loss. We first try to use half the batch to calculate
the inconsistency loss and the other half to calculate the NSP and MLM losses.
We then try to calculate the inconsistency loss and the NSP and MLM losses in
alternating batches. We present results for models trained with multiple variants
of the inconsistency loss in the language-only setting in Table 1.
We do not see any significant improvement by training with the inconsistency
loss. We note that creating samples by reordering answers in different rounds
does not improve performance. We also note that optimizing for the inconsistency
loss and the NSP and MLM losses in alternating batches leads to improvements.

