Transforming and Projecting Images into
Class-Conditional Generative Networks
Minyoung Huh1,2(B) , Richard Zhang2 , Jun-Yan Zhu2 , Sylvain Paris2 ,
and Aaron Hertzmann2
1

MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
minhuh@mit.edu
2
Adobe Research, San Francisco, USA
Abstract. We present a method for projecting an input image into the
space of a class-conditional generative neural network. We propose a
method that optimizes for transformation to counteract the model biases
in generative neural networks. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate that one can
solve for image translation, scale, and global color transformation, during the projection optimization to address the object-center bias and
color bias of a Generative Adversarial Network. This projection process
poses a diﬃcult optimization problem, and purely gradient-based optimizations fail to ﬁnd good solutions. We describe a hybrid optimization
strategy that ﬁnds good projections by estimating transformations and
class parameters. We show the eﬀectiveness of our method on real images
and further demonstrate how the corresponding projections lead to better editability of these images. The project page and the code is available
at https://minyoungg.github.io/GAN-Transform-and-Project/.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models, particularly Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[24], can create a diverse set of realistic images, with a number of controls for
transforming the output, e.g., [7,30,33,48]. However, most of these methods
apply only to synthetic images that are generated by GANs in the ﬁrst place. In
many real-world cases, a user would like to edit their own image. One approach is
to train a network for each separate image transformation. However, this would
require a combinatorial explosion of training time and model parameters.
Instead, a user could “project” their image to the manifold of images produced
by the GAN, by searching for an appropriate latent code [60]. Then, any transformations available within the GAN could be applied to the user’s image. This
could allow a powerful range of editing operations within a relatively compact representation. However, projection is a challenging problem. Previous methods have
M. Huh—Work started during an internship at Adobe Research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 17–34, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_2

