Cascade Graph Neural Networks
for RGB-D Salient Object Detection
Ao Luo1 , Xin Li2 , Fan Yang2 , Zhicheng Jiao3 , Hong Cheng1(B) , and Siwei Lyu4
1

Center for Robotics, School of Automation Engineering, UESTC, Chengdu, China
aoluo uestc@hotmail.com, hcheng@uestc.edu.cn
2
Group 42 (G42), Abu Dhabi, UAE
xinli uestc@hotmail.com, fanyang uestc@hotmail.com
3
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA
4
University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, USA

Abstract. In this paper, we study the problem of salient object detection (SOD) for RGB-D images using both color and depth information.
A major technical challenge in performing salient object detection from
RGB-D images is how to fully leverage the two complementary data
sources. Current works either simply distill prior knowledge from the
corresponding depth map for handling the RGB-image or blindly fuse
color and geometric information to generate the coarse depth-aware representations, hindering the performance of RGB-D saliency detectors.
In this work, we introduce Cascade Graph Neural Networks (Cas-Gnn),
a uniﬁed framework which is capable of comprehensively distilling and
reasoning the mutual beneﬁts between these two data sources through
a set of cascade graphs, to learn powerful representations for RGB-D
salient object detection. Cas-Gnn processes the two data sources individually and employs a novel Cascade Graph Reasoning (CGR) module
to learn powerful dense feature embeddings, from which the saliency map
can be easily inferred. Contrast to the previous approaches, the explicitly modeling and reasoning of high-level relations between complementary data sources allows us to better overcome challenges such as occlusions and ambiguities. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CasGnn achieves signiﬁcantly better performance than all existing RGB-D
SOD approaches on several widely-used benchmarks. Code is available
at https://github.com/LA30/Cas-Gnn.
Keywords: Salient object detection · RGB-D perception · Graph
neural networks

1

Introduction

Salient object detection is the crux to dozens of high-level AI tasks such as
object detection or classiﬁcation [52,69,80], weakly-supervised semantic segmentation [30,63], semantic correspondences [77] and others [35,71,72]. An ideal
A. Luo and X. Li—Equal contribution
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 346–364, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_21

