Learning Surrogates via Deep Embedding
Yash Patel(B) , Tomáš Hodaň, and Jiřı́ Matas
Visual Recognition Group, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Czech Republic, Czechia
{patelyas,hodanto2,matas}@fel.cvut.cz

Abstract. This paper proposes a technique for training a neural network by minimizing a surrogate loss that approximates the target evaluation metric, which may be non-diﬀerentiable. The surrogate is learned
via a deep embedding where the Euclidean distance between the prediction and the ground truth corresponds to the value of the evaluation
metric. The eﬀectiveness of the proposed technique is demonstrated in
a post-tuning setup, where a trained model is tuned using the learned
surrogate. Without a signiﬁcant computational overhead and any bells
and whistles, improvements are demonstrated on challenging and practical tasks of scene-text recognition and detection. In the recognition task,
the model is tuned using a surrogate approximating the edit distance
metric and achieves up to 39% relative improvement in the total edit
distance. In the detection task, the surrogate approximates the intersection over union metric for rotated bounding boxes and yields up to 4.25%
relative improvement in the F1 score.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning of a neural network involves minimizing a diﬀerentiable loss
function on annotated data. The diﬀerentiable nature of the loss function and
the network architecture allows the model weights to be updated via backpropagation [53]. The performance on a wide range of computer vision tasks have
signiﬁcantly improved thanks to the progress in deep neural network architectures [21,30,56] and the introduction of large scale supervised datasets [8,35].
As designing architectures often demands detailed domain expertise and creating
new datasets is expensive, there has been a substantial eﬀort in automating the
process of designing better task-speciﬁc architectures [10,54,65] and employing self-supervised methods of learning to reduce the dependence on humanannotated data [7,12,14]. However, little attention has been paid to automate
the process of designing the loss functions.
For many practical problems in computer vision, models are trained with
simple proxy losses, which may not align with the evaluation metric. The evaluation metric may not always be diﬀerentiable, prohibiting its use as a loss
function. An example of a non-diﬀerentiable metric is the visible surface discrepancy (VSD) [23] used to evaluate 6D object pose estimation methods. Another
example is the edit distance (ED) deﬁned by counting unit operations (addition,
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 205–221, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_13

