Beyond Fixed Grid: Learning Geometric Image
Representation with a Deformable Grid
Supplementary Material
Jun Gao1,2,3 , Zian Wang1,2 , Jinchen Xuan4 , and Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 NVIDIA, 4 Peking University
{jungao, zianwang, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu
1600012865@pku.edu.cn

In the supplementary material, we provide additional details for our applications in Sec. 1, ablation studies in Sec. 2, as well as additional experimental
results in Sec. 3.

1

Applications Details

We here provide details for our boundary-based object annotation approach.
Details for other applications were presented in the main paper.
1.1

Boundary-based Object Annotation Method

Following the notation introduced in the main paper, we search a closed path
that has minimal distance transform energy in the deformed grid. The distance
transform is a distance map which labels each pixel of the image with the distance
to the nearest boundary pixels. We first use PSP-Deeplab to extract the feature
map, and apply two 3×3 conv filters with batch normalization and relu activation to predict the distance transform map. The model is trained with L2 loss.
Note that the PSP-Deeplab encoder is shared among DT preditor, Curve-GCN
predictor and grid decoder. We denote the path as: Q = {vQ1 , vQ2 , · · · , vQM },
where vQi are the vertices in the grid, and two consecutive vertices need to be
connected with an edge in the grid. Suppose Curve-GCN [8] predicts M control
points, which we denote as cp1 , cp2 , · · · , cpM . For every control point cpi , we
first find its top-k nearest vertices, vcp1i , vcp2i , · · · , vcpki , in the deformed grid.
For each vertex, we compute its distance transform energy via bilinear sampling
using the vertex’s position in the predicted distance transform energy map. We
then snap each control point to the vertex that has minimal distance transform
energy among its top-k closest vertices. Specifically:
vQi = arg min DT (vcpki ).

(1)

vcpk
i

To search a path from vQi to vQ(i+1)%M , we use the Dijkstra Algorithm1 . Specifically, we first construct the same graph as for the deformable grid. To get the
1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dijkstra%27s algorithm

