A Competence-Aware Curriculum
for Visual Concepts Learning
via Question Answering
Qing Li(B) , Siyuan Huang , Yining Hong , and Song-Chun Zhu
UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy (VCLA),
Los Angeles, USA
{liqing,huangsiyuan,yininghong}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract. Humans can progressively learn visual concepts from easy
to hard questions. To mimic this eﬃcient learning ability, we propose a
competence-aware curriculum for visual concept learning in a questionanswering manner. Speciﬁcally, we design a neural-symbolic concept
learner for learning the visual concepts and a multi-dimensional Item
Response Theory (mIRT) model for guiding the learning process with an
adaptive curriculum. The mIRT eﬀectively estimates the concept diﬃculty and the model competence at each learning step from accumulated
model responses. The estimated concept diﬃculty and model competence are further utilized to select the most proﬁtable training samples.
Experimental results on CLEVR show that with a competence-aware
curriculum, the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performances
with superior data eﬃciency and convergence speed. Speciﬁcally, the
proposed model only uses 40% of training data and converges three
times faster compared with other state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Visual question answering · Visual concept learning ·
Curriculum learning · Model competence

1

Introduction

Humans excel at learning visual concepts and their compositions in a questionanswering manner [10,16,18], which requires a joint understanding of vision and
language. The essence of such learning skill is the superior capability to connect
linguistic symbols (words/phrases) in question-answer pairs with visual cues
(appearance/geometry) in images. Imagine a person without prior knowledge of
colors is presented with two contrastive examples in Figure 1-I. The left images
are the same except for color, and the right question-answer pairs diﬀer only in
the descriptions about color. By assuming that the diﬀerences in the questionanswer pairs capture the diﬀerences in appearances, he can learn the concept of
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 141–157, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_9

