Describing Textures Using Natural
Language
Chenyun Wu(B) , Mikayla Timm , and Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, USA
{chenyun,mtimm,smaji}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract. Textures in natural images can be characterized by color,
shape, periodicity of elements within them, and other attributes that can
be described using natural language. In this paper, we study the problem
of describing visual attributes of texture on a novel dataset containing
rich descriptions of textures, and conduct a systematic study of current
generative and discriminative models for grounding language to images
on this dataset. We ﬁnd that while these models capture some properties
of texture, they fail to capture several compositional properties, such
as the colors of dots. We provide critical analysis of existing models
by generating synthetic but realistic textures with diﬀerent descriptions.
Our dataset also allows us to train interpretable models and generate
language-based explanations of what discriminative features are learned
by deep networks for ﬁne-grained categorization where texture plays a
key role. We present visualizations of several ﬁne-grained domains and
show that texture attributes learned on our dataset oﬀer improvements
over expert-designed attributes on the Caltech-UCSD Birds dataset.

1

Introduction

Texture is ubiquitous and provides useful cues for a wide range of visual recognition tasks. We rely on texture for estimating material properties of surfaces,
for discriminating objects with a similar shape, for generating realistic imagery
in computer graphics applications, and so on. Texture is localized and can be
more easily modeled than shape that is aﬀected by pose, viewpoint, or occlusion.
The eﬀectiveness of texture for perceptual tasks is also mimicked by deep networks trained on current computer vision datasets that have been shown to rely
signiﬁcantly on texture for discrimination (e.g., [14,16,22,26]).
While there has been signiﬁcant work in the last few decades on visual representations of texture, limited work has been done on describing detailed properties of textures using natural language. The ability to describe texture in rich
detail can enable applications on domains such as fashion and graphics, as well
as to interpret discriminative attributes of visual categories within a ﬁne-grained
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 52–70, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_4

