Learning Visual Commonsense
for Robust Scene Graph Generation:
Supplementary Material
Alireza Zareian? , Zhecan Wang? , Haoxuan You? , and Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University, New York NY 10027, USA
{az2407,zw2627,hy2612,sc250}@columbia.edu

In the following, we provide additional details and analysis that was not
included in the main paper due to limited space. We first provide more implementation details, followed by a novel evaluation protocol that reveals insightful
statistics about the data and the state of the art performance. We finally provide
more qualitative examples to showcase what our commonsense model learns.

1

Implementation Details

We have three training stages: perception, commonsense, and joint fine-tuning.
We train the perception model by closely following the implementation details
of each method we adopt [2, 3, 1], with the exception that for IMP [2], we use
the implementation by Zellers et al. [3], because it performs much better. We
separately train the commonsense model (GLAT) once, independent of the perception model, as we described in the main paper. Then we stack GLAT on top
of each perception model and perform fine-tuning, without the fusion module.
Finally, we add the fusion model for inference.
Our GLAT implementation has 6 layers each with 8 attention heads, each
with 300-D representations. We train it with a 30% masking rate on Visual
Genome (VG) training scene graphs, using an Adam optimizer with a learning
rate of 0.0001, for 100 epochs. To stack the trained GLAT model on top of a
perception model, we take the scene graph output of the perception model for
a given image, keep the top 100 most confident triplets and remove the rest,
and represent each remaining entity and predicate with a one-hot vector that
specifies the top-1 predicted class. We intentionally discard the class distribution
predicted by the perception model, to let the commonsense model reason independently in an abstract, symbolic space. Perception confidence is later taken
into account by our fusion module.
The resulting one-hot graph is represented in the same way as a VG graph,
that we have pretrained GLAT on, and is fed into GLAT without masking any
node. The GLAT decoder predicts new classes for each node, and new edges,
but we ignore the new edges and keep the structure fixed. Hence, the output
of GLAT looks like the output of the perception model with the exception that
?

Equal contribution.

