Joint Disentangling and Adaptation for
Cross-Domain Person Re-Identification
Yang Zou1(B) , Xiaodong Yang2 , Zhiding Yu2 , B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar1 ,
and Jan Kautz2
1

Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
yzou2@andrew.cmu.edu
2
NVIDIA, Santa Clara, USA

Abstract. Although a signiﬁcant progress has been witnessed in supervised person re-identiﬁcation (re-id), it remains challenging to generalize
re-id models to new domains due to the huge domain gaps. Recently,
there has been a growing interest in using unsupervised domain adaptation to address this scalability issue. Existing methods typically conduct
adaptation on the representation space that contains both id-related and
id-unrelated factors, thus inevitably undermining the adaptation eﬃcacy
of id-related features. In this paper, we seek to improve adaptation by
purifying the representation space to be adapted. To this end, we propose a joint learning framework that disentangles id-related/unrelated
features and enforces adaptation to work on the id-related feature space
exclusively. Our model involves a disentangling module that encodes
cross-domain images into a shared appearance space and two separate
structure spaces, and an adaptation module that performs adversarial
alignment and self-training on the shared appearance space. The two
modules are co-designed to be mutually beneﬁcial. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed joint learning framework outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods by clear margins.
Keywords: Person re-id · Feature disentangling · Domain adaptation

1

Introduction

Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) is a task of retrieving the images that contain
the person of interest across non-overlapping cameras given a query image. It
has been receiving lots of attention as a popular benchmark for metric-learning
and found wide real applications such as smart cities [35,47,48,55]. Current
state-of-the-art re-id methods predominantly hinge on deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and have considerably boosted re-id performance in the
Y. Zou—Work done during an internship at NVIDIA Research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 87–104, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_6

