SoundSpaces: Audio-Visual Navigation in 3D
Environments Supplementary Materials
Changan Chen∗1,4 , Unnat Jain∗†2,4 , Carl Schissler3 , Sebastia Vicenc
Amengual Gari3 , Ziad Al-Halah1 , Vamsi Krishna Ithapu3 ,
Philip Robinson3 , and Kristen Grauman1,4
1

UT Austin, 2 UIUC, 3 Facebook Reality Labs, 4 Facebook AI Research

In this supplementary material we provide additional details about:
1. Details of the audio simulation—including grid construction, mesh upgrades,
acoustic simulation technique, and connectivity graph (as referenced in Sec. 3
of the main paper).
2. Additional illustrations of pressure fields from the audio simulation and the
sampled grid.
3. Reinforcement learning training utilized in the network description (as referenced in Sec. 5 of the main paper.)
4. Audio intensity baselines, as referenced in Sec. 6 of the main paper.
5. Heard/unheard sounds, as referenced in Sec. 6, Tab. 2, and Tab. 3.
6. Additional navigation trajectory examples, similar to Fig. 4 in the main
paper.

8

Audio Simulation Details

Grid construction. We use an automatic point placement algorithm to determine the locations where the simulated sound sources and listeners are placed
in a two-step procedure: adding points on a regular grid and then pruning. For
adding points on a regular grid, first, we compute an axis-aligned 3D bounding
box of a scene. Within this box we sample points from a regular 2D square grid
with resolution 0.5m (Replica) or 1m (Matterport) that slices the bounding box
in the horizontal plane at a distance of 1.5m from the floor (representing the
height of a humanoid robot).
The second step prunes grid points in inaccessible locations. To prune, we
compute how closed the region surrounding a particular point is. This entails
tracing R uniformly-distributed random rays in all directions from the point,
then letting them diffusely reflect through the scene up to B bounces using a
path tracing algorithm. Simultaneously, we compute the total number of “hits”
H: the number of rays that intersect the scene. After all rays are traced, the
H
closed-ness C ∈ [0, 1] of a point is given by C = R·B
. A point is declared outside
the scene if C < Cmin . the value of C for a particular point is below a threshold
Cmin . Finally, we remove points that are within a certain distance dmin from
∗

CC and UJ contributed equally; † work done as an intern at Facebook AI Research

