Leveraging Seen and Unseen Semantic
Relationships for Generative Zero-Shot
Learning
Maunil R. Vyas(B) , Hemanth Venkateswara ,
and Sethuraman Panchanathan
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA
{mrvyas,hemanthv,panch}@asu.edu

Abstract. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) addresses the unseen class recognition problem by leveraging semantic information to transfer knowledge from seen classes to unseen classes. Generative models synthesize
the unseen visual features and convert ZSL into a classical supervised
learning problem. These generative models are trained using the seen
classes and are expected to implicitly transfer the knowledge from seen
to unseen classes. However, their performance is stymied by overﬁtting,
which leads to substandard performance on Generalized Zero-Shot learning (GZSL). To address this concern, we propose the novel LsrGAN,
a generative model that Leverages the Semantic Relationship between
seen and unseen categories and explicitly performs knowledge transfer by incorporating a novel Semantic Regularized Loss (SR-Loss). The
SR-loss guides the LsrGAN to generate visual features that mirror the
semantic relationships between seen and unseen classes. Experiments
on seven benchmark datasets, including the challenging Wikipedia textbased CUB and NABirds splits, and Attribute-based AWA, CUB, and
SUN, demonstrates the superiority of the LsrGAN compared to previous
state-of-the-art approaches under both ZSL and GZSL. Code is available
at https://github.com/Maunil/LsrGAN.
Keywords: Generalized zero-shot learning · Generative Modeling
(GANs) · Seen and unseen relationship

1

Introduction

Consider the following discussion between a kindergarten teacher and her
student.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 70–86, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_5

