Active Visual Information Gathering for
Vision-Language Navigation
Supplementary Material
Hanqing Wang1 , BWenguan Wang2 , Tianmin Shu3 , Wei Liang1 , and Jianbing Shen4
1

3

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology 2 ETH Zurich
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
https://github.com/HanqingWangAI/Active_VLN

In this document, we first detail the work and data flow of our navigation
agent (see §2). Then in §3, more ablation studies are conducted to fully assess
the effectiveness of our learning protocol. Later, in §4, visual results for some
representative successful and failed cases as well as analyses are presented. Finally, in §5, we provide more statistics of our exploration module, to give an
in-depth glimpse into our agent.

1

Memory based Late Action-Taking Strategy

As described above, after a round of exploration, the agent goes back to the
starting point at tth navigation step to update the knowledge collected about a
certain direction. However, this ”going back” may result in the repeated visiting
of viewpoints in three manners, 1) the re-visiting of the viewpoints on the way
back to the starting point, 2) the re-visiting of the viewpoints within the rounds
of exploration at tth navigation step. Though each exploration leads to a certain
direction (viewpoint), those directions may interact somewhere in front and the
intersection may be re-visited. 3) the re-visiting of the viewpoints across different
navigation steps, e.g., the viewpoints explored at tth navigation step may be revisited at t + 1th navigation step. Those re-visiting will lead to additional TL.
To shrink the trajectory, a novel moving strategy is adopted. We call it “Lazy”
strategy. The core idea of the strategy is that the agent moves only when it is
necessary. Specifically, supposing that the agent finished a round exploration at
viewpoint vt . We store the views of all the visited points and the connectivity
between the points in a memory graph, so the agent can “image” the execution
of his following action without really going back to the starting point. When he
needs to visit a point (assumed as v) that is not stored in the memory graph,
the new point v will be added to the memory graph and the agent will go to v
from vt following the shortest path in the memory graph, then the view of v will
be stored. The agent will not leave v until he needs to visit a new point that is
not stored in the memory graph or he decides to stop the navigation. In such
“Lazy” way, a lot of repeated visitings are saved.
B Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang (wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com).

