Dive Deeper Into Box for Object Detection

15

This is our supplementary material which includes more experiments on semantic consistency and performance analysis to show the effectiveness of our
work.

A

Analysis on Semantic Consistency Module

We visualize the dynamic consistency at different epoches to see how semantic consistency affects on the learning targets. As shown in Fig. 8, the sampled
points in each epoch with both high classification scores among categories and
high IoU scores are highlighted, named high consistency samples. The low consistency samples are appear in dark colors. Part of sample points at initial stage
is not locate at the instance, as the model is not robust at the beginning. With
the semantic consistency module, the learned positive samples are progressively
distributed at the semantic area of the instance. As the training going on, high
consistency samples become robust and appear in lighter colors. We also evaluate to see how inconsistency problem be solved by our method. Some qualitative
results are presented in fig. 9, the typical inconsistency in which center-like annotations cannot handle presented in Fig. 1 are improved to a large extent. By
utilizing the segmentation annotations, we found that the proportion of samples
locate on background reduced around 15% (from 51.7% at initial to 36.1% when
training finished) with the semantic consistency module.
epoch 0

epoch 4

epoch 8

epoch 12

Fig. 8: Visualized examples of semantic consistency module. The left image of
each row is the training data select from COCO trainval35k. Rest images on
the right are the heatmaps of sampled points with semantic consistency module
at different training epoch. Note that, entries of heatmaps represent the product
results of IoU scores and classification scores. Sampled points with high IoU
scores and high classification scores are highlighted in the heatmaps. Sampled
points with low IoU scores or low classification scores are in dark colors.Better
viewed in colors and zoom in.

