Nighttime Defogging Using High-Low
Frequency Decomposition and
Grayscale-Color Networks
Wending Yan1(B) , Robby T. Tan1,2 , and Dengxin Dai3
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
{eleyanw,robby.tan}@nus.edu.sg
2
Yale-NUS College, Singapore, Singapore
3
ETH Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
dai@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract. We address the problem of nighttime defogging from a single
image by introducing a framework consisting of two modules: grayscale
and color modules. Given an RGB foggy nighttime image, our grayscale
module takes the grayscale version of the image as input, and decomposes it into high and low frequency layers. The high frequency layers contain the scene texture information, which is less aﬀected by fog.
While the low frequency layers contain the scene layout/structure information including fog and glow. Our grayscale module then enhances the
visibility of the textures in the high frequency layers, and removes the
presence of glow and fog in the low frequency layers. Having processed
the high/low frequency information, it fuses the two layers to obtain a
grayscale defogged image. Our second module, the color module, takes
the original RGB image, and process it similarly to what the grayscale
module does. However, to obtain fog-free high and low frequency information, the module is guided by the grayscale module. The reason of
doing this is because grayscale images are less aﬀected by multiple colors
of atmospheric light, which are commonly present in nighttime scenes.
Moreover, having the grayscale module allows us to have consistency
losses between the outputs of the two modules, which is critical to our
framework, since we do not have paired ground-truths for our real data.
Our extensive experiments on real foggy nighttime images show the eﬀectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Fog in nighttime can signiﬁcantly degrades visibility. Few methods have been
proposed to address this degradation problem, e.g.: [17,26,27]. Unfortunately,
due to the complexity of illumination colors, the presence of multiple light sources
and the strong glow, these methods still perform suboptimally as shown in Fig. 1.
To our knowledge, there is no deep-learning based nighttime defogging method
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 473–488, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_28

