Supplementary Material
Jie Cao1,3 , Huaibo Huang1,3 , Yi Li1,3 , Ran He1,2,3 ∗ , and Zhenan Sun1,2,3
1

Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{jie.cao, huaibo.huang, yi.li}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {rhe, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1

Network Architecture

In this work, we implement our method based on Pytorch. In our experiments,
the batch size is 16 and the image size is [3 × 256 × 256]. Given a n-dimensional
attribute vector, we apply spatial replication to change its shape to [n×256×256].
The inputs of the generator and the discriminator are both the concatenations of
images and attribute vectors. Hence, the input tensor shape is [(3+n)×256×256].
The network architectures of the generator and the discriminator are reported
in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.

2

Additional Results

We report additional visual comparisons in this section. The single facial attribute transfer results are shown in Figures 1 and 2. The multiple facial attribute transfer results are shown in Figures 3, 4, and 5. For multiple facial
attribute transfer, we also visualize the residual heatmaps between the inputs
and the outputs to reveal the modified regions of images. We report more season
transfer results in Figure 6 and more sketch&photo transfer results in Figure 7.
Furthermore, we report the visual comparisons of our variations in the ablation
study in Figure 8. Figures 9 and 10 show our results on facial attribute interpolation. We can control the intensity of the transferred attribute by interpolating
the attribute vector.
These additional visual results further demonstrate the superiority of our
approach. The results of other methods are not satisfying in some specific challenging cases, although they can also address most of the easy cases. For instance,
STGAN always produces unrealistic facial skin when altering age. AttGAN tends
to make modifications minor than expected when altering gender or beard. In
general, our approach produces most plausible results with finer texture details.

