SceneSketcher: Fine-Grained Image Retrieval
with Scene Sketches
Fang Liu1,2 ? , Changqing Zou3 ? , Xiaoming Deng1 † , Ran Zuo1,2 ,
Yu-Kun Lai4 , Cuixia Ma1,2 † , Yong-Jin Liu5,† , Hongan Wang1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science and Beijing Key Lab of
Human-Computer Interaction, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 HMI Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
Cardiff University 5 Tsinghua University

1

Network Details

The node feature vector of our scene graph is extracted with Inception-V3, and
its dimension is 2048. Category label ci of each node is encoded to a 300-d
vector by Word2Vec [1]. We denote the spatial information of the node by a
4-d vector pi indicating the top left and bottom right coordinates of the node
bounding box. We adopt two graph convolutional layers in our graph encoder.
Table 1 shows the details of our graph encoder. Moreover, we use the leaky relu
activation function to replace the conventional relu function, which enables the
GCN layers to be better trained with triplet loss.
Table 1. Details of our graph encoder. GCN1 and GCN2 are denotes as the first and
the second graph convolutional layers, respectively. ’Batch’ means batch size.
Layer name
Input
Adjacency matrix
Output dimension
GCN1
(Batch, # of Node, 2352) (# of Node,# of Node) (Batch, # of Node, 128)
GCN2
(Batch, # of Node, 128) (# of Node,# of Node) (Batch, # of Node, 32)

2

Details of Our Extended Database

In order to investigate the performance of our method using a larger image
gallery, we extend our scene sketch database with natural images from Cocostuff [2], named our extended scene sketch database. We select 21,379 natural
images, the objects of which are within the 14 categories in our scene sketch
database. These natural images do not have corresponding sketches in our scene
sketch database. Then we split these natural images into a test dataset with
5,000 images and a training dataset with 16,379 images, and combine them with
the images of the training and test dataset in our scene sketch database.
Table 2 shows the number of sketches and images in our extended database.
?

indicates equal contributions. † indicates corresponding author.

