Efficient Non-Parametric Function Induction in Semi-Supervised
Learning

Olivier Delalleau, Yoshua Bengio and Nicolas Le Roux
Dept. IRO, Université de Montréal
P.O. Box 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montreal, H3C 3J7, Qc, Canada
{delallea,bengioy,lerouxni}@iro.umontreal.ca

Abstract
There has been an increase of interest for
semi-supervised learning recently, because of
the many datasets with large amounts of
unlabeled examples and only a few labeled
ones. This paper follows up on proposed nonparametric algorithms which provide an estimated continuous label for the given unlabeled examples. First, it extends them to
function induction algorithms that minimize
a regularization criterion applied to an outof-sample example, and happen to have the
form of Parzen windows regressors. This allows to predict test labels without solving
again a linear system of dimension n (the
number of unlabeled and labeled training examples), which can cost O(n3 ). Second, this
function induction procedure gives rise to an
efficient approximation of the training process, reducing the linear system to be solved
to m  n unknowns, using only a subset of
m examples. An improvement of O(n2 /m2 )
in time can thus be obtained. Comparative
experiments are presented, showing the good
performance of the induction formula and approximation algorithm.

1

INTRODUCTION

Several non-parametric approaches to semi-supervised
learning (see (Seeger, 2001) for a review of semisupervised learning) have been recently introduced,
e.g. in (Szummer & Jaakkola, 2002; Chapelle et al.,
2003; Belkin & Niyogi, 2003; Zhu et al., 2003a; Zhu
et al., 2003b; Zhou et al., 2004). They rely on weak implicit assumptions on the generating data distribution,
e.g. smoothness of the target function with respect to
a given notion of similarity between examples1 . For
1
See also (Kemp et al., 2004) for a hierarchically structured notion of a priori similarity.

classification tasks this amounts to assuming that the
target function is constant within the region of input
space (or “cluster” (Chapelle et al., 2003)) associated
with a particular class. These previous non-parametric
approaches exploit the idea of building and smoothing
a graph in which each example is associated with a
node, and arcs between two nodes are associated with
the value of a similarity function applied on the corresponding two examples.
It is not always clear with these graph-based kernel
methods for semi-supervised learning how to generalize to previously unseen test examples. In general
they have been designed for the transductive setting,
in which the test examples must be provided before
doing the expensive part of training. This typically
requires solving a linear system with n equations and
n parameters, where n is the number of labeled and
unlabeled data. In a truly inductive setting where new
examples are given one after the other and a prediction must be given after each example, it can be very
computationally costly to solve such a system anew
for each of these test examples. In (Zhu et al., 2003b)
it is proposed to assign to the test case the label (or
inferred label) of the nearest neighbor (NN) from the
training set (labeled or unlabeled). In this paper we
derive from the training criterion an inductive formula
that turns out to have the form of a Parzen windows
predictor, for a computational cost that is O(n). Besides being smoother than the NN-algorithm, this induction formula is consistent with the predicted labels
on the unlabeled training data.
In addition to providing a relatively cheap way of doing function induction, the proposed approach opens
the door to efficient approximations even in the transductive setting. Since we know the analytic functional
form of the prediction at a point x in terms of the
predictions at a set of training points, we can use it to
express all the predictions in terms of a small subset of
m  n examples (i.e. a low-rank approximation) and
solve a linear system with m variables and equations.

