Gradient Centralization: A New
Optimization Technique for Deep
Neural Networks
Hongwei Yong1,2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xiansheng Hua2 , and Lei Zhang1,2(B)
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong
{cshyong,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, huaxiansheng@gmail.com

Abstract. Optimization techniques are of great importance to eﬀectively and eﬃciently train a deep neural network (DNN). It has been
shown that using the ﬁrst and second order statistics (e.g., mean and
variance) to perform Z-score standardization on network activations
or weight vectors, such as batch normalization (BN) and weight standardization (WS), can improve the training performance. Diﬀerent from
these existing methods that mostly operate on activations or weights,
we present a new optimization technique, namely gradient centralization
(GC), which operates directly on gradients by centralizing the gradient
vectors to have zero mean. GC can be viewed as a projected gradient
descent method with a constrained loss function. We show that GC can
regularize both the weight space and output feature space so that it can
boost the generalization performance of DNNs. Moreover, GC improves
the Lipschitzness of the loss function and its gradient so that the training
process becomes more eﬃcient and stable. GC is very simple to implement and it can be embedded into existing gradient based DNN optimizers with only one line of code. Our experiments on various applications, including general image classiﬁcation, ﬁne-grained image classiﬁcation, detection and segmentation, demonstrate that GC can consistently
improve the performance of DNN learning. The code of GC can be found
at https://github.com/Yonghongwei/Gradient-Centralization.
Keywords: Deep network optimization · Gradient descent

1

Introduction

The broad success of deep learning largely owes to the recent advances on largescale datasets [41], powerful computing resources (e.g., GPUs and TPUs), sophisticated network architectures [14,15] and optimization algorithms [3,22]. Among
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 37) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 635–652, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_37

