Learning Permutation Invariant
Representations Using Memory Networks
Shivam Kalra1 , Mohammed Adnan1,2 , Graham Taylor2,3 ,
and H. R. Tizhoosh1,2(B)
1

Kimia Lab, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
{shivam.kalra,m7adnan,tizhoosh}@uwaterloo.ca
2
Vector Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, MaRS Centre, Toronto, Canada
3
School of Engineering, University of Guelph, Guelph, Canada
gwtaylor@uoquelph.ca

Abstract. Many real-world tasks such as classiﬁcation of digital
histopathology images and 3D object detection involve learning from
a set of instances. In these cases, only a group of instances or a set,
collectively, contains meaningful information and therefore only the sets
have labels, and not individual data instances. In this work, we present
a permutation invariant neural network called Memory-based Exchangeable Model (MEM) for learning universal set functions. The MEM model
consists of memory units that embed an input sequence to high-level features enabling it to learn inter-dependencies among instances through a
self-attention mechanism. We evaluated the learning ability of MEM on
various toy datasets, point cloud classiﬁcation, and classiﬁcation of whole
slide images (WSIs) into two subtypes of the lung cancer—Lung Adenocarcinoma, and Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma. We systematically
extracted patches from WSIs of the lung, downloaded from The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset, the largest public repository of WSIs,
achieving a competitive accuracy of 84.84% for classiﬁcation of two subtypes of lung cancer. The results on other datasets are promising as well,
and demonstrate the eﬃcacy of our model.
Keywords: Permutation invariant models · Multi Instance Learning ·
Whole slide image classiﬁcation · Medical images

1

Introduction

Deep artiﬁcial neural networks have achieved impressive performance for representation learning tasks. The majority of these deep architectures take a single
instance as an input. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are a popular approach
to learn representations from sequential ordered instances. However, the lack of
S. Kalra and M. Adnan—Authors have equal contribution.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 677–693, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_40

