Flow-edge Guided Video Completion
Chen Gao1(B) , Ayush Saraf2 , Jia-Bin Huang1 , and Johannes Kopf2
1

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
chengao@vt.edu
2
Facebook, Seattle, USA

Abstract. We present a new ﬂow-based video completion algorithm.
Previous ﬂow completion methods are often unable to retain the sharpness of motion boundaries. Our method ﬁrst extracts and completes
motion edges, and then uses them to guide piecewise-smooth ﬂow completion with sharp edges. Existing methods propagate colors among
local ﬂow connections between adjacent frames. However, not all missing
regions in a video can be reached in this way because the motion boundaries form impenetrable barriers. Our method alleviates this problem
by introducing non-local ﬂow connections to temporally distant frames,
enabling propagating video content over motion boundaries. We validate
our approach on the DAVIS dataset. Both visual and quantitative results
show that our method compares favorably against the state-of-the-art
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Video completion is the task of ﬁlling a given space-time region with newly
synthesized content. It has many applications, including restoration (removing scratches), video editing and special eﬀects workﬂows (removing unwanted
objects), watermark and logo removal, and video stabilization (ﬁlling the exterior
after shake removal instead of cropping). The newly generated content should
embed seamlessly in the video, and the alteration should be as imperceptible as
possible. This is challenging because we need to ensure that the result is temporally coherent (does not ﬂicker) and respects dynamic camera motion as well as
complex object motion in the video.
Up until a few years ago, most methods used patch-based synthesis techniques
[14,26,39]. These methods are often slow and have limited ability to synthesize
new content because they can only remix existing patches in the video. Recent
learning-based techniques achieve more plausible synthesis [5,38], but due to the
high memory requirements of video, methods employing 3D spatial-temporal kernels suﬀer from resolution issues. The most successful methods to date [14,42]
are ﬂow-based. They synthesize color and ﬂow jointly and propagate color along
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 42) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 713–729, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_42

