An Attention-driven Two-stage Clustering Method for
Unsupervised Person Re-Identification Supplementary
Materials
Zilong Ji1 , Xiaolong Zou2 , Xiaohan Lin2 , Xiao Liu3 , Tiejun Huang2 , and Si Wu2,3
1

State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University,
China. jizilong@mail.bnu.edu.cn
2
School of Electronics Engineering & Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China.
3
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China.
{xiaolz,Lin.xiaohan,xiaoliu23,tjhuang,siwu}@pku.edu.cn

1

Hyper-parameters used in our ADTC model

Here we list the hyper-parameters we used in our model. Results reported in the main
text is based on the settings in Table 1 here. The results of different settings of hyperparameters are given in Sec. 2.

2

Robustness analysis of the model

We carry out experiments to explore the robustness of our model with respect to hyperparameters. Here we mainly focus on four hyper-parameters: the number of clusters, the
margin in the triplet loss, the number of hidden units (bottleneck units) in the channel
branch of the voxel attention module and the size of dimension reduction of the features
for clustering. Each time, we vary one hyper-parameter in a range each time and the others are fixed. First we show the effect of the number of clusters, as this is unknown in
advance but needs to pre-specified4 . We check the model performance on Market1501
by setting different numbers of clusters, varying from 300 to 1500, in two-stage clustering. Table 2 shows that the model performance is quite robust over a wide range of
cluster numbers, even when the data is largely under-segmented or over-segmented.
Results of varying other hyper-parameters are given in Table 3. We see that the performances of our model are rather robust with respect to the triplet margin, the number
of hidden units (bottleneck units) in the channel branch of the voxel attention module
and the size of dimension reduction of the features for clustering. It seems that the size
of nearest neighbours p in the two-stage clustering has an impact on the model performance. The reason is when p is small (p = 5), the number of selected images is small,
4

Although some methods such as density-based clustering do not require specifying the number
of clusters, they do need to pre-define the minimum number of points for the neighborhood
and the maximum distance for two points to be considered as in the same cluster. To our best
knowledge, there is no clustering algorithm which does not impose any pre-defined constraint
on clustering.

