Invertible Image Rescaling
Mingqing Xiao1 , Shuxin Zheng2(B) , Chang Liu2(B) , Yaolong Wang3 , Di He1 ,
Guolin Ke2 , Jiang Bian2 , Zhouchen Lin1 , and Tie-Yan Liu2
1
Peking University, Beijing, China
{mingqing xiao,di he,zlin}@pku.edu.cn
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{shuz,changliu,guoke,jiabia,tyliu}@microsoft.com
3
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
yaolong.wang@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract. High-resolution digital images are usually downscaled to ﬁt
various display screens or save the cost of storage and bandwidth, meanwhile the post-upscaling is adopted to recover the original resolutions or
the details in the zoom-in images. However, typical image downscaling
is a non-injective mapping due to the loss of high-frequency information,
which leads to the ill-posed problem of the inverse upscaling procedure
and poses great challenges for recovering details from the downscaled lowresolution images. Simply upscaling with image super-resolution methods
results in unsatisfactory recovering performance. In this work, we propose
to solve this problem by modeling the downscaling and upscaling processes from a new perspective, i.e. an invertible bijective transformation,
which can largely mitigate the ill-posed nature of image upscaling. We
develop an Invertible Rescaling Net (IRN) with deliberately designed
framework and objectives to produce visually-pleasing low-resolution
images and meanwhile capture the distribution of the lost information
using a latent variable following a speciﬁed distribution in the downscaling process. In this way, upscaling is made tractable by inversely passing
a randomly-drawn latent variable with the low-resolution image through
the network. Experimental results demonstrate the signiﬁcant improvement of our model over existing methods in terms of both quantitative and qualitative evaluations of image upscaling reconstruction from
downscaled images. Code is available at https://github.com/pkuxmq/
Invertible-Image-Rescaling.

1

Introduction

With exploding amounts of high-resolution (HR) images/videos on the Internet, image downscaling is quite indispensable for storing, transferring and sharing such large-sized data, as the downscaled counterpart can signiﬁcantly save
M. Xiao and Y. Wang—Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 126–144, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_8

