Stochastic Fine-Grained Labeling of
Multi-state Sign Glosses for Continuous
Sign Language Recognition
Zhe Niu(B)

and Brian Mak(B)

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{zniu,mak}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract. In this paper, we propose novel stochastic modeling of various components of a continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) system that is based on the transformer encoder and connectionist temporal
classiﬁcation (CTC). Most importantly, We model each sign gloss with
multiple states, and the number of states is a categorical random variable that follows a learned probability distribution, providing stochastic
ﬁne-grained labels for training the CTC decoder. We further propose a
stochastic frame dropping mechanism and a gradient stopping method
to deal with the severe overﬁtting problem in training the transformer
model with CTC loss. These two methods also help reduce the training
computation, both in terms of time and space, signiﬁcantly. We evaluated our model on popular CSLR datasets, and show its eﬀectiveness
compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Sign language is the primary communication medium among the deaf. It conveys
meaning using gestures, facial expressions and upper body posture, etc., and has
linguistic rules that are diﬀerent from those of spoken languages. Sign language
recognition (SLR) is the task of converting a sign language video to the corresponding sequence of (sign) glosses (i.e., “words” in a sign language), which are
the basic units of the sign language semantics. Both isolated sign language recognition (ISLR) [15] and continuous sign language recognition (CSLR) have been
attempted. ISLR classiﬁes a gloss-wise segmented video into its corresponding
gloss, whereas CSLR classiﬁes a sentence-level sign video into its corresponding
sequence of glosses. The latter task is more diﬃcult and is the focus of this paper.
Most of the modern CSLR architectures contain three components: visual
model, contextual model and alignment model. The visual model ﬁrst extracts
the visual features from the input video frames, based on which the contextual
model further mines the correlation between the glosses. Convolutional neural
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 172–186, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_11

