Supplimentary Materials:
Learning Object Placement by Inpainting for
Compositional Data Augmentation
Lingzhi Zhang1 , Tarmily Wen1 , Jie Min1 ,
Jiancong Wang1 , David Han2 , and Jianbo Shi1
1

University of Pennsylvania
Army Research Laboratory
{zlz,went,minjie,jshi}@seas.upenn.edu,
jiancong.wang@pennmedicine.upenn.edu, ctmkhan@gmail.com
2

In this section, we discuss the implementation details of data acquisition module, object placement newtork, and compositional data augmentation pipeline
in our paper.

1

Implementation Details of Image Inpainting

To implement the image inpainting module in our data acquisition system, we
utilize a state-of-the-art image inpainting network [3]. We used the unlabeled
Cityscape images [1], which has a total number of 184,700. To generate the
ocludded images, we crop out the pixel regions at several random locations using
the object masks, which contain shapes of car, person, bicycle, and etc. Then,
we train the inpainting network to fill the holes of these cropped regions to learn
the image prior.

2

Implementation Details of PlaceNet

In the training of object placement network, the foreground and background
images have dimensions of 128x128 and 128x256 respectively, and the output
placements are parameterized as normalized center point (x,y), width and height
in range of 0 and 1.
We employ the following abbreviation: N = Number of filters, K = Kernel
size, S = Stride, P = Padding. ”Conv” and ”FC”, ”BN”, ”SN” denote convolutional layer, fully-connected layer, batch normalization, and spectral normalization respectively. The network architecture are shown as follows.
In the encoding space, the foreground image is encoded as a 128d feature vector and the background image is encoded as a 256d feature vector. The dimension
of random variable is 2. In the latent space, the foreground code, background
code and the random variable are concatenated and then decoded to a predicted
placement. Therefore, the input dimension to the decoder is 128+256+2 = 386.
The inputs to the discriminator network are the predicted/ground-truth
placement plus the foreground and background images. The foreground and

