Physics-Based Feature Dehazing
Networks
Jiangxin Dong1 and Jinshan Pan2(B)
1
2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrucken, Germany
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
sdluran@gmail.com

Abstract. We propose a physics-based feature dehazing network for
image dehazing. In contrast to most existing end-to-end trainable
network-based dehazing methods, we explicitly consider the physics
model of the haze process in the network design and remove haze in a
deep feature space. We propose an eﬀective feature dehazing unit (FDU),
which is applied to the deep feature space to explore useful features for
image dehazing based on the physics model. The FDU is embedded into
an encoder and decoder architecture with residual learning, so that the
proposed network can be trained in an end-to-end fashion and eﬀectively
help haze removal. The encoder and decoder modules are adopted for feature extraction and clear image reconstruction, respectively. The residual
learning is applied to increase the accuracy and ease the training of deep
neural networks. We analyze the eﬀectiveness of the proposed network
and demonstrate that it can eﬀectively dehaze images with favorable
performance against state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Image dehazing · Physics model · Feature dehazing unit ·
Deep convolutional neural networks

1

Introduction

Haze is a common atmospheric phenomenon. Images captured in hazy environments usually lose the color ﬁdelity and contrast. Restoring clear images from
hazy ones has been an active research eﬀort in the computational photography
and vision community within the last decade. As low-quality hazy images usually
interfere with the subsequent image editing, analysis, and so on, it is of great
interest to remove haze and restore high-quality images.
Mathematically, a hazy image I is usually modeled by [9,13]
I(x) = T (x)J(x) + (1 − T (x))A,

(1)

where J, T , and A denote the latent clear image, medium transmission, and
global atmospheric light, respectively, and x denotes the pixel position. This
problem is highly ill-posed as only the hazy image I is available.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 188–204, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_12

