G-LBM: Generative Low-Dimensional
Background Model Estimation from Video
Sequences
Behnaz Rezaei, Amirreza Farnoosh, and Sarah Ostadabbas(B)
Augmented Cognition Lab, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{brezaei,afarnoosh,ostadabbas}@ece.neu.edu
http://www.northeastern.edu/ostadabbas/

Abstract. In this paper, we propose a computationally tractable and
theoretically supported non-linear low-dimensional generative model to
represent real-world data in the presence of noise and sparse outliers. The non-linear low-dimensional manifold discovery of data is done
through describing a joint distribution over observations, and their
low-dimensional representations (i.e. manifold coordinates). Our model,
called generative low-dimensional background model (G-LBM) admits
variational operations on the distribution of the manifold coordinates
and simultaneously generates a low-rank structure of the latent manifold given the data. Therefore, our probabilistic model contains the
intuition of the non-probabilistic low-dimensional manifold learning. GLBM selects the intrinsic dimensionality of the underling manifold of the
observations, and its probabilistic nature models the noise in the observation data. G-LBM has direct application in the background scenes
model estimation from video sequences and we have evaluated its performance on SBMnet-2016 and BMC2012 datasets, where it achieved
a performance higher or comparable to other state-of-the-art methods
while being agnostic to diﬀerent scenes. Besides, in challenges such as
camera jitter and background motion, G-LBM is able to robustly estimate the background by eﬀectively modeling the uncertainties in video
observations in these scenarios. (The code and models are available at:
https://github.com/brezaei/G-LBM.)
Keywords: Background estimation · Foreground segmentation ·
Non-linear manifold learning · Deep neural network · Variational
auto-encoding

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_18) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 293–310, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_18

