Character Region Attention
for Text Spotting
Youngmin Baek, Seung Shin, Jeonghun Baek, Sungrae Park, Junyeop Lee,
Daehyun Nam, and Hwalsuk Lee(B)
Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp., Seongnam-si, South Korea
{youngmin.baek,seung.shin,jh.baek,sungrae.park,junyeop.lee,
daehyun.nam,hwalsuk.lee}@navercorp.com

Abstract. A scene text spotter is composed of text detection and recognition modules. Many studies have been conducted to unify these modules into an end-to-end trainable model to achieve better performance.
A typical architecture places detection and recognition modules into separate branches, and a RoI pooling is commonly used to let the branches
share a visual feature. However, there still exists a chance of establishing
a more complimentary connection between the modules when adopting
recognizer that uses attention-based decoder and detector that represents spatial information of the character regions. This is possible since
the two modules share a common sub-task which is to ﬁnd the location
of the character regions. Based on the insight, we construct a tightly
coupled single pipeline model. This architecture is formed by utilizing
detection outputs in the recognizer and propagating the recognition loss
through the detection stage. The use of character score map helps the
recognizer attend better to the character center points, and the recognition loss propagation to the detector module enhances the localization of
the character regions. Also, a strengthened sharing stage allows feature
rectiﬁcation and boundary localization of arbitrary-shaped text regions.
Extensive experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance in publicly available straight and curved benchmark dataset.
Keywords: Optical character recognition (OCR) · Character Region
Attention · Text spotting · Scene text detection · Scene text recognition

1

Introduction

Scene text spotting, including text detection and recognition, has recently
attracted much attention because of its variety of applications in instant translation, image retrieval, and scene parsing. Although existing text detectors and
recognizers work well on horizontal texts, it still remains as a challenge when it
comes to spotting curved text instances in scene images.
To spot curved texts in an image, a classic method is to cascade existing
detection and recognition models to manage text instances on each side. The
detectors [2,31,32] attempt to capture the geometric attributes of curved texts
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 504–521, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_30

