GDumb: A Simple Approach
that Questions Our Progress
in Continual Learning
Ameya Prabhu1(B) , Philip H. S. Torr1 , and Puneet K. Dokania1,2
1

University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
Five AI Ltd., Oxford, UK
{ameya,phst,puneet}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract. We discuss a general formulation for the Continual Learning
(CL) problem for classiﬁcation—a learning task where a stream provides
samples to a learner and the goal of the learner, depending on the samples
it receives, is to continually upgrade its knowledge about the old classes
and learn new ones. Our formulation takes inspiration from the openset recognition problem where test scenarios do not necessarily belong
to the training distribution. We also discuss various quirks and assumptions encoded in recently proposed approaches for CL. We argue that
some oversimplify the problem to an extent that leaves it with very little
practical importance, and makes it extremely easy to perform well on.
To validate this, we propose GDumb that (1) greedily stores samples in
memory as they come and; (2) at test time, trains a model from scratch
using samples only in the memory. We show that even though GDumb
is not speciﬁcally designed for CL problems, it obtains state-of-the-art
accuracies (often with large margins) in almost all the experiments when
compared to a multitude of recently proposed algorithms. Surprisingly, it
outperforms approaches in CL formulations for which they were speciﬁcally designed. This, we believe, raises concerns regarding our progress in
CL for classiﬁcation. Overall, we hope our formulation, characterizations
and discussions will help in designing realistically useful CL algorithms,
and GDumb will serve as a strong contender for the same.

1

Introduction

A fundamental characteristic of natural intelligence is its ability to continually
learn new concepts while updating information about the old ones. Realizing that
very objective in machines is precisely the motivation behind continual learning
(CL). While current machine learning (ML) algorithms can achieve excellent
performance given any single task, learning new (or even related) tasks continually is extremely diﬃcult for them as, in such scenarios, they are prone to the
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 31) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 524–540, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_31

