Supplementary Material:
Dynamic Group Convolution for Accelerating
Convolutional Neural Networks
Zhuo Su1,? , Linpu Fang2,? , Wenxiong Kang2 ,
Dewen Hu3 , Matti Pietikäinen1 , and Li Liu3,1,†
1

1

Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
2
South China University of Technology, China
3
National University of Defense Technology, China

Global Threshold and its Derivations

This section is, for anyone’s attention, a more detailed illustration about the
global threshold mentioned in Section 3.2 and Section 4.3 of the original paper.
1.1

Detailed derivations and Updating strategy
0

0

0

Let x ∈ RC×H×W , x 0 ∈ RC ×H ×W be the input and output of a particular
DGC layer and the pruning rate is denoted as ξ.
For a dynamic group convolution (DGC) network, the head-wise threshold
makes sure each head in the network exactly selects a certain number of channels
according to the target pruning rate ξ after training, i.e., (1 − ξ)C channels are
selected from the input volume x (see Eq. 6 in the paper). While the global
threshold T makes DGC structures more flexible allowing an uneven channel
selection among heads within any DGC layer, while at the same time keeping
the average pruning rate of the whole structure meeting the target ξ with tiny
deviation.
To obtain T , firstly, all saliency vectors throughout the network are collected
and concatenated as a single saliency vector G:
G = [g 1,1 , g 1,2 , ..., g 1,H , g 2,1 , ..., g L,H ],

(1)

where, L and H represents the number of DGC layers and number of heads
in each DGC layer of the network respectively, g i,j is the saliency vector from
the jth head in the ith DGC layer which is derived from Eq. 5 in the original
paper but remove the ReLU activation to keep the negative saliencies for a
further exploration. After that, similar to Eq. 6 in the paper, we find the global
threshold by meeting:
ξ=

|{g | abs(g) < T , g ∈ G }|
,
|{g | g ∈ G }|

where |S| is the length of set S, abs(z) returns the absolute value of z.
?

Equal contributions. † Corresponding author: li.liu@oulu.fi

(2)

