Visual Relation Grounding in Videos Supplementary Material

1

Implementation Details

Trajectory Generation. In the test phase, to group continuous frames into
candidate segments, two adjacent frames will be grouped as long as the distance
between them are smaller than a value of Dgroup = max(1, 10 ∗ r), where r
denotes the frame sample rate of the video, and the maximal sample distance
is 1200
120 = 10 frames in the dataset. Besides, to obtain the bounding boxes on
un-sampled frames, we adopt linear interpolation as follows. Given two bounding
boxes of a trajectory Bk and Bk+1 corresponding to the sampled frames Fk and
Fk+1 , we achieve the bounding boxes in between by
Bc =

Fk+1 − Fc
Fc − Fk
∗ Bk +
∗ Bk+1 , Fc ∈ (Fk , Fk+1 )
Fk+1 − Fk
Fk+1 − Fk

(1)

where Bc denotes the bounding box in frame Fc . Since the maximal distance
between two sampled frames is 10 (about 1/3 seconds), it is reasonable to think
that the objects move linearly in such a short time.
Baselines. In both implementation variants of WSSTG [1], we extract 15
trajectory proposals (resulting in 15*14 = 210 pairs) for each video based on the
frame-level region proposals. Each trajectory is then evenly divided into 20 subsegments, with each segment represented by region appearance feature (average
across frames) and sequence feature I3D-RGB as in [1]. Then, the trajectories
are modeled with LSTM and interacted with the query sentence to get the
similarities between them.

2

Additional Results

To evaluate the models’ performances on different kinds of relationships, we
classify the relationships defined in ImageNet-VidVRD [3] into dynamic and
static ones (Refer to Sec. 3) and separately report results on them. As a result,
we obtain 2343 video-relation instances for static relationships and 2492 for
dynamic ones, both covering the 200 test videos.
As shown in Table 1, the results on static relationships are better than those
on dynamic ones. When compare our method with the baseline approaches, we
can achieve consistently better results as in the main text. We speculate the reason is that moving objects will result in deformation, motion blur and occlusion
which are very challenging for grounding. Fortunately, the online optimization
mechanism in our approach exploits the relationships to pinpoint some objects
with the condition of their related partners, and thus cope better with the dynamic scenario than the baselines. This speculation is also supported by the

