Adversarial Robustness on In- and
Out-Distribution Improves Explainability
Maximilian Augustin, Alexander Meinke, and Matthias Hein
University of Tübingen, Germany

Abstract. Neural networks have led to major improvements in image
classification but suffer from being non-robust to adversarial changes,
unreliable uncertainty estimates on out-distribution samples and their
inscrutable black-box decisions. In this work we propose RATIO, a training procedure for Robustness via Adversarial Training on In- and Outdistribution, which leads to robust models with reliable and robust confidence estimates on the out-distribution. RATIO has similar generative
properties to adversarial training so that visual counterfactuals produce
class specific features. While adversarial training comes at the price of
lower clean accuracy, RATIO achieves state-of-the-art l2 -adversarial robustness on CIFAR10 and maintains better clean accuracy.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown phenomenal success in achieving high accuracy on challenging classification tasks [35]. However, they are lacking in terms
of robustness against adversarial attacks [62], make overconfident predictions
[23, 25] especially on out-of-distribution (OOD) data [49, 28] and their black box
decisions are inscrutable [67]. Progress has been made with respect to all these
aspects but there is currently no approach which is accurate, robust, has good
confidence estimates and is explainable. Adversarial training (AT) [41] leads
to models robust against adversarial attacks in a defined threat model and has
recently been shown to produce classifiers with generative capabilities [57]. However, AT typically suffers from a significant drop in accuracy and is over-confident
on OOD data as we show in this paper. Adversarial confidence enhanced training
(ACET) [25] enforces low confidence in a neighborhood around OOD samples
and can be seen as adversarial training on the out-distribution. ACET leads to
models with good OOD detection performance even in an adversarial setting and
suffers from a smaller loss in clean accuracy compared to AT. However, ACET
models typically are significantly less robust than adversarially trained models.
In this paper we show that combining AT and ACET into RATIO, Robustness via Adversarial Training on In- and Out-distribution, inherits the good
properties of adversarial training and ACET without, or at least with significantly reduced, negative effects, e.g. we get SOTA l2 -robustness on CIFAR10
and have better clean accuracy than AT. On top of this we get reliable confidence
estimates on the out-distribution even in a worst case scenario. In particular AT

