ViZDoom: A Doom-based AI Research Platform
for Visual Reinforcement Learning
Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek & Wojciech Jaśkowski

arXiv:1605.02097v2 [cs.LG] 20 Sep 2016

Institute of Computing Science, Poznan University of Technology, Poznań, Poland
wjaskowski@cs.put.poznan.pl

Abstract—The recent advances in deep neural networks have
led to effective vision-based reinforcement learning methods that
have been employed to obtain human-level controllers in Atari
2600 games from pixel data. Atari 2600 games, however, do
not resemble real-world tasks since they involve non-realistic
2D environments and the third-person perspective. Here, we
propose a novel test-bed platform for reinforcement learning
research from raw visual information which employs the firstperson perspective in a semi-realistic 3D world. The software,
called ViZDoom, is based on the classical first-person shooter
video game, Doom. It allows developing bots that play the game
using the screen buffer. ViZDoom is lightweight, fast, and highly
customizable via a convenient mechanism of user scenarios. In
the experimental part, we test the environment by trying to
learn bots for two scenarios: a basic move-and-shoot task and
a more complex maze-navigation problem. Using convolutional
deep neural networks with Q-learning and experience replay,
for both scenarios, we were able to train competent bots, which
exhibit human-like behaviors. The results confirm the utility of
ViZDoom as an AI research platform and imply that visual
reinforcement learning in 3D realistic first-person perspective
environments is feasible.
Keywords: video games, visual-based reinforcement learning,
deep reinforcement learning, first-person perspective games, FPS,
visual learning, neural networks

I. I NTRODUCTION
Visual signals are one of the primary sources of information
about the surrounding environment for living and artificial
beings. While computers have already exceeded humans in
terms of raw data processing, they still do not match their
ability to interact with and act in complex, realistic 3D
environments. Recent increase in computing power (GPUs),
and the advances in visual learning (i.e., machine learning
from visual information) have enabled a significant progress in
this area. This was possible thanks to the renaissance of neural
networks, and deep architectures in particular. Deep learning
has been applied to many supervised machine learning tasks
and performed spectacularly well especially in the field of
image classification [18]. Recently, deep architectures have
also been successfully employed in the reinforcement learning
domain to train human-level agents to play a set of Atari 2600
games from raw pixel information [22].
Thanks to high recognizability and an easy-to-use software
toolkit, Atari 2600 games have been widely adopted as a
benchmark for visual learning algorithms. Atari 2600 games
have, however, several drawbacks from the AI research perspective. First, they involve only 2D environments. Second, the
environments hardly resemble the world we live in. Third, they

are third-person perspective games, which does not match a
real-world mobile-robot scenario. Last but not least, although,
for some Atari 2600 games, human players are still ahead of
bots trained from scratch, the best deep reinforcement learning
algorithms are already ahead on average. Therefore, there is
a need for more challenging reinforcement learning problems
involving first-person-perspective and realistic 3D worlds.
In this paper, we propose a software platform, ViZDoom1 ,
for the machine (reinforcement) learning research from raw
visual information. The environment is based on Doom, the
famous first-person shooter (FPS) video game. It allows developing bots that play Doom using only the screen buffer.
The environment involves a 3D world that is significantly
more real-world-like than Atari 2600 games. It also provides a
relatively realistic physics model. An agent (bot) in ViZDoom
has to effectively perceive, interpret, and learn the 3D world
in order to make tactical and strategic decisions where to go
and how to act. The strength of the environment as an AI
research platform also lies in its customization capabilities.
The platform makes it easy to define custom scenarios which
differ by maps, environment elements, non-player characters,
rewards, goals, and actions available to the agent. It is also
lightweight – on modern computers, one can play the game at
nearly 7000 frames per second (the real-time in Doom involves
35 frames per second) using a single CPU core, which is of
particular importance if learning is involved.
In order to demonstrate the usability of the platform, we
perform two ViZDoom experiments with deep Q-learning [22].
The first one involves a somewhat limited 2D-like environment, for which we try to find out the optimal rate at which
agents should make decisions. In the second experiment, the
agent has to navigate a 3D maze collecting some object and
omitting the others. The results of the experiments indicate that
deep reinforcement learning is capable of tackling first-person
perspective 3D environments2 .
FPS games, especially the most popular ones such as Unreal
Tournament [12], [13], Counter-Strike [15] or Quake III Arena
[8], have already been used in AI research. However, in
these studies agents acted upon high-level information like
positions of walls, enemies, locations of items, etc., which
are usually inaccessible to human players. Supplying only
raw visual information might relieve researchers of the burden
1 http://vizdoom.cs.put.edu.pl
2 Precisely speaking, Doom is pseudo-3D or 2.5D.

