TAO: A Large-Scale Benchmark for
Tracking Any Object
Supplementary Material
Achal Dave1 , Tarasha Khurana1 , Pavel Tokmakov1
Cordelia Schmid2 , and Deva Ramanan1,3
1

Carnegie Mellon University
2
3
Inria
Argo AI

Section 1 further analyzes TAO annotations, including quality control and
statistics. Section 2 further analyzes metrics, comparing 3D IoU to MOT challenge [19] metrics. Finally, Section 3 further analyzes tracking methods, providing
results on non-LVIS categories, improved initialization for user-initialized trackers,
and hyperparameter tuning experiments.

1

TAO annotations

This section presents additional details about TAO annotations. Section 1.1
assesses the diversity and quality of annotations. Section 1.2 analyzes the size,
length and motion statistics of labeled tracks. Finally, Section 1.3 provides further
information regarding the construction of dataset splits.
1.1

Annotation diversity and quality

We analyze the diversity and quality of TAO annotations by re-annotating 50
videos in the dataset.
Diversity. One might hope that this re-annotation closely matches the original
annotation. However, in our federated setup, annotators are instructed to label
only a subset of moving objects in each video. Thus, the annotations would only
match if annotators had a bias towards a specific set of objects, which would
hurt the diversity of TAO annotations. To verify whether this is the case, we
check whether each track in the re-annotation corresponds to an object labeled
in the original annotation. Concretely, if a re-annotated track has high overlap
(IoU > 0.75) with a track in the original annotation, we assume the annotator is
labeling the same object. Our re-annotation results in 310 tracks from 50 videos.
Of these 310 tracks, just over half (177, or 57%) overlapped with those in the
initial labeling with IoU > 0.75. The rest were new objects not originally labeled
in TAO, suggesting that annotators chose to label a diverse selection of objects.
Quality. Next, we evaluate the annotation agreement of the 177 re-annotated
tracks that correspond to tracks originally labeled in TAO. If our annotations
are of high quality, we expect these tracks to have a very high IoU (say, > 0.9),
as well as matching class labels. Indeed, the average IoU for the 177 overlapping

