Supplementary Material for
Regional Homogeneity: Towards Learning
Transferable Universal Adversarial
Perturbations Against Defenses
Yingwei Li1 , Song Bai2 , Cihang Xie1 , Zhenyu Liao3 ,
Xiaohui Shen4 , and Alan Yuille1
1

Johns Hopkins University
2
University of Oxford
3
Kuaishou Technology
4
ByteDance Research

The document contains the supplementary material for “Regional Homogeneity: Towards Learning Transferable Universal Adversarial Perturbations Against
Defenses”. The primary goal of this document is to provide an ablation study on
K, the number of region partitions. Besides, we present additional quantitative
results about training the gradient transformer module with different numbers
of images, which further support our claim that the gradient transformer module
becomes quasi-input-independent when training with a large number of images.

1

Number of Regions

In this section, we study the effect of K, the number of region partitions. Specifically, we split the image into 1196, 598, 299, 150, 100, 75, 50, 38, 25, 17, 8
or 4 regions. We show the learned universal perturbations in Figure 1. Due to
the limitation of GPU memory, we study at most 1196 regions. The performance comparison is presented in Table 1. We observe that for stronger defenses
(e.g., PGD [4] and FD [7]), the optimal value of K is relatively small. We explain that these strong defenses have stronger ability to denoise (Some work [3,
7] interprets the defense procedure as denoising), while the perturbations with
small K are less like a noise, thereby serving as strong perturbations for the
strong defenses.

2

Quantitative Universal Results

Besides the quantitative results included in the main manuscript, we show some
qualitative results in Figure 2. Specifically, we show and compare the perturbations generated by universal inference (use a fixed zero as the input of the
gradient transformer module) and image-dependent (use the loss gradient as
the input) inference via using the gradient transformer module trained with
different numbers of images. We arrive at the same conclusion as the main
manuscript, i.e., the gradient transformer module becomes quasi-input-independent
when training with a large number of images (e.g., 5k images or more).

