Inducing Optimal Attribute Representations for
Conditional GANs (Supplementary Material)
Binod Bhattarai1 and Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
1

Imperial College London, UK
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea
{b.bhattarai,tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk
2

1

Additional Results

We present our additional results and insights of our work.
Simultaneous Multiple Attribute Manipulation: One of the key characteristics of our method in comparison to existing arts is to make simultaneous
manipulation of frequently co-occurring auxiliary attributes to give a natural
translation of the target attribute. Fig. 1 shows few more qualitative comparison of our method and its counter-part (Attgan on Diff-mode). As mentioned
on the main paper, cGANs trained on Diff-mode outperforms the Std-mode.
In the Fig. 1, the first, the second, and the third columns show the input image, synthetic image from the counter-part method, and synthetic image from
our method respectively. First three rows of the Figure 1 show the outcomes
when the target attribute is female. In all these three cases, wearing lipstick
is clearly visible in our case whereas the counter-part method failed to do so.
P (Wearing lipstick | male= 0.01) => P (Wearing lipstick | female = 0.99)
from the co-occurrence matrix. Similarly, cheekbones are higher in all of the
synthetic images from our method. Again from the co-occurrence Table, the
probability of a female having high cheekbones is nearly 72%. Also in the second
row, the beard is thinned a lot by our method but the counter-part method could
not manage to do so. Similarly, in the third row, the intensity of colour of the
hair is more brown than original image. Face is wrinkled, hairs removed leaving
few grey hairs behind by our method when we set the target attribute as bald.
These characterstics support the natural process of getting bald. Whereas the
counter-part method just removes the hair. We can observe these differences on
the fourth row the Table. In the fifth row, our method made the synthetic image
look younger when we apply black hair on an old man with grey hair. In the
final row, heavy make up turning skin to pale can be observed when we set the
target attribute as blonde hair. The above mentioned pair of attributes are highly
co-occurring attributes. We have captured such information on co-occurrence
matrix and this information has been quite helpful to make such a realistic
translation to target. Such meaningful translation is ultimately helping us to
obtain the high target attributes recognition rate (please check experimental
results on main paper).

