Online Meta-learning for Multi-source
and Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation
Da Li1(B)

and Timothy Hospedales1,2

1

Samsung AI Center Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
dali.academic@gmail.com, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk
2
The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK

Abstract. Domain adaptation (DA) is the topical problem of adapting models from labelled source datasets so that they perform well on
target datasets where only unlabelled or partially labelled data is available. Many methods have been proposed to address this problem through
diﬀerent ways to minimise the domain shift between source and target
datasets. In this paper we take an orthogonal perspective and propose
a framework to further enhance performance by meta-learning the initial conditions of existing DA algorithms. This is challenging compared
to the more widely considered setting of few-shot meta-learning, due to
the length of the computation graph involved. Therefore we propose an
online shortest-path meta-learning framework that is both computationally tractable and practically eﬀective for improving DA performance.
We present variants for both multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation (MSDA), and semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA). Importantly, our approach is agnostic to the base adaptation algorithm, and
can be applied to improve many techniques. Experimentally, we demonstrate improvements on classic (DANN) and recent (MCD and MME)
techniques for MSDA and SSDA, and ultimately achieve state of the art
results on several DA benchmarks including the largest scale DomainNet.
Keywords: Meta-learning · Domain adaptation

1

Introduction

Contemporary deep learning methods now provide excellent performance across
a variety of computer vision tasks when ample annotated training data is available. However, this performance often degrades rapidly if models are applied to
novel domains with very diﬀerent data statistics from the training data, which
is a problem known as domain shift. Meanwhile, data collection and annotation
for every possible domain of application is expensive and sometimes impossible.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 23) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 382–403, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_23

