Regularized Evolution for Image Classifier Architecture Search
Esteban Real∗† and Alok Aggarwal† and Yanping Huang† and Quoc V. Le

arXiv:1802.01548v7 [cs.NE] 16 Feb 2019

†

Google Brain, Mountain View, California, USA
Equal contribution. ∗ Correspondence: ereal@google.com

Abstract
The effort devoted to hand-crafting neural network image
classifiers has motivated the use of architecture search to discover them automatically. Although evolutionary algorithms
have been repeatedly applied to neural network topologies,
the image classifiers thus discovered have remained inferior
to human-crafted ones. Here, we evolve an image classifier—
AmoebaNet-A—that surpasses hand-designs for the first time.
To do this, we modify the tournament selection evolutionary algorithm by introducing an age property to favor the
younger genotypes. Matching size, AmoebaNet-A has comparable accuracy to current state-of-the-art ImageNet models
discovered with more complex architecture-search methods.
Scaled to larger size, AmoebaNet-A sets a new state-of-theart 83.9% top-1 / 96.6% top-5 ImageNet accuracy. In a controlled comparison against a well known reinforcement learning algorithm, we give evidence that evolution can obtain results faster with the same hardware, especially at the earlier
stages of the search. This is relevant when fewer compute resources are available. Evolution is, thus, a simple method to
effectively discover high-quality architectures.

Introduction
Until recently, most state-of-the-art image classifier architectures have been manually designed by human experts
[20,23,24,28,45]. To speed up the process, researchers have
looked into automated methods [2, 29, 32, 35, 36, 43, 47, 53].
These methods are now collectively known as architecturesearch algorithms. A traditional approach is neuro-evolution
of topologies [1, 33, 42]. Improved hardware now allows
scaling up evolution to produce high-quality image classifiers [30, 36, 47]. Yet, the architectures produced by evolutionary algorithms / genetic programming have not reached
the accuracy of those directly designed by human experts.
Here we evolve image classifiers that surpass hand-designs.
To do this, we make two additions to the standard evolutionary process. First, we propose a change to the wellestablished tournament selection evolutionary algorithm
[19] that we refer to as aging evolution or regularized evolution. Whereas in tournament selection, the best genotypes
Accepted for publication at AAAI 2019, the Thirty-Third
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
A brief talk from Nov 2018 summarizes this paper at https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=MqYHo7BVzoE

(architectures) are kept, we propose to associate each genotype with an age, and bias the tournament selection to choose
the younger genotypes. We will show that this change turns
out to make a difference. The connection to regularization
will be clarified in the Discussion section. Second, we implement the simplest set of mutations that would allow evolving
in the NASNet search space [54]. This search space associates convolutional neural network architectures with small
directed graphs in which vertices represent hidden states and
labeled edges represent common network operations (such
as convolutions or pooling layers). Our mutation rules only
alter architectures by randomly reconnecting the origin of
edges to different vertices and by randomly relabeling the
edges, covering the full search space.
Searching in the NASNet space allows a controlled comparison between evolution and the original method for which
it was designed, reinforcement learning (RL). Thus, this paper presents the first comparative case study of architecturesearch algorithms for the image classification task. Within
this case study, we will demonstrate that evolution can attain similar results with a simpler method, as will be shown
in the Discussion section. In particular, we will highlight that
in all our experiments evolution searched faster than RL and
random search, especially at the earlier stages, which is important when experiments cannot be run for long times due
to compute resource limitations.
Despite its simplicity, our approach works well in our
benchmark against RL. It also evolved a high-quality model,
which we name AmoebaNet-A. This model is competitive
with the best image classifiers obtained by any other algorithm today at similar sizes (82.8% top-1 / 96.1% top-5 ImageNet accuracy). When scaled up, it sets a new state-ofthe-art accuracy (83.9% top-1 / 96.6% top-5 ImageNet accuracy)1 .

Related Work
Review papers provide informative surveys of earlier [18,
49] and more recent [15] literature on image classifier architecture search, including successful RL studies [2, 6, 29,
52–54] and evolutionary studies like those mentioned in
1

After our submission, a recent preprint has further scaled up
and retrained AmoebaNet-A to reach 84.3% top-1 / 97.0% top-5
ImageNet accuracy [25].

