Invertible Neural BRDF
for Object Inverse Rendering
Supplementary Material

Zhe Chen, Shohei Nobuhara, and Ko Nishino
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
zchen@vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp {nob,kon}@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we show additional experimental results on
– in-depth comparison with Georgoulis et al. TPAMI 2017,
– reflectance estimation with iBRDF,
– illumination estimation with deep illumination prior, and
– joint estimatation of reflectance and illumination both for synthetic
and real images.

1

Comparison with Georgoulis et al. TPAMI 2017 [15]

As we stated in the main manuscript, “Georgoulis et al. [15] extend their prior
work [36] to jointly estimate geometry, material and illumination. The method,
however, assumes Phong BRDF which significantly restricts its applicability to
real-world materials.” For this reason, their data are selectively of shiny material.
Furthermore, the method consists of two steps in which the first step predicts
a reflectance map from the input image and the second step decomposes the
reflectance map into Phong parameters and an environment map. As our goal is
fundamentally different, in that we jointly estimate an arbitrary BRDF and natural illumination directly from the input image albeit of an object with known
geometry, our method is compared with the reflectance map decomposition network in [15].
Since we thoroughly evaluate our method’s effectiveness on synthetic data
in the main manuscript and in the following sections, we focus on comparing
our method to the reflectance map decomposition on the real data of [15]. Fig.
1 shows comparisons of the estimated reflectance and illumination side-by-side
with their results. We show results of rendered sphere of estimated illumination
with mirror reflection (mirror) and rendered sphere of the estimated BRDF with
a different illumination (nat. illum.). We omit comparison on rendered spheres of
the estimated illumination with different known BRDF from the input as we believe they are misleading. As Lombardi and Nishino [25] showed, the reflectance
and illumination are estimated up to the highest frequencies of either. As such,

