Renovating Parsing R-CNN for Accurate
Multiple Human Parsing
Lu Yang1 , Qing Song1(B) , Zhihui Wang1 , Mengjie Hu1 , Chun Liu1 ,
Xueshi Xin1 , Wenhe Jia1 , and Songcen Xu2
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
{soeaver,priv,wangzh,mengjie.hu,chun.liu,xinxueshi,
srxhemailbox}@bupt.edu.cn
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
xusongcen@huawei.com

Abstract. Multiple human parsing aims to segment various human
parts and associate each part with the corresponding instance simultaneously. This is a very challenging task due to the diverse human appearance, semantic ambiguity of diﬀerent body parts, and complex background. Through analysis of multiple human parsing task, we observe
that human-centric global perception and accurate instance-level parsing
scoring are crucial for obtaining high-quality results. But the most stateof-the-art methods have not paid enough attention to these issues. To
reverse this phenomenon, we present Renovating Parsing R-CNN (RP RCNN), which introduces a global semantic enhanced feature pyramid network and a parsing re-scoring network into the existing high-performance
pipeline. The proposed RP R-CNN adopts global semantic representation to enhance multi-scale features for generating human parsing maps,
and regresses a conﬁdence score to represent its quality. Extensive experiments show that RP R-CNN performs favorably against state-of-the-art
methods on CIHP and MHP-v2 datasets. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/soeaver/RP-R-CNN.
Keywords: Multiple human parsing · Region-based approach · Global
semantic enhanced FPN · Parsing re-scoring network

1

Introduction

Multiple human parsing [8,21,40] is a fundamental task in multimedia and
computer vision, which aims to segment various human parts and associate
each part with the corresponding instance. It plays a crucial role in applications in human-centric analysis and potential down-stream applications, such
as person re-identiﬁcation [22,27], action recognition [5], human-object interaction [1,7,29], and virtual reality [14].
Due to the successful development of convolutional neural networks [13,33],
great progress has been made in multiple human parsing. Current state-of-the-art
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 421–437, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_25

