Can You Read Me Now? Content Aware
Rectification Using Angle Supervision
Amir Markovitz(B) , Inbal Lavi, Or Perel, Shai Mazor, and Roee Litman
Amazon Web Services, Seattle, USA
{amirmak,ilavi,orperel,smazor,rlit}@amazon.com

Abstract. The ubiquity of smartphone cameras has led to more and
more documents being captured by cameras rather than scanned. Unlike
ﬂatbed scanners, photographed documents are often folded and crumpled, resulting in large local variance in text structure. The problem of
document rectiﬁcation is fundamental to the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) process on documents, and its ability to overcome geometric distortions signiﬁcantly aﬀects recognition accuracy. Despite the
great progress in recent OCR systems, most still rely on a pre-process
that ensures the text lines are straight and axis aligned. Recent works
have tackled the problem of rectifying document images taken in-thewild using various supervision signals and alignment means. However,
they focused on global features that can be extracted from the document’s boundaries, ignoring various signals that could be obtained from
the document’s content.
We present CREASE: Content Aware Rectiﬁcation using Angle
Supervision, the ﬁrst learned method for document rectiﬁcation that
relies on the document’s content, the location of the words and specifically their orientation, as hints to assist in the rectiﬁcation process.
We utilize a novel pixel-wise angle regression approach and a curvature
estimation side-task for optimizing our rectiﬁcation model. Our method
surpasses previous approaches in terms of OCR accuracy, geometric error
and visual similarity.

1

Introduction

Documents are a common way to share information and record transactions
between people. In order to digitize mass amounts of printed documents, the
hard copies are scanned and text is extracted automatically by Optical Character
Recognition (OCR) systems, such as [11,12]. In the past, most documents were
scanned in ﬂatbed scanners. However, the past few years have seen a rise in the
use of smartphones, and with it the use of the smartphone camera as a document
A. Markovitz and I. Lavi—Equal Contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 13) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 208–223, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_13

