SESAME: Semantic Editing of Scenes by
Adding, Manipulating or Erasing Objects Supplementary Material
Evangelos Ntavelis1,2 , Andrés Romero1 , Iason Kastanis2 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , and
Radu Timofte1
1

2

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Robotics and Machine Learning, CSEM SA, Switzerland
3
PSI, ESAT, KU Leuven, Belgium

Model Architectures The detailed architectures of the SESAME generator
and discriminator are depicted in Tables 1 and 2 respectively. Please note that
for the discriminator we use this architecture twice, once for each scale.
To further justify the architectural choices of our generator we compare
against Pix2PixHD++ [6], with SPADE layers on the decoder part. We use
both our SESAME discriminator and the commonly used PatchGAN.
The performance assessment is reported in Table 3. The use of our discriminator over PatchGAN improved the results in almost all cases. However, we
observe that while our generator-discriminator combination performs the best,
the second combination is without any of our networks. We argue that our proposed method works better together as the large receptive field provided by the
dilated convolutions in our generator synergizes well with the highly focused
gradient flow coming from our discriminator.
Replacement of objects Apart from adding and removing objects, SESAME
can also be used to replace an instance of an object, given that we know its class
and its outline. SESAME can be utilized in this manner for dataset augmentation. We conduct experiments on replacing objects in street scenes of Cityscapes
and we ablate on the usage of our SESAME discriminator against the PatchGAN. In Table 4 we measure the FID score of the image results, the SSIM of
the generated regions and we also devoted a part of our user study, described in
Section 4 of the main paper, to test which of the two discriminators produces
the most photo-realistic results. Visual results can be found in Figure 1.
Visual Results We show more edited and generated images produced by our
method:
– Figure 1 contains visual results of our ablation analysis on various access
levels of semantics and different discriminators.
– Figure 2 contains visual results for removing objects under different configurations.

