Infrastructure-Based Multi-camera
Calibration Using Radial Projections
Yukai Lin1 , Viktor Larsson1(B) , Marcel Geppert1 , Zuzana Kukelova2 ,
Marc Pollefeys1,3 , and Torsten Sattler4
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
vlarsson@inf.ethz.ch
2
VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic
3
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Zurich Lab, Zürich, Switzerland
4
Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden

Abstract. Multi-camera systems are an important sensor platform for
intelligent systems such as self-driving cars. Pattern-based calibration
techniques can be used to calibrate the intrinsics of the cameras individually. However, extrinsic calibration of systems with little to no visual
overlap between the cameras is a challenge. Given the camera intrinsics, infrastructure-based calibration techniques are able to estimate the
extrinsics using 3D maps pre-built via SLAM or Structure-from-Motion.
In this paper, we propose to fully calibrate a multi-camera system from
scratch using an infrastructure-based approach. Assuming that the distortion is mainly radial, we introduce a two-stage approach. We ﬁrst
estimate the camera-rig extrinsics up to a single unknown translation
component per camera. Next, we solve for both the intrinsic parameters and the missing translation components. Extensive experiments on
multiple indoor and outdoor scenes with multiple multi-camera systems
show that our calibration method achieves high accuracy and robustness.
In particular, our approach is more robust than the naive approach of
ﬁrst estimating intrinsic parameters and pose per camera before reﬁning
the extrinsic parameters of the system. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/youkely/InfrasCal.

1

Introduction

Being able to perceive the surrounding environment is a crucial ability for any
type of autonomous intelligent system, including self-driving cars [11,34] and
robots [36]. Multi-camera systems (see e.g. Fig. 1) are popular sensors for this
task: they are cheap to build and maintain, consume little energy, and provide
high-resolution data under a wide range of conditions. Enabling 360◦ perception
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 20) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 327–344, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_20

