Supplementary Materials for
Structured3D: A Large Photo-realistic Dataset
for Structured 3D Modeling
Jia Zheng1,2∗† , Junfei Zhang1∗ , Jing Li2 , Rui Tang1 ,
Shenghua Gao2,3 , and Zihan Zhou4
1

KooLab, Kujiale.com
ShanghaiTech University
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
4
The Pennsylvania State University
https://structured3d-dataset.org
2

1

Additional Details about the Dataset

Dataset Statistics. Fig. 1 reports the statistics for the number of rooms per
scene, room types, and instances with 3D bounding box annotations for the
top 20 categories. We also report the proportion of large (area ⩾ 962 ), medium
(322 ⩽ area < 962 ) and small objects (area < 322 ) in each category. The area is
measured as the number of pixels in the segmentation mask.
More Annotations. Based on the “primitive+relationship” representation, we
can generate various types of structures, such as wireframe, planes, and floorplan.
Some examples are shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show more layout annotations of panoramic and perspective
images in our dataset, respectively. The first two rows show cuboid layouts. The
layouts become more complicated from top to bottom in Fig. 5. Note that all
ground truth 3D annotations are automatically extracted from the original house
design files.
Our dataset also provides 3D bounding box annotations in all scenes. Some
examples are shown in Fig. 7.

2

Impact of Rendering Quality

To illustrate the importance of photo-realistic rendering, we have conducted
additional experiments to investigate how rendering quality affects room layout
estimation accuracy. In this experiment, we render low-quality images by (i)
disabling global illumination, (ii) using only ambient light, and (iii) for BSDF,
only keeping the diffuse reflection. We show the qualitative comparison between
high-quality and low-quality rendering methods in Fig. 2. Table 1 shows the
*: Equal contribution.
†: The work was partially done when Jia Zheng interned at KooLab, Kujiale.com.

