A simple neural network module
for relational reasoning

Adam Santoro∗
adamsantoro@google.com

David Raposo∗
draposo@google.com

Mateusz Malinowski
mateuszm@google.com

Razvan Pascanu
razp@google.com

David G.T. Barrett
barrettdavid@google.com
Peter Battaglia
peterbattaglia@google.com

Timothy Lillicrap
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
countzero@google.com

Abstract
Relational reasoning is a central component of generally intelligent behavior, but
has proven difficult for neural networks to learn. In this paper we describe how to
use Relation Networks (RNs) as a simple plug-and-play module to solve problems
that fundamentally hinge on relational reasoning. We tested RN-augmented networks on three tasks: visual question answering using a challenging dataset called
CLEVR, on which we achieve state-of-the-art, super-human performance; textbased question answering using the bAbI suite of tasks; and complex reasoning
about dynamic physical systems. Then, using a curated dataset called Sort-ofCLEVR we show that powerful convolutional networks do not have a general
capacity to solve relational questions, but can gain this capacity when augmented
with RNs. Thus, by simply augmenting convolutions, LSTMs, and MLPs with
RNs, we can remove computational burden from network components that are
not well-suited to handle relational reasoning, reduce overall network complexity,
and gain a general ability to reason about the relations between entities and their
properties.

1

Introduction

The ability to reason about the relations between entities and their properties is central to generally
intelligent behavior (Figure 1) [10, 7]. Consider a child proposing a race between the two trees in the
park that are furthest apart: the pairwise distances between every tree in the park must be inferred and
compared to know where to run. Or, consider a reader piecing together evidence to predict the culprit
in a murder-mystery novel: each clue must be considered in its broader context to build a plausible
narrative and solve the mystery.
Symbolic approaches to artificial intelligence are inherently relational [16, 5]. Practitioners define
the relations between symbols using the language of logic and mathematics, and then reason about
these relations using a multitude of powerful methods, including deduction, arithmetic, and algebra.
But symbolic approaches suffer from the symbol grounding problem and are not robust to small
∗

Equal contribution.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

