Box2Seg: Attention Weighted Loss and Discriminative
Feature Learning for Weakly Supervised Segmentation
Viveka Kulharia? 2 , Siddhartha Chandra∗1 ,
Amit Agrawal1 , Philip Torr2 , Ambrish Tyagi1
1

Amazon Lab126,

2

University of Oxford

We provide supplementary qualitative and quantitative results for our weakly supervised Box2Seg approach, as well as implementation details and results for three additional Grabcut based baselines. In Sec. 1, we show additional qualitative results demonstrating superior performance of our Box2Seg method compared to Box and Grabcut
baselines. In Sec. 2, we provide implementation details and results for three Grabcut
based baselines, which out-perform some of the previously published approaches. In
Sec. 3, we show examples of noisy bounding-box annotations from the OpenImages
dataset [2] which was used to pretrain one of our methods, Box2Seg(OI), in Table 1 of
the main manuscript.

1

Qualitative results

We show more qualitative results in Figure 1 comparing the outputs of our Box2Seg
model against several baselines we considered in Table 2 of the main manuscript.

2

GrabCut Baselines: Implementation Details and Quantitative
Results

We use the GrabCut method [3] to generate the pseudo ground-truth M (ref. to Sec. 3.1
in the manuscript for a more detailed description) for an input image I with bounding
box annotations Bbox . As described in Sec. 3.1 of the manuscript, Bbox ∈ RK×5 , where
K is the number of bounding boxes in the image, each comprising of 4 coordinates and
a class label. We use grabCut function of the python library cv2 as mentioned in the
Algorithm 1 to generate the pseudo ground-truth.
In Table 1, we evaluate the accuracy of this GrabCut algorithm itself, without any
training, against the segmentation ground-truth. Interestingly, GrabCut output on ground
truth bounding boxes (GrabCut-NoTrain-GT) results in a strong weakly-supervised
baseline in itself with 71.6% mIoU. This is better compared to previous weakly supervised methods as shown in Table 1 of the main manuscript. However, since the ground
truth bounding boxes are not available at inference, a more practical baseline is to obtain
bounding boxes on the validation set using an object detector (we used SNIPER [4]) and
then run GrabCut on those. This baseline is referred to as GrabCut-NoTrain-Det and
obtains 68.5% mIoU. Furthermore, training our segmentation network with GrabCut
masks as supervision (LGC loss only, refer to Eqn. 2 in the main manuscript) without
?

Authors contributed equally. V. Kulharia was an intern at Amazon Lab126.

