Supplementary Materials
SF-Net: Single-Frame Supervision for
Temporal Action Localization
Fan Ma1 , Linchao Zhu1 , Yi Yang1 , Shengxin Zha2 , Gourab Kundu2 ,
Matt Feiszli2 , and Zheng Shou2
1

1

University of Technology Sydney, Australia
2
Facebook AI

Single-frame Annotation

We invite annotators with different backgrounds to label single-frames for all
actions intances. Before annotating each dataset, four annotators have watched a
few video examples containing different actions to be familiar with action classes.
They are asked to annotate one single frame for each target action instance
while watching the video by our designed annotation tool. Specifically, they are
required to pause the video when they identify an action instance and choose the
action class that the paused frame belongs to. Once they have chosen the action
class, they need to continue watching the video and record the frames for the next
target action instances. After watching the whole video, the annotator should
press the generation button and the annotation tool will then automatically
produce the timestamps and action classes of all operated frames for the given
video. Compared to the annotation process in the weakly-supervised setting, this
results into almost no extra time cost since the timestamps are automatically
generated. The single-frame annotation process is much faster than annotating
the temporal boundary of each action in which the annotator often watches the
video many times to define the start and end timestamp of a given action.
1.1

Annotation guideline

Different people may have different understandings of what constitutes a given
action. To reduce the ambiguity, we prepare a detailed annotation guideline,
which includes both clear action definitions as well as positive/negative examples with detailed clarifications for each action. For each action, we give (1)
textual action definition for single-frame annotation, (2) positive single-frame
annotations, and (3) segmented action instances for annotator to be familiar
with.
1.2

Annotation tool

Our annotation tool supports automatically recording timestamp for annotating
single-frame. This makes the annotation process faster when annotators notice an

