1

Ocean: Object-aware Anchor-free Tracking
———————— Supplementary Material ————————–
The supplementary material presents the details of target localization in Sec. 4
and the additional experiments of Sec. 5:
1) We provide details of scale penalty in target localization.
1) We provide additional ablation experiments.
2) We provide qualitative comparisons of our tracker with state-of-the-arts.
Target localization. We impose a penalty on scale change to suppress the
large variation of object size and aspect ratio.
r r0
s s0
α = exp(k · max( 0 , ) · max( 0 , )),
(1)
r r
s s
where k is a hyper-parameter, r and r0 represent the aspect ratio of the predicted
bounding boxes in the previous and current frames respectively, while s and s0
denote the size (i.e., height and width) of the predicted boxes in the previous
and current frames. The final target classification probability p̂cls is calculated
as p̂cls = α · pcls . The maximum value in the classification map p̂cls indicates the
position of the foreground target. To keep the shape of predicted bounding boxes
changing smoothly, a linear weight function is used to calculate the final scale
as ŝreg = β · s0 + (1 − β) · s, where β is a weight parameter. The hyperparameter
k in Eq. (1) for the penalty of large scale change is set to 0.021, while the scale
weight β is set to 0.7.
Feature combination. We further evaluate the impact of dilated convolutions
in the feature combination module and report the results on VOT-2018 in Tab.
1. The baseline setting is a normal convolution with dilation stride of 1 along
both the X-axis and Y -axis, i.e., Φ11 . We observe that adding a standard convolution Φ11 brings an improvement of 0.8 points in terms of EAO ( 2 vs. 1 ).
This indicates that the proposed parallel convolutions in the feature combination
module is effective. It is very interesting to see that if we modify the dilation
strides along X and Y directions to be different, the performance can be further
improved, e.g., 1.3 points gains for 3 vs. 2 while 1.0 points gains for 4 vs.
2 . This verifies that the irregular dilations is effective to enhance feature representability. A combination of the three dilation kernels with different strides
obtains the best results in our experiment.
Feature visualization. We visualize the features extracted before and after
the alignment, i.e., the regular-region feature and object-aware feature, in Fig.
1. We observe that the object-aware feature focuses on the entire object, while
the regular-region feature concentrates on the center part of the target. The
former improves the reliability of the classification since it provides a global
view of the target. The latter contributes more to localize the object centerness
since the features are more sensitive to local changes.

