Supplementary Material
for
Sketch-Guided Object Localization
in Natural Images
Aditay Tripathi1 , Rajath R Dani1 , Anand Mishra2 and Anirban Chakraborty1
1

2
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
http://visual-computing.in/sketch-guided-object-localization/

A

Implementation Details

We implemented the Cross-modal Attention Model using the Pytorch v1.0.1
framework with CUDA 10.0 and CUDNN v7.1. The model is trained with
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with momentum of 0.9 on one NVIDIA
1080-Ti with a batch-size of 10. The learning rate was initially set at 0.01 but it
decays with a rate of 0.1 after every four epochs and it is trained for 30 epochs.
The constant K in eq. (4) is fixed at 256 and m+ = 0.3 and m− = 0.7 in eq. (7)
and (8) for all experiments.
For optimal results, Cross-modal attention model is trained incrementally.
Firstly, the localization model is trained without attention. Then, the attention
model is added to it and it is trained again. The training protocol is same as
explained before and it is same for both the steps.
For optimal training of multi-query sketch-guided localization model, the
single-query sketch-guided model is trained first and it is used to initialize the
multi-query sketch-guided model. The training protocol is same as before except
the starting learning rate is set at 0.001.

B

Additional Results

In this section, we will describe additional results on single query sketch-guided
localization as well as multi-query sketch-guided localization with 3 sketch queries
on Pascal VOC dataset. The results are reported for seen and unseen sets of disjoint (Ctrain ∩ Ctest = φ) training and test sets as well as the union of both the
sets. The results are shown in fig 1 and 2.
For the disjoint train-test classes experiment, the data from 6 classes is used
for training and the data from 3 classes is used for evaluation. There is no overlap
between training and testing images.
The multi-query sketch-guided localization model has also been evaluated for
the case of 3 sketch queries. We evaluated the model for the disjoint train and test
classes as well as the common train and test classes. Both the Query Fusion and
Attention Fusion methods show consistent improvement across disjoint classes

