Multi-view Optimization of Local Feature
Geometry
Mihai Dusmanu1(B) , Johannes L. Schönberger2 , and Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
mihai.dusmanu@inf.ethz.ch
2
Microsoft, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract. In this work, we address the problem of reﬁning the geometry of local image features from multiple views without known scene or
camera geometry. Current approaches to local feature detection are inherently limited in their keypoint localization accuracy because they only
operate on a single view. This limitation has a negative impact on downstream tasks such as Structure-from-Motion, where inaccurate keypoints
lead to large errors in triangulation and camera localization. Our proposed method naturally complements the traditional feature extraction
and matching paradigm. We ﬁrst estimate local geometric transformations between tentative matches and then optimize the keypoint locations over multiple views jointly according to a non-linear least squares
formulation. Throughout a variety of experiments, we show that our
method consistently improves the triangulation and camera localization
performance for both hand-crafted and learned local features.
Keywords: 3D reconstruction · Local features

1

Introduction

Local image features are one of the central blocks of many computer vision
systems with numerous applications ranging from image matching and retrieval
to visual localization and mapping. Predominantly, local feature extraction and
matching are the ﬁrst stages in these systems with high impact on their ﬁnal
performance in terms of accuracy and completeness [37]. The main advantages
of local features are their robustness, scalability, and eﬃcient matching, thereby
enabling large-scale 3D reconstruction [18] and localization [21].
Handcrafted local feature approaches generally focus on low-level structures
for detection [16,23]. Despite the typically accurate keypoint localization of these
methods, they are easily perturbed by appearance variations such as day-tonight or seasonal changes, as shown by Sattler et al. [35]. To achieve a better
robustness against viewpoint and appearance changes, recent methods turned
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 39) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 670–686, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_39

