Supplementary Material for CPGAN:
Content-Parsing Generative Adversarial
Networks for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Jiadong Liang1,† , Wenjie Pei2,† , and Feng Lu1,3,∗
1
2

1

State Key Lab. of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen

Details of Coarse-to-fine Generative Framework

As described in Sec 3.1 in the paper, we adopt three cascaded generators to obtain coarse-to-fine synthesized images. At each stage, the generator Gi is adopted
to generate intermediate feature maps Ci which could be directly mapped to
generated image by convolutional layers.
As shown in Figure 1 (a), the global embedding for the whole sentence s
concatenated with Gaussian noise z is processed by G0 , which is composed of a
FC layer, a reshape layer and four cascaded upsampling layers. The obtain intermediate feature map C0 , together with H0 , are then fed into the subsequent
generators G1 and G2 , which consists of three residual blocks and a upsampling
layer. Here H0 is the output of the attention model F att designed to attend to the
word embeddings W to each pixel of C0 . Formally, given the input word embedˆ
ding W = {w1 , w2 , . . . wT } and the intermediate feature map Ci ∈ Rd×Ni ×Ni ,
the Hi is modeled as:
Hi = Fiatt (W, Ci ),

i = 0, 1.

(1)

Herein Ni × Ni is the shape of intermediate feature map at the stage i and
wt ∈ Rd denotes the embedding for the t-th word. The word embeddings are
first projected into the common space of the intermediate features by a FC
ˆ
layer, i.e., ŵt = Mp wt , where Mp ∈ Rd×d . Suppose the (m, n)-th intermediate
ˆ
feature in the feature map is denoted as Ci m,n ∈ Rd , m, n ∈ 1, 2, 3, ..., Ni . We
compute the dynamic representation of word embeddings related to the (m, n)-th
intermediate feature by attention mechanism:
exp((Ci m,n )T ŵk )
, n = 1, 2, . . . , T,
bk = PT
m,n T
) ŵp )
p=1 exp((Ci
Hi

m,n

=

T
X

(2)

bk ŵk ,

k=1
†
?

Both authors contributed equally.
Corresponding Author: Feng Lu (lufeng@buaa.edu.cn)
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant 61972012 and 61732016.

