Contextual Diversity for Active Learning
Sharat Agarwal1 , Himanshu Arora2 , Saket Anand1(B) , and Chetan Arora3
1 IIIT-Delhi, New Delhi, India
{sharata,anands}@iiitd.ac.in
2 Flixstock Inc., New Delhi, India
himanshu@flixstock.com
3 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
chetan@cse.iitd.ac.in
Abstract. Requirement of large annotated datasets restrict the use of
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for many practical applications. The problem can be mitigated by using active learning (AL) techniques which, under a given annotation budget, allow to select a subset
of data that yields maximum accuracy upon ﬁne tuning. State of the art
AL approaches typically rely on measures of visual diversity or prediction
uncertainty, which are unable to eﬀectively capture the variations in spatial context. On the other hand, modern CNN architectures make heavy
use of spatial context for achieving highly accurate predictions. Since the
context is diﬃcult to evaluate in the absence of ground-truth labels, we
introduce the notion of contextual diversity that captures the confusion
associated with spatially co-occurring classes. Contextual Diversity (CD)
hinges on a crucial observation that the probability vector predicted by
a CNN for a region of interest typically contains information from a
larger receptive ﬁeld. Exploiting this observation, we use the proposed
CD measure within two AL frameworks: (1) a core-set based strategy
and (2) a reinforcement learning based policy, for active frame selection. Our extensive empirical evaluation establish state of the art results
for active learning on benchmark datasets of Semantic Segmentation,
Object Detection and Image classiﬁcation. Our ablation studies show
clear advantages of using contextual diversity for active learning. The
source code and additional results are available at https://github.com/
sharat29ag/CDAL.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have acheived state of the art
(SOTA) performance on various computer vision tasks. One of the key driving factors for this success has been the eﬀort gone in preparing large amounts
Sharat Agarwal and Himanshu Arora—Equal contribution.
Himanshu Arora—Work done while the author was at IIIT-Delhi.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 137–153, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_9

