1

Appendix A

Graph Neural Network

In this section, we describe the details of the graph neural network (GNN) we
use in our IDAM+GNN model.
Suppose we have a point cloud P. Let Ni denote the set of indices of K points
(n)
closest to the point pi in P. In the nth layer of GNN, let ui be the feature
vector for pi . Then the features for the next layer is computed as
(n+1)

ui

= f(

M

(n)

g(ui

(n)

− uj ))

(1)

j∈Ni

L
where f and g are multi-layer perceptrons (MLP),
is the element-wise max
operation. We use a 2-hidden-layer MLP with output dimensions (64, 64) for g,
and a single-layer MLP with output dimension 64 for f . Batch normalization [3]
and ReLU [2] are used in each layer in the MLPs.
(0)
The initial features ui are just the 3D coordinates of the points in P. We
stack 5 layers of Eq. 1 to hierarchically extract high-level features. The dimension
of the output features is 64.

Appendix B

Visualization

In this section, we show some visualization results. Appendix B.1 shows the visualization of IDAM+GNN registering two partially overlapping point clouds in
ModelNet40. Appendix B.2 shows the results of the same model on the Stanford 3D Scan dataset [1]. Appendix B.3 shows the visualization of the preserved
points by hard point elimination. Appendix B.4 visualizes how the hybrid point
elimination works.
Appendix B.1

ModelNet40

In this section, We show the visualization of IDAM+GNN registering two partially overlapping point clouds in ModelNet40. The model is trained on the whole
training set of ModelNet40 with Gaussian noise of standard deviation 0.01. The
visualization shows the results of the model on the shapes in the test set of ModelNet40. This corresponds to the “Gaussian Noise” experiment in the paper. The
results are shown in Fig. 1.
Appendix B.2

Stanford 3D Scan

We also test the same model (Appendix B.1) on the Stanford 3D Scan dataset [1].
We use the same method described in the paper to generate partially overlapping
point clouds. Note that we only train on the ModelNet40 dataset. This shows
the generalization ability of our model. The results are shown in Fig. 2.

