SoundNet: Learning Sound
Representations from Unlabeled Video

Yusuf Aytar∗
MIT
yusuf@csail.mit.edu

Carl Vondrick∗
MIT
vondrick@mit.edu

Antonio Torralba
MIT
torralba@mit.edu

Abstract
We learn rich natural sound representations by capitalizing on large amounts of
unlabeled sound data collected in the wild. We leverage the natural synchronization
between vision and sound to learn an acoustic representation using two-million
unlabeled videos. Unlabeled video has the advantage that it can be economically
acquired at massive scales, yet contains useful signals about natural sound. We
propose a student-teacher training procedure which transfers discriminative visual
knowledge from well established visual recognition models into the sound modality
using unlabeled video as a bridge. Our sound representation yields significant
performance improvements over the state-of-the-art results on standard benchmarks
for acoustic scene/object classification. Visualizations suggest some high-level
semantics automatically emerge in the sound network, even though it is trained
without ground truth labels.

1

Introduction

The fields of object recognition, speech recognition, machine translation have been revolutionized by
the emergence of massive labeled datasets [31, 42, 10] and learned deep representations [17, 33, 10,
35]. However, there has not yet been the same corresponding progress in natural sound understanding
tasks. We attribute this partly to the lack of large labeled datasets of sound, which are often both
expensive and ambiguous to collect. We believe that large-scale sound data can also significantly
advance natural sound understanding. In this paper, we leverage over one year of sounds collected
in-the-wild to learn semantically rich sound representations.
We propose to scale up by capitalizing on the natural synchronization between vision and sound
to learn an acoustic representation from unlabeled video. Unlabeled video has the advantage that
it can be economically acquired at massive scales, yet contains useful signals about sound. Recent
progress in computer vision has enabled machines to recognize scenes and objects in images and
videos with good accuracy. We show how to transfer this discriminative visual knowledge into sound
using unlabeled video as a bridge.
We present a deep convolutional network that learns directly on raw audio waveforms, which is
trained by transferring knowledge from vision into sound. Although the network is trained with
visual supervision, the network has no dependence on vision during inference. In our experiments,
we show that the representation learned by our network obtains state-of-the-art accuracy on three
standard acoustic scene classification datasets. Since we can leverage large amounts of unlabeled
sound data, it is feasible to train deeper networks without significant overfitting, and our experiments
suggest deeper models perform better. Visualizations of the representation suggest that the network is
also learning high-level detectors, such as recognizing bird chirps or crowds cheering, even though it
is trained directly from audio without ground truth labels.
∗

contributed equally

30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

