Supplementary Material : Utilizing Patch-level
Category Activation Patterns for Multiple Class
Novelty Detection
Poojan Oza and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles St, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{poza, vp36}@jhu.edu

Due to the space limitations, in this supplementary material we provide additional details regarding network architecture and training strategy.

1

Additional Grad-cam Visualizations : In-class vs Novel

Here, we provide additional grand-cam visualizations, similar to the ones shown
in Fig. 3 of the paper. The given grad-cam visualization show that though for
both in-class and novel images convolutional neural network predicts same category with high confidence, but there are differences in their patch-level activation
patterns.

2

More Examples of Wrong Predictions

We provided some examples of novel-classes that are miss-identified as in-class
in Fig. 6 of the paper. Here, we provide examples of in-class samples that are
miss-identified as novel with low prediction score. In some cases the image examples are miss-classified as in the case of Baseball, Billiards and Dice where
network has high activation from wrong local-patches of the image. In other
cases such as Telescope and Pisa-tower, the miss-identification happens due to
the difficulty of image examples. E.g., in Pisa-tower image example the tower
of Pisa is around cluster of other buildings and hence results in low prediction
score. In the case of Telescope example the telescope is occluded by Person in
the front and hence receives low activation across informative image patches,
resulting in low prediction score for the image.

3

Training Details

We first separately fine-tune the global and local inference networks with given
in-class data. The global inference network is fine-tuned for 20000 iterations using SGD with 0.9 momentum, batch size of 64, initial learning rate of 0.001
which is decreased by a factor of 10 every 5000 iterations. The local inference
network is fine-tuned till 40000 iterations using SGD with 0.9 momentum, batch
size of 128, initial learning rate of 0.01 which is decreased by a factor of 10 every
10000 iterations. Both these fine-tuned networks then used to train the novelty

