Local Correlation Consistency
for Knowledge Distillation
Xiaojie Li1 , Jianlong Wu2,3(B) , Hongyu Fang4 , Yue Liao5 ,
Fei Wang1 , and Chen Qian1
1
SenseTime Research, Beijing, China
{lixiaojie,wangfei,qianchen}@sensetime.com
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China
jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn
3
Zhejiang Laboratory,Hangzhou, China
4
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University,
Beijing, China
fanghongyu@pku.edu.cn
5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
liaoyue.ai@gmail.com

Abstract. Suﬃcient knowledge extraction from the teacher network
plays a critical role in the knowledge distillation task to improve the
performance of the student network. Existing methods mainly focus on
the consistency of instance-level features and their relationships, but
neglect the local features and their correlation, which also contain many
details and discriminative patterns. In this paper, we propose the local
correlation exploration framework for knowledge distillation. It models three kinds of local knowledge, including intra-instance local relationship, inter-instance relationship on the same local position, and the
inter-instance relationship across diﬀerent local positions. Moreover, to
make the student focus on those informative local regions of the teacher’s
feature maps, we propose a novel class-aware attention module to highlight the class-relevant regions and remove the confusing class-irrelevant
regions, which makes the local correlation knowledge more accurate and
valuable. We conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies on challenging datasets, including CIFAR100 and ImageNet, to show our superiority over the state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Knowledge distillation · Local correlation consistency ·
Class-aware attention

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks have achieved great successes in the vision
community, signiﬁcantly facilitating the development of many practical tasks,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 18–33, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_2

