DeepFit: 3D Surface Fitting via Neural
Network Weighted Least Squares
Yizhak Ben-Shabat(B)

and Stephen Gould(B)

Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australian National University,
Canberra, Australia
{yizhak.benshabat,stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
https://github.com/sitzikbs/DeepFit

Abstract. We propose a surface ﬁtting method for unstructured 3D
point clouds. This method, called DeepFit, incorporates a neural network to learn point-wise weights for weighted least squares polynomial
surface ﬁtting. The learned weights act as a soft selection for the neighborhood of surface points thus avoiding the scale selection required of
previous methods. To train the network we propose a novel surface consistency loss that improves point weight estimation. The method enables
extracting normal vectors and other geometrical properties, such as principal curvatures, the latter were not presented as ground truth during
training. We achieve state-of-the-art results on a benchmark normal and
curvature estimation dataset, demonstrate robustness to noise, outliers
and density variations, and show its application on noise removal.
Keywords: Normal estimation · Surface ﬁtting · Least squares ·
Unstructured 3D point clouds · 3D point cloud deep learning

1

Introduction

Commodity 3D sensors are rapidly becoming an integral component of
autonomous systems. These sensors, e.g., RGB-D cameras or LiDAR, provide
a 3D point cloud representing the geometry of the scanned objects and surroundings. This raw representation, however, is challenging to process since it
lacks connectivity information or structure, and is often incomplete, noisy and
contains point density variations. In particular, processing it by means of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)—highly eﬀective for images—is problematic
because CNNs require structured, grid-like data as input.
When available, additional local geometric information, such as the surface
normal and principal curvatures at each point, induces a partial local structure
and improves performance of diﬀerent tasks for interpreting the scene, such as
over-segmentation [1], classiﬁcation [19] and surface reconstruction [9].
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 20–34, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_2

