Self-challenging Improves Cross-Domain
Generalization
Zeyi Huang, Haohan Wang, Eric P. Xing, and Dong Huang(B)
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
zeyih@andrew.cmu.edu, {haohanw,epxing}@cs.cmu.edu, donghuang@cmu.edu
Abstract. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) conduct image classiﬁcation by activating dominant features that correlated with labels.
When the training and testing data are under similar distributions, their
dominant features are similar, leading to decent test performance. The
performance is nonetheless unmet when tested with diﬀerent distributions, leading to the challenges in cross-domain image classiﬁcation. We
introduce a simple training heuristic, Representation Self-Challenging
(RSC), that signiﬁcantly improves the generalization of CNN to the outof-domain data. RSC iteratively challenges (discards) the dominant features activated on the training data, and forces the network to activate
remaining features that correlate with labels. This process appears to
activate feature representations applicable to out-of-domain data without
prior knowledge of the new domain and without learning extra network
parameters. We present the theoretical properties and conditions of RSC
for improving cross-domain generalization. The experiments endorse the
simple, eﬀective, and architecture-agnostic nature of our RSC method.
Keywords: Cross-domain generalization · Robustness

1

Introduction

Imagine teaching a child to visually diﬀerentiate “dog” from “cat”: when presented with a collection of illustrations from her picture books, she may immediately answer that “cats tend to have chubby faces” and end the learning. However, if we continue to ask for more diﬀerences, she may start to notice other
features like ears or body-size. We conjecture this follow-up challenge question
plays a signiﬁcant role in helping human reach the remarkable generalization
ability. Most people should be able to diﬀerentiate “cat” from “dog” visually
even when the images are presented in irregular qualities. After all, we did not
stop learning after we picked up the ﬁrst clue when we were children, even the
ﬁrst clue was good enough to help us recognize all the images in our textbook.
Z. Huang, H. Wang—Equal contribution; codes are available at https://github.com/
DeLightCMU/RSC
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 124–140, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_8

