Rewriting a Deep Generative Model
David Bau1(B) , Steven Liu1 , Tongzhou Wang1 , Jun-Yan Zhu2 ,
and Antonio Torralba1
1

MIT CSAIL, Cambridge, USA
davidbau@csail.mit.edu
2
Adobe Research, San Jose, USA

Abstract. A deep generative model such as a GAN learns to model a
rich set of semantic and physical rules about the target distribution, but
up to now, it has been obscure how such rules are encoded in the network,
or how a rule could be changed. In this paper, we introduce a new problem setting: manipulation of speciﬁc rules encoded by a deep generative
model. To address the problem, we propose a formulation in which the
desired rule is changed by manipulating a layer of a deep network as a linear associative memory. We derive an algorithm for modifying one entry
of the associative memory, and we demonstrate that several interesting
structural rules can be located and modiﬁed within the layers of stateof-the-art generative models. We present a user interface to enable users
to interactively change the rules of a generative model to achieve desired
eﬀects, and we show several proof-of-concept applications. Finally, results
on multiple datasets demonstrate the advantage of our method against
standard ﬁne-tuning methods and edit transfer algorithms.

1

Introduction

We present the task of model rewriting, which aims to add, remove, and alter
the semantic and physical rules of a pretrained deep network. While modern
image editing tools achieve a user-speciﬁed goal by manipulating individual input
images, we enable a user to synthesize an unbounded number of new images by
editing a generative model to carry out modiﬁed rules.
For example in Fig. 1, we apply a succession of rule changes to edit a StyleGANv2 model [40] pretrained on LSUN church scenes [77]. The ﬁrst change
removes watermark text patterns (a); the second adds crowds of people in front
of buildings (b); the third replaces the rule for drawing tower tops with a rule
that draws treetops (c), creating a fantastical eﬀect of trees growing from towers.
Because each of these modiﬁcations changes the generative model, every single
change aﬀects a whole category of images, removing all watermarks synthesized
by the model, arranging people in front of many kinds of buildings, and creating tree-towers everywhere. The images shown are samples from an endless
distribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 21) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 351–369, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_21

