Solving Phase Retrieval with a Learned
Reference
Rakib Hyder , Zikui Cai , and M. Salman Asif(B)
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA
{rhyde001,zcai032,sasif}@ucr.edu

Abstract. Fourier phase retrieval is a classical problem that deals with
the recovery of an image from the amplitude measurements of its Fourier
coeﬃcients. Conventional methods solve this problem via iterative (alternating) minimization by leveraging some prior knowledge about the
structure of the unknown image. The inherent ambiguities about shift
and ﬂip in the Fourier measurements make this problem especially diﬃcult; and most of the existing methods use several random restarts with
diﬀerent permutations. In this paper, we assume that a known (learned)
reference is added to the signal before capturing the Fourier amplitude
measurements. Our method is inspired by the principle of adding a reference signal in holography. To recover the signal, we implement an iterative phase retrieval method as an unrolled network. Then we use back
propagation to learn the reference that provides us the best reconstruction for a ﬁxed number of phase retrieval iterations. We performed a
number of simulations on a variety of datasets under diﬀerent conditions
and found that our proposed method for phase retrieval via unrolled
network and learned reference provides near-perfect recovery at ﬁxed
(small) computational cost. We compared our method with standard
Fourier phase retrieval methods and observed signiﬁcant performance
enhancement using the learned reference.

1

Introduction

The problem of phase retrieval refers to the challenge of recovering a real- or
complex-valued signal from its amplitude measurements. This problem arises in
diﬀraction imaging, X-ray crystallography, and ptychography [14,15,21,35,43].
Fourier phase retrieval is a special class of phase retrieval problems aimed at the
recovery of a signal from the amplitude of its Fourier coeﬃcients. Let us assume
that Fourier amplitude measurements are given as
y = |F x| + η,

(1)

where F denotes the Fourier transform operator, x denotes the unknown signal or image, and η denotes the measurement noise. Our goal is to recover
x given y.
R. Hyder and Z. Cai—Equal contribution.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 425–441, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_26

