Hybrid Models for Open Set Recognition
Hongjie Zhang1 , Ang Li2 , Jie Guo1 , and Yanwen Guo1(B)
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University,
Nanjing 210023, China
hjzhang@smail.nju.edu.cn, {guojie,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn
2
DeepMind, Mountain View, CA, USA
anglili@google.com

Abstract. Open set recognition requires a classiﬁer to detect samples
not belonging to any of the classes in its training set. Existing methods
ﬁt a probability distribution to the training samples on their embedding
space and detect outliers according to this distribution. The embedding
space is often obtained from a discriminative classiﬁer. However, such
discriminative representation focuses only on known classes, which may
not be critical for distinguishing the unknown classes. We argue that the
representation space should be jointly learned from the inlier classiﬁer
and the density estimator (served as an outlier detector). We propose the
OpenHybrid framework, which is composed of an encoder to encode the
input data into a joint embedding space, a classiﬁer to classify samples
to inlier classes, and a ﬂow-based density estimator to detect whether a
sample belongs to the unknown category. A typical problem of existing
ﬂow-based models is that they may assign a higher likelihood to outliers.
However, we empirically observe that such an issue does not occur in our
experiments when learning a joint representation for discriminative and
generative components. Experiments on standard open set benchmarks
also reveal that an end-to-end trained OpenHybrid model signiﬁcantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods and ﬂow-based baselines.
Keywords: Flow-based model · Density estimation · Image
classiﬁcation

1

Introduction

Image classiﬁcation is a core problem in computer vision. However, most of
the existing research is based on the closed-set assumption, i.e., training set is
assumed to cover all classes that appear in the test set. This is an unrealistic
assumption. Even with a large-scale image dataset, such as ImageNet [15], it
is impossible to cover all scenarios in the real world. When a closed-set model
encounters an out-of-distribution sample, it is forced to identify it as a known
class, which can cause issues in many real-world applications. We instead study
the “open-set” problem where the test set is assumed to contain both known and
unknown classes. So the model has to classify samples into either known (inlier)
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12348, pp. 102–117, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58580-8_7

