AUTO3D: Novel view synthesis through unsupervisely
learned variational viewpoint and global 3D representation
Supplementary Materials
Paper ID 719

1

Experiment details.

We implemented our model on Pytorch [3]. Our model is trained end-to-end using
using ADAM [2] optimization with hyper-parameters β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.999.
We used a batch size of 8 for ShapeNet objects. The encoder network is trained
using a learning rate of 5 × 105 and the generator is trained using a learning rate
104 .

2

Discriminator architecture.

Let Cs,k,c denote a convolutional layer with a stride s, kernel size k, and an output
channel c. Then, the discriminator architecture can be expressed as C2,4,32 →
C2,4,64 → C2,4,128 → C2,4,256 → C1,1,3 . Note that we use a local discriminator
similar to that of [1]. We use a Leaky ReLU activation function with slope of 0.2
on every layer, except for the last layer. Normalization layer is not applied. This
architecture is shared across all experiments.

3

Property of Global 3D encoding

Definition 1. Let π be an arbitrary permutation function for a sequence. We
say a function f (X) is permutation-invariant iff for ∀π; f (X) = f (π(X)).
Property 1. The Global 3D encoding is permutation-invariant, due to the fact
that non-local diffusion is permutation-invariant and all features used to calculate
[f (x)] are considered in an order-less manner (sum or average operation).

4

The Effect of Source Image Ordering

The source images are randomly ordered during training and testing. The goal
of this paper is to maximize performance from what is given, not to find the
best observation strategy. Although in applications where an agent can actively
sample viewpoints, it would be interesting to investigate the effectiveness of
observation orderings.
The sum operation used in AUTO3D is essentially permutation invariant.
We conduct a simple experiment where we test the model on all possible order.
We randomly sampled 1000 tuple of source (image, camera pose) pairs from

