On Modulating the Gradient for Meta-Learning
(Supplementary Material)
Christian Simon†,§ Piotr Koniusz†,§
Richard Nock†,‡,§ Mehrtash Harandi♣,§
†

The Australian National University, ♣ Monash University,
‡
The University of Sydney, § Data61-CSIRO
first.last@{anu.edu.au,monash.edu,data61.csiro.au}

Keywords: Meta Learning, Few Shot Learning, Adaptive Gradients
Below, we provide the implementation and training details of our method. The
modulation generator is described in detail. Moreover, we provide a step-by-step
algorithm for reinforcement learning. Finally, we perform a theoretical analysis, simulations and real-data experiments on the Hadamard-based modulator
M (Ψ, r) ∇L of the ModGrad unit.

1

Details of Experiments

For experiments on the few-shot image classification, we use three backbones
to evaluate the accuracy and the convergence rate of our method, namely 4convolutional blocks (Conv-4) [1], WRN-28-10 [2], and ResNet-34 [3]. Conv-4
has 64 filters in each layer. The model is trained on episodes without any data
augmentation. WRN-28-10 uses the pre-trained model from the mini -ImageNet
training set following [4]. We trained the ModGrad on WRN-28-10 using episodes
with data augmentation. On ResNet-34, following [5], we initialized the weights
randomly and trained the model on episodes. Learning rates were fixed to 0.1 and
0.001 for the inner- and the outer-loop on ResNet-34, respectively (though heavy
fine-tuning the learning rates could potentially improve the results marginally).
The models are trained with 100K episodes by the Adam [6] optimizer in the
outer-loop.

2

Implementation Details of the Gradient Modulation
Generator

Below we detail how the gradient modulation generator can be incorporated into
a Fully Connected (FC) layer or a convolutional layer. The preconditioner generator is attached to a layer of a neural network. During training, this generator
is fixed in the inner-loop but it is updated in the outer-loop.
FC Layer. An FC layer consists of a weight matrix (W ∈ RD1 ×D2 ) and an
additional bias (b ∈ RD2 ). A ModGrad cell (ψi ) consists of two small networks

