Generalizing Person Re-Identification by
Camera-Aware Invariance Learning and
Cross-Domain Mixup
— Supplementary Material —
Chuanchen Luo1,2 , Chunfeng Song1,2 , and Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3
1

2

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, NLPR, CASIA
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{luochuanchen2017,chunfeng.song,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

In the supplementary material, we provide additional discussions and experimental results to validate the superiority of our method further.

1

Discussions

1.1

Sensitivity to Neighborhood Range 

We adopt the relative similarity ratio  rather than the number of neighbors k
to define the range of neighborhood. The feasible scope shrinks from (0, N ) for
k to (0, 1) for , where N denotes the size of the dataset. In this case, a small
change of  corresponds to a drastic change of k. Thus, sensitivity is magnified.
However, the optimal setting for  is generalizable, which frees us from tuning
separate hyper-parameters for intra-camera matching and inter-camera matching. In preliminary experiments, we find that the optimal setting of k is quite
different between intra-camera matching (k = 5) and inter-camera matching
(k = 15). While the performance reaches the optimum around  = 0.8 for both
matching cases.
1.2

Insights of the Virtual Classifier in Cross-Domain Mixup

The proposed design of classifier in cross-domain mixup is based on the following
insights: 1. According to the setup of cross-domain re-ID, the label space of
the target domain is disjoint with that of the source domain. For this reason,
we should differentiate target instances from source identities. Otherwise, the
learned identity embedding could be corrupted irrationally. 2. Without access to
identity annotations, it is infeasible to define a complete classifier for the target
domain. By introducing a dynamic virtual prototype, we can bypass this issue
and meanwhile ensure the separation between source and target instances. As for
the constraint between target instances, we leave it to Neighborhood Invariance
component to impose.

