SimPose: Eﬀectively Learning DensePose
and Surface Normals of People
from Simulated Data
Tyler Zhu1(B) , Per Karlsson2 , and Christoph Bregler2
1

Google Research, Montreal, Canada
tylerzhu@google.com
2
Google Research, Mountain View, US
perk@google.com, bregler@google.com

Abstract. With a proliferation of generic domain-adaptation
approaches, we report a simple yet eﬀective technique for learning diﬃcult per-pixel 2.5D and 3D regression representations of articulated people. We obtained strong sim-to-real domain generalization for the 2.5D
DensePose estimation task and the 3D human surface normal estimation
task. On the multi-person DensePose MSCOCO benchmark, our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods which are trained on real
images that are densely labelled. This is an important result since obtaining human manifold’s intrinsic uv coordinates on real images is time consuming and prone to labeling noise. Additionally, we present our model’s
3D surface normal predictions on the MSCOCO dataset that lacks any
real 3D surface normal labels. The key to our approach is to mitigate the
“Inter-domain Covariate Shift” with a carefully selected training batch
from a mixture of domain samples, a deep batch-normalized residual
network, and a modiﬁed multi-task learning objective. Our approach
is complementary to existing domain-adaptation techniques and can be
applied to other dense per-pixel pose estimation problems.
Keywords: Person pose estimation · Simulated data · Dense pose
estimation · 3D surface normal · Multi-task objective · Sim-real
mixture

1

Introduction

Robustly estimating multi-person human body pose and shape remains an
important research problem. Humans, especially well trained artists, can reconstruct densely three dimensional multi-person sculptures with high accuracy
given a RGB reference image. Only recently [2,18,19,40,42,48,53,59] it was
demonstrated that this challenging task can also be done using convolutional
neural networks with modest in-the-wild accuracy. Improving the accuracy may
lead to new applications such as telepresence in virtual reality, large-scale sports
video analysis, and 3D MoCap on consumer devices. The challenges presented in
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 225–242, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_14

