Weakly Supervised Learning with Side
Information for Noisy Labeled Images
Lele Cheng(B) , Xiangzeng Zhou(B) , Liming Zhao(B) , Dangwei Li(B) ,
Hong Shang(B) , Yun Zheng(B) , Pan Pan(B) , and Yinghui Xu(B)
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Damo Academy, Alibaba Group,
Hangzhou, China
{yinan.cll,xiangzeng.zxz,lingchen.zlm,dangwei.ldw,shanghong.sh,
zhengyun.zy,panpan.pp}@alibaba-inc.com, renji.xyh@taobao.com

Abstract. In many real-world datasets, like WebVision, the performance of DNN based classiﬁer is often limited by the noisy labeled data.
To tackle this problem, some image related side information, such as
captions and tags, often reveal underlying relationships across images.
In this paper, we present an eﬃcient weakly-supervised learning by using
a Side Information Network (SINet), which aims to eﬀectively carry out a
large scale classiﬁcation with severely noisy labels. The proposed SINet
consists of a visual prototype module and a noise weighting module.
The visual prototype module is designed to generate a compact representation for each category by introducing the side information. The
noise weighting module aims to estimate the correctness of each noisy
image and produce a conﬁdence score for image ranking during the training procedure. The propsed SINet can largely alleviate the negative
impact of noisy image labels, and is beneﬁcial to train a high performance CNN based classiﬁer. Besides, we released a ﬁne-grained product dataset called AliProducts, which contains more than 2.5 million
noisy web images crawled from the internet by using queries generated
from 50,000 ﬁne-grained semantic classes. Extensive experiments on several popular benchmarks (i.e. Webvision, ImageNet and Clothing-1M)
and our proposed AliProducts achieve state-of-the-art performance. The
SINet has won the ﬁrst place in the 5000 category classiﬁcation task
on WebVision Challenge 2019, and outperforms other competitors by a
large margin.
Keywords: Weakly supervised learning · Noisy labels · Side
information · Large scale web images

1

Introduction

In recent years, the computer vision community has witnessed the signiﬁcant
success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) on several benchmark datasets of image
classiﬁcation, such as ImageNet [1] and MS-COCO [22]. However, obtaining
large-scale data with clean and reliable labels is expensive and time-consuming.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 306–321, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_19

