AiR: Attention with Reasoning Capability
Shi Chen , Ming Jiang , Jinhui Yang , and Qi Zhao(B)
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
{chen4595,mjiang,yang7004,qzhao}@umn.edu

Abstract. While attention has been an increasingly popular component in deep neural networks to both interpret and boost performance of
models, little work has examined how attention progresses to accomplish
a task and whether it is reasonable. In this work, we propose an Attention with Reasoning capability (AiR) framework that uses attention to
understand and improve the process leading to task outcomes. We ﬁrst
deﬁne an evaluation metric based on a sequence of atomic reasoning operations, enabling quantitative measurement of attention that considers
the reasoning process. We then collect human eye-tracking and answer
correctness data, and analyze various machine and human attentions
on their reasoning capability and how they impact task performance.
Furthermore, we propose a supervision method to jointly and progressively optimize attention, reasoning, and task performance so that models learn to look at regions of interests by following a reasoning process.
We demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed framework in analyzing and modeling attention with better reasoning capability and task
performance. The code and data are available at https://github.com/
szzexpoi/AiR.
Keywords: Attention · Reasoning · Eye-tracking dataset

1

Introduction

Recent progress in deep neural networks (DNNs) has resulted in models with signiﬁcant performance gains in many tasks. Attention, as an information selection
mechanism, has been widely used in various DNN models, to improve their ability
of localizing important parts of the inputs, as well as task performances. It also
enables ﬁne-grained analysis and understanding of the black-box DNN models,
by highlighting important information in their decision-making. Recent studies
explored diﬀerent machine attentions and showed varied degrees of agreement
on where human consider important in various vision tasks, such as captioning
[15,33] and visual question answering (VQA) [7].
S. Chen and M. Jiang–Equal contributions.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 91–107, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_6

