Beyond Controlled Environments: 3D Camera
Re-Localization in Changing Indoor Scenes
Supplementary Material

This supplementary material provides the following information: Sec. 1 shows
the individual scenes of our benchmark dataset. Sec. 2 provides statistics about
the changes that occur in our benchmark dataset (c.f . Sec. 4.1 in the main
paper). Sec. 3 discusses the means by which we classify the difficulties of the
test frames in our dataset (c.f . Sec. 5.1 in the main paper). Sec. 4 provides
further details about our DCRE metric (c.f . Sec. 4.2 in the main paper). Sec. 5
discusses implementation details for HF-Net and the image retrieval methods we
tested (c.f . Sec. 5.2 in the main paper), as well as the sequence-based approaches
evaluated in the main paper. In addition to this document, we also provide a
supplementary video summarizing our paper.

1

Benchmark Visualization

Figs. 6 – 15 show the 3D reconstructions of each of the individual scenes in the
RIO10 dataset. The scenes selected for RIO10 are very diverse, and exhibit
a wide variety of changes, including, but not limited to, complex illumination
changes, and appearance variations mostly caused by human interactions, such
as rigid object movements (e.g. the movement of major objects such as the bed
and sofa in scenes 3 and 4, respectively) and non-rigid object deformations (e.g.
the rearrangement of the blankets in scene 3). Our dataset provides 10 train,
10 validation and 54 test sequences, with 52 562 images in the train set, 34 415
images in the validation set and 165 744 in the test set.

2

Change Statistics

Per-scene change statistics corresponding to the change measures described in
Sec. 4.1 of the main paper can be found in Fig. 1. It can be seen that on the one
hand, scene 4 has the highest semantic (c) and geometric (d) change values (many
objects, including a sofa, move in the rescans), whilst on the other hand, scenes 8
and 9 have a low normalised correlation coefficient (a) and a high normalised SSD
(b), highlighting the visual differences that they contain (see also the original
scans in Figs. 9, 13 and 14).

3

Classifying Frame Difficulty

Variance of Laplacian (VoL) As mentioned in the main paper, the Variance
of Laplacian (VoL) measure captures both motion blur and a lack of texture

