Runtime Neural Pruning

Ji Lin∗
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
lin-j14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jiwen Lu
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
lujiwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yongming Rao∗
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
raoyongming95@gmail.com
Jie Zhou
Department of Automation
Tsinghua University
jzhou@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Runtime Neural Pruning (RNP) framework which
prunes the deep neural network dynamically at the runtime. Unlike existing neural
pruning methods which produce a fixed pruned model for deployment, our method
preserves the full ability of the original network and conducts pruning according to
the input image and current feature maps adaptively. The pruning is performed in a
bottom-up, layer-by-layer manner, which we model as a Markov decision process
and use reinforcement learning for training. The agent judges the importance
of each convolutional kernel and conducts channel-wise pruning conditioned on
different samples, where the network is pruned more when the image is easier
for the task. Since the ability of network is fully preserved, the balance point is
easily adjustable according to the available resources. Our method can be applied
to off-the-shelf network structures and reach a better tradeoff between speed and
accuracy, especially with a large pruning rate.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been proven to be effective in various areas. Despite the great success,
the capability of deep neural networks comes at the cost of huge computational burdens and large
power consumption, which is a big challenge for real-time deployments, especially for embedded
systems. To address this, several neural pruning methods have been proposed [11, 12, 13, 25, 38] to
reduce the parameters of convolutional networks, which achieve competitive or even slightly better
performance. However, these works mainly focus on reducing the number of network weights, which
have limited effects on speeding up the computation. More specifically, fully connected layers are
proven to be more redundant and contribute more to the overall pruning rate, while convolutional
layers are the most computationally dense part of the network. Moreover, such pruning strategy
usually leads to an irregular network structure, i.e. with part of sparsity in convolution kernels, which
needs a special algorithm for speeding up and is hard to harvest actual computational savings. A
surprisingly effective approach to trade accuracy for the size and the speed is to simply reduce the
number of channels in each convolutional layer. For example, Changpinyo et al. [27] proposed a
method to speed up the network by deactivating connections between filters in convolutional layers,
achieving a better tradeoff between the accuracy and the speed.
All these methods above prune the network in a fixed way, obtaining a static model for all the input
images. However, it is obvious that some of the input sample are easier for recognition, which can be
∗

indicates equal contribution

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

