Supplementary Material: Deep Feedback Inverse
Problem Solver
Wei-Chiu Ma1,2 Shenlong Wang1,3 Jiayuan Gu1,4
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,3 Antonio Torralba2 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1

2

Uber Advanced Technologies Group
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
University of Toronto
4
University of California San Diego

Abstract. This supplementary material provides more details and thorough analysis of our deep feedback inverse problem solver. We hope the
readers can gain more insights into our approach. In the following, we
first showcase that our model can be combined with traditional optimizers to further improve the performance. Next, we provide more detailed
ablation studies regarding the design choices that we made. Then we
discuss in depth the relationships between our work and several previous approaches. To demonstrate that our method is not limited to the
tasks shown in the paper, we further apply it to a dense inverse image
reconstruction problem — JPEG image deblocking. Finally, we present
more qualitative results.

1

Analysis

Deep feedback network as initialization: Structure optimization approaches
are usually sensitive to initialization. The initial estimations have to be reasonably close so that the optimizers can converge to reasonably good results.
Since our deep feedback network can bypass the local energy landscape and can
produce very accurate estimations within extremely short amount of time, one
natural solution is to exploit our model as an initialization and employ classic
solvers for the final optimization. As shown in Tab. 1, by combining with SoftRas [4], we can reduce the error by a significant margin. To further understand
how robust the joint model is and how often it can converge to a certain error
range, we visualize the cumulative error in Fig. 1. The joint model significantly
outperforms all approaches at 90th , 95th , and even 99th percentile, verifying our
hypothesis that our deep feedback network is more robust to the initialization
as well as the curvature of the local energy landscape, and can serve as a good
initializer.
Effectiveness of unrolling steps: Tab. 2 shows the step by step performance
of our model on three different tasks. Through iterative feedback and update, our
deep feedback inverse problem solver can significantly reduce the overall error.
We also provide several side-by-side visualizations in the attached gif files. We
encourage the readers to watch the animations to see how the estimations evolve.

