Clustered Multi-Task Learning:
a Convex Formulation
Laurent Jacob
Mines ParisTech – CBIO
INSERM U900, Institut Curie
35, rue Saint Honoré, 77300 Fontainebleau, France
laurent.jacob@mines-paristech.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA – Willow Project
Ecole Normale Supérieure,
45, rue d’Ulm, 75230 Paris, France
francis.bach@mines.org

Jean-Philippe Vert
Mines ParisTech – CBIO
INSERM U900, Institut Curie
35, rue Saint Honoré, 77300 Fontainebleau, France
jean-philippe.vert@mines-paristech.fr

Abstract
In multi-task learning several related tasks are considered simultaneously, with
the hope that by an appropriate sharing of information across tasks, each task may
benefit from the others. In the context of learning linear functions for supervised
classification or regression, this can be achieved by including a priori information about the weight vectors associated with the tasks, and how they are expected
to be related to each other. In this paper, we assume that tasks are clustered into
groups, which are unknown beforehand, and that tasks within a group have similar
weight vectors. We design a new spectral norm that encodes this a priori assumption, without the prior knowledge of the partition of tasks into groups, resulting
in a new convex optimization formulation for multi-task learning. We show in
simulations on synthetic examples and on the IEDB MHC-I binding dataset, that
our approach outperforms well-known convex methods for multi-task learning, as
well as related non-convex methods dedicated to the same problem.

1

Introduction

Regularization has emerged as a dominant theme in machine learning and statistics, providing an
intuitive and principled tool for learning from high-dimensional data. In particular, regularization
by squared Euclidean norms or squared Hilbert norms has been thoroughly studied in various settings, leading to efficient practical algorithms based on linear algebra, and to very good theoretical
understanding (see, e.g., [1, 2]). In recent years, regularization by non Hilbert norms, such as ℓp
norms with p 6= 2, has also generated considerable interest for the inference of linear functions in
supervised classification or regression. Indeed, such norms can sometimes both make the problem
statistically and numerically better-behaved, and impose various prior knowledge on the problem.
For example, the ℓ1 -norm (the sum of absolute values) imposes some of the components to be equal
to zero and is widely used to estimate sparse functions [3], while various combinations of ℓp norms
can be defined to impose various sparsity patterns.
While most recent work has focused on studying the properties of simple well-known norms, we
take the opposite approach in this paper. That is, assuming a given prior knowledge, how can we
design a norm that will enforce it?
More precisely, we consider the problem of multi-task learning, which has recently emerged as a
very promising research direction for various applications [4]. In multi-task learning several related inference tasks are considered simultaneously, with the hope that by an appropriate sharing
1

