—Supplementary Materials—
SRNet: Improving Generalization in 3D Human
Pose Estimation with a Split-and-Recombine
Approach
Ailing Zeng1,2? , Xiao Sun2 , Fuyang Huang1 , Minhao Liu1 , Qiang Xu1 , and
Stephen Lin2
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Microsoft Research Asia
alzeng, fyhuang, mhliu, qxu@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
xias, stevelin@microsoft.com

In this supplementary material, we present more implementation details of
our model, additional experimental results and more qualitative results which
are not shown in the main paper due to the space limitation. First, Section 1
gives more details on experiment settings. Second, Section 2 discuses different
design choices for the combination operator ◦ in Equation 5 of the main paper.
Third, Section 3 shows results of using both MPJPE and PA-MPJPE as the
evaluation metrics in a comparison with state-of-the-art methods on the Human3.6M dataset. Next, Section 4 shows more results under the cross action
protocol. Finally, Section 5 demonstrates additional qualitative results.

1

Implementation Details

Training Data. Following many previous works [14, 11, 6, 18, 20, 5], we show
results of using two different kinds of 2D keypoints as input for our model in the
experiments. They are 2D ground truth and 2D detections from an off-the-shelf
2D keypoint detector. Following those works [14, 3, 9], we use the smoothed CPN
model [4] which finetuned on the Human3.6M dataset by an eight-layer residual
fully-connected temporal model as our 2D keypoint detector, which is pretrained
on the COCO dataset. No extra 2D data has been used for mixed training. In
the ablation study (Section 5.1) of the main paper, we use 2D ground truth as
input. When comparing with previous works in Section 5.2, both inputs are used
and compared respectively. For data normalization, we use two methods. One is
provided by [14] called the Basic normalization and another is provided by [5]
called the Pixel normalization. Please refer to their code base [1, 2] for detailed
implementation. By default, the Basic normalization is used in our ablation
study. When comparing with the state-of-the-arts ([5] in single pose and [14] in
temporal pose), we use the same data normalization method as each for a fair
comparison. For data augmentation, we follow [14, 5] by using horizontal flip
data augmentation at both training and test stages.
?

The work is done when Ailing Zeng is an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.

