Deformation-Aware 3D Model Embedding and
Retrieval — Supplementary Material
Mikaela Angelina Uy1 , Jingwei Huang1 , Minhyuk Sung2 ,
Tolga Birdal1 , and Leonidas Guibas1
1

S.1

Stanford University

2

Adobe Research

Details of Deformation Function D

We opt to use a simple deformation function for D in our experiments, which is
designed to preserve local rigidity similarly with ARAP [4] but much simpler yet
effective in practice. Specifically, given a source mesh s = (V ∈ {R3 }1···N , E ∈ V 2 ),
where V and E denote the collections of vertices and edges, and a target t
represented as an unsigned distance function ft , we define our deformation
function D(s; t) as follows:


X
X
D(s; t) = argmin
ft (vˆi ) + λ
||(vˆi − vˆj ) − (vi − vj )||2 , E
(S1)
b
V

b
vˆi ∈V

(i,j)∈E

where vi and vˆi are the given and optimized positions of i-th vertex. The first
term represents the fitting loss that pushes the deformed source shape D(s; t)
to be close to t, and the second term is the rigidity regularization loss that
penalizes for the length changes of each edge in E. In our implementation, we
solve the minimization in Eq. S1 using Ceres solver [1] by initializing the vertex
coordinates with the source mesh and defining the unsigned distance function
with 1003 voxel grids. We set λ = 1 in all our experiments, as we found that it
well-preserves the CAD model features including sharp edges and corners for
most of the 3D models we used.
While we convert the CAD models to simplified watertight meshes in Sec. 4 in
the paper to efficiently deform and preserve the connectivity across the connected
components in the CAD model, the ARAP deformation can also be directly
applied to the surface of the CAD model with a simple preprocessing. We found
that remeshing each connected component and linking the components each
other with additional edges based on the proximity can also give a very similar
result in the deformation with that of using the converted watertight meshes.
This way can maintain the original CAD model structure with its accompanied
meta information. Fig. S1 shows the difference between the converted watertight
mesh deformation to the direct CAD model deformation, which are almost
indistinguishable. All figures of the qualitative evaluation results in our main
paper are rendered with the results of the direct CAD model deformation.
S.2

Image-to-CAD

To show the flexibility of our approach, we now extend it to the application
of image-to-CAD generation. Given an image of a 3D model, we first use

