Contrastive Learning for Weakly Supervised Phrase Grounding

A

Appendix

A.1

Limitations and Future Works

17

The empirical examination of our framework reveals the following limitations:
Pretrained representations. Like prior arts, our approach relies on pretrained object detector and a language model to represent regions and captionwords. Ideally, we would expect to learn from scratch or improve existing region
and word representations directly from image-caption data.
Need for fully-labeled validation set. In Fig. 4, we observe that an early
stopping based on the validation performance is required to choose the best
model for phrase grounding. While this is common practice for weakly supervised
learning [10] and the Flickr30K Entities validation set we use is 80⇥ smaller than
the COCO training set, this translates to using full supervision for a small set
of images.
Bounds on MI. While log(K) Limg in Eq. 8 is a valid lower bound on MI,
our log(K) Llang in Eq. 9 is no longer a lower bound on MI as it oversamples
negative words related to a caption. A valid bound would involve random sampling of captions from the training data however our context-preserving negative
captions lead to much better performance.
A.2

Advantages of Context-Preserving Negative Sampling

Commonly used strategies for negative sampling for contrastive learning include
randomly sampling captions from the training data as negatives or mining hardnegatives from a randomly sampled mini-batch. In our experiments (Tab. 2),
random sampling showed no significant gains over a model trained without negative captions. This is because the sampled negatives often have an entirely different context as compared to the image and the positive caption which makes it
too easy for the model to produce a low compatibility score for these negatives.
In contrast, contrast-preserving negative sampling shows significant gains
over random sampling (76.74% vs. 66.89% pointing accuracy). This is because
we construct harder negative captions which yield a more informative training
signal than random sampling. We construct negatives by substituting only a
single word in the caption while preserving the context from the positive caption.
The substitutions are further chosen to be plausible given the context while
discarding likely synonyms and hypernyms. Unlike random sampling approaches
whose success depends on the occurrence of informative negative captions in the
training data and the likelihood of sampling such negatives for a positive caption
in the same minibatch, our approach can construct e↵ective negatives for any
positive caption.

