Supplementary Material for “Adaptive Offline
Quintuplet Loss for Image-Text Matching”
Tianlang Chen1 , Jiajun Deng2 , and Jiebo Luo1
1

2

University of Rochester, {tchen45,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu,
Uiversity of Science and Technology of China, {djiajun1206}@gmail.com

In this document, we provide additional materials to supplement our paper
“Adaptive Offline Quintuplet Loss for Image-Text Matching”. In the first section,
we perform additional ablation studies to verify the robustness and efficiency of
the proposed training approach. In the second section, we show additional qualitative examples to compare the performance of the models trained by different
approaches.

1

Ablation Study

In the section, we perform extra experiments to demonstrate the robustness and
efficiency of our proposed training approach. All the experiments are performed
based on VSRN (the last one is based on both VSRN and BFAN) on a single
GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU.
First, one may ask whether simply increasing the training mini-batch size can
replace our proposed training approach since it can also increase the “hardness”
of the negative samples. To verify this, we increase the training batch size of
VSRN to 192 – the maximum batch size that can be allocated by a single GeForce
GTX 1080 Ti GPU. As shown in Table 1, simply improving the batch size cannot
lead to better performance, demonstrating the effectiveness and validity of the
proposed training approach.
Table 1. Performance of VSRN with the mini-batch size set to 192.
Sentence Retrieval Image Retrieval
Model R@1 R@5 R@10 R@1 R@5 R@10
1K Test Images
VSRN 75.7 95.0 98.3 62.4 89.7 95.2

In Section 3.3 of the main paper, we feed the information of offline hard
negatives into the online loss term and present a new loss function (i.e. Equation
5 of the main paper) for the second-round training. Hyper-parameters α and
β are used to adjust the degree of adaptive penalization. Table 2 shows the
performance of training VSRN with different α and β on the MSCOCO 1K test
set. Overall, the performance difference is little when using different α and β of
specific ranges to train the model. The adaptive penalization is not very sensitive

