Multi-view Action Recognition using Cross-view
Video Prediction
(Supplementary)
Shruti Vyas, Yogesh S Rawat, and Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
{shruti,yogesh,shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

This document provides additional details supplementary to the main paper. It covers network architecture details, experimental details, and additional
qualitative results.

1

Model Details

The proposed approach consists of two main components: Representation Learning network (RL-NET) and Video Rendering Network (VR-NET) (shown in
main manuscript - Figure 1). RL-NET is used to learn a representation r given
some observations oi . It consists of a base network (ENC-NET), which is shared
among all the observations to encode individual observations, and a Blending
Network (BL-NET), which integrates encodings from all the observations to
learn a unified representation r. The representation r is then passed to the VRNET which renders a video from arbitrary view and time. The multi-tasking
architecture, which also performs action recognition, consists of another branch
called Classification Network (CL-NET). It takes the learned representation r
as input and predicts confidence scores for the activity classes. We will discuss
the architecture details for all these networks in the following subsections.
1.1

Representation Learning Network (RL-NET)

The overview of the RL-NET is shown in Figure 2.C (main manuscript). ENCNET is the encoding part of RL-NET which is shared among all the observations
and the corresponding encodings are passed to the BL-NET for representation
learning. A detailed architecture for this part of the network is shown in Figure 1.
The ENC-NET for this architecture utilizes 3D convolution in combination with
max-pooling to get video level encodings. Each observation is a set of multiple
video clips from different viewpoints. We also tested our representation learning
network for a single view dataset using a similar architecture. However, for single
view each observation was a set of multiple input clips from the same video/viewpoint.
The encodings learned by the base network are passed on to the blending
network (BL-NET), which is a recurrent network with bi-directional convolutional LSTM cells. The architecture of BL-NET is shown in Figure 2.E (main
manuscript). The number of recurrent steps in the network will be equal to the

