Improving Face Recognition from Hard
Samples via Distribution Distillation Loss
Yuge Huang1 , Pengcheng Shen1 , Ying Tai1(B) , Shaoxin Li1(B) , Xiaoming Liu2 ,
Jilin Li1 , Feiyue Huang1 , and Rongrong Ji3
1

Youtu Lab, Tencent, Shanghai, China
{yugehuang,quantshen,yingtai,darwinli,jerolinli,garyhuang}@tencent.com
2
Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA
liuxm@cse.msu.edu
3
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
rrji@xmu.seu.cn

Abstract. Large facial variations are the main challenge in face recognition. To this end, previous variation-speciﬁc methods make full use of
task-related prior to design special network losses, which are typically
not general among diﬀerent tasks and scenarios. In contrast, the existing
generic methods focus on improving the feature discriminability to minimize the intra-class distance while maximizing the inter-class distance,
which perform well on easy samples but fail on hard samples. To improve
the performance on hard samples, we propose a novel Distribution Distillation Loss to narrow the performance gap between easy and hard
samples, which is simple, eﬀective and generic for various types of facial
variations. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst adopt state-of-the-art classiﬁers such as
Arcface to construct two similarity distributions: a teacher distribution
from easy samples and a student distribution from hard samples. Then,
we propose a novel distribution-driven loss to constrain the student distribution to approximate the teacher distribution, which thus leads to
smaller overlap between the positive and negative pairs in the student
distribution. We have conducted extensive experiments on both generic
large-scale face benchmarks and benchmarks with diverse variations on
race, resolution and pose. The quantitative results demonstrate the superiority of our method over strong baselines, e.g., Arcface and Cosface.
Code will be available at https://github.com/HuangYG123/DDL.
Keywords: Face recognition · Loss function · Distribution distillation

Y. Huang and P. Shen—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 138–154, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_9

