Mapillary Planet-Scale Depth Dataset
Manuel López Antequera1(B) , Pau Gargallo1 , Markus Hoﬁnger2 ,
Samuel Rota Bulò1 , Yubin Kuang1 , and Peter Kontschieder1
1

Facebook, Menlo Park, USA
mlop@fb.com
2
Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology,
Graz, Austria

Abstract. Learning-based methods produce remarkable results on single image depth tasks when trained on well-established benchmarks, however, there is a large gap from these benchmarks to real-world performance that is usually obscured by the common practice of ﬁne-tuning on
the target dataset. We introduce a new depth dataset that is an order of
magnitude larger than previous datasets, but more importantly, contains
an unprecedented gamut of locations, camera models and scene types
while oﬀering metric depth (not just up-to-scale). Additionally, we investigate the problem of training single image depth networks using images
captured with many diﬀerent cameras, validating an existing approach
and proposing a simpler alternative. With our contributions we achieve
excellent results on challenging benchmarks before ﬁne-tuning, and set
the state of the art on the popular KITTI dataset after ﬁne-tuning.
The dataset is available at mapillary.com/dataset/depth.

1

Introduction

The availability of large-scale training datasets has signiﬁcantly contributed to
the rise of deep learning based approaches in computer vision. Starting with
ImageNet [6] for image classiﬁcation, also the quality of object detection [3,8]
or semantic-, instance- and panoptic segmentation algorithms [5,18,22,31] has
been greatly improved within a few years only. Yet, metric-accurate, large-scale,
natural image datasets are still to come for the task of monocular depth estimation, most likely because they cannot be collected with commodity hardware in a
straightforward way. Research in monocular depth estimation therefore predominantly use smaller, less varied or up-to-scale datasets for training [11,17,30].
Unsupervised methods are achieving remarkable results [12,13], but their performance still lags behind that of supervised methods.
For validation of single image depth methods, an important benchmark is the
Make3D [24] dataset, comprising laser scans coupled with RGB images. Although
dated, it is still a reference benchmark in the ﬁeld. Recently, modern hardware
has been used in a similar fashion to produce very high-quality datasets to be
used as benchmarks for single-image depth methods such as DIODE [29] and
iBims-1 [15]. Please refer to Table 1 for an overview of depth datasets.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 589–604, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_35

