ECCV 2020 Supplementary Material
Anonymous ECCV supplementary material
Paper ID 5589

1

Tactile Property Descriptions
Tactile Dimension

Description
The perceived effort required to initiate sliding on a surface,
fRS
Sliding Resistance
ranging from low grip to high grip.
The perceived effort required to continue sliding over a surface,
fST
Tactile Stiction
ranging from slippery to resistive.
The perceived spacing of small (<1mm spacing) features,
uCO Microtexture Coarseness
ranging from fine to coarse.
The intensity of small (<1mm) features that
uRO Microtexture Roughness
creates the perception of roughness, ranging from smooth to rough.
The perceived uniformity of large (>1mm spacing) features, ranging
mRG Macrotexture Regularity
from random to regular.
The perceived spacing of large (>1mm spacing) features, ranging
mCO Macrotexture Coarseness
from fine to coarse.
The intensity of large (>1mm) features that creates the perception
mTX
Macrotexture
of texture, ranging from smooth to textured.
The initial rate that a surface draws heat from the fingertip,
tCO
Thermal Cooling
ranging from warm to cool.
The extent to which a surface continues to draw heat from
tPR
Thermal Persistence
the fingertip, ranging from transient cooling to sustained cooling.
The degree to which a surface deforms under pressure,
cCM
Tactile Compliance
ranging from rigid to compliant.
The degree to which the surface wraps around the fingertip
cDF
Local Deformation
when being deformed, ranging from flat to high wrap.
The speed with which a surface returns to its original
cDP
Damping
shape after being deformed, ranging from springy to damped.
The degree to which a surface stops pushing back after being
cRX
Relaxation
deformed, ranging from maintaining force to relaxing.
The degree to which a surface remains deformed after being pressed,
cYD
Yielding
ranging from recovering shape to remaining deformed.
The perceived effort required to break contact with a surface,
aTK
Adhesive Tack
ranging from no adhesion to sticky.

2

Network Training Implementation Details

General Settings All models were trained for 30 epochs with a batch size of 8.
The weights of all networks were updated via the Adam optimizer [5] with a
learning rate of 1e-4 and a weight decay value of 1e-5. The learning rate was
adjusted with cosine learning rate scheduler [4]. During training, the model with
the best R2 validation score is saved and used for evaluation. The five measured
tactile properties per surface are combined by an average operation before use in
the network. Images of 1280 × 960 resolution are cropped to 256 × 256 at random

