Supplementary Material
Prithvijit Chattopadhyay1 , Yogesh Balaji2 , and Judy Hoffman1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology
2
University of Maryland
{prithvijit3,judy}@gatech.edu, yogesh@cs.umd.com

In this supplement, we further discuss the specificity of the obtained domainspecific masks (Section. 0.1). Following this, we discuss how sparsity as an incentive compares with sIoU in terms of learning a balance between specificity and
invariance and in terms of performance (Section. 0.2). In Section. 0.3, we discuss alternative techniques for directly ensembling masks instead of the output
predictions in response to each mask. In Section. 0.4, we provide more extensive
comparisons to prior work on the PACS [10] dataset. Finally, in Section. 0.5,
we describe in detail the implementation and other details associated with our
experiments. We use C, I, P, Q, R, S to denote the domains – clipart, infograph,
painting, quickdraw, real and sketch respectively on the DomainNet [17] dataset.
0.1 Domain Specificity
As discussed in Section. 3.2 (main paper), we incentivize domain specificity by
optimizing the soft-IoU (sIoU) objective (see Eqn. 2 in main paper). To understand the extend of domain-specificity achieved at convergence, we measure the
Jaccard Similarity Coefficient [7] (also known as IoU) among pairs of discrete
source domain masks, which we obtain by thresholding the soft-mask values
per-domain at 0.5, i.e., m = 1md >0.5 for domain d.
Fig. 1 shows the IoU among pairs of source domain masks in addition to
the overall average on DomainNet for the I,P,Q,R,S→C and C,I,P,R,S→Q shifts
with AlexNet as the backbone architecture (λO = 0.1 during training). Note
that the above metric provides information about the fraction of overlapping
neurons which are shared among pairs of source domains but only considers
them among the ones which are activated (turned on) based on the discrete
masks m. Therefore, in addition to the IoU statistics (as represented by the
bars), we also report the fraction of activated neurons on average. We note that
domain specificity does emerge by learning masks in the manner described in
Sec. 3.2 of the main paper, as evident by the IoU measures across pairs being
lower than – (1) ∼96% for the maximal pairwise IoU and (2) ∼92% for overall
IoU measures across both the shifts. Fig. 2 shows how the layerwise overall IoU
measure evolves as λO increases. While at lower values of λO , the amount of
specificity is relatively low and similar across layers, at higher values of λO we
see an increase of varying degrees across layers – the relative ordering among
layers in terms of IoU being fc6>fc7>fc8, indicating the importance of having
more shared neurons in the earlier layers.
Finally, note that since the pairwise IoU measures indicate the fraction of
neurons which are shared among the neurons which are turned on, upon convergence we can essentially categorize the neurons present in the task network

