Supplementary Material
NAS-Count: Counting-by-Density with Neural
Architecture Search
Yutao Hu1 ∗ , Xiaolong Jiang4 ∗ , Xuhui Liu1 , Baochang Zhang5 ,
Jungong Han6 , Xianbin Cao1,2,3 † , and David Doermann7
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Technologies for Near Space Information Systems,
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China
3
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data-Based Precision Medicine,China
4
YouKu Cognitive and Intelligent Lab, Alibaba Group
5
Beihang University, Beijing, China
6
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, SY23 3FL, UK
7
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University at Buffalo, New York, USA
{huyutao, bczhang, xbcao}@buaa.edu.cn, xainglu.jxl@alibaba-inc.com,
xuhui cc@126.com, jungonghan77@gmail.com, doermann@buffalo.edu

Comparison with various decoder
In the Sec.4.3 of the main paper, we compare the searched AMSNet decoder with
single-path decoder. In fact, in our two-level search, we leverage the macro-level
search to explore an optimal multi-path encoder-decoder architecture, which
helps us achieve the sufficient feature aggregation. To fully elaborate the efficacy
of our macro-level search, we conduct experiments on the ShanghaiTech Part A
dataset to compare our AMSNet decoder with various baseline decoder. Specifically, based on the decoding block and hierarchical fusion strategy in [1], we
fuse multi-scale features from the last three (two) cells. The experimental results are shown in Table 1. The first row shows the counting accuracy of single-path
decoder. The second and third row show the performance of trellis multi-path
decoder that fuses features from the last two cells and last three cells respectively. The fourth row reports the performance of our AMSNet decoder that fusing
features from last three cells. Additionally, the four networks are all equipped
with AMSNet encoder and optimized with SPPLoss. We can find multi-path
decoder surpasses the single-path decoder, which coincides with the idea that
fusing multi-scale features from different stages can improve the performance.
Furthermore, the decoder in our AMSNet also achieves a better performance
than trellis multi-path decoder, which not only demonstrates its superior ability
in multi-scale feature aggregation but also shows the great effectiveness of the
macro-level search in obtaining an efficient multi-path encoder-decoder network.
∗
†

Contribute equally
Corresponding author

