LIMP: Learning Latent Shape
Representations with Metric
Preservation Priors
Luca Cosmo1,2(B) , Antonio Norelli1 , Oshri Halimi3 , Ron Kimmel3 ,
and Emanuele Rodolà1
1

Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
cosmo@di.uniroma1.it
2
University of Lugano, Lugano, Switzerland
3
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

Abstract. In this paper, we advocate the adoption of metric preservation as a powerful prior for learning latent representations of deformable
3D shapes. Key to our construction is the introduction of a geometric
distortion criterion, deﬁned directly on the decoded shapes, translating
the preservation of the metric on the decoding to the formation of linear
paths in the underlying latent space. Our rationale lies in the observation that training samples alone are often insuﬃcient to endow generative
models with high ﬁdelity, motivating the need for large training datasets.
In contrast, metric preservation provides a rigorous way to control the
amount of geometric distortion incurring in the construction of the latent
space, leading in turn to synthetic samples of higher quality. We further
demonstrate, for the ﬁrst time, the adoption of diﬀerentiable intrinsic
distances in the backpropagation of a geodesic loss. Our geometric priors are particularly relevant in the presence of scarce training data, where
learning any meaningful latent structure can be especially challenging.
The eﬀectiveness and potential of our generative model is showcased in
applications of style transfer, content generation, and shape completion.
Keywords: Learning shapes · Generative model · Metric distortion

1

Introduction

Constructing high-ﬁdelity generative models for 3D shapes is a challenging problem that has met with increasing interest in recent years. Generative models are
applicable in many practical domains, ranging from content creation to shape
exploration, as well as in 3D reconstruction. As a new generation of methods,
they come to face a number of diﬃculties.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58580-8 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12348, pp. 19–35, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58580-8_2

