Domain-Specific Mappings
for Generative Adversarial Style Transfer
Supplementary Material
Hsin-Yu Chang, Zhixiang Wang, and Yung-Yu Chuang
National Taiwan University

A

Overview

In this supplementary material, we present additional results to complement the
main manuscript. We first demonstrate the trade-off between content-preserving
and style translation in Section B. Second, we discuss the domain-specific mappings and the intuition behind in Section C. Third, we provide the implementation details, including network architectures and hyper-parameter settings in
Section D. Then, we demonstrate the disentanglement representation ability of
the latent features in Section E. Finally, we show the complete quantitative result
of FID/LPIPS/SSIM and user study in Section F, and more visual comparisons
in Section G.

B

The trade-off problem

Most I2I methods make trade-offs between content preservation and style translation. They decompose features into style and content ones in individual spaces.
Although each domain has its own style space, the content space is shared among
domains, which could compromise the content representation power and generate unsatisfactory results. The problem is severe, especially when applying these
methods to the tasks requiring semantic matches (Fig. B.1).1
For addressing the problem, the paper proposes domain-specific mappings to
remap content features from the shared space to the individual space of each
domain. It learns the content features in individual image domains to provide
content information specific to the domain. Therefore, for style translation, it
adjusts the content features so that they better match the ones in the target
domains and cooperate better with the domain-specific style features for synthesizing better results. Thus, our method can reach a better trade-off between
content preservation and style translation than previous methods.

1

Note that the performance of MSGAN is close to DRIT since it is an advanced version of DRIT,
and thus we only compare with MSGAN in the paper.

