Appendix

1

Role of Random Occlusion

The random occlusion (RO) we designed for data augmentation is similar to the
random erasing (RE) [6] and cutout [2] methods. In the RE implementation, the
target erasing area is sampled from a combination of random area and aspect
ratio, which could exceed the original image height or width. Therefore, it needs
to try multiple times (100 by default) to generate a reasonable region for erasing.
In contrast, in our implementation of the random occlusion, a square area is used,
with the size randomly sampled at most 0.8 × width of the image, and randomly
put in a valid location. Then the square area is filled with white pixels. Note that
with a simple square area, there is no need to sample multiple times of areas and
aspect ratios and check the validity, and hence the generation process is more
efficient. As for the cutout method, it uses multiple square regions in fixed sizes
specified by hyperparameters, but not in random. The fixed-size regions may
make the cut either too small or too large, and so it is not very convenient to
set.
To show their differences, in the training of QAConv, we compare these data
augmentation methods as well as a baseline without any random occlusion. From
the results shown in Table 1, it can be observed that the three data augmentation
methods generally improve the baseline which does not apply any random occlusion. Intuitively, they are useful for QAConv because random occlusion forces
QAConv to learn various local correspondences, instead of only salient but easy
ones. Besides, the three data augmentation methods perform comparable, with
the RO implementation being slightly better. Therefore, considering also the efficiency of the RO implementation, it is adopted in the training of the proposed
QAConv algorithm.
Table 1. Role of random occlusion.
Market→Duke Duke→Market
Rank-1 mAP Rank-1 mAP
QAConv without occlusion 50.5
29.5
61.6
28.4
QAConv with RE [6]
51.6
30.6
62.0
29.8
QAConv with cutout [2]
51.6
30.8
62.6
30.3
QAConv with RO
54.4 33.6 62.8 31.6
Method

2

Complete Comparisons of Backbone Networks

Tables 2 and 3 show complete comparisons between the QAConv results with
the ResNet-50 as backbone (denoted as QAConv50 ) and with the ResNet-152

