Supplementary Material for VQA-LOL: Visual
Question Answering under the Lens of Logic
Tejas Gokhale?[0000−0002−5593−2804] , Pratyay Banerjee ?[0000−0001−5634−410X] ,
Chitta Baral[0000−0002−7549−723X] , and Yezhou Yang[0000−0003−0126−8976]
Arizona State University, United States
{tgokhale, pbanerj6, chitta, yz.yang}@asu.edu

Abstract. In our paper, we investigated visual question answering
(VQA) through the lens of logical transformation. We showed that stateof-the-art VQA models are unable to reliably predict answers for questions
composed with logical operations, i.e. negation, conjunction, and disjunction. We introduced new datasets VQA-Compose and VQA-Supplement,
created with logical composition and a novel methodology to train models
to learn logical operators in questions In this supplementary material, we
elaborate upon the following topics:
– Data creation process,
– Dataset analysis,
– Training datasets used for each experiment,
– Additional details about model training and hyper-parameters,
– Additional details about parser models, and
– Further analysis and insights about our results.

1

Dataset Creation

The key idea behind our dataset creation process is to leverage existing annotations from the VQA-v2 dataset [1] and from MS-COCO [3] which is the source of
images in VQA-v2. We use questions from VQA-v2, and object annotations and
captions from MS-COCO for each image. In order to create logically composed
questions, we first filter out the “yes-no” questions which constitute 38% of the
VQA dataset. We further filter these by retaining only those yes-no questions
with a single valid answer. These questions which are 20% of the VQA data,
have an unambiguous answer, chosen unanimously by all human annotators who
created the VQA dataset. This satisfies the definition of “closed questions” [2]
that we use, and are thus the atoms of our data creation process.
We use two closed questions corresponding to the same image to create logically
composed questions using the Boolean operators: negation (¬), conjunction (∧),
and disjunction (∨). Since they have a clear unambiguous answer that is either
“yes” or “no”, we can treat them as Boolean variables, and obtain answers for
every new question composed. For negating a question, we follow a templatebased procedure negates the question by adding a “no” or “not” before a verb,
?

Equal Contribution

