Self-supervised Outdoor Scene Relighting Supplementary Document
Ye Yu1 , Abhimitra Meka2 , Mohamed Elgharib2 , Hans-Peter Seidel2 , Christian
Theobalt2 , and William A. P. Smith1
1

University of York, United Kingdom
{yy1571,william.smith}@york.ac.uk
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany

1

Relighting of the test dataset

We show more relighting results on the test dataset in Fig. 1. Along with relit
images, we also include inverse rendering results. The first column shows the
input image. Column 2 to 5 show the inverse rendering results. The last four
columns show two pairs of novel illuminations and relighting results. These results
demonstrate that our network generates plausible shading, shadows and colour
casts for a given novel target illumination.

2

Relighting videos

We use our neural rendering network to perform continuous relighting under
time-lapse illumination and rotating lighting conditions.We encourage the reader
to look at the supplementary videos. The timelapse HDR environment maps
are taken from the Laval HDR sky database [3]. Note that the videos rendered
here are the raw output of our neural renderer without any temporal smoothing
operations. Our network is able to generate plausible relighting videos under
smoothly varying real-world lighting conditions.

3

Relightings without rendered skys

For relighting results shown before, we compare our relightings containing generated skys with other methods whose skys are simply rendered as blacks. To
help readers better judge the quality of relighting effects without the distraction
from skys, we similarly blend our relighting results with black skys and show
them in Fig. 2. Other than such no-sky relighting results, we also demonstrate
the relighting comparison under identical generated skys in this figure, where
we blend generated skys originated from our results with comparison relighting
results. Images used in Fig. 2 are from the test split in MegaDepth dataset [5].
Likewise, we show comparison results on BigTime [4] with same settings on sky
regions in Fig. 3.

4

Comparison between shadow generation and
Lambertian shading

We show the comparison between shadow prediction from our shadow generation network with Lambertian shading reasoning simple cosine relationship

