Impact of Base Dataset Design
on Few-Shot Image Classification
Othman Sbai1,2(B) , Camille Couprie1 , and Mathieu Aubry2
1

2

Facebook AI Research, Paris, France
LIGM (UMR 8049) - École des Ponts, UPE, Champs-sur-Marne, France
sbaio@fb.com

Abstract. The quality and generality of deep image features is crucially
determined by the data they have been trained on, but little is known
about this often overlooked eﬀect. In this paper, we systematically study
the eﬀect of variations in the training data by evaluating deep features
trained on diﬀerent image sets in a few-shot classiﬁcation setting. The
experimental protocol we deﬁne allows to explore key practical questions.
What is the inﬂuence of the similarity between base and test classes?
Given a ﬁxed annotation budget, what is the optimal trade-oﬀ between
the number of images per class and the number of classes? Given a ﬁxed
dataset, can features be improved by splitting or combining diﬀerent
classes? Should simple or diverse classes be annotated? In a wide range
of experiments, we provide clear answers to these questions on the miniImageNet, ImageNet and CUB-200 benchmarks. We also show how the
base dataset design can improve performance in few-shot classiﬁcation
more drastically than replacing a simple baseline by an advanced state
of the art algorithm.
Keywords: Dataset labeling · Few-shot classiﬁcation ·
Meta-learning · Weakly-supervised learning

1

Introduction

Deep features can be trained on a base dataset and provide good descriptors
on new images [31,39]. The importance of large scale image annotation for the
base training is now fully recognized and many eﬀorts are dedicated to creating
very large scale datasets. However, little is known on the desirable properties
of such dataset, even for standard image classiﬁcation tasks. To evaluate the
impact of the dataset on the quality of learned features, we propose an experimental protocol based on few-shot classiﬁcation. In this setting, a ﬁrst model is
typically trained to extract features on a base training dataset, and in a second
classiﬁcation stage, features are used to label images of novel classes given only
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 35) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 597–613, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_35

