Empowering Relational Network by
Self-attention Augmented Conditional
Random Fields for Group Activity
Recognition
Rizard Renanda Adhi Pramono(B) , Yie Tarng Chen ,
and Wen Hsien Fang
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan
{d10702801,ytchen,whf}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract. This paper presents a novel relational network for group
activity recognition. The core of our network is to augment the conditional random ﬁelds (CRF), amenable to learning inter-dependency of
correlated observations, with the newly devised temporal and spatial selfattention to learn the temporal evolution and spatial relational contexts
of every actor in videos. Such a combination utilizes the global receptive ﬁelds of self-attention to construct a spatio-temporal graph topology to address the temporal dependency and non-local relationships of
the actors. The network ﬁrst uses the temporal self-attention along with
the spatial self-attention, which considers multiple cliques with diﬀerent
scales of locality to account for the diversity of the actors’ relationships
in group activities, to model the pairwise energy of CRF. Afterward, to
accommodate the distinct characteristics of each video, a new mean-ﬁeld
inference algorithm with dynamic halting is also addressed. Finally, a
bidirectional universal transformer encoder (UTE), which combines both
of the forward and backward temporal context information, is used to
aggregate the relational contexts and scene information for group activity recognition. Simulations show that the proposed approach surpasses
the state-of-the-art methods on the widespread Volleyball and Collective
Activity datasets.
Keywords: Bidirectional universal transformer encoder ·
Self-attention mechanism · Conditional random ﬁeld · Graph cliques ·
Group activity

1

Introduction

Group activity recognition has received much attention in view of numerous
applications in abnormal event detection [1], sport tactical analysis [2], social
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 71–90, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_5

