Intrinsic Point Cloud Interpolation
via Dual Latent Space Navigation
Marie-Julie Rakotosaona(B) and Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris, Palaiseau, France
{mrakotos,maks}@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract. We present a learning-based method for interpolating and
manipulating 3D shapes represented as point clouds, that is explicitly
designed to preserve intrinsic shape properties. Our approach is based
on constructing a dual encoding space that enables shape synthesis
and, at the same time, provides links to the intrinsic shape information, which is typically not available on point cloud data. Our method
works in a single pass and avoids expensive optimization, employed by
existing techniques. Furthermore, the strong regularization provided by
our dual latent space approach also helps to improve shape recovery in
challenging settings from noisy point clouds across diﬀerent datasets.
Extensive experiments show that our method results in more realistic and smoother interpolations compared to baselines. Both the code
and our pre-trained network can be found online: https://github.com/
mrakotosaon/intrinsic interpolations.
Keywords: 3D point clouds · 3D reconstruction · Deep learning ·
Applications · Methodology · Theory

1

Introduction

A core problem in 3D computer vision is to manipulate and analyze shapes
represented as point clouds. Compared to other representations such as triangle
meshes or dense voxel grids, point clouds are distinguished by their generality,
simplicity and ﬂexibility. For these reasons, and especially with the introduction
of PointNet and its variants [37,38,42], point clouds have gained popularity in
machine learning applications, including point-based generative models.
Unfortunately the ﬂexibility of the point cloud representation also comes at
a cost, as it does not encode any topological or intrinsic metric information of
the underlying object. Thus, methods trained on point cloud data can, by their
nature, be insensitive to distortion that might appear on generated shapes. This
problem is particularly prominent in 3D shape interpolation, where a common
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 39) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 655–672, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_39

