TextCaps: A Dataset for Image
Captioning with Reading Comprehension
Oleksii Sidorov1(B) , Ronghang Hu1,2 , Marcus Rohrbach1 ,
and Amanpreet Singh1
1

Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, USA
acecreamu@gmail.com, {mrf,asg}@fb.com
2
University of California, Berkeley, USA
ronghang@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract. Image descriptions can help visually impaired people to
quickly understand the image content. While we made signiﬁcant
progress in automatically describing images and optical character recognition, current approaches are unable to include written text in their
descriptions, although text is omnipresent in human environments and
frequently critical to understand our surroundings. To study how to comprehend text in the context of an image we collect a novel dataset,
TextCaps, with 145k captions for 28k images. Our dataset challenges
a model to recognize text, relate it to its visual context, and decide what
part of the text to copy or paraphrase, requiring spatial, semantic, and
visual reasoning between multiple text tokens and visual entities, such as
objects. We study baselines and adapt existing approaches to this new
task, which we refer to as image captioning with reading comprehension.
Our analysis with automatic and human studies shows that our new
TextCaps dataset provides many new technical challenges over previous
datasets.

1

Introduction

When trying to understand man-made environments, it is not only important
to recognize objects but also frequently critical to read associated text and comprehend it in the context to the visual scene. Knowing there is “a red sign” is
not suﬃcient to understand that one is at “Mornington Crescent” Station (see
Fig. 1(a)), or knowing that an old artifact is next to a ruler is not enough to
know that it is “40 mm wide” (Fig. 1(c)). Reading comprehension in images is
crucial for blind people. As the VizWiz datasets [5] suggest, 21% of questions
visually-impaired people asked about an image were related to the text in it.
Image captioning plays an important role in starting a visual dialog with a blind
user allowing them to ask for further information as required. In addition, text
out of context (e.g. ‘5:43p’ ) may be of little help, whereas scene description (e.g.
‘shown on a departure tableau’) makes it substantially more meaningful.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 44) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 742–758, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_44

