Good Semi-supervised Learning
That Requires a Bad GAN

Zihang Dai∗, Zhilin Yang∗, Fan Yang, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Melon University
dzihang,zhiliny,fanyang1,wcohen,rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning methods based on generative adversarial networks
(GANs) obtained strong empirical results, but it is not clear 1) how the discriminator benefits from joint training with a generator, and 2) why good semi-supervised
classification performance and a good generator cannot be obtained at the same
time. Theoretically we show that given the discriminator objective, good semisupervised learning indeed requires a bad generator, and propose the definition
of a preferred generator. Empirically, we derive a novel formulation based on
our analysis that substantially improves over feature matching GANs, obtaining
state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmark datasets2 .

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are usually trained on a large amount of labeled data, and it has been a challenge
to apply deep models to datasets with limited labels. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to leverage
the large amount of unlabeled data to boost the model performance, particularly focusing on the
setting where the amount of available labeled data is limited. Traditional graph-based methods [2, 26]
were extended to deep neural networks [22, 23, 8], which involves applying convolutional neural
networks [10] and feature learning techniques to graphs so that the underlying manifold structure
can be exploited. [15] employs a Ladder network to minimize the layerwise reconstruction loss
in addition to the standard classification loss. Variational auto-encoders have also been used for
semi-supervised learning [7, 12] by maximizing the variational lower bound of the unlabeled data
log-likelihood.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6] were demonstrated to be able to generate
visually realistic images. GANs set up an adversarial game between a discriminator and a generator.
The goal of the discriminator is to tell whether a sample is drawn from true data or generated by the
generator, while the generator is optimized to generate samples that are not distinguishable by the
discriminator. Feature matching (FM) GANs [16] apply GANs to semi-supervised learning on Kclass classification. The objective of the generator is to match the first-order feature statistics between
the generator distribution and the true distribution. Instead of binary classification, the discriminator
employs a (K + 1)-class objective, where true samples are classified into the first K classes and
generated samples are classified into the (K + 1)-th class. This (K + 1)-class discriminator objective
leads to strong empirical results, and was later widely used to evaluate the effectiveness of generative
models [5, 21].
Though empirically feature matching improves semi-supervised classification performance, the
following questions still remain open. First, it is not clear why the formulation of the discriminator
∗
2

Equal contribution. Ordering determined by dice rolling.
Code is available at https://github.com/kimiyoung/ssl_bad_gan.

31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.

