An Analysis of Sketched IRLS
for Accelerated Sparse Residual
Regression
Daichi Iwata(B) , Michael Waechter, Wen-Yan Lin, and Yasuyuki Matsushita
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
{iwata.daichi,waechter.michael,lin.daniel,yasumat}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract. This paper studies the problem of sparse residual regression,
i.e., learning a linear model using a norm that favors solutions in which
the residuals are sparsely distributed. This is a common problem in a
wide range of computer vision applications where a linear system has a
lot more equations than unknowns and we wish to ﬁnd the maximum feasible set of equations by discarding unreliable ones. We show that one of
the most popular solution methods, iteratively reweighted least squares
(IRLS), can be signiﬁcantly accelerated by the use of matrix sketching.
We analyze the convergence behavior of the proposed method and show
its eﬃciency on a range of computer vision applications. The source
code for this project can be found at https://github.com/Diwata0909/
Sketched IRLS.
Keywords: Sparse residual regression · 1 minimization · Randomized
algorithm · Matrix sketching

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of residual minimization, where we wish to learn a
linear model that minimizes the residuals that deviate from the model in some
distance metric. For a linear model we have a matrix A ∈ Rn×d (we consider tall
matrices, i.e., the strongly over-determined case with n  d), a vector b ∈ Rn×1 ,
b ∈ R(A) (the range of A), and we seek to ﬁnd
p

(1)
x∗ = argmin Ax − bp
x

for some p-norm. In this paper, we consider this linear model and call it an p
(residual) minimization problem. For the more general case including non-linear
residual minimization we refer the reader to, e.g., Aftab and Hartley [1] or Kiani
and Drummond [36].
One of the most popular methods for p residual minimization with 1 ≤ p < 2
is iteratively reweighted least squares (IRLS), in which weighted 2 minimization is repeatedly computed, eventually converging to the p solution. It is generally understood that p = 2 is optimal for Gaussian distributed errors whereas
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 609–626, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_36

