Unsupervised Learning of Spoken Language with
Visual Context
David Harwath, Antonio Torralba, and James R. Glass
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02115
{dharwath, torralba, jrg}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Humans learn to speak before they can read or write, so why can’t computers
do the same? In this paper, we present a deep neural network model capable of
rudimentary spoken language acquisition using untranscribed audio training data,
whose only supervision comes in the form of contextually relevant visual images.
We describe the collection of our data comprised of over 120,000 spoken audio
captions for the Places image dataset and evaluate our model on an image search
and annotation task. We also provide some visualizations which suggest that our
model is learning to recognize meaningful words within the caption spectrograms.

1

Introduction

1.1

Problem Statement

Conventional automatic speech recognition (ASR) is performed by highly supervised systems which
utilize large amounts of training data and expert knowledge. These resources take the form of
audio with parallel transcriptions for training acoustic models, collections of text for training language models, and linguist-crafted lexicons mapping words to their pronunciations. The cost of
accumulating these resources is immense, so it is no surprise that very few of the more than 7,000
languages spoken across the world [1] support ASR (at the time of writing the Google Speech API
supports approximately 80). This highly supervised paradigm is not the only perspective on speech
processing. Glass [2] defines a spectrum of learning scenarios for speech and language systems.
Highly supervised approaches place less burden on the machine learning algorithms and more on
human annotators. With less annotation comes more learning difficulty, but more flexibility. At the
extreme end of the spectrum, a machine would need to make do with only sensory-level inputs, the
same way that humans do. It would need to infer the set of acoustic phonetic units, the subword
structures such as syllables and morphs, the lexical dictionaries of words and their pronunciations, as
well as higher level information about the syntactic and semantic elements of the language. While
such a machine does not exist today, there has been a significant amount of research in the speech
community in recent years working towards this goal. Sensor-based learning would allow a machine
to acquire language by observation and interaction, and could be applied to any language universally.
In this paper, we investigate novel neural network architectures for the purpose of learning high-level
semantic concepts across both audio and visual modalities. Contextually correlated streams of sensor
data from multiple modalities - in this case a visual image accompanied by a spoken audio caption
describing that image - are used to train networks capable of discovering patterns using otherwise
unlabelled training data. For example, these networks are able to pick out instances of the spoken
word “water" from within continuous speech signals and associate them with images containing
bodies of water. The networks learn these associations directly from the data, without the use of
conventional speech recognition, text transcriptions, or any expert linguistic knowledge whatsoever.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

