Learning Visual Representations
with Caption Annotations
Supplementary Material
Mert Bulent Sariyildiz, Julien Perez, Diane Larlus
NAVER LABS Europe

In this document, we provide the following:
(i) An ablation study on label sets vs. target task performances (Sec. A).
(ii) An ablation study on possible design choices in ICMLM? architectures vs. target task performances (Sec. B).
(iii) Evaluations of the models trained in Sec. 4.2 of the main paper, on zero-shot
image classification tasks (Sec. C).
(iv) Qualitative results obtained by our ICMLMatt-fc model with VGG16 backbone (Sec. D).
(v) The details of the transformer encoder we employ in our ICMLMtfm models
(Sec. E).
(vi) Implementation details including both training and evaluation of the models
we compare in this paper (Sec. F).

A

Label sets vs. target task performances

As we mention in the main paper, for TPPostag and ICMLM? models, we can
construct multiple concept (or label) sets from captions, e.g. the most frequent
K nouns, adjectives or verbs in captions can be used as tags for TPPostag and as
maskable tokens for ICMLM? models. In this section, we investigate the impact
of learning from such label sets on target task performances. To do so, we compare learning visual representations using annotated labels of images vs. tags
derived from captions, i.e. TPLabel vs. TPPostag with various label sets.
For this analysis, we first train ResNet50 backbones, and then, once a model is
trained, we extract image representations from the frozen backbones. To test generalization capabilities of the representations, we train linear SVMs on VOC [4]
and linear logistic regression classifiers on IN-1K [14]. Additionally, to understand how effectively models can learn from the training set, we also train linear
SVMs on COCO [11].
Results are presented in Tab. 1. All TPPostag models trained for the ablation
improve over TPLabel , suggesting that a caption describing an image can provide more comprehensive supervision compared to labeling it with a small set
of classes. It is surprising that gaps are more significant on IN-1K, indicating
that a large vocabulary of tags allows backbones to encode more discriminative
patterns. TPPostag obtained by using the most frequent 5K nouns, adjectives and
verbs in captions improves TPLabel by 2.4%, 9.9% and 2.0% on VOC, IN-1K

