Dual Grid Net: Hand Mesh Vertex
Regression from Single Depth Maps
Chengde Wan1(B) , Thomas Probst2 , Luc Van Gool2 , and Angela Yao3
1

Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh, USA
vgrasp@fb.com
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore

Abstract. We aim to recover the dense 3D surface of the hand from
depth maps and propose a network that can predict mesh vertices,
transformation matrices for every joint and joint coordinates in a single
forward pass. Use fully convolutional architectures, we ﬁrst map depth
image features to the mesh grid and then regress the mesh coordinates
into real world 3D coordinates. The ﬁnal mesh is found by sampling
from the mesh grid reﬁt in closed-form based on an articulated template mesh. When trained with supervision from sparse key-points, our
accuracy is comparable with state-of-the-art on the NYU dataset for key
point localization, all while recovering mesh vertices and dense correspondences. Under multi-view settings for training, our framework can
also learn through self-supervision by minimizing a set of data-ﬁtting
terms and kinematic priors. Our approach is competitive with strongly
supervised methods and showcases the potential for self-supervision in
dense mesh estimation.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of estimating 3D shape and pose of articulated objects
from single depth images. Speciﬁcally, we want to estimate the position of surface
mesh vertices of the human hand model. Unlike skeleton joints, dense mesh
vertices encode both pose and shape of the hand and enable a much wider range
of virtual and mixed reality applications. For example, one can directly put the
virtual hand in a VR game, or overlay a user’s hand surface with another texture
map in mixed reality. Furthermore, manipulation of virtual objects can naturally
be modelled through interaction of dense surface representations.
Estimating mesh vertices is signiﬁcantly more challenging than estimating
skeleton joints. First, the scale of the problem increases by several magnitudes.
To reasonably represent a human hand, one needs thousands of mesh vertices,
as opposed to tens of joint positions and angles. Secondly, getting accurate 3D
ground truth for the thousands of vertices from real-world data is extremely
diﬃcult even though having large amounts of labelled training data is crucial for
data-driven learning based methods.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 442–459, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_27

