Learning to Exploit Multiple Vision
Modalities by Using Grafted Networks
Yuhuang Hu(B) , Tobi Delbruck , and Shih-Chii Liu
Institute of Neuroinformatics, University of Zürich and ETH Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland
{yuhuang.hu,tobi,shih}@ini.uzh.ch
Abstract. Novel vision sensors such as thermal, hyperspectral, polarization, and event cameras provide information that is not available
from conventional intensity cameras. An obstacle to using these sensors with current powerful deep neural networks is the lack of large
labeled training datasets. This paper proposes a Network Grafting Algorithm (NGA), where a new front end network driven by unconventional
visual inputs replaces the front end network of a pretrained deep network
that processes intensity frames. The self-supervised training uses only
synchronously-recorded intensity frames and novel sensor data to maximize feature similarity between the pretrained network and the grafted
network. We show that the enhanced grafted network reaches competitive average precision (AP50 ) scores to the pretrained network on an
object detection task using thermal and event camera datasets, with no
increase in inference costs. Particularly, the grafted network driven by
thermal frames showed a relative improvement of 49.11% over the use
of intensity frames. The grafted front end has only 5–8% of the total
parameters and can be trained in a few hours on a single GPU equivalent to 5% of the time that would be needed to train the entire object
detector from labeled data. NGA allows new vision sensors to capitalize
on previously pretrained powerful deep models, saving on training cost
and widening a range of applications for novel sensors.
Keywords: Network Grafting Algorithm · Self-supervised learning ·
Thermal camera · Event-based vision · Object detection

1

Introduction

Novel vision sensors like thermal, hyperspectral, polarization, and event cameras
provide new ways of sensing the visual world and enable new or improved vision
system applications. So-called event cameras, for example, sense normal visible
light, but dramatically sparsify it to pure brightness change events, which provide sub-ms timing and HDR to oﬀer fast vision under challenging illumination
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 85–101, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_6

