Towards Eﬃcient Coarse-to-Fine
Networks for Action and Gesture
Recognition
Niamul Quader(B) , Juwei Lu, Peng Dai, and Wei Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Toronto, Canada
{niamul.quader1,juwei.lu,peng.dai,wei.li.crc}@huawei.com

Abstract. State-of-the-art approaches to video-based action and gesture recognition often employ two key concepts: First, they employ multistream processing; second, they use an ensemble of convolutional networks. We improve and extend both aspects. First, we systematically
yield enhanced receptive ﬁelds for complementary feature extraction
via coarse-to-ﬁne decomposition of input imagery along the spatial and
temporal dimensions, and adaptively focus on training important feature pathways using a reparameterized fully connected layer. Second, we
develop a ‘use when needed’ scheme with a ‘coarse-exit’ strategy that
allows selective use of expensive high-resolution processing in a datadependent fashion to retain accuracy while reducing computation cost.
Our C2F learning approach builds ensemble networks that outperform
most competing methods in terms of both reduced computation cost
and improved accuracy on the Something-Something V1, V2, and Jester
datasets, while also remaining competitive on the Kinetics-400 dataset.
Uniquely, our C2F ensemble networks can operate at varying computation budget constraints.
Keywords: Action and gesture recognition · Spatiotemporal coarse to
ﬁne decomposition · Weight reparameterization · Budgeted
computation

1

Introduction

The human visual system appears to process information across multiple spatial
and temporal scales in a coarse-to-ﬁne (C2F) fashion [22]. A key advantage of such a
strategy is that perception can be achieved without reliance on the most expensive
high resolution processing, as analysis can exit when the needed level of precision
has been achieved. Additionally, if all actions do not require equal resolutions, there
is no reason to use equal input resolutions to identify all actions.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 35–51, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_3

