Learning to Cluster under Domain Shift:
Supplementary Material
Willi Menapace1 , Stéphane Lathuilière3 , and Elisa Ricci1,2
1

University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
3
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Palaiseau, France
willi.menapace@gmail.com
2

1

Additional Implementation Details

We use a ResNet-18 backbone for all the experiments and report the hyperparameters used for each in Table 1. For all datasets we compose T using random crops, random horizontal flips and random hue, saturation and brightness
changes. The input resolution to the network is 64×64px and on our GPUS with
8GB of memory allows the use of a maximum batch size of 162 images. The
value of α is a function of the number of ground truth classes and the number
of source domains in each dataset. A larger number of ground truth classes C
causes a larger probability matrix Pcc0 to be estimated, while a higher number
of source domains empirically causes more instability, probably due to a higher
variance of features despite alignment. In particular, the PACS [3] dataset with
C = 7 does not suffer much from training instability problems, so a value of
α = 0.7 is chosen. On the other hand, the Office31 [4] and the Office-Home [5]
datasets with respectively C = 31 and C = 65 pose more stability problems. As
we note in our Ablation Study on the main paper, a value of α = 0.1 produces
the best results on the Office31 dataset when training on all the dataset domains.
Since in the standard experimental setting, however, we consider one domain as
the target and train on one less source domain, we decide to use a higher value
of α = 0.2. The number of classes produced by the overclustering head Coc is
chosen following [2] which obtains the best results when choosing a value from
5 to 7 times C. Note that on the Office-Home dataset, due to the high number
of ground truth classes, a factor of 2 is used. We use the Adam optimizer with
learning rate 10−4 in all the experiments.

2

Additional Details about Baselines

As stated in the main paper, we make use of the IIC [2] and DeepCluster [1]
algorithms as baselines for the evaluation of our method. With regards to the
IIC baseline, we make use of the same ResNet-18 backbone and the same hyperparameters reported in Table 1 to guarantee fairness in the evaluation. Note that
we do not employ the α-smoothing strategy in the IIC baseline in order to follow
their exact implementation. For DeepCluster, we use a ResNet-18 backbone and

