People as Scene Probes
Yifan Wang, Brian L. Curless, and Steven M. Seitz
University of Washington, Seattle
{yifan1,curless,seitz}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract. By analyzing the motion of people and other objects in a
scene, we demonstrate how to infer depth, occlusion, lighting, and shadow
information from video taken from a single camera viewpoint. This information is then used to composite new objects into the same scene with a
high degree of automation and realism. In particular, when a user places
a new object (2D cut-out) in the image, it is automatically rescaled, relit, occluded properly, and casts realistic shadows in the correct direction
relative to the sun, and which conform properly to scene geometry. We
demonstrate results (best viewed in supplementary video) on a range
of scenes and compare to alternative methods for depth estimation and
shadow compositing.

1

Introduction

The presence of people in an image reveals much about scene structure. Each
pedestrian effectively acts as a depth probe, whose image height is inversely proportional to distance. Similarly, people act as occlusion probes, revealing which
parts of the scene are in front of others, as they pass in front of or behind signs,
trees, cars, fences, and other structures. They also act as light probes, revealing
both how the scene casts light on them (shade vs. sun), as well as how they cast
shadows on the scene. Taken together (and over many observations), these cues
capture a great deal of information about the scene.
This paper presents techniques for inferring depth, occlusion, and lighting/shadow information from image sequences of a scene, through analysis of
people (and other objects such as cars). A key property of our approach is that
it is completely passive – unlike prior use of light probes [7], depth probes [4],
or shadow probes [5] which require actively placing and/or moving special objects in the scene; we recover all of this information purely from the images
themselves.
As an application, we focus on geometry- and lighting-aware image compositing, i.e., pasting new people or other objects into an image in a way that automatically accounts for depth, occlusions, lighting, and shadows. For example,
when you drag a segmented image of a person onto the image, it automatically
resizes her to be larger in the foreground and smaller in the background. Placing
her on the stairs will correctly occlude the car behind, and the system will add a
realistic shadow that bends over the stairs and onto the pavement below. Dragging her behind the tree close to a building automatically adds partial occlusion

