Supplementary material for
iCaps: An Interpretable Classifier
via Disentangled Capsule Networks
Dahuin Jung, Jonghyun Lee, Jihun Yi, and Sungroh Yoon
Electrical and Computer Engineering,
ASRI, INMC, and Institute of Engineering Research
Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, South Korea

S1

Experimental Details

Our code uses TensorFlow and Keras libraries. For the underlying DeepCaps [10]
code, we used the official Keras code uploaded by the authors of the original
paper. All experiments were implemented on one Titan V with a batch size of
64.
We resized the images as 64 for MNIST, SVHN, and CelebA datasets for
experimental convenience. We obtained the reported results within epochs 10–20
for the MNIST dataset, and epochs 20–30 for the SVHN and CelebA datasets.
For λM , λrecon , λG , λDG , λLGP , and λKL , we set the values to 100, 100, 1, 1,
10, and 0.0001, respectively, for all the three datasets. For λCS , λconcept , and
λCR , we increased the value from 3 to 5 at epoch 10, from 1 to 10 in the first
ten epochs, and from 0 to 1 at epoch 1, respectively, for the three datasets. For
λCG , we set the value to 1 in the case of CelebA and 1 for the original and
10 for swapping in the case of MNIST and SVHN. For λRS , we set the value
to 1 for CelebA and 0.001 for MNIST and SVHN. In addition, for Lrecon , the
structural similarity index [6] value was clearer than the mean squared error in
the cases of SVHN and CelebA datasets. Lastly, for batches 200-400 just before
the end of the training, we set λconcept as 0 to allow images to have concept
values, regardless of class labels.
We ran the code three times with the same hyperparameter setting to determine whether the same concepts consistently appear. Several concepts appeared
to be a little unclear; however, we saw consistent concepts in general.
In experiments, we investigate whether our method performs on par with noninterpretable (ResNet-18) and base (DeepCaps) methods. We confirmed that
iCaps provide a prediction along with proper rationales behind it with no performance degradation. Architecture details are given in Table. S1 and Fig. S1.
The architectures for MNIST, SVHN, and CelebA datasets are the same. One
difference is that for MMIST and SVHN, the capsule dimension of CC remains
at 4 till the final layer. We measured the number of model parameters needed for
each methods as shown in Table. S2. The number of parameters of our framework is 2-3 times more than that of ResNet-18 and DeepCaps. However, we think
that this is not a big increase because our framework can additionally offer an
explanation behind its own prediction.

