Stable Low-Rank Tensor Decomposition for
Compression of Convolutional Neural Network
Anh-Huy Phan1(B) , Konstantin Sobolev1 , Konstantin Sozykin1 , Dmitry Ermilov1 ,
Julia Gusak1 , Petr Tichavský2 , Valeriy Glukhov3 , Ivan Oseledets1 ,
and Andrzej Cichocki1
1

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Moscow, Russia
{a.phan,konstantin.sobolev,konstantin.sozykin,dmitrii.ermilov,y.gusak,
i.oseledets,a.cichocki}@skoltech.ru
2
The Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Information Theory and Automation,
Prague, Czech Republic
tichavsk@utia.cas.cz
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
glukhov.valery@huawei.com

Abstract. Most state-of-the-art deep neural networks are overparameterized and
exhibit a high computational cost. A straightforward approach to this problem is
to replace convolutional kernels with its low-rank tensor approximations, whereas
the Canonical Polyadic tensor Decomposition is one of the most suited models.
However, fitting the convolutional tensors by numerical optimization algorithms
often encounters diverging components, i.e., extremely large rank-one tensors but
canceling each other. Such degeneracy often causes the non-interpretable result
and numerical instability for the neural network ne-tuning. This paper is the first
study on degeneracy in the tensor decomposition of convolutional kernels. We
present a novel method, which can stabilize the low-rank approximation of convolutional kernels and ensure eﬃcient compression while preserving the highquality performance of the neural networks. We evaluate our approach on popular
CNN architectures for image classification and show that our method results in
much lower accuracy degradation and provides consistent performance.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network acceleration · Low-rank tensor
decomposition · Sensitivity · Degeneracy correction

1 Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and their recent extensions have significantly
increased their ability to solve complex computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, instance segmentation, image generation, etc. Together with big
data and fast development of the internet of things, CNNs bring new tools for solving
computer science problems, which are intractable using classical approaches.
Despite the great successes and rapid development of CNNs, most modern neural network architectures contain a huge number of parameters in the convolutional
c Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 522–539, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_31

