Supplementary Material:
TANet: Towards Fully Automatic Tooth
Arrangement
Guodong Wei1,2 , Zhiming Cui2 , Yumeng Liu2 , Nenglun Chen2 , Runnan Chen2 ,
Guiqing Li1 , and Wenping Wang2
1

1

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{csgdwei@mail, ligq}.scut.edu.cn
2
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{zmcui, lym29, nolenc, rnchen2, wenping}@cs.hku.hk

Post-processing

In order to ensure that our results are physically feasible, we propose a postprocessing module to eliminate collisions and spaces between teeth. We first
construct a discrete signed distance field around each tooth. Then we are able
to compute the penetration distance d between two adjacent teeth. Notice that
when d < 0, two teeth are intersected. Inspired by Jones [1], we remove collisions
and spaces by minimizing the barrier function
Ecollision = (

1
1
)12 − 2(
)6 ,
1 + d/dm
1 + d/dm

(1)

where dm is the sum of the maximum internal distance of two teeth. Let x =
d/dm ∈ (−1, +∞), the graph of this function is showed in Figure. 1(a). This
barrier function increases rapidly when d < 0, thus its gradient will cause separation between teeth. When two teeth are far from each other, the distance d > 0
and Ecollision will also get greater, but the magnitude of its gradient is relatively
small, which can maintain the spatial relationship of the input. Therefore this
module is able to avoid collision between teeth without creating gaps between
adjacent teeth.
The effect of our simple post-processing based on physical constraints is to
fine-tune the output of the neural network and make the final arrangement physical feasible, e.g. free of collision, without significant changes of positions of the
individual teeth in comparison with the output of the neural network. We have
evaluated our refinement module on the test set and the mean position displacement of tooth is about 0.768mm.

2

More Results

In this section, we provide more qualitative test examples to the main paper, including the visualization of occlusion fields, critical points and a qualitative comparison between our complete method and a baseline method (NetBL+Lrecon).

