Supplementary Material for:
Learning Modality Interaction for
Temporal Sentence Localization and
Event Captioning in Videos
Shaoxiang Chen1? , Wenhao Jiang2 , Wei Liu2 , and Yu-Gang Jiang1??
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Tencent AI Lab
{sxchen13, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, cswhjiang@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

1

Learning Latent Semantic Modality

Apart from the visual, motion, and audio modalities, which can be directly
observed (apparent modalities), the latent semantics modality that carries highlevel semantic information can be helpful for the language related tasks. We
design a lightweight network to perform semantic attributes prediction using
the sentence annotation provided by each dataset (either the video captioning
or the sentence localization dataset). Note that this is a standalone task and the
latent semantics modality is optional for our method.
The input of this network is the concatenation of all apparent modalities
X A = [X v ||X m ||X a ], where X A ∈ RN ×(da +dm +dv ) . We simply process X A
using bidirectional LSTMs and concatenate the hidden states of each LSTM:
−−−−→
←−−−−
X l = [LSTM(X A )||LSTM(X A )],

(1)

−−−−→
←−−−−
where X l ∈ RN ×2dhid , and LSTM(·) and LSTM(·) denote the LSTM networks
that have dhid units and process their input sequences in the forward and backward directions, respectively. X l is then passed through a fully-connected layer
with sigmoid activation to predict semantic attribute probabilities:
P = sigmoid(X l Wc + bc ),

(2)

where Wc and bc are parameters, P ∈ RC×N collects the temporal semantic
attributes, and C is the vocabulary size of predefined attributes.
To train this network, we construct labels from the sentence annotations in
event captioning or sentence localization datasets. We first process the training
sentences of a dataset, select the most frequent C words that are noun or verb,
and lemmatize them to form an attribute vocabulary. Then each sentence can
?
??

Part of the work is done when the author was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding author.

