Momentum Batch Normalization
for Deep Learning with Small Batch Size
Hongwei Yong1,2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Deyu Meng3,4 , Xiansheng Hua2 ,
and Lei Zhang1,2(B)
1

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
{cshyong,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, huaxiansheng@gmail.com
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
4
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. Normalization layers play an important role in deep network
training. As one of the most popular normalization techniques, batch
normalization (BN) has shown its eﬀectiveness in accelerating the model
training speed and improving model generalization capability. The success of BN has been explained from diﬀerent views, such as reducing
internal covariate shift, allowing the use of large learning rate, smoothing optimization landscape, etc. To make a deeper understanding of BN,
in this work we prove that BN actually introduces a certain level of noise
into the sample mean and variance during the training process, while
the noise level depends only on the batch size. Such a noise generation
mechanism of BN regularizes the training process, and we present an
explicit regularizer formulation of BN. Since the regularization strength
of BN is determined by the batch size, a small batch size may cause the
under-ﬁtting problem, resulting in a less eﬀective model. To reduce the
dependency of BN on batch size, we propose a momentum BN (MBN)
scheme by averaging the mean and variance of current mini-batch with
the historical means and variances. With a dynamic momentum parameter, we can automatically control the noise level in the training process.
As a result, MBN works very well even when the batch size is very small
(e.g., 2), which is hard to achieve by traditional BN.
Keywords: Batch normalization · Small batch size · Noise ·
Momentum

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 14) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 224–240, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_14

