Neural Architecture Optimization

1

Renqian Luo†∗, 2 Fei Tian†, 2 Tao Qin, 1 Enhong Chen, 2 Tie-Yan Liu
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
1
lrq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn
2
{fetia, taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Automatic neural architecture design has shown its potential in discovering powerful neural network architectures. Existing methods, no matter based on reinforcement learning or evolutionary algorithms (EA), conduct architecture search in a
discrete space, which is highly inefficient. In this paper, we propose a simple and
efficient method to automatic neural architecture design based on continuous optimization. We call this new approach neural architecture optimization (NAO). There
are three key components in our proposed approach: (1) An encoder embeds/maps
neural network architectures into a continuous space. (2) A predictor takes the
continuous representation of a network as input and predicts its accuracy. (3) A
decoder maps a continuous representation of a network back to its architecture.
The performance predictor and the encoder enable us to perform gradient based
optimization in the continuous space to find the embedding of a new architecture
with potentially better accuracy. Such a better embedding is then decoded to a
network by the decoder. Experiments show that the architecture discovered by
our method is very competitive for image classification task on CIFAR-10 and
language modeling task on PTB, outperforming or on par with the best results of
previous architecture search methods with a significantly reduction of computational resources. Specifically we obtain 2.11% test set error rate for CIFAR-10
image classification task and 56.0 test set perplexity of PTB language modeling
task. The best discovered architectures on both tasks are successfully transferred to
other tasks such as CIFAR-100 and WikiText-2. Furthermore, combined with the
recent proposed weight sharing mechanism, we discover powerful architecture on
CIFAR-10 (with error rate 3.53%) and on PTB (with test set perplexity 56.6), with
very limited computational resources (less than 10 GPU hours) for both tasks.

1

Introduction

Automatic design of neural network architecture without human intervention has been the interests of
the community from decades ago [12, 22] to very recent [45, 46, 27, 36, 7]. The latest algorithms for
automatic architecture design usually fall into two categories: reinforcement learning (RL) [45, 46,
34, 3] based methods and evolutionary algorithm (EA) based methods [40, 32, 36, 27, 35]. In RL
based methods, the choice of a component of the architecture is regarded as an action. A sequence
of actions defines an architecture of a neural network, whose dev set accuracy is used as the reward.
In EA based method, search is performed through mutations and re-combinations of architectural
components, where those architectures with better performances will be picked to continue evolution.
It can be easily observed that both RL and EA based methods essentially perform search within
the discrete architecture space. This is natural since the choices of neural network architectures are
∗
†

The work was done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

