SumGraph: Video Summarization via Recursive
Graph Modeling
-Supplementary Materials-

Jungin Park1? , Jiyoung Lee1? , Ig-Jae Kim2 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1??
1

2

Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology(KIST), Seoul, Korea
{newrun, easy00, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr
drjay@kist.re.kr

In this document, we provide more details of SumGraph and more experimental results on SumMe [2] and TVSum [7] dataset.

1

Network Architecture

Our networks are split into three parts: initial graph construction network to
construct an initial graph using features from the pretrained feature extractor,
recursive graph refinement network to obtain the initial graph by recursively
estimating and refining the graph, and summarization network to perform the
node classification. Although we use three graph convolution layers in the recursive graph refinement network, we can use fewer or more additional graph
convolutional layers. The overall architectures of SumGraph corresponding to
the number of graph convolution layers in the recursive graph refinement network are shown in Table 1.

2

Implementation and Training Details

Features. Following prior works [10, 11, 6], we uniformly sampled frames in the
video to 2 fps. And then, we fed sampled frames into the pretrained GoogleNet [8]
to extract the features from the pool5 layer. Note that any feature representation(e.g., C3D [9], I3D [1]) can be used for our model. For the fair comparison
with previous works, we mainly use GoogleNet features.
Groundtruth. The datasets we used in experiments (i.e., SumMe, TVSum,
OVP, and YouTube) provide the groundtruth annotations in a different format.
We record the groundtruth(GT) annotations used during training and testing
for different datasets in Table 2. Following [10, 11, 6], we generate the single set
of groundtruth keyframes for each training video from the multiple user annotations. For evaluation on testing videos, we convert the generated summaries
and the groundtruth summaries to the interval-based keyshot summaries [11,
6]. While SumMe dataset provides groundtruth in the form of keyshots, TVSum dataset needs to be converted from keyframe annotations to keyshot-based
?
??

Both authors contributed equally to this work
Corresponding author

