Supplementary Material - Why Are Deep
Representations Good Perceptual Quality
Features?
Taimoor Tariq1 , Okan Tarhan Tursun1 , Munchurl Kim2 , and Piotr Didyk1
1

1

Università della Svizzera italiana, Switzerland.
2
KAIST, South Korea.

Input Generation

One of the most important perceptual aspects of Human Visual System (HVS)
is the relation between its contrast sensitivity and spatial frequency. This relation is explained by the Contrast Sensitivity Function (CSF) which is estimated
by psychophysical experiments involving spatial sine-wave gratings. Our input
generation routine is closely related to those input stimuli which are used in CSF
experiments.
In order to make CSF function independent from a specific display device,
the spatial frequency is defined in cycles per degree (c/deg) units. When a display
device is used in experiments, it requires a conversion to device dependent units,
which is cycles per pixel. The conversion between those two types of units can
be expressed as a series of simple mathematical formulas using viewing distance
and physical dimensions of the screen.
In our experiments, we generate input gratings using cycles per pixel units
on a hypothetical display. In order to convert the spatial frequencies from CSF
into cycles per pixel, we fix viewing at a retinal resolution of 60 pixels per degree
(PPD) [5].
The relation between cycles per pixel, cycles per degree is and pixels per degree
is:
cycles
cycles
pixels −1
=
×(
) ,
(1)
pixel
degree
degree
To measure orientation selectivity, the spatial frequency of the input gratings
is set to the frequency where Human CSF peak sensitivity occurs. We set this
particular frequency to 8 cpd according to Mannos and Sakrison’s CSF model
[4].

2

Independent Attributes

The P E that we have defined combines both µ1 and µ2 with equal contribution.
Fig. 1 shows that both of them play their role in the ability of deep representations as perceptual features. When used independently, both the µ1 and µ2

