XingGAN for Person Image Generation
–Supplementary Material–
Hao Tang1,2 , Song Bai2 , Li Zhang2 , Philip H.S. Torr2 , and Nicu Sebe1,3
1

2

University of Trento (hao.tang@unitn.it)
University of Oxford 3 Huawei Research Ireland

This document provides additional experimental results on the person image generation task. First, we compare the proposed XingGAN with the most
state-of-the-art method Pose-Transfer [3] (Sec. 1). Additionally, we show more
ablation results of the proposed XingGAN (Sec. 2). Lastly, we also provide the
visualization results of the generated co-attention maps (Sec. 3).

1

State-of-the-Art Comparisons

In Fig. 1 and 2, we provide more generation results of the proposed XingGAN and
Pose-Transfer [3] on both the Market-1501 [2] and DeepFashion [1] datasets. Note
that we generated the results of Pose-Transfer [3] using the well-trained models
provided by the authors1 for fair comparisons. We observe that the proposed
XingGAN consistently achieves photo-realistic results with fewer visual artifacts
than Pose-Transfer on both challenging datasets.

2

More Ablation Results

In Fig. 3, we provide more qualitative ablation comparisons of the proposed
XingGAN on Market-1501. These results further demonstrate the advantage of
each component of the proposed XingGAN. Moreover, we observe that our full
model consistently generates more coherent and natural person images.
In Fig. 4, we show the results of varying the number of the proposed Xing
blocks on Market-1501. We observe that adopting about 9 Xing blocks makes
the generated person images more natural and realistic, revealing the benefits of
our progressive generation strategy.

3

Visualization of Co-Attention Maps

We also provide more visualization results of the generated co-attention maps
and intermediate results in Fig. 5. We show 10 randomly chosen intermediate
results, their corresponding 10 co-attention maps, and the input attention map.
It is clear that these co-attention maps have learned different activated content
between the generated intermediate results and the input image for generating
the final person images, revealing the effectiveness of the proposed co-attention
fusion module.
1

https://github.com/tengteng95/Pose-Transfer

