Regularization with Latent Space Virtual
Adversarial Training
Genki Osada1,2,5(B) , Budrul Ahsan1,3 , Revoti Prasad Bora4 ,
and TakashiNishide2
1

Philips Co-Creation Center, Tokyo, Japan
homerunrun@hotmail.com
2
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan
3
The Tokyo Foundation for Policy Research, Tokyo, Japan
4
Philips India Limited, Bangalore, India
5
I Dragon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract. Virtual Adversarial Training (VAT) has shown impressive
results among recently developed regularization methods called consistency regularization. VAT utilizes adversarial samples, generated by
injecting perturbation in the input space, for training and thereby
enhances the generalization ability of a classiﬁer. However, such adversarial samples can be generated only within a very small area around
the input data point, which limits the adversarial eﬀectiveness of such
samples. To address this problem we propose LVAT (Latent space VAT),
which injects perturbation in the latent space instead of the input space.
LVAT can generate adversarial samples ﬂexibly, resulting in more adverse
eﬀect and thus more eﬀective regularization. The latent space is built by
a generative model, and in this paper we examine two diﬀerent type of
models: variational auto-encoder and normalizing ﬂow, speciﬁcally Glow.
We evaluated the performance of our method in both supervised and
semi-supervised learning scenarios for an image classiﬁcation task using
SVHN and CIFAR-10 datasets. In our evaluation, we found that our
method outperforms VAT and other state-of-the-art methods.
Keywords: Consistency regularization · Adversarial training · Image
classiﬁcation · Semi-supervised learning · And unsupervised learning

1

Introduction

One of the goals of training machine learning models is to avoid overﬁtting.
To address overﬁtting, we use various regularization techniques. Recently consistency regularization has shown remarkable results to overcome overﬁtting
problems in deep neural networks. Consistency regularization is also known as
perturbation-based methods, and its basic strategy is to perturb inputs during
Revoti Prasad Bora—Currently working at Lowe’s Services India Pvt. Ltd.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 565–581, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_33

