Imaging Behind Occluders Using
Two-Bounce Light
Connor Henley(B) , Tomohiro Maeda, Tristan Swedish, and Ramesh Raskar
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
{co24401,tomotomo,tswedish,raskar}@mit.edu

Abstract. We introduce the new non-line-of-sight imaging problem of
imaging behind an occluder. The behind-an-occluder problem can be
solved if the hidden space is ﬂanked by opposing visible surfaces. We
illuminate one surface and observe light that scatters oﬀ of the opposing
surface after traveling through the hidden space. Hidden objects attenuate light that passes through the hidden space, leaving an observable
signature that can be used to reconstruct their shape. Our method uses
a simple capture setup—we use an eye-safe laser pointer as a light source
and oﬀ-the-shelf RGB or RGB-D cameras to estimate the geometry of
relay surfaces and observe two-bounce light. We analyze the photometric and geometric challenges of this new imaging problem, and develop a
robust method that produces high-quality 3D reconstructions in uncontrolled settings where relay surfaces may be non-planar.
Keywords: Non-line-of-sight imaging · Computational photography

1

Introduction

Traditional optical imaging techniques produce images using measurements of
light that has propagated directly, along a straight and unoccluded line of sight,
from an object or scene of interest to one’s imaging sensor. Non-line-of-sight
(NLOS) imaging techniques, by contrast, generate images from measurements
of light that has traveled from the object or scene of interest via indirect paths
that typically include reﬂections oﬀ of intermediate surfaces. NLOS imaging
techniques are particularly useful for looking behind things—walls, buildings,
vehicles—any opaque surface that blocks one’s line of sight to objects at greater
depths.
In this paper, we introduce a new NLOS imaging problem, which we will refer
to as the problem of imaging behind an occluder. The problem can be described
as follows: any opaque occluder will block an observer’s line of sight to all surfaces
that lie behind it, creating a hidden volume that extends to inﬁnite depth behind
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 34) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 573–588, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_34

