—Supplementary Material—
Event Enhanced High-Quality Image Recovery
Bishan Wang∗ , Jingwei He∗ , Lei Yu† , Gui-Song Xia, and Wen Yang
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{wangbs,jingwei he,ly.wd,guisong.xia,yangwen}@whu.edu.cn

1

Overview

In this material, we first give the detailed architectures of eSL-Net and more
training details. Then, we present ablation study to show the effectiveness of
our network architecture. Finally we provide additional visual results to show
the superiority of our eSL-Net. Dataset, code, and more results are available at:
https://github.com/ShinyWang33/eSL-Net.

2

Architecture Details of Proposed eSL-Net

The detailed architectures of proposed eSL-Net are illustrated here.
eSL-Net without super-resolution The network architecture of eSL-Net
without super-resolution is shown in Fig. 1, where D X is the low resolution dictionary. Note: “Conv(in channels, out channels, kh, kw)“ where “in channels“ is
the number of input channels, “out channels“ is the number of output channels,
“kh“ represents the height of kernels, and “hw“ is the width of kernels. There
are 187920 parameters in the eSL-Net without super-resolution.
eSL-Net with super-resolution The network architecture of eSL-Net with
super-resolution is shown in Fig. 1, where D X is the high resolution dictionary. There are 1322281 parameters in the eSL-Net with super-resolution. We
have also evaluated the proposed eSL-Net with input of size 240×180 and the
corresponding GFLOPs is 230.01, which is less than half of RCAN [6] (563
GFLOPs), a state-of-the-art image super-resolution network exploited to further super-resolve the results of the compared algorithms in Section 7 of our
paper. Moreover, eSL-Net is only with about 10% parameters of RCAN.

3

More Training Details

We trained eSL-Net on the synthetic training dataset. For eSL-Net without
super-resolution, the training dataset includes 22800 low-resolution clear images, 22800 low-resolution blurry images and 22800 event sequences. For eSLNet with super-resolution, the training dataset includes 22800 high-resolution
clear images, 22800 low-resolution blurry images and 22800 event sequences.
† Corresponding Author
* Equal contribution

