Segmenting Transparent Objects in the Wild
Enze Xie, Wenjia Wang2 , Wenhai Wang3 , Mingyu Ding1 ,
Chunhua Shen4 , and Ping Luo1
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
3
Nanjing University 4 The University of Adelaide

{xieenze, mingyuding}@hku.hk, wangwenjia@sensetime.com,
wangwenhai362@smail.nju.edu.cn, chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au,
pluo@cs.hku.hk

1

Detailed annotation information.

Our dataset contains 20 different categories of transparent objects. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), we count the number of images for different categories. We see
that for things, the “Cup” appears the most frequently while the “Stationery”
appears the least. For stuff, the “French Window” appears the most frequently
while the “Table” appears the least. Furthermore, our dataset also contains 13
scenarios. As shown in Fig. 1(b), we see that the “Desktop” is the most frequently
scene while the “Vechile” is the least scene. In summary, our Trans10K contains
abundant category distribution of transparent objects and scenarios, which is
not available in TOM-Net [1] and TransCut [2].

2

More visual results Analysis.

2.1

Failure Samples Analysis

As shown in Fig. 2, our method has some limitations. For example, in Fig. 2 (a),
when facing highly-transparency objects, our method will fail to segment in some
region. Fig. 2 (b) shows that some objects with strong reflection will also make
our method confuse and lead to wrong classification. In Fig. 2 (c), we can find
our method does not work well when some objects have overlap and occlusion
with transparent objects. Finally, in Fig. 2 (d), when semi-transparent objects
are adjacent with transparent objects, our method will also confuse.
2.2

Visual results on external data.

In this part, we also directly test our TransLab trained on Trans10K dataset
to evaluate the generalize ability of Trans10K dataset and the robustness of
TransLab. Firstly, we test our method on two prior datasets: TransCut [2] and
TOM-Net [1]. As shown in Fig. 3, our method can clearly output very highquality mask. Moreover, we also test our method on some external data randomly captured by our mobile phones or obtained from Internet videos such as
YouTube, TikTok and eBay. We see our TransLab can also successfully segment

