Regularized Loss for Weakly Supervised
Single Class Semantic Segmentation
Olga Veksler(B)
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L3G1, Canada
oveksler@uwaterloo.ca, https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~oveksler/

Abstract. Fully supervised semantic segmentation is highly successful,
but obtaining dense ground truth is expensive. Thus there is an increasing interest in weakly supervised approaches. We propose a new weakly
supervised method for training CNNs to segment an object of a single
class of interest. Instead of ground truth, we guide training with a regularized loss function. Regularized loss models prior knowledge about the
likely object shape properties and thus guides segmentation towards the
more plausible shapes. Training CNNs with regularized loss is diﬃcult.
We develop an annealing strategy that is crucial for successful training.
The advantage of our method is simplicity: we use standard CNN architectures and intuitive and computationally eﬃcient loss function. Furthermore, we apply the same loss function for any task/dataset, without
any tailoring. We ﬁrst evaluate our approach for salient object segmentation and co-segmentation. These tasks naturally involve one object class
of interest. In some cases, our results are only a few points of standard
performance measure behind those obtained training the same CNN with
full supervision, and state-of-the art results in weakly supervised setting.
Then we adapt our approach to weakly supervised multi-class semantic
segmentation and obtain state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [20,22] lead to a breakthrough in semantic segmentation [4,5,11,35,57]. Each year new architectures push the state of
the art in on fully labeled datasets [6,39,49]. However, labeling datasets is expensive. Thus there is an interest in segmentation without fully labeled data.
We consider a new approach to train CNNs in the absence of pixel precise
ground truth. Our approach is inspired by [40,41] who demonstrate the utility
of regularized loss1 for semantic segmentation with partially labeled data. Regularized losses are used in computer vision in the context of Conditional Random
1

In the context of CNNs, regularization is a term often used to refer to norm regularization on network weights [12], or other techniques to prevent overﬁtting. In this
work, regularized loss refers to the loss function on the output of CNN.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 21) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 348–365, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_21

