18

M. Kowalski et al.

6

Supplementary

6.1

High-resolution image generation

While, for simplicity and efficiency, all the experiments are performed on 256 ×
256 pixel images, it is straightforward to increase the output resolution by adding
additional layers to the generator and the image discriminators. Figure 9 shows
the results of ConfigNet trained at a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels.
6.2

Comparison to FaceID-GAN

We perform a qualitative comparison to FaceID-GAN [34] by fine-tuning ConfigNet on a number of images from the FFHQ validation set and generating a
variety of poses and expressions to match a figure shown in the FaceID-GAN paper. The results of this comparison are shown in Figure 10. While both methods
produce consistent poses and expression and preserve the identity well, ConfigNet outputs images with more consistent illumination and background. This
is best exemplified in the third row of Figure 10b where the direction and intensity of illumination stay constant despite change of head pose and expression.
6.3

Comparison to CycleGAN

We train CycleGAN [45] to convert images from the synthetic domain (SynthFace [3]) to the real domain (FFHQ [17]). We then generate synthetic image pairs
I+ and I− , where all the parameters except the modified attribute v are randomly generated and identical between the two images. These images are then
passed through CycleGAN and an attribute predictor trained on CelebA [23] to
generate the controllability metrics: Cpred (I+ ), Cpred (I− ) and MD (Section 4.1).
While CycleGAN and ConfigNet are not fully comparable, as the former does
not allow for modifying existing real face images, this simple procedure allows
us to compare the two methods in terms of the level of control over images in
the real domain.
Table 3 shows the controllability metric results for ConfigNet, CycleGAN and
the synthetic data generated with the procedure mentioned above. CycleGAN
obtains a slightly better dynamic range Cpred (I+ ) − Cpred (I− ) than ConfigNet,
at a cost of a larger mean absolute difference of other attributes. While the difference in MD may look small in absolute terms, the relative increase compared
to ConfigNet is 45%. This leads us to the conclusion that while CycleGAN can
preserve the very large difference between the values of the modified attribute
v in I+ and I− , it does not preserve other, more subtle, attributes that should
have remained constant. Figure 11 strenghtens this conclusion by showing the
effects of hair colour change performed with CycleGAN and ConfigNet, where
the former clearly changes other face attributes as well.
The controllability metric results produced by unmodified synthetic data
show lowest MD, which is expected, but also lowest dynamic range. We believe

