Robust and On-the-Fly Dataset
Denoising for Image Classification
Jiaming Song1(B) , Yann Dauphin2 , Michael Auli3 , and Tengyu Ma1(B)
1

Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{tsong,tengyuma}@stanford.edu
2
Google Brain, Mountain View, USA
yann@dauphin.io
3
Facebook AI Research, New York, USA
michaelauli@fb.com

Abstract. Memorization in over-parameterized neural networks could
severely hurt generalization in the presence of mislabeled examples. However, mislabeled examples are hard to avoid in extremely large datasets
collected with weak supervision. We address this problem by reasoning
counterfactually about the loss distribution of examples with uniform
random labels had they were trained with the real examples, and use
this information to remove noisy examples from the training set. First,
we observe that examples with uniform random labels have higher losses
when trained with stochastic gradient descent under large learning rates.
Then, we propose to model the loss distribution of the counterfactual
examples using only the network parameters, which is able to model
such examples with remarkable success. Finally, we propose to remove
examples whose loss exceeds a certain quantile of the modeled loss distribution. This leads to On-the-ﬂy Data Denoising (ODD), a simple yet
eﬀective algorithm that is robust to mislabeled examples, while introducing almost zero computational overhead compared to standard training.
ODD is able to achieve state-of-the-art results on a wide range of datasets
including real-world ones such as WebVision and Clothing1M.

1

Introduction

Over-parametrized deep neural networks have remarkable generalization properties while achieving near-zero training error [45]. However, the ability to ﬁt
the entire training set is highly undesirable, as a small portion of mislabeled
examples in the dataset could severely hurt generalization [1,45]. Meanwhile, an
exponential growth in training data size is required to linearly improve generalization in vision [37]; this progress could be hindered if there are mislabeled
examples within the dataset.
Work done at Facebook AI research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 33) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 556–572, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_33

