VoxelPose: Towards Multi-camera 3D
Human Pose Estimation in Wild
Environment
Hanyue Tu1,2 , Chunyu Wang1(B) , and Wenjun Zeng1
1

Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
chnuwa@microsoft.com, wezeng@microsoft.com
2
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
tuhanyue@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract. We present VoxelPose to estimate 3D poses of multiple people from multiple camera views. In contrast to the previous eﬀorts which
require to establish cross-view correspondence based on noisy and incomplete 2D pose estimates, VoxelPose directly operates in the 3D space
therefore avoids making incorrect decisions in each camera view. To
achieve this goal, features in all camera views are aggregated in the 3D
voxel space and fed into Cuboid Proposal Network (CPN) to localize all
people. Then we propose Pose Regression Network (PRN) to estimate
a detailed 3D pose for each proposal. The approach is robust to occlusion which occurs frequently in practice. Without bells and whistles, it
outperforms the previous methods on several public datasets.
Keyword: 3D human pose estimation

1

Introduction

Estimating 3D human pose from multiple cameras separated by wide baselines
[1–7] has been a longstanding problem in computer vision. The goal is to predict
3D positions of the landmark joints for all people in a scene. The successful
resolution of the task can beneﬁt many applications such as intelligent sports [5]
and retail analysis.
The previous works such as [4,5] propose to address the problem in three
steps. They ﬁrst estimate 2D poses in each camera view independently, for example, by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [8,9]. Then, in the second step,
the poses that correspond to the same person in diﬀerent views are grouped
into clusters according to appearance and geometry cues. The ﬁnal step is to
estimate a 3D pose for each person (i.e. each cluster) by standard methods such
as triangulation [10] or pictorial structure models [11].
In spite of the fact that 2D pose estimation has quickly matured due to the
development of CNN models [12,13], the estimation results are still unsatisfactory for challenging cases especially when occlusion occurs which is often the
This work is done when Hanyue Tu is an intern at Microsoft Research Asia.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 197–212, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_12

