Supplementary Material:
Transformation Consistency Regularization– A
Semi-Supervised Paradigm for Image-to-Image
Translation
Aamir Mustafa and Rafal K. Mantiuk
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge, UK
{am2806,rafal.mantiuk}@cl.cam.ac.uk

1

Performance with Perceptual and L1 Loss

In our experiments, we follow the exact same training protocol as reported in
the original papers for image colorization, denoising ans super-resolution. We
found that the addition of Transformation Consistency Regularization (TRC) in
a semi-supervised fashion results in substantial performance boost when meansquared error (L2 ) is used as a loss function. In this section, we evaluate the
efficacy of TRC for image super-resolution application when L2 loss (Eq. 3 in
the main paper) is replaced with perceptual loss [2, 3] or L1 loss [7].
While pixel level L2 loss is a commonly used SISR protocol, Ledig et al. in
SRGAN designed a loss function based on the perceptually relevant characteristics of images [4] for image super-resolution. To show TCR is robust to the
selection of the loss function, we perform additional experiments relying on using loss function that is closer to the perceptual similarity. For an unlabeled
data sample ui and its geometric transform T (ui ), to compute the perceptual
loss, we extract the feature maps from from a pre-trained VGG-19 network φ(·)
[6] and compute the euclidean distance between the two. Mathematically, the
perceptual loss Lp (u) is given by:
rB
M

 2
1 X 1 X
Lp (u) =
k Tm φ(fθ (ui )) − φ(fθ (Tm (ui )) k2
rB i=1 M m=1

(1)

Here fθ (·) is the super-resolution model used in our experiments, rB is the
number of unsupervised samples fed to the network per batch and Tm (·) is the
m-th geometric transformation. To train the model, we equivalently change the
supervised loss in Eq. 2 (main paper) to the following:
Ls (x, y) =

B

 2
1 X
k φ fθ (xi ) − φ yi k2
B i=1

(2)

The feature representations as extracted from deeper layers of the VGG network, which convey more information about the content of the images [5, 2, 4].

