PatchNets: Patch-Based Generalizable
Deep Implicit 3D Shape Representations
Edgar Tretschk1 , Ayush Tewari1 , Vladislav Golyanik1(B) , Michael Zollhöfer2 ,
Carsten Stoll2 , and Christian Theobalt1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus,
Saarbrücken, Germany
golyanik@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract. Implicit surface representations, such as signed-distance
functions, combined with deep learning have led to impressive models
which can represent detailed shapes of objects with arbitrary topology.
Since a continuous function is learned, the reconstructions can also be
extracted at any arbitrary resolution. However, large datasets such as
ShapeNet are required to train such models.
In this paper, we present a new mid-level patch-based surface representation. At the level of patches, objects across diﬀerent categories share
similarities, which leads to more generalizable models. We then introduce
a novel method to learn this patch-based representation in a canonical
space, such that it is as object-agnostic as possible. We show that our
representation trained on one category of objects from ShapeNet can also
well represent detailed shapes from any other category. In addition, it can
be trained using much fewer shapes, compared to existing approaches.
We show several applications of our new representation, including shape
interpolation and partial point cloud completion. Due to explicit control
over positions, orientations and scales of patches, our representation is
also more controllable compared to object-level representations, which
enables us to deform encoded shapes non-rigidly.
Keywords: Implicit functions · Patch-based surface representation ·
Intra-object class generalizability

1

Introduction

Several 3D shape representations exist in the computer vision and computer
graphics communities, such as point clouds, meshes, voxel grids and implicit
functions. Learning-based approaches have mostly focused on voxel grids due to
their regular structure, suited for convolutions. However, voxel grids [5] come
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 18) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 293–309, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_18

