Supplementary Material for
“DHP: Differentiable Meta Pruning via
HyperNetworks”
Yawei Li1 , Shuhang Gu1,2 , Kai Zhang1 , Luc Van Gool1,3 , Radu Timofte1
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 KU Leuven
{yawei.li, kai.zhang, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
shuhanggu@gmail.com

In this supplementary material, we first detail the training and testing protocol of the networks for different tasks in Sec. 1. Then the latent vector sharing
strategy is shown in Sec. 2. More results are shown in Sec. 3.

1

Training and Testing Protocol

As explained in the main paper, the proposed DHP method does not rely on
the pretrained model. Thus, all of the networks are trained and pruned from
scratch. The hypernetworks are first randomly initialized. Proximal gradient
is used to sparsify the latent vectors. When the difference between the target
and the actual FLOPs compression ratio is below 2%, the pruning procedure
stops. Then the pruned latent vectors as well as the pruned outputs of the
hypernetworks are derived. After that, the outputs of hypernetworks are used as
the weight parameters of the backbone network and updated by SGD or Adam
algorithm directly. After the pruning procedure, the hypernetworks are removed.
The training continues and the training protocol are the same as that utilized
for training the original network. The number of pruning epochs is much smaller
than that used for training the original network. The following of the section
describes the training protocols of different tasks.
1.1

Image Classification

CIFAR10 CIFAR10 [6] contains 10 different classes. The training and testing
subsets contain 50,000 and 10,000 images with resolution 32 × 32, respectively.
As done by prior works [3, 4], we normalize all images using channel-wise mean
and standard deviation of the the training set. Standard data augmentation is
also applied. The networks are trained for 300 epochs with SGD optimizer and
an initial learning rate of 0.1. The learning rate is decayed by 10 after 50% and
75% of the epochs. The momentum of SGD is 0.9. Weight decay factor is set to
0.0001. The batch size is 64.
Tiny-ImageNet For image classification, the pruning method is also compared
on Tiny-Imagenet. It has 200 classes. Each class has 500 training images and

