Probabilistic Future Prediction for Video
Scene Understanding
Anthony Hu1,2(B) , Fergal Cotter1 , Nikhil Mohan1 , Corina Gurau1 ,
and Alex Kendall1,2
1

Wayve, London, UK
anthony@wayve.ai
2
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

Abstract. We present a novel deep learning architecture for probabilistic future prediction from video. We predict the future semantics, geometry and motion of complex real-world urban scenes and use this representation to control an autonomous vehicle. This work is the ﬁrst to jointly
predict ego-motion, static scene, and the motion of dynamic agents in a
probabilistic manner, which allows sampling consistent, highly probable
futures from a compact latent space. Our model learns a representation from RGB video with a spatio-temporal convolutional module. The
learned representation can be explicitly decoded to future semantic segmentation, depth, and optical ﬂow, in addition to being an input to a
learnt driving policy. To model the stochasticity of the future, we introduce a conditional variational approach which minimises the divergence
between the present distribution (what could happen given what we have
seen) and the future distribution (what we observe actually happens).
During inference, diverse futures are generated by sampling from the
present distribution.

1

Introduction

Building predictive cognitive models of the world is often regarded as the essence
of intelligence. It is one of the ﬁrst skills that we develop as infants. We use
these models to enhance our capability at learning more complex tasks, such as
navigation or manipulating objects [50].
Unlike in humans, developing prediction models for autonomous vehicles to
anticipate the future remains hugely challenging. Road agents have to make
reliable decisions based on forward simulation to understand how relevant parts
of the scene will evolve. There are various reasons why modelling the future
is incredibly diﬃcult: natural-scene data is rich in details, most of which are
irrelevant for the driving task, dynamic agents have complex temporal dynamics,
often controlled by unobservable variables, and the future is inherently uncertain,
as multiple futures might arise from a unique and deterministic past.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 45) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 767–785, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_45

