Supplemental Material: Conditional Entropy
Coding for Efficient Video Compression
Jerry Liu1 , Shenlong Wang1,2 , Wei-Chiu Ma1,3 , Meet Shah1 ,
Rui Hu1 , Pranaab Dhawan1 , Raquel Urtasun1,2
Uber ATG1 , University of Toronto2 , MIT3
{jerryl, slwang, weichiu, meet.shah, rui.hu, pdhawan, urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we first showcase additional
qualitative results in the attached video. We then showcase additional
quantitative results on two additional evaluation datasets, MCL-JVC
and VTL, as well as additional runtime results. Moreover, we provide additional neural network architecture details for the encoder/decoder and
the conditional entropy module. We then conduct some additional quantitative ablation analysis: showcasing effects of internal learning steps on
rate-distortion performance, effects of GoP sizes in video codec performance, and effects of input frames on performance.

1

Additional Qualitative Results

We first provide additional qualitative results in the form of a video, attached
as eccv2020_supp.mp4. In the video, we highlight our compression framework
vs. H.265 veryslow on 3 low-framerate video sequences - the first two 12Hz UVG
video and the last one 10Hz NorthAmerica video. Our approach outperforms
H.265 in these settings in MS-SSIM while achieving a lower bitrate. Qualitatively,
we can see that while H.265 tends to introduce motion artifacts within various
frames in these low framerate settings, our approach preserves a more even
quality of detail within each frame.
Additionally, we provide a few more frame comparisons of our approach vs.
H.265 veryslow and H.264 veryslow in Fig. 1. We see a similar pattern as demonstrated in the video. Because our reconstructions contain less variance in detail
quality, they also contain fewer artifacts compared to H.265 and H.264. We do
note, however, that H.265 / H.264 tends to assign more bits to certain high
frequency details, such as text, providing slightly sharper outputs than our approach.

2

Evaluations on Additional Datasets

We run additional evaluations on two datasets, MCL-JVC [6] and Video Trace
Library (VTL) [2]. MCL-JVC is a video benchmarking dataset consisting of
1920x1080 video frames ranging from 24-30fps. VTL is a video benchmark dataset

