18

A

W. Peebles et al.

Implementation Details

Figure 1 in the main paper presents the basic implementation for the Hessian
Penalty. We go into more details about implementation for each experiment
below:
A.1

ProGAN Experiments

When fine-tuning ProGAN, we find that it is critical to gradually phase-in the
Hessian Penalty by ramping-up the loss weight at iteration t (call it t ) over T
gradient steps:
✓
◆
t
(9)
t = min 1,
T
We find that settings such as T = 105 or T = 106 tend to work well across
datasets. Without this warm-up, the generator sometimes collapses with the
additional regularization term imposed on it. Even with the linear warm-up, we
commonly observed a sudden decrease in image quality (as well as a sudden spike
in Fréchet Inception Distance (FID)) at the beginning of fine-tuning, usually
followed by a quick recovery. Perceptual Path Length (PPL) also rapidly decreases
at the start of fine-tuning. Increasing T decreases the spikes in both FID and
PPL. When training from scratch with the Hessian Penalty, such a warm-up was
not needed.
We apply the Hessian Penalty to the generator’s intermediate activations
instead of its direct output in pixel space. Specifically, we regularize the first 10
convolutions in the network following pixel normalization. In all experiments, we
set the blur factor ✏ = 0.1 and sampled two Rademacher vectors to compute the
variance term in the Hessian Penalty.
We set = 0.1 for the Edges+Shoes, CLEVR-Simple and CLEVR-Complex
Hessian Penalty experiments. We used = 0.025 for the CLEVR-1FOV and
CLEVR-U experiments because we found using = 0.1 led to excessive degradation of image quality at the beginning of fine-tuning for these models.
For the InfoGAN baseline, we add a second head to the discriminator as
in the original paper. We optimize a mean squared error between the head’s
output and a portion of the z vector that generated the corresponding image. We
use a loss weighting of 1.0. To strengthen the InfoGAN baseline in the CLEVR
experiments, we only regularize c components, where c is the true number of
factors of variation.
A.2

BigGAN

To learn the matrix of directions A, we optimize the Hessian Penalty in pixel
space of G(z + ✏Awi ) w.r.t. wi , where wi is a one at index i and zeros elsewhere,
i is uniformly sampled and ⌘ ⇠ U [ 5, 5], as in [40]. We also tried applying
the Hessian Penalty to intermediate activations of G, but we did not observe a

