Few-shot Compositional Font Generation
with Dual Memory – Appendix

A

Network Architecture Details

A.1

Memory addressors

Algorithm 1: Unicode-based Korean letter decomposition function
Input: A character label yc
Output: Component labels uc1 , uc2 , and uc3
Data: The number of components for each i-th component type Ni .
unicode = ToUnicode(yc )
// 0xAC00 is the initial Korean Unicode
code = unicode - 0xAC00
uc3 = code mod N3
uc2 = (code div N3 ) mod N2
uc1 = code div (N3 × N2 )
The memory addressor converts character label yc to the set of component
labels uci by the pre-defined decomposition function fd : yc 7→ {uci | i = 1 . . . Mc },
where uci is the label of i-th component of yc and Mc is the number of sub-glyphs
for yc . In this paper, we employ Unicode-based decomposition functions specified
to each language. We describe the decomposition function for Korean script as an
example in Algorithm 1. The function disassembles a character into component
labels by the pre-defined rule. On the other hand, each Thai character consists
of several Unicodes, each of which corresponds to one component. Therefore,
each Unicode constituting the letter is a label itself. The Thai decomposition
function only needs to determine the component type of each Unicode.
A.2

Network architecture

The proposed architecture has two important properties: global-context awareness and local-style preservation. Global-context awareness allows the relational
reasoning between components to the network, boosting to disassemble source
glyphs into sub-glyphs and assemble them to the target glyph. Local-style preservation indicates that the local style of source glyph is reflected in the target.
For the global-context awareness, the encoder adopts global-context block
(GCBlock) [3] and self-attention block (SABlock) [19,17], and the decoder employs hourglass block (HGBlock) [16,12]. These blocks extend the receptive field
globally and facilitate relational reasoning between components while preserving
locality. For the local-style preservation, the network handles multi-level features
based on the dual memory framework. The specific architecture overview is described visually in Figure A.1.

