Collaboration by Competition:
Self-coordinated Knowledge Amalgamation for
Multi-talent Student Learning
– Supplementary Material –
In this document, we provide the additional details and results, which we
cannot fit into the manuscript due to the page limit. In the first section, we
demonstrate the architecture of the student network. In the second section, we
provide details about the quantitative task transferability, which are utilized to
decide if and which auxiliary pre-trained model (PTM) shall be introduced. In
the third section, we show the results of student network with more target tasks,
and comparison with the teahcer PTMs as well as knowledge distillation [2].
Besides, we also provide the qualitative performance of the multi-talent student.
In the last section, we compare our multi-talent student model with multiple
distilled students each specialized in a distinct task.

1

Model Architecture

The architecture of the student model utilized in the experiment is adapted from
the taskonomy [3] teacher models. We used Tensorflow for our implementation.
As for the shared encoder of student network, a modified ResNet-50 encoder
with no average-pooling and replace the last stride 2 convolution with stride 1.
This gives us an output shape of 16 × 16 × 2048; we use a 3 × 3 convolution
to transform the output to our final shared representation, which is of shape
16 × 16 × 8. The shared representation is then fed to the multiple decoders for
task specific inference.
In fact, the shape of the decoder depends on the task. For pixels-to-pixels
prediction utilized in this paper, we use the 15-layer fully convolutional decoders,
which consist of 5 convolutional layers, and followed by alternating convolution
and convolution transpose layers. Besides, batchnorm is used for all layers (except output).
As done in [3], we also used a CGAN in addition to the objective distillation
loss function for the pixels-to-pixels prediction tasks. The GAN training began
after 25000 steps, and the discriminator was 5 layers with 10. the standard weight
decay. The loss was a linear combination of the 0.996× the soft target distillation
loss and 0.004× the GAN loss.

2

Quantitative Task Similarity

As aforementioned in the main text, we decide whether auxiliary PTM shall be
introduced and which PTM is beneficial for multi-modal incorporated amalga-

