Post-training Piecewise Linear
Quantization for Deep Neural Networks
Jun Fang1(B) , Ali Shaﬁee1 , Hamzah Abdel-Aziz1 , David Thorsley1 ,
Georgios Georgiadis2 , and Joseph H. Hassoun1
1

Samsung Semiconductor, Inc., San Jose, USA
{jun.fang,ali.shafiee,hamzah.a,d.thorsley,j.hassoun}@samsung.com
2
Microsoft, Redmond, USA
georgios.georgiadis@microsoft.com

Abstract. Quantization plays an important role in the energy-eﬃcient
deployment of deep neural networks on resource-limited devices. Posttraining quantization is highly desirable since it does not require retraining or access to the full training dataset. The well-established uniform
scheme for post-training quantization achieves satisfactory results by
converting neural networks from full-precision to 8-bit ﬁxed-point integers. However, it suﬀers from signiﬁcant performance degradation when
quantizing to lower bit-widths. In this paper, we propose a piecewise
linear quantization (PWLQ) scheme (Code will be made available at
https://github.com/jun-fang/PWLQ) to enable accurate approximation
for tensor values that have bell-shaped distributions with long tails.
Our approach breaks the entire quantization range into non-overlapping
regions for each tensor, with each region being assigned an equal number of quantization levels. Optimal breakpoints that divide the entire
range are found by minimizing the quantization error. Compared to
state-of-the-art post-training quantization methods, experimental results
show that our proposed method achieves superior performance on image
classiﬁcation, semantic segmentation, and object detection with minor
overhead.
Keywords: Deep neural networks · Post-training quantization ·
Piecewise linear quantization

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art
results in a variety of learning tasks including image classiﬁcation [19,23,24,29,
G. Georgiadis—Work performed while at Samsung Semiconductor, Inc.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 5) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 69–86, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_5

