Yet Another Intermediate-Level Attack
Qizhang Li1 , Yiwen Guo1(B) , and Hao Chen2
1

ByteDance AI Lab, Beijing, China
{liqizhang,guoyiwen.ai}@bytedance.com
2
University of California, Davis, USA
chen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract. The transferability of adversarial examples across deep neural network (DNN) models is the crux of a spectrum of black-box attacks.
In this paper, we propose a novel method to enhance the black-box transferability of baseline adversarial examples. By establishing a linear mapping of the intermediate-level discrepancies (between a set of adversarial
inputs and their benign counterparts) for predicting the evoked adversarial loss, we aim to take full advantage of the optimization procedure of
mulch-step baseline attacks. We conducted extensive experiments to verify the eﬀectiveness of our method on CIFAR-100 and ImageNet. Experimental results demonstrate that it outperforms previous state-of-the-arts
considerably. Our code is at https://github.com/qizhangli/ila-plus-plus.
Keywords: Adversarial examples · Transferability · Feature maps

1

Introduction

The adversarial vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs) has been extensively studied over the years [1,3,8,10,11,24,25,34]. It has been demonstrated
that intentionally crafted perturbations, that are small enough to be imperceptible to human eyes, on a natural image can fool advanced DNNs to make arbitrary
(incorrect) predictions. Along with this intriguing phenomenon, it is also pivotal
that the adversarial examples crafted on one DNN model can fail another with
a non-trivial success rate [8,34]. Such a property, called the transferability (or
generalization ability) of adversarial examples, plays a vital role in many blackbox adversarial scenarios [27,28], where the architecture and parameters of the
victim model is hardly accessible.
Endeavors have been devoted to studying the transferability of adversarial
examples. Very recently, intermediate-layer attacks [15,18,41] have been proposed to improve the transferability. It was empirically shown that larger midlayer disturbance (in feature maps) leads to higher transferability in general. In
this paper, we propose a new method for improving the transferability of adversarial examples generated by any baseline attack, just like in [15]. Our method
Q. Li—Work done during an internship at Bytedance AI Lab, under the guidance of
Yiwen Guo who is the corresponding author.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 241–257, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_15

