Quantum-Soft QUBO Suppression
for Accurate Object Detection
Junde Li(B) and Swaroop Ghosh
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
{jul1512,szg212}@psu.edu

Abstract. Non-maximum suppression (NMS) has been adopted by
default for removing redundant object detections for decades. It eliminates false positives by only keeping the image M with highest detection
score and images whose overlap ratio with M is less than a predeﬁned
threshold. However, this greedy algorithm may not work well for object
detection under occlusion scenario where true positives with lower detection scores are possibly suppressed. In this paper, we ﬁrst map the task
of removing redundant detections into Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimization (QUBO) framework that consists of detection score from
each bounding box and overlap ratio between pair of bounding boxes.
Next, we solve the QUBO problem using the proposed Quantum-soft
QUBO Suppression (QSQS) algorithm for fast and accurate detection
by exploiting quantum computing advantages. Experiments indicate that
QSQS improves mean average precision from 74.20% to 75.11% for PASCAL VOC 2007. It consistently outperforms NMS and soft-NMS for
Reasonable subset of benchmark pedestrian detection CityPersons.
Keywords: Object detection · Quantum computing · Pedestrian
detection · Occlusion

1

Introduction

Object detection helps image semantic understanding by locating and classifying
objects in many applications such as, image classiﬁcation [16], face recognition
[6,30], autonomous driving [7,8], and surveillance [20]. It has been developed
from handcrafted features to Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) features, and
from sliding windows to region proposals. Redundant bounding boxes are eliminated by default using Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) for decades. However,
greedy NMS can lead to detection misses for detection of partially occluded
objects by completely suppressing neighbouring bounding boxes when overlap
threshold is reached. While improvements have been made in [5,14,17,26], a
better algorithm is still a necessity for accurately retaining true positive object
locations, especially for pedestrian detection where occluded people are common. This is particularly important for autonomous systems that need to make
accurate decisions even under occluded situations to guarantee safe operations.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 158–173, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_10

