Deep Spatial-Angular Regularization
for Compressive Light Field
Reconstruction over Coded Apertures
Mantang Guo1 , Junhui Hou1(B) , Jing Jin1 , Jie Chen2 , and Lap-Pui Chau3
1

Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China
{mantanguo2-c,jingjin25-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
2
Department of Computer Science,
Hong Kong Baptist University,
Hong Kong, China
jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk, chenjie@comp.hkbu.edu.hk
3
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang, Singapore
elpchau@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. Coded aperture is a promising approach for capturing the
4-D light ﬁeld (LF), in which the 4-D data are compressively modulated
into 2-D coded measurements that are further decoded by reconstruction
algorithms. The bottleneck lies in the reconstruction algorithms, resulting in rather limited reconstruction quality. To tackle this challenge, we
propose a novel learning-based framework for the reconstruction of highquality LFs from acquisitions via learned coded apertures. The proposed
method incorporates the measurement observation into the deep learning
framework elegantly to avoid relying entirely on data-driven priors for LF
reconstruction. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst formulate the compressive LF reconstruction as an inverse problem with an implicit regularization term.
Then, we construct the regularization term with an eﬃcient deep spatialangular convolutional sub-network to comprehensively explore the signal
distribution free from the limited representation ability and ineﬃciency
of deterministic mathematical modeling. Experimental results show that
the reconstructed LFs not only achieve much higher PSNR/SSIM but
also preserve the LF parallax structure better, compared with state-ofthe-art methods on both real and synthetic LF benchmarks. In addition,
experiments show that our method is eﬃcient and robust to noise, which
is an essential advantage for a real camera system. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/angmt2008/LFCA.
Keywords: Light ﬁeld · Coded aperture · Deep learning ·
Regularization · Observation model
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 17) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 278–294, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_17

