Learning Lane Graph Representations
for Motion Forecasting
Ming Liang1(B) , Bin Yang1,2 , Rui Hu1 , Yun Chen1 , Renjie Liao1,2 , Song Feng1 ,
and Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Uber ATG, Pittsburgh, USA
{ming.liang,byang10,rui.hu,yun.chen,rjliao,songf,urtasun}@uber.com
2
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Abstract. We propose a motion forecasting model that exploits a novel
structured map representation as well as actor-map interactions. Instead
of encoding vectorized maps as raster images, we construct a lane graph
from raw map data to explicitly preserve the map structure. To capture
the complex topology and long range dependencies of the lane graph, we
propose LaneGCN which extends graph convolutions with multiple adjacency matrices and along-lane dilation. To capture the complex interactions between actors and maps, we exploit a fusion network consisting of
four types of interactions, actor-to-lane, lane-to-lane, lane-to-actor and
actor-to-actor. Powered by LaneGCN and actor-map interactions, our
model is able to predict accurate and realistic multi-modal trajectories.
Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art on the large
scale Argoverse motion forecasting benchmark.
Keywords: HD map · Motion forecasting · Autonomous driving

1

Introduction

Autonomous driving has the potential to revolutionize transportation. Selfdriving vehicles (SDVs) have to accurately predict the future motions of other
traﬃc participants in order to safely operate. High Deﬁnition maps (HD-maps)
provide extremely useful geometric and semantic information for motion forecasting, as the behaviors of actors largely depend on the map topology. For
example, a vehicle is unlikely to take a left turn when there is not a left turn
lane nearby. Eﬀectively exploiting HD maps is essential for motion forecasting
models to produce plausible and accurate trajectories.
First attempts exploit HD maps as heuristics [42]. Actors are ﬁrst associated
with lanes and all candidate motion paths are then generated based on map
topology. In this way, the prediction results are constrained by the map. However,
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 32) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 541–556, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_32

