Supplementary Material: Class-wise Dynamic
Graph Convolution for Semantic Segmentation
Hanzhe Hu1[0000−0003−2799−2655] *, Deyi Ji2[0000−0001−7561−9789] ,
Weihao Gan2 , Shuai Bai3 , Wei Wu2 , and Junjie Yan2
1
Peking University, Beijing, China
SenseTime Group Limited, Beijing, China
3
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
huhz@pku.edu.cn, {jideyi,ganweihao,wuwei,
yanjunjie}@sensetime.com, baishuai@bupt.edu.cn
2

In this supplementary material, we provide additional experimental and visualization results. In section 1, we present the impact on boundary accuracy of
our proposed CDGCNet. And in section 2, class-wise feature maps are presented.
Then some qualitative results on evaluated datasets are shown in section 3.

1

Impact on boundary accuracy

To validate the effectiveness of dynamic sampling method in mining hard samples which occur in boundary areas, we design an experiment to show that
our method improves boundary precision. Following [4,5], we adopt a standard
trimap approach where we compute the classification accuracy within a band
(called trimap) of varying width around boundaries of segments(shown in Fig. 2).
As shown in Fig. 1, we use deeplab v3 as baseline and compute the boundary
accuracy gain over baseline of CDGC module with two graph construction methods: similarity graph and dynamic sampling. The results indicate that dynamic
sampling graph construction method effectively improves the vicinity of boundaries compared with baseline method and CDGC module with simple similarity
graph, hence preserving more details.

2

Visualizations of Class-wise Features

As shown in Fig. 3, we provide additional visualizations of class-wise features
before and after graph convolution evaluated on Cityscapes[2] validation set. It
can be seen that our proposed CDGC module can effectively deal with hard
samples, hence obtaining a better segmentation results in a class-wise manner.
Concisely, ambiguity such as hard positive and hard negative samples is well
taken care of. Moreover, CDGC module can significantly increase the confidence
of classification on indistinguishable pixels.
* This work is done when Hanzhe Hu is an intern at SenseTime Group Limited.

