Deep Reinforced Attention Learning
for Quality-Aware Visual Recognition
Duo Li and Qifeng Chen(B)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Kowloon, Hong Kong
duo.li@connect.ust.hk, cqf@ust.hk

Abstract. In this paper, we build upon the weakly-supervised generation mechanism of intermediate attention maps in any convolutional
neural networks and disclose the eﬀectiveness of attention modules more
straightforwardly to fully exploit their potential. Given an existing neural
network equipped with arbitrary attention modules, we introduce a meta
critic network to evaluate the quality of attention maps in the main network. Due to the discreteness of our designed reward, the proposed learning method is arranged in a reinforcement learning setting, where the
attention actors and recurrent critics are alternately optimized to provide instant critique and revision for the temporary attention representation, hence coined as Deep REinforced Attention Learning (DREAL). It
could be applied universally to network architectures with diﬀerent types
of attention modules and promotes their expressive ability by maximizing
the relative gain of the ﬁnal recognition performance arising from each
individual attention module, as demonstrated by extensive experiments
on both category and instance recognition benchmarks.
Keywords: Convolutional Neural Networks · Attention modules ·
Reinforcement learning · Visual recognition

1

Introduction

Attention is a perception process that aggregates global information and selectively attends to the meaningful parts while neglects other uninformative ones.
Mimicking the attention mechanism has allowed deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to eﬃciently extract useful features from redundant information
contexts of images, videos, audios, and texts. Consequently, attention modules
further push the performance boundary of prevailing CNNs in handling various
visual recognition tasks. Recently, popularized attention operators usually follow
the modular design which could be seamlessly integrated into feed-forward neural
network blocks, such as channel attention [11] and spatial attention [40] modules.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 29) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 493–509, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_29

