Fast Bi-Layer Neural Synthesis
of One-Shot Realistic Head Avatars
Egor Zakharov1,2 , Aleksei Ivakhnenko1 , Aliaksandra Shysheya1,3 ,
and Victor Lempitsky1,2(B)
1

Samsung AI Center – Moscow, Moscow, Russia
v.lempitsky@samsung.com
2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia
3
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

Abstract. We propose a neural rendering-based system that creates
head avatars from a single photograph. Our approach models a person’s
appearance by decomposing it into two layers. The ﬁrst layer is a posedependent coarse image that is synthesized by a small neural network.
The second layer is deﬁned by a pose-independent texture image that
contains high-frequency details. The texture image is generated oﬄine,
warped and added to the coarse image to ensure a high eﬀective resolution of synthesized head views. We compare our system to analogous state-of-the-art systems in terms of visual quality and speed. The
experiments show signiﬁcant inference speedup over previous neural head
avatar models for a given visual quality. We also report on a real-time
smartphone-based implementation of our system.
Keywords: Neural avatars · Talking heads · Neural rendering · Head
synthesis · Head animation

1

Introduction

Personalized head avatars driven by keypoints or other mimics/pose representation is a technology with manifold applications in telepresence, gaming, AR/VR
applications, and special eﬀects industry. Modeling human head appearance is a
daunting task, due to complex geometric and photometric properties of human
heads including hair, mouth cavity and surrounding clothing. For at least two
decades, creating head avatars (talking head models) was done with computer
graphics tools using mesh-based surface models and texture maps. The resulting
systems fall into two groups. Some [4] are able to model speciﬁc people with very
high realism after signiﬁcant acquisition and design eﬀorts are spent on those
particular people. Others [18] are able to create talking head models from as
little as a single photograph, but do not aim to achieve photorealism.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 31) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 524–540, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_31

