Memory-Eﬃcient Incremental Learning
Through Feature Adaptation
Ahmet Iscen1(B) , Jeﬀrey Zhang2 , Svetlana Lazebnik2 , and Cordelia Schmid1
1

Google Research, Meylan, France
iscen@google.com
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, USA

Abstract. We introduce an approach for incremental learning that preserves feature descriptors of training images from previously learned
classes, instead of the images themselves, unlike most existing work.
Keeping the much lower-dimensional feature embeddings of images
reduces the memory footprint signiﬁcantly. We assume that the model
is updated incrementally for new classes as new data becomes available sequentially. This requires adapting the previously stored feature
vectors to the updated feature space without having access to the corresponding original training images. Feature adaptation is learned with a
multi-layer perceptron, which is trained on feature pairs corresponding
to the outputs of the original and updated network on a training image.
We validate experimentally that such a transformation generalizes well
to the features of the previous set of classes, and maps features to a
discriminative subspace in the feature space. As a result, the classiﬁer
is optimized jointly over new and old classes without requiring old class
images. Experimental results show that our method achieves state-ofthe-art classiﬁcation accuracy in incremental learning benchmarks, while
having at least an order of magnitude lower memory footprint compared
to image-preserving strategies.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown excellent performance for many computer
vision problems, such as image classiﬁcation [15,22,37] and object detection [14,
31]. However, most common models require large amounts of labeled data for
training, and assume that data from all possible classes is available for training
at the same time.
By contrast, class incremental learning [30] addresses the setting where training data is received sequentially, and data from previous classes is discarded as
data for new classes becomes available. Thus, classes are not learned all at once.
Ideally, models should learn the knowledge from new classes while maintaining
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 41) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 699–715, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_41

