S2DNAS: Transforming Static CNN
Model for Dynamic Inference via Neural
Architecture Search
Zhihang Yuan1,2 , Bingzhe Wu1 , Guangyu Sun1,2(B) , Zheng Liang1 ,
Shiwan Zhao3 , and Weichen Bi1
1

Peking University, Beijing, China
{yuanzhihang,wubingzhe,gsun,liangzheng,biweichen}@pku.edu.cn
2
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University, Hangzhou, China
3
IBM China Research Laboratory, Beijing, China
zhaosw@cn.ibm.com

Abstract. Recently, dynamic inference has emerged as a promising way
to reduce the computational cost of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). In contrast to static methods (e.g., weight pruning), dynamic
inference adaptively adjusts the inference process according to each input
sample, which can considerably reduce the computational cost on “easy”
samples while maintaining the overall model performance.
In this paper, we introduce a general framework, S2DNAS, which can
transform various static CNN models to support dynamic inference via
neural architecture search. To this end, based on a given CNN model, we
ﬁrst generate a CNN architecture space in which each architecture is a
multi-stage CNN generated from the given model using some predeﬁned
transformations. Then, we propose a reinforcement learning based approach to automatically search for the optimal CNN architecture in the
generated space. At last, with the searched multi-stage network, we can
perform dynamic inference by adaptively choosing a stage to evaluate
for each sample. Unlike previous works that introduce irregular computations or complex controllers in the inference or re-design a CNN
model from scratch, our method can generalize to most of the popular
CNN architectures and the searched dynamic network can be directly
deployed using existing deep learning frameworks in various hardware
devices.
Keywords: Dynamic inference · Neural architecture search · CNN

Z. Yuan and B. Wu—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 175–192, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_11

