Thinking in Frequency: Face Forgery
Detection by Mining Frequency-Aware
Clues
Yuyang Qian1,2 , Guojun Yin1(B) , Lu Sheng3(B) , Zixuan Chen1,4 ,
and Jing Shao1
1

SenseTime Research, Hong Kong, China
{yinguojun,shaojing}@sensetime.com
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
qyy@std.uestc.edu.cn
3
College of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
lsheng@buaa.edu.cn
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
zixuan.sean.chen@hotmail.com

Abstract. As realistic facial manipulation technologies have achieved
remarkable progress, social concerns about potential malicious abuse of
these technologies bring out an emerging research topic of face forgery
detection. However, it is extremely challenging since recent advances are
able to forge faces beyond the perception ability of human eyes, especially
in compressed images and videos. We ﬁnd that mining forgery patterns
with the awareness of frequency could be a cure, as frequency provides
a complementary viewpoint where either subtle forgery artifacts or compression errors could be well described. To introduce frequency into the
face forgery detection, we propose a novel Frequency in Face Forgery
Network (F3 -Net), taking advantages of two diﬀerent but complementary frequency-aware clues, 1) frequency-aware decomposed image components, and 2) local frequency statistics, to deeply mine the forgery
patterns via our two-stream collaborative learning framework. We apply
DCT as the applied frequency-domain transformation. Through comprehensive studies, we show that the proposed F3 -Net signiﬁcantly outperforms competing state-of-the-art methods on all compression qualities
in the challenging FaceForensics++ dataset, especially wins a big lead
upon low-quality media.
Keywords: Face forgery detection · Frequency · Collaborative
learning

Y. Qian and Z. Chen—This work was done during the internship of Yuyang Qian and
Zixuan Chen at SenseTime Research.
The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 86–103, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_6

