Appearance Consensus Driven
Self-supervised Human Mesh Recovery
Jogendra Nath Kundu1(B) , Mugalodi Rakesh1 , Varun Jampani2 ,
Rahul Mysore Venkatesh1 , and R. Venkatesh Babu1
1

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
jogendrak@iisc.ac.in
2
Google Research, Cambridge, USA

Abstract. We present a self-supervised human mesh recovery framework to infer human pose and shape from monocular images in the
absence of any paired supervision. Recent advances have shifted the
interest towards directly regressing parameters of a parametric human
model by supervising them on large-scale datasets with 2D landmark
annotations. This limits the generalizability of such approaches to operate on images from unlabeled wild environments. Acknowledging this we
propose a novel appearance consensus driven self-supervised objective.
To eﬀectively disentangle the foreground (FG) human we rely on image
pairs depicting the same person (consistent FG) in varied pose and background (BG) which are obtained from unlabeled wild videos. The proposed FG appearance consistency objective makes use of a novel, diﬀerentiable Color-recovery module to obtain vertex colors without the need
for any appearance network; via eﬃcient realization of color-picking and
reﬂectional symmetry. We achieve state-of-the-art results on the standard
model-based 3D pose estimation benchmarks at comparable supervision
levels. Furthermore, the resulting colored mesh prediction opens up the
usage of our framework for a variety of appearance-related tasks beyond
the pose and shape estimation, thus establishing our superior generalizability.

1

Introduction

Inferring highly deformable 3D human pose and shape from in-the-wild monocular images has been a longstanding goal in the vision community [12]. This is
considered as a key step for a wide range of downstream applications such as
robot interaction, rehabilitation guidance, animation industry, etc. Being one of
J. N. Kundu and M. Rakesh—Equal contribution.
Webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/ss-human-mesh.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 46) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 794–812, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_46

