The Manhattan World Assumption:
Regularities in scene statistics which
enable Bayesian inference

James M. Coughlan
Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Inst.
2318 Fillmore St.
San Francisco, CA 94115

A.L. Yuille
Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Inst.
2318 Fillmore St.
San Francisco, CA 94115

coughlan@ski.org

yuille@ski.org

Abstract
Preliminary work by the authors made use of the so-called "Manhattan world" assumption about the scene statistics of city and
indoor scenes. This assumption stated that such scenes were built
on a cartesian grid which led to regularities in the image edge gradient statistics. In this paper we explore the general applicability
of this assumption and show that, surprisingly, it holds in a large
variety of less structured environments including rural scenes. This
enables us, from a single image, to determine the orientation of the
viewer relative to the scene structure and also to detect target objects which are not aligned with the grid. These inferences are
performed using a Bayesian model with probability distributions
(e.g. on the image gradient statistics) learnt from real data.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been growing interest in the statistics of natural images
(see Huang and Mumford [4] for a recent review). Our focus, however, is on the
discovery of scene statistics which are useful for solving visual inference problems.
For example, in related work [5] we have analyzed the statistics of filter responses
on and off edges and hence derived effective edge detectors.
In this paper we present results on statistical regularities of the image gradient
responses as a function of the global scene structure. This builds on preliminary
work [2] on city and indoor scenes. This work observed that such scenes are based
on a cartesian coordinate system which puts (probabilistic) constraints on the image
gradient statistics.
Our current work shows that this so-called "Manhattan world" assumption about
the scene statistics applies far more generally than urban scenes. Many rural scenes
contain sufficient structure on the distribution of edges to provide a natural cartesian
reference frame for the viewer. The viewers' orientation relative to this frame can
be determined by Bayesian inference. In addition, certain structures in the scene
stand out by being unaligned to this natural reference frame. In our theory such

