SemanticAdv: Generating Adversarial Examples
via Attribute-conditioned Image Editing
Supplementary Materials
Chaowei Xiao∗2 Lei Yang∗3 Xinchen Yan2,4
Honglak Lee2 Bo Li5
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
2
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Uber ATG, 5 UIUC

Haonan Qiu?1

A

Implementation details

In this section, we provide implementation details used in our experiments. We
implement our SemanticAdv using PyTorch [15].
A.1

Face identity verification

We use Adam optimizer [9] to generate adversarial examples for both our SemanticAdv and the pixel-wise attack method CW [2]. More specifically, we run
optimization for up to 200 steps with a fixed updating rate 0.05 under G-FPR
< 10−4 . Under cases with a slightly higher G-FPR, we run the optimization for
up to 500 steps with a fixed updating rate 0.01. For the pixel-wise attack method
CW, we use additional pixel reconstruction objective with the weight set to 5.
Specifically, we run optimization for up to 1, 000 steps with a fixed updating rate
10−3 .
Evaluation metrics. To evaluate the performance of SemanticAdv under different
attributes, we consider three metrics as follows:
– Best: the attack is successful as long as one single attribute among 17 can be
successfully attacked;
– Average: we calculate the average attack success rate among 17 attributes
for the same face identity;
– Worst: the attack is successful only when all of 17 attributes can be successfully
attacked;
Please note that we use the Best metric as a fair comparison to the attack success
rate reported by existing pixel-wise attack methods, while SemanticAdv can be
generated with different attributes as one of our advantages. In practice, both
our SemanticAdv (Best) and CW achieve 100% attack success rate. In addition,
we report the performance using the average and worst metric, which enables us
to analyze the adversarial robustness towards certain semantic attributes.
?

The first three authors contributed equally.

