Video Object Segmentation with
Episodic Graph Memory Networks
Supplemental Material
Xiankai Lu1 , Wenguan Wang2 , Martin Danelljan2
Tianfei Zhou1 , Jianbing Shen1 , and Luc Van Gool2
1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

2

ETH Zurich

In the supplemenatry file, we provide more details of the proposed graph memory
network. We further report additional material including detailed experiment results.
Specifically,
– in §1, we present more implementation details of the proposed graph memory network, including its overall structure and the memory module.
– in §2, we provide quantitative experimental results on one-shot video object segmentation (O-VOS) setting (i.e., DAVIS17 val set [7] and Youtube-VOS [15]).
– in §3, we provide quantitative experimental results on zero-shot video object segmentation (Z-VOS) setting (i.e., DAVIS16 val set [6] and Youtube-objects dataset [8]).
– in §4, we report more visualization results.

1

More Implementation Details of Graph Memory Network

Here, we present more details of the proposed graph memory network which consist
the encoder-decoder segmentation network and the episodic memory network.
Segmentation network. The segmentation network is built based on Encoder-Decoder
architecture. Among them, the encoder is initialized of pre-trained ResNet50 [2] on
ImageNet. The input tensor of encoder is 4-channel by implanting additional single
channel fiters at the first convolution layer. The first three channels are used for RGB
input and the last channel is for mask input. During the pre-training on the syhthesis
videos from the static images, the input frame size is 384 × 384. The feature map size
of the fourth block of encoder is 24 × 24 × 512. During the main training on the video,
the input frame size is 384×640, the corresponding feature map size is 24×40×512. As
shown in Fig. 1, similar to RGMP [14], the decoder is consists of three blocks that each
block contains a refinement module. To efficiently merge features in different scales,
we employ the refinement module to take both the previous block feature as well as the
features from the encoder with same scale as input. Each refinement module produces
a feature map with 256 channels and the last one produces a two-channel mask map.
Episodic Graph memory module. Graph memory is a fully connected graph structure
G = (V, E) where each node vi ∈ V is represented by a feature map mki from the
encoder. k means the k-th step in the episodic graph memory. The edge function ei,j ∈
E which is used for message passing is implemented by a matrix inner-product:
k
ei,j = fs (mki , mkj ) = sof tmax(mk>
i ·mj ),

where sof tmax denotes the softmax normalization.

(1)

