Representation Sharing for
Fast Object Detector Search and Beyond
– Supplementary Material –
Yujie Zhong, Zelu Deng, Sheng Guo, Matthew R. Scott, and Weilin Huang
Malong LLC
{jaszhong, zeldeng, sheng, mscott, whuang}@malong.com

In this supplementary material, we first describe the implementation details
and more ablation studies for object detection regarding the macro-structure
of the detector search space, and the balance between width and depth of the
searched architectures (Section 1). We then provide the implementation details
for instance segmentation in Section 2, including the search and the training.
Lastly, Section 3 provides some details of the search space and search method for
image classification, as well as the results on the effect of decoupling RepShare.

1

Object Detection

1.1

Implementation Details

Architecture Search for the Subnetworks. The search takes 12.5k iterations with
batch size 4. The initial learning rate is 0.004 and divided by 10 at iteration
10k. The size of the input images are resized such that the short side is 416 and
the long side is less or equal to 693. The norm of the gradients are clipped to
20 to stabilize the search. During the search, we derive a discrete architecture
every 2.5k iterations. The search process is terminated when the current derived
architecture is the same as the previous one (i.e. 2.5k iterations before it). In
our experiments, we find that the search mostly terminates at 12.5k iterations
on VOC, and continuing the search does not change the derived architecture.
Meanwhile, Ltrain (w, α), which is also considered as an indicator of the search
process, flattens. Therefore, we use 12.5k iterations for all the experiments for
consistency. To balance the efficiency and consistency between the search and
detector retraining, we set M = 1 and c0 = 96 for the search. Notably, c = 256
is used for all the experiments in this work, including the search and training.
Object detector training. Once we obtain the derived architectures, we train
the whole detector on the MS-COCO train2017. For FCOS, we exactly follow
the training strategy as in [7] for different backbone networks, including input
image sizes, learning rate schedule and iterations. Similarly, the same training
strategy as in [5] is adopted for RetinaNet. All the FCOS detectors (including
vanilla and FAD) are trained using the improvements introduced in [7]. Note that
the centerness in FCOS is predicted based on the first cell group. For detector
training, we set M = 2 and c0 = 96, unless specified.

