1

1

Supplementary

1.1

Target-to-source Translation

Inspired by image-to-image translation networks [24, 14], existing domain adaptation methods [1, 17, 13] translate images from the source domain to the target
domain (source-to-target) to reduce pixel-level domain discrepancy. This is
achieved by an unsupervised image translation model F −1 such as CycleGAN
[24] to learn a mapping F −1 : Xs → Xt . However, such strategy introduces
inevitable bias to the translated images F −1 (Xs ), stemming from that F −1 (Xs )
and Xt cannot be guaranteed to follow the exactly identical distribution through
the adversarial learning [8]. This problem can get even worse in the source-totarget translation, as |Xs |  |Xt | in most of domain adaptation problems. For
example, GTA5 [19] (i.e., Xs ) contains 24,966 images, while Cityscapes (i.e., Xt )
[7] has only 2,975 images. As a consequence, F −1 (Xs ) contains massive amounts
of translation bias which will further induces negative effects when adapting
domain knowledge between F −1 (Xs ) and Xt . To alleviate this problem, for the
first time, we translate images from the target domain to the source domain
through the mapping F : Xt → Xs (where F is the reverse function of F −1 ).
Xs and F(Xt ) are then used for further domain knowledge transfer. Doing so
significantly reduces the translation bias in the translated images F(Xt ) and
is much more computationally efficient than the source-to-target translation.
Another advantage is that the segmentation network can be trained using original
source images Xs and their corresponding labels.
1.2

Network Architecture

The three multi-scale discriminators (i.e., D1 , D2 , and D3 ) used in our reconstruction model follow the identical network architecture. Each of them is a
70 × 70 PatchGAN [10] containing five convolution layers with kernel number {64,
128, 256, 512, 1}. The kernel size for each layer is 4 × 4. The first three layers
use stride 2, while the last two layers with stride 1. A leaky ReLU parameterized
by 0.2 is applied to the first four layers. We also apply BatchNorm to each layer,
except the first and last one.
1.3

Implementation Details

For multi-scale discriminators, Adam optimizer with initial learning rate 2 × 10−4
and momentum { 0.5, 0.999} are used in our study. The learning rate is linearly
decayed to zero with step size 100.
1.4

mIoU Gap

We investigate our model’s ability in narrowing the mIoU gap between the
model (Oracle) that is trained in a fully-supervised matter. Compared to existing
state-of-the-art methods, we significantly recover the performance loss based

