Neural Dense Non-Rigid Structure from
Motion with Latent Space Constraints
Vikramjit Sidhu1,2 , Edgar Tretschk1 , Vladislav Golyanik1(B) , Antonio Agudo3 ,
and Christian Theobalt1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC, Saarbrücken, Germany
golyanik@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
Saarland University, SIC, Saarbrücken, Germany
3
Institut de Robótica i Informática Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract. We introduce the ﬁrst dense neural non-rigid structure from
motion (N-NRSfM) approach, which can be trained end-to-end in an
unsupervised manner from 2D point tracks. Compared to the competing methods, our combination of loss functions is fully-diﬀerentiable and
can be readily integrated into deep-learning systems. We formulate the
deformation model by an auto-decoder and impose subspace constraints
on the recovered latent space function in a frequency domain. Thanks to
the state recurrence cue, we classify the reconstructed non-rigid surfaces
based on their similarity and recover the period of the input sequence.
Our N-NRSfM approach achieves competitive accuracy on widely-used
benchmark sequences and high visual quality on various real videos.
Apart from being a standalone technique, our method enables multiple applications including shape compression, completion and interpolation, among others. Combined with an encoder trained directly on 2D
images, we perform scenario-speciﬁc monocular 3D shape reconstruction
at interactive frame rates. To facilitate the reproducibility of the results
and boost the new research direction, we open-source our code and provide trained models for research purposes (http://gvv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/
projects/Neural NRSfM/).
Keywords: Neural Non-Rigid Structure from Motion · Sequence
period detection · Latent space constraints · Deformation auto-decoder

1

Introduction

Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) reconstructs non-rigid surfaces and
camera poses from monocular image sequences using multi-frame 2D correspondences calculated across the input views. It relies on motion and deformation cues
as well as weak prior assumptions, and is object-class-independent in contrast
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 13) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 204–222, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_13

