Visual Commonsense Graphs: Reasoning about
the Dynamic Context of a Still Image
–Supplementary Material–
We provide detailed statistics about the VisualCOMET dataset including
its language diversity, and qualitative examples of inferences made by various
model variants. We also show results from additional experiments for varying
decoding schemes and performance for event description and place generation.
Figure 12 shows a snapshot of our Visual Commonsense Graphs. The
three images show very distinct scenes, but the graph allows us to reason that
the intent of the person sitting at a shack (bottom right image), the before event
for the woman at an indoor bar (top left image), and the likely after event for
the woman in the ballroom (bottom left) are identical – to “order a drink”.
Each image is associated with several inferences of the three types: (i) intents at
present, (ii) events before, and (iii) events after.

A

Dataset Statistics

Additional statistics of the dataset are provided in Table 1. On average, there are
2.12 Intent, 4.30 Before, and 4.31 After Inferences for each event. Each image has
2.34 events on average (place is always annotated once for each image). Figure
2 shows a breakdown of most frequent phrases per each inference type. Before
and After inferences tend to focus on action statements, specifically activities
involving entering or leaving the place. Intent inferences mostly involve various
interactions with another person and also include person’s mental states, such
as “have a good time”, “be polite”, and “look formal”.
We also provide more detailed distribution of the sentences. Figure 8 shows
the number of occurrences of starting bigram (first two words) for each inference
type. As we see, the distribution is vastly different based on the inference type,
and there is no overlapping bigram among the top 5 phrases. Figure 9 shows
the a) noun and b) verb distributions of the event sentences. We omit person
in noun, and linking verbs in verb distributions for visualization purposes. We
show histogram of unique place phrases in Figure 10. Popular places that are
annotated include “office”, “living room”, “restaurant”, “kitchen”, and “party”.
Lastly, Figure 11 provides the length of event, place, and inference sentences.

B

Qualitative Examples

We show more qualitative examples in Figure 3 and 4. Following Figure 6 of
the main paper, we use the best performing model when Text only, Image only,
and Image + Text input are given. Specifically, the models are Row 3 [Event +
Place], Last Row [Image + Event + Place + PG + EP Loss (No Text Given)],

