GeLaTO: Generative Latent Textured Objects
Supplementary Material
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Rohit Pandey, Sofien Bouaziz,
Matthew Brown, and Dan B Goldman
Google Research
{rmbrualla,rohitpandey,sofien,mtbr,dgo}@google.com

1

Architecture and Training Details

Here we provide more detailed architecture and training descriptions. Input images are 512 × 512 for the eyeglasses dataset and 256 × 256 for the ShapeNet
cars. We use three textured proxies with spatial resolution of 256 × 128 for the
eyeglasses frames dataset, and five textured proxies with texture resolution of
128 × 128 for ShapeNet cars. In both cases, the neural textures contain 9 channels. The input to the texture generator is the transformed latent code w. It
consists of a reshape layer to a spatial resolution of 8 × 4, followed by 5 upsampling blocks, each consisting of a bilinear upsampling layer, and two 3 × 3
convolutions with 64 filters and ReLU activations. A final 3 × 3 convolution with
9 filters produces the neural texture. Note that we use the same architecture for
generating textures for each proxy without sharing weights between them, i.e.,
there is a separate texture generator per proxy.
The renderering U-net consists of 5 encoding and 5 decoding blocks which
each upsample or downsample their inputs by a factor of 2. Each encoder block
consists of two convolutional layers with M filters of size 3 × 3, followed by
a BlurPooling layer [2] which reduces the size of the spatial dimensions by a
factor of 2, and improves the results by reducing aliasing in the intermediate
network features. We use M = 32, 64, 128, 256, 512 as the number of filters for
each encoder block. Each decoder block consists of two convolutional layers with
N filters of size 3×3, followed by bilinear upsampling by a factor of 2. Pre-pooling
features from the encoder are concatenated with upsampled features as skip
connections, and all convolutions use ReLU activations. A final convolutional
layer with 4 filters of size 3 × 3 produces the final RGB and alpha channels of
the output.
The losses weights are the following: the `1 loss weights are 0.2, 20, and 0.5
for the RGB, alpha and composite on neutral gray respectively. The perceptual
loss [1] weights applied on the composite are 1−3 and 1−4 for then 2nd and 5th
layers respectively.
The architecture of the VAE baseline is the following: the input to the VAE
encoder is a one-hot vector encoding the instance index. The encoder consists
of 3-layer MLP of 256 features. The output of the encoder is the mean and log
variance of the latent distribution, that is 128 dimensional. The sampled latent

