Online Multi-modal Person Search
in Videos
Jiangyue Xia1 , Anyi Rao2(B) , Qingqiu Huang2 , Linning Xu2 , Jiangtao Wen1 ,
and Dahua Lin2
1

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China
xiajy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,jtwen@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China
{anyirao,hq016,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk,
linningxu@link.cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract. The task of searching certain people in videos has seen
increasing potential in real-world applications, such as video organization and editing. Most existing approaches are devised to work in an
oﬄine manner, where identities can only be inferred after an entire video
is examined. This working manner precludes such methods from being
applied to online services or those applications that require real-time
responses. In this paper, we propose an online person search framework,
which can recognize people in a video on the ﬂy. This framework maintains a multi-modal memory bank at its heart as the basis for person
recognition, and updates it dynamically with a policy obtained by reinforcement learning. Our experiments on a large movie dataset show that
the proposed method is eﬀective, not only achieving remarkable improvements over online schemes but also outperforming oﬄine methods.
Keywords: Online person search · Multi-modality · Dynamic memory
bank · Uncertain instance cache · Reinforcement learning

1

Introduction

Person identiﬁcation in videos can be speciﬁed into diﬀerent forms and tasks.
Among them, person search with one portrait is especially related to realworld applications, such as “intelligent fast forwards” on online video platforms and multimedia-oriented web search, and can further beneﬁt video summarization and story understanding. This task is very challenging compared
with other person identiﬁcation problems such as person Re-ID [6,8,41] and
person recognition in photo album [19,43], as the appearance, pose, and clothing of the characters may vary dramatically through the videos. To overcome
this diﬃculty, the research community has explored the use of various modalities [1,3,5,11,16,25,34], such as face, lip motion, body, audio, subtitle, and
screenplay.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 174–190, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_11

