Supplementary Material to:
Identity-Aware Multi-Sentence
Video Description
Here, we provide some technical details as well as qualitative examples and
analysis. Section A provides details regarding our local person ID re-labeling,
data augmentation, and accuracy metric for the Fill-in the Identity task.
Section B includes a qualitative comparison of our approach to Fill-in the
Identity and two concurrent methods, Yu et al. and Brown et al. We also
discuss some failure cases. In Section C we provide further insights into human
performance on the Fill-in the Identity task. Finally, in Section D we include
Identity-Aware Video Description scores on the validation set and more
qualitative results for our approach to Identity-Aware Video Description task.

A

Technical Details

First, we illustrate our local person ID re-labeling and training data augmentation in Figure 1. One can see the default segmentation (consecutive sets of 5
clips) and additional segmentations, which serve for data augmentation. Each
individual set of 5 clips with associated local IDs serves as a unique data point
for our model.
Next, we illustrate our proposed accuracy metric (introduced in Section 5.2
of the main paper) in Figure 2. We consider pairwise comparisons between predicted IDs (whether they are the same or not), and compare that to ground-truth
pairs. Accuracies are then computed respectively as the number of correct pairs
divided by the total number of ground truth pairs with the same IDs (Same-Acc),
with the different IDs (Different-Acc), and with all the pairs (Instance-Acc). In
the figure, there are 2 ground truth pairwise comparisons with same IDs, 8 with
different IDs, and 10 total. Note that the Same-Acc and Different-Acc are used
to calculate the Class-Acc in the main paper.

B

Fill-in the Identity: Qualitative Results

In the qualitative examples, our model is able to recognize different characters
and link the same characters across the video1 . In Figure 3 (a), our model consistently links the character that appears from the second clip with the same
ID. Likewise, we get the correct identities for video clip that involves more than
two characters in Figure 3 (b). On the other hand, other state of the art models
either tend to predict characters that are not present in the video e.g. predicting [PERSON5] for the last sentence in Figure 3 (a), or fail to correctly link
1

Note, that we skip the clips/sentences with no blanks, therefore, sometimes resulting
in less than 5 clips per set.

