Supplementary Material for “Connecting the
Dots: Detecting Adversarial Perturbations Using
Context Inconsistency”
Shasha Li1 , Shitong Zhu1 , Sudipta Paul1 ,
Amit Roy-Chowdhury1 , Chengyu Song1 , Srikanth Krishnamurthy1 ,
Ananthram Swami2 , and Kevin S Chan2
1

University of California, Riverside, USA
{sli057, szhu014, spaul007}@ucr.edu,
{amitrc}@ece.ucr.edu, {csong, krish}@cs.ucr.edu
2
US Army CCDC Army Research Lab
{ananthram.swami.civ, kevin.s.chan.civ}@mail.mil

In this supplementary material, we 1) provide a tabular representation of the
numbers used for the plots in the paper; 2) describe the architecture of the autoencoders; 3) explain how we extend the state-of-the-art adversarial perturbation
detection method FeatureSqueeze to defend object detection system; 4) describe
how we apply non-deep Co-occurGraph to defend object detection system using
cooccurrence relations inside the scene images; 5) include results of the detection
performance of our proposed method against digital perturbations generated
by various generation mechanisms; 6) provide results on the comparison of our
proposed method with others that use context inconsistency to detect adversarial
perturbations.

1

Values in the Plots

In the paper, some experimental results have been provided as plots for better
visualization. We provide a table for each plot in this supplementary material.
Tab. 1 and Tab. 2 correspond to the upper part and the lower part of Fig.8(a).
Tab. 3 corresponds to Fig.8(b). Tab. 4 and Tab. 5 correspond to the upper part
and lower part of Fig.8(c). Some entries are missing due to inadequate number
of samples. For example, there are no entries for digital hiding attack for images
with 6 objects in Tab. 4 because there are only 14 hiding-attacked images and
the AUC reported would not be accurate. We report AUC when we have at least
50 attacked samples.

2

Architecture of the Auto-encoders

For each category, we use a separate auto-encoder to learn the distribution
of its context profile. The architecture of the auto-encoders is identical and
is shown in Fig. 1. The input to the auto-encoder is the context profile x =
[r, γu1 , γu2 , γr1 , γr2 ]. We denote the height and width of the input as H and W .

