CosyPose: Consistent multi-view multi-object
6D pose estimation
Yann Labbé1,2 , Justin Carpentier1,2 , Mathieu Aubry3 , and Josef Sivic1,2,4
1

École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, Paris, France
2
INRIA, Paris
3
LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts, UPE, France
4
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical
University in Prague
{yann.labbe,justin.carpentier,josef.sivic}@inria.fr,
mathieu.aubry@imagine.enpc.fr

Supplementary material
The supplementary material is organized as follows. In Sec. 1 we present additional qualitative results of our multi-view multi-object 6D pose estimation
approach. We discuss in detail some examples to illustrate key benefits of our
method as well as point out the main limitations. We then provide more examples randomly selected from the results on the T-LESS and YCB-Video datasets.
In Sec. 2, we give more details of our single-view single-object 6D object pose
estimator. In Sec. 3 we illustrate the object candidate matching strategy on a
simple 2D example. In Sec. 4, we give additional details about our parametrization and initialization of the object-level bundle adjustment problem, introduced
in Sec. 3.4 of the main paper. Finally, Sec. 5 presents the datasets used in the
main paper and recalls the metrics that are used for each dataset.

1

Additional multi-view multi-object results

Each scene reconstruction is presented with a dedicated figure and we provide
close-ups on various parts of the visualization to illustrate the different aspects
in detail. The explanation is provided in the caption of each figure.
Layout of the figures. In each figure presented below, four (on T-LESS) or
five (on YCB-Video) RGB images were used to reconstruct each scene. In each
figure, each row corresponds to results associated with one image and different
columns present the results of different stages of our method. The last column
shows the ground truth scene. The different columns are described next.
– “Input image” is the (RGB) image used as input to the method.
– “2D detections” shows the detections obtained by the object detector (RetinaNet on T-LESS, PoseCNN on YCB-Video), after removing detections that

