An Ensemble of Epoch-Wise Empirical
Bayes for Few-Shot Learning
Yaoyao Liu1(B) , Bernt Schiele1 , and Qianru Sun2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken,
Germany
{yaoyao.liu,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
School of Information Systems, Singapore Management University,
Singapore, Singapore
qsun@mpi-inf.mpg.de, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract. Few-shot learning aims to train eﬃcient predictive models
with a few examples. The lack of training data leads to poor models that perform high-variance or low-conﬁdence predictions. In this
paper, we propose to meta-learn the ensemble of epoch-wise empirical Bayes models (E3 BM) to achieve robust predictions. “Epoch-wise”
means that each training epoch has a Bayes model whose parameters are speciﬁcally learned and deployed. “Empirical” means that the
hyperparameters, e.g., used for learning and ensembling the epochwise models, are generated by hyperprior learners conditional on taskspeciﬁc data. We introduce four kinds of hyperprior learners by considering inductive vs. transductive, and epoch-dependent vs. epochindependent, in the paradigm of meta-learning. We conduct extensive
experiments for ﬁve-class few-shot tasks on three challenging benchmarks: miniImageNet, tiered ImageNet, and FC100, and achieve top performance using the epoch-dependent transductive hyperprior learner,
which captures the richest information. Our ablation study shows that
both “epoch-wise ensemble” and “empirical” encourage high eﬃciency
and robustness in the model performance (Our code is open-sourced at
https://gitlab.mpi-klsb.mpg.de/yaoyaoliu/e3bm).

1

Introduction

The ability of learning new concepts from a handful of examples is well-handled
by humans, while in contrast, it remains challenging for machine models whose
typical training requires a signiﬁcant amount of data for good performance [34].
However, in many real-world applications, we have to face the situations of lacking a signiﬁcant amount of training data, as e.g., in the medical domain. It is
thus desirable to improve machine learning models to handle few-shot settings
where each new concept has very scarce examples [13,30,39,70].
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 24) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 404–421, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_24

