Combining Task Predictors via Enhancing
Joint Predictability
Kwang In Kim1(B) , Christian Richardt2 , and Hyung Jin Chang3
1

UNIST, Ulsan, Korea
kimki@unist.ac.kr
2
University of Bath, Bath, UK
3
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

Abstract. Predictor combination aims to improve a (target) predictor
of a learning task based on the (reference) predictors of potentially relevant tasks, without having access to the internals of individual predictors.
We present a new predictor combination algorithm that improves the target by i) measuring the relevance of references based on their capabilities
in predicting the target, and ii) strengthening such estimated relevance.
Unlike existing predictor combination approaches that only exploit pairwise relationships between the target and each reference, and thereby
ignore potentially useful dependence among references, our algorithm
jointly assesses the relevance of all references by adopting a Bayesian
framework. This also oﬀers a rigorous way to automatically select only
relevant references. Based on experiments on seven real-world datasets
from visual attribute ranking and multi-class classiﬁcation scenarios, we
demonstrate that our algorithm oﬀers a signiﬁcant performance gain
and broadens the application range of existing predictor combination
approaches.

1

Introduction

Many practical visual understanding problems involve learning multiple tasks.
When a target predictor, e.g. a classiﬁcation or a ranking function tailored for the
task at hand, is not accurate enough, one could beneﬁt from knowledge accumulated in the predictors of other tasks (references). The predictor combination
problem studied by Kim et al. [11] aims to improve the target predictor by
exploiting the references without requiring access to the internals of any predictors or assuming that all predictors belong to the same class of functions. This is
relevant when the forms of predictors are not known (e.g. precompiled binaries)
or the best predictor forms diﬀer across tasks. For example, Gaussian process
rankers [9] trained on ResNet101 features [7] are identiﬁed as the best for the
main task, e.g. for image frame retrieval, while convolutional neural networks
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 26) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 439–455, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_26

