PROFIT: A Novel Training Method for
sub-4-bit MobileNet Models
Supplementary Material
Eunhyeok Park1[0000−0002−7331−9819] and Sungjoo Yoo2[0000−0002−5853−0675]
1
1

1

canusglow@gmail.com and 2 sungjoo.yoo@gmail.com
Inter-university Semiconductor Research Center (ISRC)
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
2
Neural Processing Research Center (NPRC)
1,2
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

Training and validation loss curves with and without
PROFIT

Figure 1 shows the training and validation loss curves regarding the existance of
PROFIT. The loss curves are obtained while fine-tuning the quantized MobileNetv3 with teacher-student and progressive quantization technique. The orange line
represents the loss curve of PROFIT, while the blue line represents the loss curve
without PROFIT. As shown in the figure, without PROFIT, the validation loss
curve heavily fluctuates. When we apply PROFIT, the fine-tuning process is
greatly stabilized by removing, from the training process, the source of AIWQ
problem, i.e., the sensitive layers to AIWQ. Under PROFIT, both training and
validation loss curves are lower than the curves without PROFIT, and the fluctuation of the validation loss is minimized, which shows that PROFIT can offer
better convergence in the training of low-precision networks.

2

Training and validation loss curves of PACT versus
DuQ

Figure 2 shows the training and loss curves of 4-bit MobileNet-v3 for ImageNet
with PACT and DuQ with negative padding. In progressive quantization, we first
train activation quantizatioin parameters and then weight quantization ones.
At the end of fine-tuining, DuQ with negative padding gives lower loss than
PACT for both activation and weight quantization. This is because DuQ is
designed to support asymmetric distribution and consider both truncation and
rounding errors. In addition, the negative padding helps DuQ to fully utilize
the given quantization levels. However, in the case of weight quantization, the
validation loss of DuQ in the early epochs is larger than that of PACT. This
is because PACT with SAWB is designed under a distribution prior to preserve
the scale of input distribution, while DuQ has additional parameters for input,

