GMNet: Graph Matching Network for Large
Scale Part Semantic Segmentation in the Wild
Supplementary Material
Umberto Michieli[0000−0003−2666−4342] , Edoardo Borsato, Luca Rossi, and
Pietro Zanuttigh[0000−0002−9502−2389]
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, Italy
{michieli, borsatoedo, rossiluc, zanuttigh}@dei.unipd.it

In this document we show some further experimental results. In particular we
report the Intersection over Union (IoU) and Pixel Accuracy (PA) for each perpart-class and some averaged metrics as mean IoU (mIoU), mean PA (mPA) and
mean Class Accuracy (mCA) [2]. The results are reported for both the PascalPart-58 and the Pascal-Part-108 datasets. Finally, some additional visual results
on both datasets are presented.

1

Additional Results on Pascal-Part-58

We start by analyzing the per-part-class IoU and PA on the Pascal-Part-58
dataset. The results are shown in Table 1, where it is possible to see that the
proposed method (GMNet) outperforms the baseline [1] approach on almost
every part both considering the per-part-IoU and the per-part-PA. With respect
to BSANet [3], GMNet can produce clearly higher results on 15 objects out of
21 (such as bottle, bus, dog, sheep,...) and can produce comparable results on 2
objects (i.e., on car ad cat).
We can further verify the ranking of the compared methods analyzing the
average metrics reported in Table 2. Here, we can appreciate how GMNet is able
to outperform both the baseline and BSANet robustly on all the most widely
used metrics for semantic segmentation.
Then, we proceed to analyze some additional qualitative results as reported
in Figure 1. The effects of the two main components of our work, namely the
object-level semantic embedding network S and the graph matching module, are
clearly visible in the images. The effect of the semantic embedding network is
evident in the last 5 rows, where object-level conditioning helps the part-level
decoder to accurately segment and label the parts. For instance, in the last row
both the baseline and BSANet mislead the dog’s parts with cat’s parts, while
GMNet is able to avoid this error. In row 6, BSANet confuses cow’s parts with
sheep’s parts. In row 7, the baseline confuses sheep’s parts with cat’s ones and
BSANet with dog’s parts. GMNet is able to correctly deal with these situations
thanks to the object-level guidance.

