From Proceedings of Imaging Understanding Workshop, pp. 121-130 (1981).

An Iterative Image Registration Technique
with an Application to Stereo Vision
Bruce D. Lucas
Takeo Kanade
Computer Science Department
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213

Abstract

2. The registration problem

Image registration finds a variety of applications in
computer vision. Unfortunately, traditional image registration
techniques tend to be costly. We present a new image
registration technique that makes use of the spatial intensity
gradient of the images to find a good match using a type of
Newton-Raphson iteration. Our technique is faster because
it examines far fewer potential matches between the images
than existing techniques. Furthermore, this registration
technique can be generalized to handle rotation, scaling and
shearing. We show show our technique can be adapted for
use in a stereo vision system.

The translational image registration problem can be
characterized as follows: We are given functions F(x) and
G(x) which give the respective pixel values at each location
x in two images, where x is a vector. We wish to find the
disparity vector h which minimizes some measure of the
difference between F(x + h) and G(x), for x in some region of
interest R. (See figure 1).

1. Introduction
Image registration finds a variety of applications in
computer vision, such as image matching for stereo vision,
pattern recognition, and motion analysis. Untortunately,
existing techniques for image registration tend to be costly.
Moreover, they generally fail to deal with rotation or other
distortions of the images.
In this paper we present a new image registration
technique that uses spatial intensity gradient information to
direct the search for the position that yields the best match.
By taking more information about the images into account,
this technique is able to find the best match between two
images with far fewer comparisons of images than
techniques which examine the possible positions of
registration in some fixed order. Our technique takes
advantage of the fact that in many applications the two
images are already in approximate registration. This
technique can be generalized to deal with arbitrary linear
distortions of the image, including rotation. We then describe
a stereo vision system that uses this registration technique,
and suggest some further avenues for research toward
making effective use of this method in stereo image
understanding.

Figure 1: The image registration problem
Typical measures of the difference between F(x + h) and
G(x) are:
• L1 norm =

∑ | F ( x + h ) − G( x ) |

• L2 norm =

(∑ [ F( x + h) − G( x)] )

xεR

2 1/ 2

xεR

• negative of normalized correlation
=

− ∑ xεR F( x + h)G( x )

( ∑ F ( x + h ) ) ( ∑ G( x ) )
2

xεR

1/ 2

2

1/ 2

XεR

We will propose a more general measure of image difference,
of which both the L2 norm and the correlation are special
cases. The L1 norm is chiefly of interest as an inexpensive
approximation to the L2 norm.

121

