A Dataset for Telling the Stories of Social Media Videos
Spandana Gella1∗ Mike Lewis2 Marcus Rohrbach2
1 University of Edinburgh, 2 Facebook AI Research
spandana.gella@ed.ac.uk, {mikelewis,mrf}@fb.com

Abstract
Video content on social media platforms constitutes a major part of the communication between people, as it allows everyone to share
their stories. However, if someone is unable to
consume video, either due to a disability or network bandwidth, this severely limits their participation and communication. Automatically
telling the stories using multi-sentence descriptions of videos would allow bridging this gap.
To learn and evaluate such models, we introduce VideoStory, a new large-scale dataset for
video description as a new challenge for multisentence video description. Our VideoStory
captions dataset is complementary to prior
work and contains 20k videos posted publicly
on a social media platform amounting to 396
hours of video with 123k sentences, temporally aligned to the video.

1

Introduction

Telling stories about what we experience is a central part of human communication (Mateas and Sengers, 2003). Increasingly, stories about our experiences are captured in the form of videos and then
shared on social media platforms. One goal of automatically understanding and describing such videos
with natural language is to generate multi-sentence
descriptions which convey the story, making them
accessible to situationally (e.g. bandwidth) or physically (“blind”) disabled people. However, it is still
a challenge for vision and language models to automatically encode and describe temporal content in
videos with multi-sentence descriptions (Rohrbach
et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2018b). To better understand the stories shared on social media we collect
and annotate a novel dataset consisting of videos
from a social media platform. Importantly, we
collect descriptions containing multiple sentences,

as single sentences would typically not be able to
capture the narration and plot of the video.
We introduce a large-scale multi-sentence description dataset for videos. To build a dataset
of high quality, diverse and narratively interesting
videos, we choose videos that had high engagement on a social media platform. Existing video
captioning datasets, such as ActivityNet Captions
(Krishna et al., 2017) or cooking video datasets
(Regneri et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 2018a), have
focused on sets of pre-selected human activities,
whereas social media videos contain a great diversity of topics. Videos with high engagement tend
to be narratively interesting, because humans find
very predictable videos less enjoyable, meaning
that captioning of the videos accurately requires
integrating information from the entire video to
describe a sequence of events (see Figure 1). Together, this creates a diverse and challenging new
benchmark for video and language understanding.
We present a thorough analysis of the new benchmark, demonstrating that linguistic and video context is crucial to accurate captioning and that the
captions have a temporal consistency. We also
show baseline results using state-of-the-art models.

∗
*Work done while SG was intern at Facebook AI Research.

2

Multi-Sentence VideoStory Dataset

In Table 1 we summarize existing video description datasets; most provide only single-sentence
descriptions or are restricted to narrow domains.
Other multi-sentence description datasets are proposed for story narration of sets of images taken
from a Flickr album (Huang et al., 2016; Krause
et al., 2017). Other related work includes visual
summarization of Flickr photo albums (Sigurdsson et al., 2016a) or videos (De Avila et al., 2011;
Zhang et al., 2016) where the idea is to pick the
key images or frames that summarize the visual
content.

968
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 968–974
Brussels, Belgium, October 31 - November 4, 2018. c 2018 Association for Computational Linguistics

