LEED: Label-Free Expression Editing
via Disentanglement
Rongliang Wu

and Shijian Lu(B)

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
ronglian001@e.ntu.edu.sg, shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract. Recent studies on facial expression editing have obtained
very promising progress. On the other hand, existing methods face the
constraint of requiring a large amount of expression labels which are often
expensive and time-consuming to collect. This paper presents an innovative label-free expression editing via disentanglement (LEED) framework
that is capable of editing the expression of both frontal and proﬁle facial
images without requiring any expression label. The idea is to disentangle
the identity and expression of a facial image in the expression manifold,
where the neutral face captures the identity attribute and the displacement between the neutral image and the expressive image captures the
expression attribute. Two novel losses are designed for optimal expression
disentanglement and consistent synthesis, including a mutual expression
information loss that aims to extract pure expression-related features and
a siamese loss that aims to enhance the expression similarity between the
synthesized image and the reference image. Extensive experiments over
two public facial expression datasets show that LEED achieves superior
facial expression editing qualitatively and quantitatively.
Keywords: Facial expression editing · Image synthesis · Disentangled
representation learning

1

Introduction

Facial expression editing (FEE) allows users to edit the expression of a face image
to a desired one. Compared with facial attribute editing which only considers
appearance modiﬁcation of speciﬁc facial regions [31,42,58], FEE is much more
challenging as it often involves large geometrical changes and requires to modify
multiple facial components simultaneously. FEE has attracted increasing interest
due to the recent popularity of digital and social media and a wide spectrum of
applications in face animations, human-computer interactions, etc.
Until very recently, this problem was mainly addressed from a graphical
perspective in which a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) was ﬁrst ﬁtted to the image
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 46) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 781–798, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_46

