Supplementary Material:
Large-Scale Few-Shot Learning via Multi-Modal
Knowledge Discovery
Shuo Wang1,3 , Jun Yue3 , Jianzhuang Liu3 , Qi Tian4 , and Meng Wang1,2
1

School of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
Hefei University of Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
Huawei Cloud BU

1

Visual Knowledge Discovery

In this section, we provide more visual responsive results from the three independent CNNs, Ωo , Ωf , and Ωb . As shown in Fig. A(a), for many base samples,
such as “Mousetrap”, “Hamster”, “Balloon”, “French Horn”, “Drake”, “Acoustic Guitar”, “Tricycle”, and “Radio Telescope”, it is easy to see that Ωo and Ωf
focus on the regions of the objects, and Ωb concentrates on the bodies or edges
of these objects. By the way, in the “Acoustic Guitar” image, Ωb can find more
guitars with their shapes in the background. On the other hand, these CNNs
perform differently on many novel samples as shown in Fig. A(b) and Fig. A(c).
For the novel samples in Fig. A(b), the responses of Ωo are deviated from the
objects like “Scuba Diver”, “Beigel”, “Palace”, “Mailbox”, “Goblet”, “Cicada”,
“Basketball”, and “Pencil Sharpener”. When Ωf is used, we can see that the
responses on these instances are shifted to the bodies of the objects. Then we
show the importance of Ωb in Fig. A(c). For many other novel samples, such
as “Cassette”, “Valley”, “Parachute”, “Space Heater”, “Marimba”, “Radiator”,
“Microwave Oven”, and “Home Theater” images, the objects may be segmented
as the backgrounds by the unsupervised saliency detection [4]. Thus, Ωb is necessary to extract useful features from the backgrounds in these cases. It is worth
mentioning that, as shown in Fig. A(b), for the objects “Palace”, “Mailbox”,
“Basketball”, and “Pencil Sharpener”, the responses of both Ωf and Ωb are
useful to describe the objects.

2

Textual Knowledge Discovery

In this section, we list more examples of the results by the network with the
textual knowledge discovery (denoted as “LCE + LSemantic ”) and the network
without it (denoted as “LCE Only”) in Fig. B. Compared with the predictions
of “LCE Only”, the predicted results of “LCE + LSemantic ” are more relevant to
the input objects. For example, when the input novel image is a kind of car (“Tow

