Co-regularized Alignment for Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation

Abhishek Kumar
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
abhishk@us.ibm.com

Prasanna Sattigeri
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
psattig@us.ibm.com

Kahini Wadhawan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
kahini.wadhawan@ibm.com

Leonid Karlinsky
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
leonidka@il.ibm.com

Rogerio Feris
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
rsferis@us.ibm.com

William T. Freeman
MIT
billf@mit.edu

Gregory Wornell
MIT
gww@mit.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks, trained with large amount of labeled data, can fail to
generalize well when tested with examples from a target domain whose distribution
differs from the training data distribution, referred as the source domain. It can be
expensive or even infeasible to obtain required amount of labeled data in all possible
domains. Unsupervised domain adaptation sets out to address this problem, aiming
to learn a good predictive model for the target domain using labeled examples
from the source domain but only unlabeled examples from the target domain.
Domain alignment approaches this problem by matching the source and target
feature distributions, and has been used as a key component in many state-of-the-art
domain adaptation methods. However, matching the marginal feature distributions
does not guarantee that the corresponding class conditional distributions will be
aligned across the two domains. We propose co-regularized domain alignment
for unsupervised domain adaptation, which constructs multiple diverse feature
spaces and aligns source and target distributions in each of them individually,
while encouraging that alignments agree with each other with regard to the class
predictions on the unlabeled target examples. The proposed method is generic
and can be used to improve any domain adaptation method which uses domain
alignment. We instantiate it in the context of a recent state-of-the-art method and
observe that it provides significant performance improvements on several domain
adaptation benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has shown impressive performance improvements on a wide variety of tasks. These
remarkable gains often rely on the access to large amount of labeled examples (x, y) for the concepts
of interest (y ∈ Y ). However, a predictive model trained on certain distribution of data ({(x, y) :
x ∼ Ps (x)}, referred as the source domain) can fail to generalize when faced with observations
pertaining to same concepts but from a different distribution (x ∼ Pt (x), referred as the target
domain). This problem of mismatch in training and test data distributions is commonly referred
as domain or covariate shift [34]. The goal in domain adaptation is to address this mismatch and
obtain a model that generalizes well on the target domain with limited or no labeled examples from
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

