18

A. Osokin, D. Sumin, V. Lomakin

Supplementary Material (Appendix)
OS2D: One-Stage One-Shot Object Detection by
Matching Anchor Features
A

Data and evaluation

A.1

Retail products

Data. We used the GroZi-3.2k dataset [7] for retail product detection (680 images
collected from 5 different stores) as development data. We could not use the
original annotation of this dataset because it was often grouping multiple similar
objects into a single bounding box and had no strict policy about what objects
are of the same class and what are of different classes. Thus, we created new
annotation where each object has an individual bounding box, and only identical
objects belong to the same class. For each class, we selected a template class
image either from the original annotation (if available) or from the internet by
querying the product names. Importantly, each object was assigned the “difficult”
flag when the human annotator could not assign a class without guessing. We
ended up having 8921 objects of 1063 classes annotated.
Data splits. We created the splits of the dataset by selecting 185 classes
and keeping the images with those classes away from training: 622 objects in
84 images. We will refer to this set as val-new-cl. The selected images also
contained 518 objects of classes that appeared at training. We will refer to this set
as val-old-cl. Throughout our experiments we used val-new-cl as our main
validation set, and val-old-cl as a secondary validation showing performance
on the training classes.
Extra test sets. To assess the generalization ability of our method, we
collected extra test sets containing objects of new classes in the images taken
in different conditions. The dairy set consists of 12 images with 786 objects
of 166 classes of dairy products. The paste-f set consists of 91 images with
4861 objects of 259 classes of toothpaste and accompanying products. However,
the paste-f set contains objects of all orientations, which is different from the
training conditions. We also selected a subset paste-v, where all the objects
with incorrect orientation are masked out with the “difficult” flag.
Table 3 of the main paper contains results of the OS2D methods and baselines
on the test and validation subsets.
A.2

Additional dataset: INSTRE

In addition to the domain of retail products, we applied our methods to the INSTRE dataset [41], which was originally collected for large scale instance retrieval
and has bounding box annotation for all objects. The dataset is considered hard
due to occlusions and large variations in scales and rotations [14]. The dataset has

