Probabilistic Anchor Assignment with IoU
Prediction for Object Detection: Supplementary
Material

1

Appendix

1.1

Training Details

We train our models with 8 GPUs each of which holds two images during training. The parameters of Batch Normalization layers [2] are frozen as is a common
practice. All backbones are pre-trained with ImageNet dataset [3]. We set the
initial learning rate to 0.01 and decay it by a factor of 10 at 90k and 120k iterations for the 135k setting and at 120k and 160k for the 180k setting. For
the 180k setting the multi-scale training strategy (resizing the shorter side of
input images to a scale randomly chosen from 640 to 800) is adopted as is also
a common practice. The momentum and weight decay are set to 0.9 and 1e-4
respectively. Following [1] we use the learning rate warmup for the first 500 iterations. It is noted that multiplying individual localization losses by the scores
of an auxiliary task (in our case, this is predicted IoUs with corresponding GT
boxes, and centerness scores when using the centerness prediction as in [4, 5]),
which is also applied in previous works [4, 5], helps train faster and leads to a
better performance.
1.2

Network architecture

Here we provide Figure 1 for a visualization of our network architecture. It is a
modified RetinaNet architecture with a single anchor per spatial location which
is exactly the same as models used in FCOS [4] and ATSS [5]. The only difference
is that the additional head in our model predicts IoUs of predicted boxes whereas
FCOS and ATTS models predict centerness scores.
1.3

More Ablation Studies

We conduct additional ablation studies regarding the effects of topk K and the
default anchor scale. All the experiments in the main paper are conducted with
K = 9 and the default anchor scale of 8. The anchor size for each pyramid level
is determined by the product of its stride and the default anchor scale1 . Table 1
shows the results on different default anchor scales. It shows that the proposed
probabilistic anchor assignment is robust to both K and anchor sizes.
1

So with the default anchor scale 8 and a feature pyramid of strides from 8 to 128,
the anchor sizes are from 64 to 1024.

