Photon-Efficient 3D Imaging with A Non-Local
Neural Network: Supplementary Material
Jiayong Peng, Zhiwei Xiong( ) , Xin Huang, Zheng-Ping Li,
Dong Liu, and Feihu Xu
University of Science and Technology of China
jiayong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn
{hx9711,lizhp}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu,feihuxu}@ustc.edu.cn

In this supplementary material, we provide more details about our network
architecture and long-distance coaxial single-photon imaging system.

1

Network architecture

The flowchart of our proposed network is shown in Fig. 1. The network consists
of four parts: a feature extraction block, a non-local block, a feature integration
block (consisting of a downsampling operator and several 3D dense dilated fusion
sub-blocks), and a reconstruction block. The details of network layers as well as
theECCV_framework
parameter numbers are demonstrated in Sec. 1.1. The details of the non-local
block are demonstrated in Sec. 1.2. The amount of GPU memory requirements
during training phase is presented in Sec. 1.3.

1024

1024

Input

+

Feature Extraction

1024

+
Non-local Block

1024

64

+

+

Feature Integration

64

1024

Reconstruction Depth

Fig. 1. The flowchart of our proposed network for depth reconstruction from the input
raw photon-efficient measurements. The cuboids denote features which are in 3D volume (spatial and temporal). The temporal dimension of features is 1024 originally, and
64 after downsampling. Note that we only show one channel of features for simplification. The red, blue, and green colors denote the 3D convolution, dilated convolution
and deconvolution with kernel size of 3×3×3, respectively. The gray color denotes the
3D convolution with kernel size of 1×1×1. “+” and “×” with circular blocks denote the
concatenation and matrix multiplication, respectively. Each layer (except for the last
one) adopts ReLU as the activation function, which is omitted here for simplification

1.1

Details of network layers and parameter numbers

The network layers and parameter numbers are shown in Table 1. C, D, and DC
denote the 3D convolution, dilate convolution, and deconvolution, respectively.

