Interactive Multi-Dimension Modulation
with Dynamic Controllable Residual Learning
for Image Restoration
Supplementary File
Jingwen He?1,2 , Chao Dong?1,2 , and Yu Qiao†1,2
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime
Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{jw.he, chao.dong, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract. In this supplementary file, we mainly present quantitative
results on more test datasets. Note that the model is the same as the main
paper without any retraining. First, we show the quantitative results of
2D modulation and 3D modulation on CBSD68 and LIVE1 datasets.
Then we add some qualitative results of 2D and 3D modulation. Besides,
we compare with SD methods on more degradation types and levels. For
ablation studies, we provide more results about the effectiveness of global
connection and local connections. Moreover, the results under different
sampling strategies on CBSD68 dataset is provided.

1

More quantitative results of 2D and 3D modulation

In the main paper, we only present the results on the CBSD68 dataset due to
the space limitation. Here, we show more testing results on the LIVE1 dataset.
As shown in Table 1 and 2 the overall trend of PSNR distances on these two
datasets are similar. Specifically, the largest distances appear in blur r1, which
is the zero starting point and mild degradation. Results on two degradations are
generally below 0.2 dB, indicating a high modulation accuracy.

2

More qualitative results of 2D and 3D modulation

In this section, we show more qualitative results of our 2D (Figure 3(a)) and 3D
modulation (Figure 3(b)) in image restoration. Note that there are more degradation combinations in 3D modulation, including (noise+blur), (noise+JPEG),
(blur+JPEG) and (noise+blur+JPEG). Here, we show some 2D modulation
achieved by model of 3D modulation.
?

The first two authors are co-first authors. † Corresponding author

