Supplementary Materials: Testing the Safety of
Self-driving Vehicles by Simulating Perception
and Prediction
Kelvin Wong1,2? , Qiang Zhang1,3? , Ming Liang1 , Bin Yang1,2 , Renjie Liao1,2 ,
Abbas Sadat1 , and Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Uber Advanced Technologies Group, Toronto, Canada
2
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
3
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{kelvin.wong, ming.liang, byang10, rjliao, asadat, urtasun}@uber.com
zhangqiang2016@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract. In this document, we provide additional details to supplement the main text. We first describe additional experiment details
(Sec. 1). Then, we provide additional quantitative results that study
our approach’s generalization performance (Sec. 2.1) and the effect of
the training dataset’s size on final performance (Sec. 2.2). Finally, in
Sec. 3, we present a number of qualitative results that demonstrate the
efficacy of using perception and prediction simulation for testing motion
planning.

1

Additional Experiment Details

1.1

Model Architectures

MultimodalNoise. We implement MultimodalNoise as a Gaussian Mixture
Model with k = 8 components, each with a full covariance matrix. We use the
Scikit-learn implementation [5]. We also model misdetection noise by fitting a
Bernoulli distribution to the rate of false negative detections in our training split.
ActorNoise. ActorNoise takes as input the actor’s bounding box parameters
(x, y, w, h, θ), where (x, y) is the box’s center, (w, h) are the box’s width and
height, and θ is the box’s heading angle, as well as the actor’s past and future
positions centered at (x, y). This input feature vector is then processed by a
multi-layer perceptron. In particular, we use a model architecture consisting of:
(i) an initial fully-connected layer with 128-dimensional hidden features, ReLU
activations [1], and group normalization [7]; (ii) two fully-connected residual
blocks [3] with 128-dimensional hidden features, ReLU activations, and group
normalization; and (iii) a final fully-connected layer to predict perturbations to
the actor’s bounding box and future states as well as a misdetection score.
?

Indicates equal contribution. Work done during Qiang’s internship at Uber ATG.

