Recurrent Image Annotation with
Explicit Inter-label Dependencies
Ayushi Dutta1(B) , Yashaswi Verma2 , and C. V. Jawahar3
1

Target Corporation India Private Limited, Bangalore, India
ayushi.dutta@target.com
2
Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, India
yashaswi@iitj.ac.in
3
IIIT Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
jawahar@iiit.ac.in

Abstract. Inspired by the success of the CNN-RNN framework in the
image captioning task, several works have explored this in multi-label
image annotation with the hope that the RNN followed by a CNN would
encode inter-label dependencies better than using a CNN alone. To do so,
for each training sample, the earlier methods converted the ground-truth
label-set into a sequence of labels based on their frequencies (e.g., rareto-frequent) for training the RNN. However, since the ground-truth is an
unordered set of labels, imposing a ﬁxed and predeﬁned sequence on them
does not naturally align with this task. To address this, some of the recent
papers have proposed techniques that are capable to train the RNN without feeding the ground-truth labels in a particular sequence/order. However, most of these techniques leave it to the RNN to implicitly choose
one sequence for the ground-truth labels corresponding to each sample
at the time of training, thus making it inherently biased. In this paper,
we address this limitation and propose a novel approach in which the
RNN is explicitly forced to learn multiple relevant inter-label dependencies, without the need of feeding the ground-truth in any particular
order. Using thorough empirical comparisons, we demonstrate that our
approach outperforms several state-of-the-art techniques on two popular
datasets (MS-COCO and NUS-WIDE). Additionally, it provides a new
perspecitve of looking at an unordered set of labels as equivalent to a
collection of diﬀerent permutations (sequences) of those labels, thus naturally aligning with the image annotation task. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/ayushidutta/multi-order-rnn.
Keywords: Image annotation · Multi-label learning · CNN-RNN
framework · Inter-label dependencies · Order-free training

A. Dutta—The author did most of this work while she was a student at IIIT Hyderabad,
India.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 191–207, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_12

