Forecasting Human-Object Interaction:
Joint Prediction of Motor Attention
and Actions in First Person Video
Miao Liu1(B) , Siyu Tang3 , Yin Li2 , and James M. Rehg1
1

Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
mliu328@gatech.edu
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, USA
3
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Abstract. We address the challenging task of anticipating humanobject interaction in ﬁrst person videos. Most existing methods either
ignore how the camera wearer interacts with objects, or simply considers body motion as a separate modality. In contrast, we observe that
the intentional hand movement reveals critical information about the
future activity. Motivated by this observation, we adopt intentional hand
movement as a feature representation, and propose a novel deep network that jointly models and predicts the egocentric hand motion, interaction hotspots and future action. Speciﬁcally, we consider the future
hand motion as the motor attention, and model this attention using
probabilistic variables in our deep model. The predicted motor attention is further used to select the discriminative spatial-temporal visual
features for predicting actions and interaction hotspots. We present
extensive experiments demonstrating the beneﬁt of the proposed joint
model. Importantly, our model produces new state-of-the-art results for
action anticipation on both EGTEA Gaze+ and the EPIC-Kitchens
datasets. Our project page is available at https://aptx4869lm.github.
io/ForecastingHOI/.
Keywords: First Person Vision · Action anticipation · Motor
attention

1

Introduction

The human ability of “looking into the near future” remains a key challenge for
computer vision. Consider the example in Fig. 1, given a video shortly before
the start of an action, we can easily predict what will happen next, e.g., the
person will take the canister of salt. Even without seeing any future frames, we
can vividly imagine how the person will perform the action, e.g., the trajectory
of the hand when reaching for the canister or the location on the canister that
will be grasped.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 41) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 704–721, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_41

