Expressive Telepresence via Modular
Codec Avatars
Hang Chu1,2(B) , Shugao Ma3 , Fernando De la Torre3 , Sanja Fidler1,2 ,
and Yaser Sheikh3
1

University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
chuhang1122@cs.toronto.edu
2
Vector Institute, Toronto, Canada
3
Facebook Reality Lab, Pittsburgh, USA

Abstract. VR telepresence consists of interacting with another human
in a virtual space represented by an avatar. Today most avatars are
cartoon-like, but soon the technology will allow video-realistic ones.
This paper aims in this direction, and presents Modular Codec Avatars
(MCA), a method to generate hyper-realistic faces driven by the cameras in the VR headset. MCA extends traditional Codec Avatars (CA) by
replacing the holistic models with a learned modular representation. It is
important to note that traditional person-speciﬁc CAs are learned from
few training samples, and typically lack robustness as well as limited
expressiveness when transferring facial expressions. MCAs solve these
issues by learning a modulated adaptive blending of diﬀerent facial components as well as an exemplar-based latent alignment. We demonstrate
that MCA achieves improved expressiveness and robustness w.r.t to CA
in a variety of real-world datasets and practical scenarios. Finally, we
showcase new applications in VR telepresence enabled by the proposed
model.
Keywords: Virtual reality · Telepresence · Codec Avatar

1

Introduction

Telepresence technologies aims to make a person feel as if they were present, to
give the appearance of being present, or to have an eﬀect via telerobotics, at a
place other than their true location. Telepresence systems can be broadly categorized based on the level of immersiveness. The most basic form of telepresence
is video teleconferencing (e.g., Skype, Hangouts, Messenger) that is widely-used,
and includes both audio and video transmissions. Recently, a more sophisticated
form of telepresence has become available featuring a smart camera that follows
a person (e.g., the Portal from Facebook).
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 20) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 330–345, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_20

