UNITER: UNiversal Image-TExt
Representation Learning
Yen-Chun Chen(B) , Linjie Li, Licheng Yu, Ahmed El Kholy, Faisal Ahmed,
Zhe Gan, Yu Cheng, and Jingjing Liu
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research, Redmond, USA
{yen-chun.chen,lindsey.li,licheng.yu,ahmed.elkholy,fiahmed,
zhe.gan,yu.cheng,jingjl}@microsoft.com

Abstract. Joint image-text embedding is the bedrock for most Visionand-Language (V+L) tasks, where multimodality inputs are simultaneously processed for joint visual and textual understanding. In this
paper, we introduce UNITER, a UNiversal Image-TExt Representation,
learned through large-scale pre-training over four image-text datasets
(COCO, Visual Genome, Conceptual Captions, and SBU Captions),
which can power heterogeneous downstream V+L tasks with joint multimodal embeddings. We design four pre-training tasks: Masked Language Modeling (MLM), Masked Region Modeling (MRM, with three
variants), Image-Text Matching (ITM), and Word-Region Alignment
(WRA). Diﬀerent from previous work that applies joint random masking to both modalities, we use conditional masking on pre-training tasks
(i.e., masked language/region modeling is conditioned on full observation of image/text). In addition to ITM for global image-text alignment,
we also propose WRA via the use of Optimal Transport (OT) to explicitly encourage ﬁne-grained alignment between words and image regions
during pre-training. Comprehensive analysis shows that both conditional
masking and OT-based WRA contribute to better pre-training. We also
conduct a thorough ablation study to ﬁnd an optimal combination of
pre-training tasks. Extensive experiments show that UNITER achieves
new state of the art across six V+L tasks (over nine datasets), including Visual Question Answering, Image-Text Retrieval, Referring Expression Comprehension, Visual Commonsense Reasoning, Visual Entailment, and NLVR2 (Code is available at https://github.com/ChenRocks/
UNITER.).

1

Introduction

Most Vision-and-Language (V+L) tasks rely on joint multimodal embeddings
to bridge the semantic gap between visual and textual clues in images and text,
Y.-C. Chen, L. Li and L. Yu—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 104–120, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_7

