Who left the dogs out?
Supplementary Material
Benjamin Biggs1 , Oliver Boyne1 , James Charles1 ,
Andrew Fitzgibbon2 , and Roberto Cipolla1
1

1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
{bjb56,ob312,jjc75,rc10001}@cam.ac.uk
2
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK awf@microsoft.com

Dataset curation

In this section, we describe our process for obtaining keypoint and segmentation
annotations for the Stanford Dog Dataset [1]. We submit the entire set of 20,580
dog images to the Amazon Mechnical Turk crowdsourcing platform to obtain a
set of 20 keypoint and segmentation masks. We overlay 1 bounding box, provided
with the original dataset, on the submitted images to identify the specific dog
for the annotators to label. Each image was sent to 3 independent annotators
for collecting keypoints and segmentation masks.
Keypoints. To identify keypoints, workers were given a list of 20 keypoints to
click: 2 per tail, 3 per leg, 2 per ear, nose and jaw. They were additionally asked
to provide a visibility flag per point.
For each keypoint, we process the three clicks to yield a reliable coordinate.
From the 3 clicks, we discard clicks that are further than a set tolerance from the
mean. If at least 2 clicks remain, we take the mean coordinate as the accepted
keypoint position. Otherwise, the point has not been reliably identified between
workers, so we set the keypoint as invisible. As described in the main paper,
we remove images from train and test splits which have fewer than 8 visible
keypoints.
Segmentation. For each image, each worker w ∈ {w1 , w2 , w3 } submits a binary
segmentation mask Aw ∈ RH×W . We request a re-labelling for any submissions
which fail simple criteria, such as if the highlighted area is below a threshold
number of pixels.
For each image, we generate the most likely segmentation by comparing submissions across workers. For any two workers w, w0 we compute a correlation
coefficient:
i
P P h w
w0
A
A
i
j
P P p i,j
cw,w0 =
(1)
max 0
i
j Ai,j
p={w,w }

Where
denotes the element-wise product of the matrices. We remove a
worker’s segmentation Aw if all correlation coefficients cw,w0 are below a set
threshold. The final binary mask is computed from the remaining submissions:

