Invertible Zero-Shot Recognition Flows
Yuming Shen1 , Jie Qin2(B) , Lei Huang2 , Li Liu2 , Fan Zhu2 , and Ling Shao2,3
1
EBay, San Jose, USA
ymcidence@gmail.com
2
Inception Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
qinjiebuaa@gmail.com
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract. Deep generative models have been successfully applied to
Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) recently. However, the underlying drawbacks
of GANs and VAEs (e.g., the hardness of training with ZSL-oriented regularizers and the limited generation quality) hinder the existing generative ZSL models from fully bypassing the seen-unseen bias. To tackle the
above limitations, for the ﬁrst time, this work incorporates a new family
of generative models (i.e., ﬂow-based models) into ZSL. The proposed
Invertible Zero-shot Flow (IZF) learns factorized data embeddings (i.e.,
the semantic factors and the non-semantic ones) with the forward pass
of an invertible ﬂow network, while the reverse pass generates data samples. This procedure theoretically extends conventional generative ﬂows
to a factorized conditional scheme. To explicitly solve the bias problem,
our model enlarges the seen-unseen distributional discrepancy based on
a negative sample-based distance measurement. Notably, IZF works ﬂexibly with either a naive Bayesian classiﬁer or a held-out trainable one
for zero-shot recognition. Experiments on widely-adopted ZSL benchmarks demonstrate the signiﬁcant performance gain of IZF over existing
methods, in both classic and generalized settings.
Keywords: Zero-Shot Learning · Generative ﬂows · Invertible
networks

1

Introduction

With the explosive growth of image classes, there is an ever-increasing need for
computer vision systems to recognize images from never-before-seen classes, a
task which is known as Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [25]. Generally, ZSL aims
at recognizing unseen images by exploiting relationships between seen and
unseen images. Equipped with prior semantic knowledge (e.g., attributes [26],
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 36) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 614–631, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_36

