Minimal Rolling Shutter Absolute Pose with
Unknown Focal Length and Radial Distortion Supplementary Material
Zuzana Kukelova1 , Cenek Albl2 , Akihiro Sugimoto3 , Konrad Schindler2 , and
Tomas Pajdla4
1

1

VRG, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan
4
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical
University in Prague

Additional synthetic experiments

In this section we show additional evaluation of the proposed algorithms on
synthetic data. We show five more experiments demonstrating the practical advantages of using R7Pf and R7Pfr.
In the first two experiments we gradually increased rotational and translational velocity to the same values as in the experiments in Figure 2 in the main
paper, e.g. rotation velocity up to 30 degrees/frame and relative translational
velocity up to 1/10 of the camera distance from the scene per the duration of a
frame. The difference from the experiments in the main paper is that this time
the camera orientation is not set to identity and, therefore, R7Pf and R7Pfr have
to be initialized by an initial rotation. We use the output rotation from P4Pf
and P4Pfr to initialize R7Pf and R7Pfr respectively.
The data in the first experiment was generated without radial distortion
whereas in the second experiment we used a fixed radial distortion of about half
the maximum value of the one used in experiment in Figure 3 in the main paper.
Figure 1 shows how R7P and R7Pfr should behave in a practical scenario with
a moderate RS distortion, unknown focal length and no radial distortion and
Figure 2 shows the case for radial distortion.
We can see that without radial distortion, the initialization by both P4Pf and
P4Pfr is good enough to ensure R7Pf and R7Pfr provide a significantly better
camera pose and focal length than the existing solutions. The P4Pfr+R7Pfr is
significantly less stable on data without radial distortion, which indicates that
the RS effect is being explained partially by the radial distortion. As expected
on data with radial distoriton, P4Pf+R7Pf performs significantly poorer which
indicates that radial distortion present in the image is being explained by some
RS distortions, similar effect as with R7Pfr on non-distorted data. This is also
visible in the extremely poor result of P4Pf+R6P. R7Pf initialized by P4Pfr on
average outperforms P4Pfr+R6P, but it is clear from the results of both, that the
radial distortion estimated by a solver without RS model (P4Pfr) is poor. R7Pfr
provides the best performance and significantly outperforms all alternatives.

