PieNet: Personalized Image Enhancement
Network
Han-Ul Kim1 , Young Jun Koh2(B) , and Chang-Su Kim1
1
Korea University, Seoul, Korea
hanulkim@mcl.korea.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr
2
Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea
yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

Abstract. Image enhancement is an inherently subjective process since
people have diverse preferences for image aesthetics. However, most
enhancement techniques pay less attention to the personalization issue
despite its importance. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst deep learning approach to personalized image enhancement, which can enhance
new images for a new user, by asking him or her to select about 10–20
preferred images from a random set of images. First, we represent various users’ preferences for enhancement as feature vectors in an embedding space, called preference vectors. We construct the embedding space
based on metric learning. Then, we develop the personalized image
enhancement network (PieNet) to enhance images adaptively using each
user’s preference vector. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm is capable of achieving personalization successfully, as
well as outperforming conventional general image enhancement algorithms signiﬁcantly. The source codes and trained models are available
at https://github.com/hukim1124/PieNet.
Keywords: Image enhancement · Personalization · Metric learning

1

Introduction

Nowadays, people take photographs casually but are often unsatisﬁed with them.
Photos may be noisy because of limited camera sensors. Also, photos taken
in uncontrolled environments may suﬀer from low dynamic ranges or distorted
color tones [25,32]. Thus, image enhancement is required, which post-processes
and edits photographs to satisfy user preferences. Professional softwares provide
many tools to support manual image enhancement. However, the results of manual enhancement depend on users’ skills and experience. Moreover, the manual
process requires lots of eﬀorts.
Many researches have been carried out to perform image enhancement automatically. But, image enhancement is a non-trivial problem partly due to the
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 23) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 374–390, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_23

