Tracking Emerges by Looking Around Static
Scenes, with Neural 3D Mapping –
Supplementary Material
Adam W. Harley, Shrinidhi Kowshika Lakshmikanth,
Paul Schydlo, and Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA, 15213, USA
{aharley,kowshika,pschydlo,katef}@cs.cmu.edu

1

Implementation details

1.1

Neural 3D mapping

Our 3D convolutional network f has the following architecture. The input is a 4channel 3D grid shaped 128×32×128. The four channels are RGB and occupancy.
“Unoccupied” voxels have zeros in all channels. This input is passed through a
3D convolutional network, which is an encoder-decoder with skip connections.
There are three encoder layers: each have stride-2 3D convolutions, with kernel
size 4 × 4 × 4, and the output channel dimensions are 64, 128, 192. There are
three decoder layers: the first two have stride-2 transposed convolutions with
stride 2 and 4 × 4 × 4 kernels with 256 output channels; after each of these we
concatenate the same-resolution layer from the encoder half; the last layer has
a 1 × 1 × 1 kernel and 64 channels.
At training time f encodes a metric space sized 32 × 4 × 32 meters. At test
time we “zoom in” on the area of interest (i.e., the search region), and encode a
space sized 16 × 4 × 16 meters.
We train with the Adam optimizer [5] and train for 200, 000 iterations at a
learning rate of 1e − 4.
1.2

Baselines

– Unsupervised 3D flow [3]. The original work by Harley et al. [3] only
estimated flow for pairs of frames. We extend this into a 3D tracker by deploying the flow module in an object-centric manner, and by “chaining” the
flows together across time. We effectively compute the flow from the first
frame directly to every other frame in the sequence, but with an alignment
step designed to keep the object within the field of view of the flow module.
Specifically, given the object location in the first frame, we extract a volume of flow vectors in the object region, and run RANSAC to find a rigid
transformation that explains the majority of the flow field. We apply this
rigid transform to the box, yielding the object’s location in the next frame.
Then, we back-warp the next frame according to the box transformation,

