Self-Paced Deep Regression Forests
with Consideration on Underrepresented
Examples
Lili Pan1(B) , Shijie Ai1 , Yazhou Ren1 , and Zenglin Xu1,2,3
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
{lilipan,yazhou.ren}@uestc.edu.cn,asj1995@163.com,zenglin@gmail.com
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract. Deep discriminative models (e.g. deep regression forests,
deep neural decision forests) have achieved remarkable success recently
to solve problems such as facial age estimation and head pose estimation. Most existing methods pursue robust and unbiased solutions either
through learning discriminative features, or reweighting samples. We
argue what is more desirable is learning gradually to discriminate like
our human beings, and hence we resort to self-paced learning (SPL).
Then, a natural question arises: can self-paced regime lead deep discriminative models to achieve more robust and less biased solutions? To this
end, this paper proposes a new deep discriminative model—self-paced
deep regression forests with consideration on underrepresented examples
(SPUDRFs). It tackles the fundamental ranking and selecting problem
in SPL from a new perspective: fairness. This paradigm is fundamental
and could be easily combined with a variety of deep discriminative models (DDMs). Extensive experiments on two computer vision tasks, i.e.,
facial age estimation and head pose estimation, demonstrate the eﬃcacy
of SPUDRFs, where state-of-the-art performances are achieved.
Keywords: Underrepresented examples · Self-paced learning ·
Entropy · Deep regression forests

1

Introduction

Deep discriminative models (e.g. deep regression forests, deep neural decision
forests) have recently been applied to many computer vision problems with
remarkable success. They compute the input to output mapping for regression
or classiﬁcation by virtue of deep neural networks [3,4,14,23,44,45]. In general,
DDMs probably perform better when large amounts of eﬀective training data
(less noisy and balanced) is available. However, such ideal data is hard to collect,
especially when large amounts of labels are required.
Computer vision literatures are ﬁlled with scenarios in which we are required
to learn DDMs, not only robust to confusing and noisy examples, but also capable
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 271–287, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_17

