TSIT: A Simple and Versatile Framework for
Image-to-Image Translation
Supplementary Material
Liming Jiang1 , Changxu Zhang2 , Mingyang Huang3 , Chunxiao Liu3 ,
Jianping Shi3 , and Chen Change Loy1
1

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
{liming002,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
2
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
zhangcx@berkeley.edu
3
SenseTime Research, Beijing, China
{huangmingyang,liuchunxiao,shijianping}@sensetime.com

Abstract. This document provides the supplementary information that
is not elaborated in our main paper due to the space constraints: Sec. A
details the different applications we have explored. Sec. B describes details of the datasets used in our experiments. Sec. C provides additional
implementation details. Sec. D presents several supplementary ablation
studies. Sec. E shows more examples of the images generated by our
method.

A

Application Exploration

We have introduced a Two-Stream Image-to-image Translation (TSIT) framework in the main paper. The proposed framework is simple and versatile for various image-to-image translation tasks under both unsupervised and supervised
settings. We have considered three important and representative applications
of conditional image synthesis: arbitrary style transfer (unsupervised), semantic
image synthesis (supervised), and multi-modal image synthesis (enriching generation diversity). We employ a two-stream network, namely “content” stream
and “style” stream, on these applications.
For the unsupervised arbitrary style transfer application, we feed the content
image to the content stream and the style image to the style stream, and let
the networks learn different levels of feature representations of the content and
style. The proposed feature transformations, FADE and FAdaIN, adaptively fuse
content and style feature maps, respectively, at different scales in the generator.
In contrast to prior works, our method is more adaptable to style transfer tasks in
diverse scenarios (e.g., natural images, real-world scenes, and artistic paintings).
We further expand the application of our method to cater to semantic image
synthesis under the supervised setting. The definition of “content” and “style”
can be more general: all the images that provide semantic structure information

