Reconstructing NBA Players
Supplementary Material
Luyang Zhu, Konstantinos Rematas, Brian Curless,
Steven M. Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
University of Washington

1

NB2K Dataset Capture

In this section we provide more details of how we select captures of the NBA2K
dataset.
One way to decide which frames to capture is to let the game use its AI
where two teams play against each other, however we found that the variety of
poses captured in this manner is rather limited. It captures mostly walking and
running people, while we target more complex basketball moves. Instead, we
have people play the game and proactively capture frames where dunk, dribble,
shooting, and other complex basketball moves occur.

2

PoseNet

In this section we provide more details for the PoseNet architecture and setup.
The input is a single, person-centered image with dimensions 256 × 256.
We extract ResNet [17] features from layer 4 and supply them to four separate
network branches (2D pose, 3D pose, jump class, jump height). The 2D and 3D
pose branches consist of 3 set of Deconvolution-BatchNorm-ReLu blocks. For
the jump class, we use a fully connected layer followed by two linear residual
blocks [10] to get the final output and we use the same network architecture for
the jump height branch. We estimate both the jump class and the jump height
because the jump class can serve as a threshold to reject the inaccurate jump
height prediction in the global position estimation.
The 2D pose branch outputs a set of 2D 64 × 64 heatmaps, one for every
keypoint, indicating where a particular keypoint is located. Similarly, the 3D
pose branch outputs a set of 2D 64 × 64 location maps [11], where each location
map indicates the possible 3D location for every pixel. Each location map has
3 channels that encode the XY Z position of a keypoint with respect to pelvis.
To generate the ground truth heatmaps, we first transform the 2D pose from its
original image resolution (256 × 256) to 64 × 64 resolution, and then generate a
2D Gaussian map centered at each joint location. For ground truth XYZ location
maps, we put the 3D joint location at the position where the heatmap has nonzero value. To obtain the final output, we take the location of the maximum
value in every keypoint heatmap to get the 2D pose at 64 × 64 resolution and
use it to sample the 3D pose from the XY Z location maps. After that, the 2d

