End-to-End Trainable Deep Active
Contour Models for Automated Image
Segmentation: Delineating Buildings
in Aerial Imagery
Ali Hatamizadeh(B) , Debleena Sengupta, and Demetri Terzopoulos
Computer Science Department, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
{ahatamiz,debleenas,dt}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract. The automated segmentation of buildings in remote sensing imagery is a challenging task that requires the accurate delineation
of multiple building instances over typically large image areas. Manual
methods are often laborious and current deep-learning-based approaches
fail to delineate all building instances and do so with adequate accuracy.
As a solution, we present Trainable Deep Active Contours (TDACs), an
automatic image segmentation framework that intimately unites Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Active Contour Models (ACMs).
The Eulerian energy functional of the ACM component includes perpixel parameter maps that are predicted by the backbone CNN, which
also initializes the ACM. Importantly, both the ACM and CNN components are fully implemented in TensorFlow and the entire TDAC architecture is end-to-end automatically diﬀerentiable and backpropagation
trainable without user intervention. TDAC yields fast, accurate, and fully
automatic simultaneous delineation of arbitrarily many buildings in the
image. We validate the model on two publicly available aerial image
datasets for building segmentation, and our results demonstrate that
TDAC establishes a new state-of-the-art performance.
Keywords: Computer vision · Image segmentation · Active contour
models · Convolutional neural networks · Building delineation

1

Introduction

The delineation of buildings in remote sensing imagery [24] is a crucial step in
applications such as urban planning [29], land cover analysis [35], and disaster
relief response [28], among others. Manual or semi-automated approaches can
be very slow, laborious, and sometimes imprecise, which can be detrimental to
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 43) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 730–746, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_43

