Supplementary Material for “Improving
One-stage Visual Grounding by Recursive
Sub-query Construction”
Zhengyuan Yang1

Tianlang Chen1

Liwei Wang2

Jiebo Luo1

1

University of Rochester 2 Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue
{zyang39,tchen45,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu, liweiwang@tencent.com

1

Qualitative Results

We present additional qualitative results in Figures A, B to visualize the recursive
disambiguation process. We highlight the following scenarios.
– Recursive disambiguation. The proposed recursive sub-query construction framework improves one-stage visual grounding by addressing the current limitations on grounding long queries. We observe a desired recursive
disambiguation process that the text-conditional visual feature step by step
generates more accurate and confident predictions.
As an easy case, better modeling the modifiers of the head noun already
corrects a portion of previous failures. For example, in Figure A (a), the
peak in the heatmap moves from the tennis player to the referred person in
the back, after observing the modifier “watching” in the second round. On
the contrary, previous one-stage methods tend to overemphasize the head
nouns, without full consideration of the modifiers. Our proposed method
also works well on more complex queries via recursive disambiguation, such
as in the example “persons head with drill in the middle” from the main
paper, and “pony tail lady on the right forefront” in Figure A (b).
– Challenging regions. We observe that our method performs well on challenging examples such as Figures A (c) and (d), where the referred target
is tiny, the scene contains visually similar distracting objects, and the query
includes complex attributes and relationship descriptions.
– Attributes. Figures A (e) and (f) include examples that require the correct
understanding of attributes such as color and size. For example, in the final
round of Figure A (e), the peak moves from the distracting object “trolley”
to the referred red suitcase by observing the constructed sub-query “red.”
– Failure cases. Figures A (g) and (h) show failure cases of our model. The
model either misses certain related objects such as the “controller” in Figures A (g) or fails to understand some rarely appeared attributes such as
“plaid” in Figures A (h). Therefore, one or more distracting objects remain
to have high heatmap responses in the final round, despite the model might
still predict the correct bounding box.
We present additional qualitative results in Figure B.

