Combinatorial Energy Learning for Image
Segmentation

Jeremy Maitin-Shepard
UC Berkeley Google
jbms@google.com
Peter Li
Google
phli@google.com

Viren Jain
Google
viren@google.com

Michal Januszewski
Google
mjanusz@google.com

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new machine learning approach for image segmentation that uses a
neural network to model the conditional energy of a segmentation given an image.
Our approach, combinatorial energy learning for image segmentation (CELIS)
places a particular emphasis on modeling the inherent combinatorial nature of
dense image segmentation problems. We propose efficient algorithms for learning
deep neural networks to model the energy function, and for local optimization of
this energy in the space of supervoxel agglomerations. We extensively evaluate
our method on a publicly available 3-D microscopy dataset with 25 billion voxels
of ground truth data. On an 11 billion voxel test set, we find that our method
improves volumetric reconstruction accuracy by more than 20% as compared to
two state-of-the-art baseline methods: graph-based segmentation of the output
of a 3-D convolutional neural network trained to predict boundaries, as well as a
random forest classifier trained to agglomerate supervoxels that were generated by
a 3-D convolutional neural network.

1

Introduction

Mapping neuroanatomy, in the pursuit of linking hypothesized computational models consistent
with observed functions to the actual physical structures, is a long-standing fundamental problem
in neuroscience. One primary interest is in mapping the network structure of neural circuits by
identifying the morphology of each neuron and the locations of synaptic connections between
neurons, a field called connectomics. Currently, the most promising approach for obtaining such
maps of neural circuit structure is volume electron microscopy of a stained and fixed block of
tissue. [4, 16, 17, 10] This technique was first used successfully decades ago in mapping the structure
of the complete nervous system of the 302-neuron Caenorhabditis elegans; due to the need to
manually cut, image, align, and trace all neuronal processes in about 8000 50 nm serial sections, even
this small circuit required over 10 years of labor, much of it spent on image analysis. [31] At the time,
scaling this approach to larger circuits was not practical.
Recent advances in volume electron microscopy [11, 20, 15] make feasible the imaging of large
circuits, potentially containing hundreds of thousands of neurons, at sufficient resolution to discern
even the smallest neuronal processes. [4, 16, 17, 10] The high image quality and near-isotropic
resolution achievable with these methods enables the resultant data to be treated as a true 3-D volume,
which significantly aids reconstruction of processes that do not run parallel to the sectioning axis, and
is potentially more amenable to automated image processing.
30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2016), Barcelona, Spain.

