Learning Flow-Based Feature Warping
for Face Frontalization with Illumination
Inconsistent Supervision
Yuxiang Wei1 , Ming Liu1 , Haolin Wang1 , Ruifeng Zhu2,4 , Guosheng Hu3 ,
and Wangmeng Zuo1,5(B)
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology,
Harbin, China
yuxiang.wei.cs@gmail.com, csmliu@outlook.com, Why cs@outlook.com,
wmzuo@hit.edu.cn
2
University of Burgundy Franche-Comté, Besançon, France
reefing.z@gmail.com
3
Anyvision, Belfast, UK
huguosheng100@gmail.com
4
University of the Basque Country, Eibar, Spain
5
Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract. Despite recent advances in deep learning-based face frontalization methods, photo-realistic and illumination preserving frontal face
synthesis is still challenging due to large pose and illumination discrepancy during training. We propose a novel Flow-based Feature Warping
Model (FFWM) which can learn to synthesize photo-realistic and illumination preserving frontal images with illumination inconsistent supervision. Speciﬁcally, an Illumination Preserving Module (IPM) is proposed
to learn illumination preserving image synthesis from illumination inconsistent image pairs. IPM includes two pathways which collaborate to
ensure the synthesized frontal images are illumination preserving and
with ﬁne details. Moreover, a Warp Attention Module (WAM) is introduced to reduce the pose discrepancy in the feature level, and hence to
synthesize frontal images more eﬀectively and preserve more details of
proﬁle images. The attention mechanism in WAM helps reduce the artifacts caused by the displacements between the proﬁle and the frontal
images. Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show that our
FFWM can synthesize photo-realistic and illumination preserving frontal
images and performs favorably against the state-of-the-art results. Our
code is available at https://github.com/csyxwei/FFWM.
Keywords: Face frontalization · Illumination preserving · Optical
ﬂow · Guided ﬁlter · Attention mechanism
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 33) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 558–574, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_33

