1

A. Appendix
A.1. Method - Details of region-scale/contextual-relation
pseudo labels and regularizer weight
We would share more details about the region-scale/contextual-relation pseudo
labels and the weight of regularizer used in this paper. For the source domain,
the sizes of the input image for datasets GTA5 and SYNTHIA are 720 × 1280
and 760 × 1280 , respectively. In this paper, we use two types of regions with two
different sizes. The first sizes of regions for datasets GTA5 and SYNTHIA are
18 × 32 and 19 × 32, respectively. The second sizes of regions for datasets GTA5
and SYNTHIA are 36 × 64 and 38 × 64, respectively. For the target domain
(dataset Cityscapes), the size of input image is 512 × 1024. The sizes of regions
are 16×32 and 32×64, respectively. We use two independent contextual-relations
(CR) classifiers to deal with these two types of regions with two different sizes.
The weight of the regularizer in adaptive entropy max-minimizing adversarial
learning scheme decreases with training iteration, which is expressed as: λR =
iter
power
with power = 0.9.
(1 − max
iter )

A.2. Method - Traditional Losses
For the source domain, traditional approaches learn a supervised segmentation
model G that aims to minimize a segmentation loss. For the target domain, UDA
networks using adversarial learning train G to extract domain-invariant features
though the minimaxing game between G and a domain discriminator D. The
overall loss in the UDA networks can therefore be formulated by:
L(Xs , Xt ) = Lseg (G) + Ladv (G, D)

(1)

A.3. Method - Loss in Multi-Scale Adaptation
Source Flow: In our contextual-relation consistent domain adaptation (CrCDA) with multi-scale form, the source-domain data contribute to Lseg , Lcr
and LD . Given a source-domain image xs ⊂ Xs and the corresponding pixelscale label ys ⊂ Ys , region-scale (contextual-relations) pseudo label ys cr ⊂ Ys cr ,
(h,w,c)
Ps
= Cseg (E(xs )) is the predicted probability map w.r.t each pixel over C
(i,j,n)
classes; Ps cr = Ccr (E(xs )) is the predicted probability map w.r.t each re(h,w,c+n)
gion over N classes. The layout probability map Ps layout is generated by con(h,w,c)

(i,j,n)

catenating Ps
and up-sampled Ps cr . Lseg and Lcr are provided in the
submitted manuscript. Lsd is formulated as follows:
Lsd (E, Cseg , Ccr , CD ) =

X
h,w

(h,w,c+n)

E[log CD (Ps layout )]

(2)

