CLAWS: Clustering Assisted Weakly Supervised
Learning with Normalcy Suppression for
Anomalous Event Detection
Muhammad Zaigham Zaheer1,2 , Arif Mahmood3 , Marcella Astrid1,2 , and
Seung-Ik Lee1,2
1

2

University of Science and Technology, Daejeon, South Korea.
Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute, Daejeon, South Korea.
{mzz, marcella.astrid}@ust.ac.kr, the silee@etri.re.kr
3
Information Technology University, Ferozpur Road, Lahore, Pakistan
arif.mahmood@itu.edu.pk

Abstract. This is supplementary material for the paper, providing an
extended overview on our proposed normalcy suppression mechanism
for weakly supervised anomalous event detection. The document also
provides visualizations of suppression output from our trained model, as
well as the discussion on its behaviour. A comparison with conventional
attention mechanism is also provided to highlight the main differences
as well as the gains in performance by using the proposed suppression
approach.

1

Normalcy Suppression Module (NSM)

The role of normalcy suppression module in our proposed CLAWS Net is twofold:
– It learns to suppress the normal portions of an input batch.
– It holds back the backbone network from producing high anomaly scores for
all input features in the presence of noisy labels.
The ideal behavior of NSM is to minimize the output values as much as
possible if an input batch corresponds to a normal video.In the case that an
input batch corresponds to an anomalous, the NSM minimizes its values along
the normal segments. Another noticeable property that an NSM should posses
is to learn abnormal behavior based on the temporal order of the events in an
input batch.
In the following sections, we define several possible configurations of our
suppression module and analyze the performances. This study verifies the effectiveness of our proposed architecture by presenting various comparisons of
these configurations. Also, we present a detailed analysis highlighting significant
differences between our approach and the existing attention mechanisms which
have been widely used for various other problems.

