Label-Similarity Curriculum Learning
Ürün Dogan1(B) , Aniket Anand Deshmukh1 , Marcin Bronislaw Machura1 ,
and Christian Igel2
1

Microsoft Ads, Microsoft, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
{udogan,andeshm,mmachura}@microsoft.com
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark
igel@di.ku.dk

Abstract. Curriculum learning can improve neural network training by
guiding the optimization to desirable optima. We propose a novel curriculum learning approach for image classiﬁcation that adapts the loss
function by changing the label representation.
The idea is to use a probability distribution over classes as target
label, where the class probabilities reﬂect the similarity to the true class.
Gradually, this label representation is shifted towards the standard onehot-encoding. That is, in the beginning minor mistakes are corrected less
than large mistakes, resembling a teaching process in which broad concepts are explained ﬁrst before subtle diﬀerences are taught.
The class similarity can be based on prior knowledge. For the special
case of the labels being natural words, we propose a generic way to automatically compute the similarities. The natural words are embedded into
Euclidean space using a standard word embedding. The probability of
each class is then a function of the cosine similarity between the vector
representations of the class and the true label.
The proposed label-similarity curriculum learning (LCL) approach
was empirically evaluated using several popular deep learning architectures for image classiﬁcation tasks applied to ﬁve datasets including ImageNet, CIFAR100, and AWA2. In all scenarios, LCL was
able to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy on the test data compared to standard training. Code to reproduce results is available at
https://github.com/speedystream/LCL.
Keywords: Curriculum learning · Deep learning · Multi-modal
learning · Classiﬁcation

1

Introduction

When educating humans, the teaching material is typically presented
with increasing diﬃculty. Curriculum learning adopts this principle for
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_11) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 174–190, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_11

