Location Sensitive Image Retrieval
and Tagging
Raul Gomez1,2(B) , Jaume Gibert1 , Lluis Gomez2 , and Dimosthenis Karatzas2
1

Eurecat, Centre Tecnològic de Catalunya, Unitat de Tecnologies Audiovisuals,
Barcelona, Spain
{raul.gomez,jaume.gibert}@eurecat.org
2
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
{lgomez,dimos}@cvc.uab.es

Abstract. People from diﬀerent parts of the globe describe objects and
concepts in distinct manners. Visual appearance can thus vary across different geographic locations, which makes location a relevant contextual
information when analysing visual data. In this work, we address the task
of image retrieval related to a given tag conditioned on a certain location
on Earth. We present LocSens, a model that learns to rank triplets of
images, tags and coordinates by plausibility, and two training strategies
to balance the location inﬂuence in the ﬁnal ranking. LocSens learns to
fuse textual and location information of multimodal queries to retrieve
related images at diﬀerent levels of location granularity, and successfully
utilizes location information to improve image tagging.

1

Introduction

Image tagging is the task of assigning tags to images, referring to words that
describe the image content or context. An image of a beach, for instance, could
be tagged with the words beach or sand, but also with the words swim, vacation
or Hawaii, which do not refer to objects in the scene. On the other hand, imageby-text retrieval is the task of searching for images related to a given textual
query. Similarly to the tagging task, the query words can refer to explicit scene
content or to other image semantics. In this work we address the speciﬁc retrieval
case when the query text is a single word (a tag).
Besides text and images, location is a data modality widely present in contemporary data collections. Many cameras and mobile phones with built-in GPS systems store the location information in the corresponding Exif metadata header
when a picture is taken. Moreover, most of the web and social media platforms
add this information to generated content or use it in their oﬀered services.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 38) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 649–665, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_38

