Supplementary for “Object-Contextual
Representations for Semantic Segmentation”
Yuhui Yuan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2 , and Jingdong Wang3
1

Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences
(CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Microsoft Research Asia
{yuhui.yuan, jingdw}@microsoft.com, xlchen@ict.ac.cn

In Section A, we compare our approach to the existing coarse-to-fine approaches. In Section B, we study the influence of the region numbers and illustrate the qualitative results with Double Attention. In Section C, we report the
results of Panoptic-FPN + PPM / ASPP on the COCO val 2017 and the results
of Panoptic-FPN / Panoptic-FPN + OCR on the COCO test-dev. In Section D,
we apply our OCR on MobileNetV2 to verify the effectiveness of our approach
for real-time applications. In Section E, we verify the advantage of our OCR
over the conventional DeepLabv3 [1] and DeepLabv3+ [2] based on the recent
MMSegmentation code base [13]. Last, in Section F, we illustrate some examples
of the qualitative improvements based on our OCR scheme.
A. Comparison with Coarse-to-fine Schemes
Many existing studies [4,5,8,11] have exploited various coarse-to-fine schemes to
use the coarse segmentation results to boost the final segmentation results. We
mainly compare OCR with two popular mechanisms including:
 label-refinement [5,6]: combine the input image or feature map with a coarse
prediction to predict the refined label map. We concatenate the coarse segmentation maps with the feature map output from ResNet-101 Stage 4 and apply
the final classifier on the concatenated feature map to predict the refined segmentation maps.
 label-ensemble [9,10]: ensemble the coarse segmentation maps with the fine
segmentation maps directly. We directly use the weighted sum of the coarse
segmentation map and the fine segmentation map as the final refined prediction.
Besides, we also report the performance with only the coarse segmentation
map (prediction from the ResNet Stage 3) and with only the fine segmentation
map (prediction from the ResNet Stage 4). We choose the dilated ResNet-101 as
our baseline. According to the results in Table 1, it can be seen that our OCR
outperforms all the other coarse-to-fine approaches by a large margin.
B. Ablation Study of Double Attention
Number of Regions We fine-tune the number of regions within Double Attention [3] method and report the results on Cityscapes val in Table 2. We

