SeqHAND: RGB-Sequence-Based 3D
Hand Pose and Shape Estimation
John Yang1 , Hyung Jin Chang2 , Seungeui Lee1 , and Nojun Kwak1(B)
1

Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
{yjohn,seungeui.lee,nojunk}@snu.ac.kr
2
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract. 3D hand pose estimation based on RGB images has been
studied for a long time. Most of the studies, however, have performed
frame-by-frame estimation based on independent static images. In this
paper, we attempt to not only consider the appearance of a hand but
incorporate the temporal movement information of a hand in motion
into the learning framework, which leads to the necessity of a large-scale
dataset with sequential RGB hand images. We propose a novel method
that generates a synthetic dataset that mimics natural human hand
movements by re-engineering annotations of an extant static hand pose
dataset into pose-flows. With the generated dataset, we train a newly
proposed recurrent framework, exploiting visuo-temporal features from
sequential synthetic hand images and emphasizing smoothness of estimations with temporal consistency constraints. Our novel training strategy
of detaching the recurrent layer of the framework during domain ﬁnetuning from synthetic to real allows preservation of the visuo-temporal features learned from sequential synthetic hand images. Hand poses that are
sequentially estimated consequently produce natural and smooth hand
movements which lead to more robust estimations. Utilizing temporal
information for 3D hand pose estimation signiﬁcantly enhances general
pose estimations by outperforming state-of-the-art methods in our experiments on hand pose estimation benchmarks.
Keywords: 3D hand pose estimations · Pose-ﬂow generation ·
Synthetic-to-real domain gap reduction · Synthetic hand motion
dataset

1

Introduction

Since expressions of hands reﬂect much of human behavioral features in a daily
basis, hand pose estimations are essential for many human-computer interactions,
J. Yang and H. J. Chang—Equal Contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 8) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 122–139, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_8

