Towards Automated Testing
and Robustification by Semantic
Adversarial Data Generation
Rakshith Shetty1(B) , Mario Fritz2 , and Bernt Schiele1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken,
Germany
{rshetty,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de
2
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Saarbrücken, Germany
fritz@cispa.saarland

Abstract. Widespread application of computer vision systems in real
world tasks is currently hindered by their unexpected behavior on unseen
examples. This occurs due to limitations of empirical testing on ﬁnite test
sets and lack of systematic methods to identify the breaking points of
a trained model. In this work we propose semantic adversarial editing,
a method to synthesize plausible but diﬃcult data points on which our
target model breaks down. We achieve this with a diﬀerentiable object
synthesizer which can change an object’s appearance while retaining its
pose. Constrained adversarial optimization of object appearance through
this synthesizer produces rare/diﬃcult versions of an object which fool
the target object detector. Experiments show that our approach eﬀectively synthesizes diﬃcult test data, dropping the performance of YoloV3
detector by more than 20 mAP points by changing the appearance of a
single object and discovering failure modes of the model. The generated semantic adversarial data can also be used to robustify the detector
through data augmentation, consistently improving its performance in
both standard and out-of-dataset-distribution test sets, across three different datasets.

1

Introduction

Performance evaluation of computer vision systems is predominantly done by
empirical evaluation on a ﬁxed test set, often drawn from a similar distribution as the training data. However, due to limited sample size a ﬁxed test set
only captures a small portion of errors the model would make on diverse data
seen during real-world deployment. This discrepancy manifests as poor out-ofdataset-distribution (OODD) generalization [15,27,28], vulnerabilities to input
noise [14,24] and adversarial perturbations [12]. In this work, we propose automated testing through semantic adversarial editing which synthesizes diﬃcult
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5 29) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12347, pp. 489–506, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58536-5_29

