Generating Handwriting via Decoupled
Style Descriptors
Atsunobu Kotani(B) , Stefanie Tellex , and James Tompkin
Brown University, Providence, USA
Atsunobu Kotani@brown.edu

Abstract. Representing a space of handwriting stroke styles includes
the challenge of representing both the style of each character and the
overall style of the human writer. Existing VRNN approaches to representing handwriting often do not distinguish between these diﬀerent style
components, which can reduce model capability. Instead, we introduce
the Decoupled Style Descriptor (DSD) model for handwriting, which
factors both character- and writer-level styles and allows our model to
represent an overall greater space of styles. This approach also increases
ﬂexibility: given a few examples, we can generate handwriting in new
writer styles, and also now generate handwriting of new characters across
writer styles. In experiments, our generated results were preferred over a
state of the art baseline method 88% of the time, and in a writer identiﬁcation task on 20 held-out writers, our DSDs achieved 89.38% accuracy
from a single sample word. Overall, DSDs allows us to improve both
the quality and ﬂexibility over existing handwriting stroke generation
approaches.

1

Introduction

Producing computational models of handwriting is a deeply human and personal
topic—most people can write, and each writer has a unique style to their script.
Capturing these styles ﬂexibly and accurately is important as it determines the
space of descriptive expression of the model; in turn, these models deﬁne the
usefulness of our recognition and generation applications. For deep-learningbased models, our concern is how to architecture the neural network such that
we can represent the underlying stroke characteristics of the styles of writing.
Challenges in handwriting representation include reproducing ﬁne detail, generating unseen characters, enabling style interpolation and transfer, and using
human-labeled training data eﬃciently. Across these, one foundational problem
is how to succinctly represent both the style variation of each character and the
overall style of the human writer—to capture both the variation within an ‘h’
letterform and the overall consistency with other letterform for each writer.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 45) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 764–780, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_45

