Do Deep Nets Really Need to be Deep?

Rich Caruana
Microsoft Research
rcaruana@microsoft.com

Lei Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto
jimmy@psi.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Currently, deep neural networks are the state of the art on problems such as speech
recognition and computer vision. In this paper we empirically demonstrate that
shallow feed-forward nets can learn the complex functions previously learned by
deep nets and achieve accuracies previously only achievable with deep models.
Moreover, in some cases the shallow nets can learn these deep functions using the
same number of parameters as the original deep models. On the TIMIT phoneme
recognition and CIFAR-10 image recognition tasks, shallow nets can be trained
that perform similarly to complex, well-engineered, deeper convolutional models.

1

Introduction

You are given a training set with 1M labeled points. When you train a shallow neural net with one
fully connected feed-forward hidden layer on this data you obtain 86% accuracy on test data. When
you train a deeper neural net as in [1] consisting of a convolutional layer, pooling layer, and three
fully connected feed-forward layers on the same data you obtain 91% accuracy on the same test set.
What is the source of this improvement? Is the 5% increase in accuracy of the deep net over the
shallow net because: a) the deep net has more parameters; b) the deep net can learn more complex
functions given the same number of parameters; c) the deep net has better inductive bias and thus
learns more interesting/useful functions (e.g., because the deep net is deeper it learns hierarchical
representations [5]); d) nets without convolution can’t easily learn what nets with convolution can
learn; e) current learning algorithms and regularization methods work better with deep architectures
than shallow architectures[8]; f) all or some of the above; g) none of the above?
There have been attempts to answer this question. It has been shown that deep nets coupled with
unsupervised layer-by-layer pre-training [10] [19] work well. In [8], the authors show that depth
combined with pre-training provides a good prior for model weights, thus improving generalization.
There is well-known early theoretical work on the representational capacity of neural nets. For
example, it was proved that a network with a large enough single hidden layer of sigmoid units can
approximate any decision boundary [4]. Empirical work, however, shows that it is difficult to train
shallow nets to be as accurate as deep nets. For vision tasks, a recent study on deep convolutional
nets suggests that deeper models are preferred under a parameter budget [7]. In [5], the authors
trained shallow nets on SIFT features to classify a large-scale ImageNet dataset and found that it
was difficult to train large, high-accuracy, shallow nets. And in [17], the authors show that deeper
models are more accurate than shallow models in speech acoustic modeling.
In this paper we provide empirical evidence that shallow nets are capable of learning the same
function as deep nets, and in some cases with the same number of parameters as the deep nets. We
do this by first training a state-of-the-art deep model, and then training a shallow model to mimic the
deep model. The mimic model is trained using the model compression method described in the next
section. Remarkably, with model compression we are able to train shallow nets to be as accurate
as some deep models, even though we are not able to train these shallow nets to be as accurate as
the deep nets when the shallow nets are trained directly on the original labeled training data. If a
shallow net with the same number of parameters as a deep net can learn to mimic a deep net with
high fidelity, then it is clear that the function learned by that deep net does not really have to be deep.
1

