Every Pixel Matters: Center-aware Feature
Alignment for Domain Adaptive Object Detector
Cheng-Chun Hsu1 , Yi-Hsuan Tsai2 , Yen-Yu Lin1,3 , and Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5
1

3

1

Academia Sinica
National Chiao Tung University

2

4

NEC Labs America
5
UC Merced
Google Research

Overview

In this supplementary material, we provide more detailed analysis of our approach, including 1) the sensitivity analysis of the weights for the adversarial
terms, i.e., α and β in equation (1) of the paper, 2) t-SNE visualizations of
aligned features, 3) introducing an alternative scheme for center-aware alignment and the comparisons, 4) ablations of the objectness map and centerness
map for CA-alignment, 5) ablations of the multi-scale alignment using VGG-16,
6) performance gains comparison of anchor-based and anchor-free detector, 7)
the results of weather adaptation using ResNet-50, 8) computational cost in GAand CA-alignment, and 9) more visualization examples of our predicted results
on the benchmark datasets.

2

Sensitivity Analysis

The sensitivity analysis of weights α and β is reported in Table 1. The first
group shows the result of the setting adopted in our paper, i.e., α = 0.01 and
β = 0.1. The second group displays the results of varying the value of β, i.e.,
β ∈ {0.02, 0.05, 0.2, 0.5}, while fixing α to 0.01. The third group gives the results
of varying the value of α, i.e., α ∈ {0.002, 0.005, 0.02, 0.05}, while fixing β to 0.1.
By fixing α, a small value of β slightly decreases performance. The performance drops if the value of β becomes too large since it may mitigate the effects
of global alignment. By fixing β, increasing or decreasing the value of α leads to
a moderate drop in performance, but is still better than the ones only using the
GA module (see Table 3 of the manuscript). The results suggest that the GA
module is essential to our method, and the CA and GA modules complement
each other since combining them leads to better performance.

3

Aligned Feature Distribution

This section provides the visualization of feature distributions after applying
alignment with the proposed method. We first sample per-pixel features from
source and target domains, and then we visualize them using t-SNE in Fig. 1.
We observe that foreground and background features without applying feature

