Deep Image Compression using Decoder Side
Information
Sharon Ayzik and Shai Avidan
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
ayziksha@mail.tau.ac.il , avidan@eng.tau.ac.il

Supplementary Material
Dataset examples: Examples for both datasets can be seen in Figure 1, where
the top pair is an example from KITTI Stereo, and bottom pair is an example
from KITTI General. In each pair, the top image is an example for X image,
and below it, its matching side information image Y . While KITTI stereo images
present the same scene from a slightly different angle, KITTI General images
contain the same objects but in different scales and angles as well as objects that
appear in one image but not on its matching pair.
2D Gaussian mask: As mentioned in the main paper’s ablation study, we
found it beneficial to add a 2D Gaussian mask as a prior in the process of
creating Ysyn . In Figure 2 we present an example for a correlation map created for
a certain patch of Xdec by following our method of patch selection as mentioned
in the main paper. Furthermore, we compare correlation maps created with and
without the use of a 2D Gaussian mask and show their selected matching patches
(i.e., patches that yield maximum correlation) marked in Y image. We can see
that the 2D Gaussian mask focuses the attention on the more relevant patches.
Reconstruction examples: In the next pages, we share additional visual examples for both datasets - KITTI Stereo and KITTI General compared to the
baseline model, BPG, and JPEG 2000. For the other codecs, we chose the reconstruction results with the smallest bpp above ours. When very low bpp is
applied, we compare ourselves only with the baseline model since BPG failed to
reach these bpps.
By observing the results, we can see that JPEG 2000 yields very blurry images,
while BPG restores coarse edges well but lacks in textures and fine details. Our
model succeeds in restoring edges as well as fine features and textures. When
comparing our model with the baseline model, our method does a better job in
restoring objects, textures, and colors.

