Learning and Aggregating Deep Local
Descriptors for Instance-Level
Recognition
Giorgos Tolias(B) , Tomas Jenicek, and Ondřej Chum
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering,
Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
giorgos.tolias@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract. We propose an eﬃcient method to learn deep local descriptors for instance-level recognition. The training only requires examples of
positive and negative image pairs and is performed as metric learning of
sum-pooled global image descriptors. At inference, the local descriptors
are provided by the activations of internal components of the network.
We demonstrate why such an approach learns local descriptors that work
well for image similarity estimation with classical eﬃcient match kernel
methods. The experimental validation studies the trade-oﬀ between performance and memory requirements of the state-of-the-art image search
approach based on match kernels. Compared to existing local descriptors, the proposed ones perform better in two instance-level recognition
tasks and keep memory requirements lower. We experimentally show
that global descriptors are not eﬀective enough at large scale and that
local descriptors are essential. We achieve state-of-the-art performance,
in some cases even with a backbone network as small as ResNet18.
Keywords: Deep local descriptors · Deep local features · Eﬃcient
match kernel · ASMK · Image retrieval · Instance-level recognition

1

Introduction

Instance-level recognition tasks are dealing with a very large number of classes
and relatively small intra-class variability. Typically, even instance-level classiﬁcation tasks are cast as instance-level search in combination with nearest neighbor classiﬁers. The ﬁrst instance-level search approach to achieve good performance, i.e. Video Google [42], is based on local features and the Bag-of-Words
(BoW) representation. Representing images as collections of vector-quantized
descriptors of local features allows for eﬃcient spatial veriﬁcation [32], which
turns out to be a key ingredient in search for small objects. Follow-up approaches
improve the BoW paradigm either with ﬁner quantization and better matching
schemes [2,20,44] or with compact global descriptors generated through aggregation [1,22]. Good performance is achieved even without spatial veriﬁcation.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 460–477, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_27

