Searching Efficient 3D Architectures with
Sparse Point-Voxel Convolution

A.1

Implementation Details

A.1.1

Backbone Networks

We introduce two backbone networks which are used as starting points for
SPVNAS.
Based on MinkowskiNet [2], we build our backbone network by wrapping
Sparse Convolution layers in the 34-layer MinkowskiNets [2] using Sparse PointVoxel Convolution. Specifically, the U-Net consists of 4 SPVConv layers. The first
layer voxelizes the input data and devoxelizes at the end of the stemming stage
of MinkowskiNet (i.e. before downsampling). The second SPVConv generates the
volumetric representation subsequently and turns back to point-based representation after all four downsampling stages in MinkowskiNet. Each of the following
two SPVConv layers consists of two upsampling stages in MinkowskiNet.
Based on PVCNN [5], we also design our smaller backbone by directly replacing
the volumetric convolutions with a small Sparse Convolution network containing
one convolution layer (followed by normalization and activation layers) and two
residual blocks.
A.1.2

SPVNAS Details

On SemanticKITTI [1], we train SPVNAS super network for 15 epochs that
supports fine-grained channel setting with a starting learning rate 0.24 and cosine
learning rate decay. Then we train for another 15 epochs to incorporate variable
network depth with a starting learning rate 0.096 and cosine learning rate decay.
We perform evolutionary architecture search with P = 50 for 20 generations on
sequence 08 (the official validation set). Best architecture is directly extracted
from the super network and submitted to the test server after finetuning for 10
epochs with a starting learning rate of 0.032 and cosine learning rate schedule.

A.2

More Results

A.2.1

3D Scene Segmentation

We present detailed result comparisons between SPVNAS, SPVCNN and MinkowskiNets [2] on both the official test set and validation set (sequence 08) of SemanticKITTI [1] in Table 1 and Table 2. For the results on the validation set
in Table 2, we run SPVNAS pipeline again on sequences 00-07 and 09, leaving
out sequence 10 as the mini-validation set and report the results on sequence 08.
We observe similar trends on both test and validation results: both a better 3D
module (SPVConv) and the 3D Neural Architecture Search (3D-NAS) pipeline
improves the performance of MinkowskiNet [2].

