Speech-Driven Facial Animation Using
Cascaded GANs for Learning of Motion
and Texture
Dipanjan Das, Sandika Biswas(B) , Sanjana Sinha, and Brojeshwar Bhowmick
Embedded Systems and Robotics, TCS Research, Kolkata, India
{dipanjan.da,biswas.sandika,sanjana.sinha,b.bhowmick}@tcs.com

Abstract. Speech-driven facial animation methods should produce
accurate and realistic lip motions with natural expressions and realistic texture portraying target-speciﬁc facial characteristics. Moreover,
the methods should also be adaptable to any unknown faces and speech
quickly during inference. Current state-of-the-art methods fail to generate realistic animation from any speech on unknown faces due to their
poor generalization over diﬀerent facial characteristics, languages, and
accents. Some of these failures can be attributed to the end-to-end learning of the complex relationship between the multiple modalities of speech
and the video. In this paper, we propose a novel strategy where we partition the problem and learn the motion and texture separately. Firstly,
we train a GAN network to learn the lip motion in a canonical landmark
using DeepSpeech features and induce eye-blinks before transferring the
motion to the person-speciﬁc face. Next, we use another GAN based
texture generator network to generate high ﬁdelity face corresponding to
the motion on person-speciﬁc landmark. We use meta-learning to make
the texture generator GAN more ﬂexible to adapt to the unknown subject’s traits of the face during inference. Our method gives signiﬁcantly
improved facial animation than the state-of-the-art methods and generalizes well across the diﬀerent datasets, diﬀerent languages, and accents,
and also works reliably well in presence of noises in the speech.
Keywords: Realistic facial animation · Meta-learning · Cascaded
GAN

1

Introduction

Speech-driven facial animation can be used for many applications such as video
games, virtual assistants, animation movies, etc. and has thus garnered broad
D. Das and S. Biswas—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 25) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 408–424, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_25

