Weight Excitation: Built-in Attention
Mechanisms in Convolutional Neural
Networks
Niamul Quader(B) , Md Maﬁjul Islam Bhuiyan, Juwei Lu, Peng Dai,
and Wei Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Montreal, Canada
{niamul.quader1,juwei.lu,peng.dai,wei.li.crc}@huawei.com,
mbhuiyan@ualberta.ca

Abstract. We propose novel approaches for simultaneously identifying important weights of a convolutional neural network (ConvNet)
and providing more attention to the important weights during training. More formally, we identify two characteristics of a weight, its
magnitude and its location, which can be linked with the importance
of the weight. By targeting these characteristics of a weight during
training, we develop two separate weight excitation (WE) mechanisms
via weight reparameterization-based backpropagation modiﬁcations. We
demonstrate signiﬁcant improvements over popular baseline ConvNets
on multiple computer vision applications using WE (e.g. 1.3% accuracy improvement over ResNet50 baseline on ImageNet image classiﬁcation, etc.). These improvements come at no extra computational cost
or ConvNet structural change during inference. Additionally, including
WE methods in a convolution block is straightforward, requiring few lines
of extra code. Lastly, WE mechanisms can provide complementary beneﬁts when used with external attention mechanisms such as the popular
Squeeze-and-Excitation attention block.
Keywords: Convolutional neural network · Convolution ﬁlter
weights · Weight reparameterization · Attention mechanism

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) are extremely powerful in analyzing
visual imagery and have brought tremendous success in many computer vision
tasks, e.g. image classiﬁcation [9,29,40], video action and gesture recognition
[14,34], etc. A ConvNet is made up of convolution blocks, each of which consists
of a number of learnable parameters including convolution ﬁlter weights. The
eﬀectiveness of training these weights in convolution blocks can depend on the
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8 6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 87–103, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_6

