Null-sampling for Interpretable and
Fair Representations – Appendix
Thomas Kehrenberg, Myles Bartlett, Oliver Thomas, and
Novi Quadrianto
Predictive Analytics Lab (PAL), University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
{t.kehrenberg,m.bartlett,ot44,n.quadrianto}@sussex.ac.uk

A

Model Architectures

For both cMNIST and CelebA we parameterise the coupling layers with the
same convolutional architecture as in [11], consisting of 3 convolutional layers
each with 512 filters of, in order, sizes 3 × 3, 1 × 1, and 3 × 3. Following [1], we
Xavier initialise all but the last convolutional layer of the s and t sub-networks
which itself is zero-initialised so that the coupling layers begin by performing an
identity transform. We used a Glow-like architecture [11] (affine coupling layers
together with checkerboard reshaping and invertible 1 × 1 convolutions) for the
convolutional INNs. Table 1 summarises the INN architectures used for each
dataset.
For the image datasets each level of the cVAE encoder consists of two gated
convolutional layers [16] with ReLU activation. At each subsequent level, the
number of filters is doubled, starting with an initial value 32 and 64 in the case
of CelebA and cMNIST respectively. In the case of the Adult dataset, we use
an encoder with one fully-connected hidden layer of width 35, followed by SeLU
activation [12]. For both cMNIST and CelebA, we downsample to a feature map
with spatial dimensions 8 × 8, but with 3 and 16 channels respectively. For the
Adult dataset, the encoding is a vector of size 35. The output layer specifies
both the parameters (mean and variance) of the representation’s distribution.
In all cases the KL-divergence is computed with respect to a standard isotropic
Gaussian prior. Details of the encoder architectures can be found in Table 2. The
loss pre-factors were sampled from a logarithmic scale; without proper balancing
the networks can exhibit instability, especially during the early stages of training.
Table 1. INN architecture used for each dataset.
Dataset

Levels

Level depth

Coupling channels

Input to discriminator(s)

UCI Adult
cMNIST
CelebA

1
3
3

1
16
32

35
512
512

Null-samples
Encodings
Encodings

