SMART: Simultaneous Multi-Agent Recurrent
Trajectory Prediction
Supplementary Material
Sriram N N1 , Buyu Liu1 , Francesco Pittaluga1 , and Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1

NEC Laboratories America
2
UC San Diego

Abstract. In this supplementary, we provide more details for our proposed simulator in Sec. 1 and for the proposed method for trajectory
prediction, SMART in Sec. 2. We further provide quantitative analysis
and qualitative comparisons with a few prior works in Sec. 3. The accompanying video includes an overview of the method and qualitative
visualizations of our predictions.

1

Further Details for Simulator

In this section, we provide more details about reference velocity sampling, lowlevel controller and also specify the range of values for IDM [3] parameters used
in our simulation.
1.1

Velocity Sampling:

Figure 1 shows several real trajectories (x and y axes represent distance travelled
in meters in longitudinal and lateral directions) and a plot between distance
before turn and average velocity for real trajectory samples. We calculate distance
before turn as the distance travelled by the vehicle before it starts executing
a turn maneuver and average velocity is the mean velocity through the course
of the trajectory before turn. Interestingly, we found distance before taking
turns is highly correlated to average velocity. Specifically, we can see a trend of
decrease(or slowing down) in average velocity while approaching an intersection
with an intention of making a turn maneuver. To this end, we identify distance to
intersections as useful feature and demonstrate that it helps in mimicking the real
data. We label every velocity profile from the real data with a value of distance
before turn or average velocity, for turn and straight maneuvers respectively.
Here, by velocity profile we mean a series of vehicle velocities at every timestep
for the simulation period. We identify the nearest neighbor velocity profile in the
real data using the above mentioned features with the values from the simulated
vehicle. We use the identified velocity profile as reference for the simulated vehicle
to achieve at every timestep. We also add gaussian noise with zero mean and
unit variance to add diversity in the sampled velocity profiles.

