Supplementary Material of
“Deep Transferring Quantization”
Zheng Xie1,2∗ , Zhiquan Wen1∗ , Jing Liu1∗ , Zhiqiang Liu1,2 ,
Xixian Wu3 , and Mingkui Tan1†
1

South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
{sexiezheng,sewenzhiquan,seliujing,sezhiqiangliu}@mail.scut.edu.cn
mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn
2
PengCheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
HuNan Gmax Intelligent Technology, Changsha, China
wuxixian@gmax-ai.com

A

Experiments on Face Recognition

A.1

Source and Target Data sets

To further evaluate the proposed deep transferring quantization (DTQ), we conduct experiments on the face recognition task. We use the visible light (VIS) face
data set CASIA-WebFace [7] as the source data set, and the PolyU near-infrared
ray (NIR) face data set (PolyU-NIRFD) [8] as the target data set. Specifically,
CASIA-WebFace contains 494,414 VIS face images from 10,575 different individuals. PolyU-NIRFD contains 38,430 NIR face images from 335 identities. We
randomly select 80 identities of PolyU-NIRFD as the validation set and the others as training data. In total, we sample 29,158 images for training and 9,272
images for validation.
A.2

More Implementation Details

We adopt LResNet18E-IR and LResNet34E-IR [1, 2] as the base models. Following the settings in [1, 2], we use the model pre-trained on CASIA-WebFace
as the full-precision source model. We use SGD with a mini-batch size of 64,
where the momentum term is set to 0.9. The initial learning rate is set to 0.01.
We train low-precision models for 9k iterations, and the learning rate is divided
by 10 at the 6k-th iteration. Following [4], we also take feature maps from four
intermediate layers for attentive feature alignment. Since the task of transferring quantization has not received enough attention from the community, we
fail to find very related baselines for comparison. Therefore, we construct three
methods for comparison, including L2 -Q, L2 -SP -Q [5] and DELTA-Q [4]. We
use true acceptance rate (TAR) at different levels of false acceptance rate (FAR)
to measure the performance of the low-precision models for face recognition.
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

