Supplementary Material for “Spatial Hierarchy
Aware Residual Pyramid Network for
Time-of-Flight Depth Denoising”
Guanting Dong, Yueyi Zhang, and Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
gtdong@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhyuey, zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

1

Introduction

In this supplementary material, we first provide the detailed network architectures of our proposed SHARP-Net in Section 2. We then show more visualizations
of experimental results on qualitative comparison in Section 3.

2

Detailed Network Architectures

Our proposed Spatial Hierarchy Aware Residual Pyramid Network (SHARPNet) consists of three parts: a Residual Regression Module as the backbone for
multi-scale feature extraction, a Residual Fusion Module and a Depth Refinement Module to optimize the performance. The details of SHARP-Net are shown
in Table 1. The (×) represents the upsample operation based on bicubic interpolation. For example, (×2) means that interpolating the input image to twice
over its original size. The ‘all ©’ represents concating
L the upsample of output
residuals of all the residual regression blocks. The
and the © respectively
represent the addition operation and the concatenation operation.

3

Additional Experimental Results on Synthetic Dataset

In this section, we provide more visualizations of experiment results. We first
show more error maps in Fig. 1 to compare our SHARP-Net with DeepToF [2]
and ToF-KPN [4] on synthetic datasets and realistic datasets, including the
ToF-FlyingThings3D (TFT3D) dataset [4], FLAT dataset [1] and True Box
dataset [5]. It can be seen that the error of our SHARP-Net is smaller compared
with other methods. To further demonstrate the performance of our proposed
SHARP-Net in depth denoising, we visualize the depth values along a scan-line
for more scenes on the TFT3D dataset in Figure 2, following the experimental
settings in Section 5.5. It is obviously observed that our proposed SHARP-Net
achieves the best performance on eliminating the MPI noise and the shot noise.

