Supplementary Materials for:
Neural Wireframe Renderer: Learning Wireframe to
Image Translations
Yuan Xue, Zihan Zhou, and Xiaolei Huang
College of Information Sciences and Technology,
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

1

Joint Wireframe and Image Synthesis

Our joint representation learning framework is general and may also benefit other image
synthesis tasks. In this section, we report preliminary results on extending this framework to the noise-to-image task. Recently, coarse-to-fine multi-scale models [1–4] have
been shown to produce visually pleasing results. However, such models often rely on
having a large training set and do not explicitly take structural integrity into consideration.
In this work, we choose the state-of-art StackGANv2 [4] model as the baseline
model for our experiments. In the baseline model, the generator takes a random noise
vector as input and output an image. Instead of generating images only, we propose a
GAN model to generate images and their corresponding wireframes simultaneously. An
illustration of our proposed GAN model with joint representation learning can be found
in Fig. 1. Unlike the original StackGANv2 model, we first map the input noise vector to
a shared latent space of wireframe and image through the first generator G0 , then two
separate branches of coarse-to-fine generators take the joint representation and generate wireframes and images, respectively. Although we do not have explicit supervision
upon the joint representation, the wireframe-based adversarial learning guarantees that
the learned representation contains enough structure information.
Note that our GAN model for image and wireframe generation does not require
paired wireframes and images during training, as it uses separate discriminators for
wireframes and images. Thus, we can potentially use wireframes and images from different sources, which makes the model scalable to much larger datasets.
Following [4], our GAN objective consists of two parts: the traditional adversarial
loss and a color-consistency regularization term. Since we are generating both wireframe and image, we also apply a structure-consistency regularization term to the generated wireframes. More specifically, the adversarial objective for the ith generator Gi
and the ith discriminator Di is defined as
w
max min Ladv
=Exi [log Diw (xi )] + Eziw log(1 − Diw (Gw
i
i (zi )))]
θD

θG

+ Eyi [log Dis (yi )] + Ezis log(1 − Dis (Gsi (zis )))],

(1)

where zi is the input to the ith generator, x and y represent real wireframes and images,
respectively. The superscript indicates the index of the generator/discriminator branch
and G0 is shared by both branches.

