Supplementary Materials for
DSDNet: Deep Structured self-Driving Network
Wenyuan Zeng1,2 , Shenlong Wang1,2 , Renjie Liao1,2 , Yun Chen1 , Bin Yang1,2 ,
and Raquel Urtasun1,2
1

Uber ATG
University of Toronto
{wenyuan,slwang,rjliao,yun.chen,byang10,urtasun}@uber.com
2

1

Datasets

CARLA: This is a public available multi-agent trajectory prediction dataset,
collected by [3] using CARLA simulator [1]. It contains over 60k training sequences, 7k testing sequences collected from Town01, and 17k testing sequences
from Town02. Each sequence is composed of 2 seconds of history, and 4 seconds
future information.
nuScenes: It contains 1000 driving snippets of length 20 seconds each. LiDAR
point clouds are collected at 20Hz, and labels 3D bounding boxes are provided at
2Hz. To augment the labels, we generate bounding boxes for non-labeled frames
using linear interpolation from 2 consecutive labeled frames. Since nuScenes
dataset currently does not provide routing information for motion planning, we
only conduct detection and prediction studies. We follow the official data split
and compare against other methods on the “car” class.
ATG4D: We collected a challenging self-driving datasets over multiple cities
across North America. It contains ∼ 5,000 snippets collected from 1000 different
trips, with a 64-beam LiDAR running at 10 Hz and HD maps. We also labeled the
data at 10 Hz, with maximum labeling range of 100 meters. We ignore parking
areas far from the roads, as they will not interact with the SDV. We split out
500 snippets for testing and evaluate the full autonomy stack including motion
planning, prediction as well as detection performance.

2

Network Architecture Details

In the following, we first describe our backbone network, the detection header,
as well as the header for computing prediction (Etraj ) as well as planning Ctraj .
Note we use the same architecture for nuScenes and ATG4D, but a slightly
different one for CARLA as the setting there is different, which we will explain
in section 4.

