Learning Feature Embeddings
for Discriminant Model based Tracking
-Supplementary MaterialLinyu Zheng1,2 , Ming Tang1,3 , Yingying Chen1,2,4 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,4 , and
Hanqing Lu1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100049, China
3
Shenzhen Infinova Limited
4
ObjectEye Inc.
{linyu.zheng, tangm, yingying.chen, jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract. In this supplementary material, we will provide some additional discussions, experimental results, and possible future work.

1

Relationship with ATOM

It is well known that modern high-accuracy trackers [2, 9, 4, 13, 8] are mainly
composed of two modules, i.e., target localization module (TLM) and bounding
box refinement module (BBRM). The BBRM refines the target bounding box
located by the TLM for more accurate tracking. For instance, the classification
branch and the regression branch in the region proposal network of SiamRPN [9]
are the TLM and the BBRM of SiamRPN tracker, respectively.
The key insights and purposes of ATOM [4] and DCFST are fundamentally different. The major purpose of ATOM is to design an effective and generic BBRM
by maximizing the IoU between the refined bounding box and the ground-truth.
Whereas, the major purpose of DCFST is to design an accurate and robust TLM
by learning optimal feature embeddings for online discriminative tracking.
It is common for the TLM of ATOM to use the features extracted via the
CNNs which are trained on ImageNet for object classification task. As stated
in our submission, these features are not optimal for the visual tracking task.
DCFST improves the TLM of ATOM mainly by learning optimal feature embeddings, providing the BBRM of ATOM with a more accurate and reliable
initial bounding box. Therefore, ATOM is regarded as a baseline tracker of DCFST. Without bells and tricks, DCFST outperforms ATOM on all six popular
benchmarks with large margins, confirming that the improvement on the TLM
of ATOM, i.e., learning of feature embeddings, is effective.

