Dual Mixup Regularized Learning
for Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Yuan Wu1(B) , Diana Inkpen2 , and Ahmed El-Roby1
1

Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada
{yuan.wu3,Ahmed.ElRoby}@carleton.ca
2
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
Diana.Inkpen@uottawa.ca

Abstract. Recent advances on unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
rely on adversarial learning to disentangle the explanatory and transferable features for domain adaptation. However, there are two issues
with the existing methods. First, the discriminability of the latent space
cannot be fully guaranteed without considering the class-aware information in the target domain. Second, samples from the source and target
domains alone are not suﬃcient for domain-invariant feature extracting
in the latent space. In order to alleviate the above issues, we propose a
dual mixup regularized learning (DMRL) method for UDA, which not
only guides the classiﬁer in enhancing consistent predictions in-between
samples, but also enriches the intrinsic structures of the latent space.
The DMRL jointly conducts category and domain mixup regularizations
on pixel level to improve the eﬀectiveness of models. A series of empirical studies on four domain adaptation benchmarks demonstrate that our
approach can achieve the state-of-the-art.
Keywords: Domain adaptation · Mixup · Regularization

1

Introduction

The development of deep neural networks has signiﬁcantly improved the state
of the arts for a wide variety of machine learning tasks, such as computer vision
[13], speech recognition [11], and reinforcement learning [23]. However, these
advancements often rely on the existence of a large amount of labeled training
data. In many real-world applications, collecting suﬃcient labeled data is often
prohibitive due to time, ﬁnancial, and expertise constraints. Therefore, there is
a strong motivation to train an eﬀective predictive model which can leverage
knowledge learned from a label-abundant dataset and perform well on another
label-scarce domains [17]. However, due to the existence of domain shift, deep
neural networks trained on one large scale labeled dataset can be weak at generalizing learned knowledge to new datasets and tasks [17].
To address the above issue, a general strategy called domain adaptation is
introduced by transferring knowledge from a label-rich domain, referred as the
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 540–555, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_32

