Weakly Supervised 3D Object Detection from
Lidar Point Cloud
Supplementary Material
Qinghao Meng1 , BWenguan Wang2 , Tianfei Zhou3 ,
Jianbing Shen3,1 , Luc Van Gool2 , and Dengxin Dai2
1

School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
ETH Zurich 3 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
https://github.com/hlesmqh/WS3D

2

In this document, we first give more implementation details of applying our
model for 3D pedestrian detection (see §1). Later, in §2, we give some visual
results for 3D pedestrian detection on KITTI [1] val set. Then, in §3, we compare the annotation results by applying our trained model as annotation tools,
working in two annotation modes, i.e., automatic and active. Finally, we discuss
some representative failure cases in §4.

1

Weakly Supervised 3D Pedestrian Detection

We specify some modifications for adapting our method for Pedestrian class.
Data Preparation. For the KITTI training set which contains a total of 3, 712
scenes, there are only 951 scenes contain pedestrian labels. Considering the small
amount of training samples, we use the weakly annotated BEV maps of the 951
scenes to train our Stage-1 model. We randomly choose 515, nearly 25% in 2, 257
samples in those scenes as the training data for our Stage-2 model. Compared
with prior fully-supervised algorithms which leverage all the exhaustively annotated 951 scenes with 2, 257 pedestrian samples, we use far less and weak
supervision. To reduce futile false negative responses and speeding up the CANMS process for better effectiveness, following [2], we set the x, z range of the
searching region for pedestrian as [(−20, 20), (0, 48)], respectively.
Pseudo Foreground Groundtruth Generation. For Car class, we use an
ellipsoid-shaped 3D Gaussian distribution for pseudo soft foreground groundtruth
generation (see Eq. 1). For Pedestrian class, we instead directly use a pillar
(cylinder) to generate pseudo binary masks. This is because, compared with vehicles which are typically presented as elongated rectangles on BEV maps, the
shapes of human on the BEV maps are more like regular squares. The radius of
the pillars are uniformly set as 0.4 m.
Cylindrical 3D Proposal Generation. Considering the small size of pedestrians, we generate the cylindrical proposal with a 1 m radius over (x, z)-plane (4 m
radius for vehicle). For each groundtruth, the proposals whose center-distances
to it are less than 0.5 m are selected as its training samples.
B Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang (wenguanwang.ai@gmail.com).

