Playing hard exploration games by watching YouTube

Yusuf Aytar∗, Tobias Pfaff∗ , David Budden, Tom Le Paine, Ziyu Wang, Nando de Freitas
DeepMind, London, UK
{yusufaytar,tpfaff,budden,tpaine,ziyu,nandodefreitas}@google.com

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning methods traditionally struggle with tasks where environment rewards are particularly sparse. One successful method of guiding
exploration in these domains is to imitate trajectories provided by a human demonstrator. However, these demonstrations are typically collected under artificial
conditions, i.e. with access to the agent’s exact environment setup and the demonstrator’s action and reward trajectories. Here we propose a two-stage method that
overcomes these limitations by relying on noisy, unaligned footage without access
to such data. First, we learn to map unaligned videos from multiple sources to a
common representation using self-supervised objectives constructed over both time
and modality (i.e. vision and sound). Second, we embed a single YouTube video
in this representation to construct a reward function that encourages an agent to
imitate human gameplay. This method of one-shot imitation allows our agent to
convincingly exceed human-level performance on the infamously hard exploration
games M ONTEZUMA’ S R EVENGE, P ITFALL ! and P RIVATE E YE for the first time,
even if the agent is not presented with any environment rewards.

1

Introduction

People learn many tasks, from knitting to dancing to playing games, by watching videos online. They
demonstrate a remarkable ability to transfer knowledge from the online demonstrations to the task
at hand, despite huge gaps in timing, visual appearance, sensing modalities, and body differences.
This rich setup with abundant unlabeled data motivates a research agenda in AI, which could result in
significant progress in third-person imitation, self-supervised learning, reinforcement learning (RL)
and related areas. In this paper, we show how this proposed research agenda enables us to make
some initial progress in self-supervised alignment of noisy demonstration sequences for RL agents,
enabling human-level performance on the most complex and previously unsolved Atari 2600 games.
Despite the recent advancements in deep reinforcement learning algorithms [7, 9, 17, 19] and
architectures [22, 35], there are many “hard exploration” challenges, characterized by particularly
sparse environment rewards, that continue to pose a difficult challenge for existing RL agents. One
epitomizing example is Atari’s M ONTEZUMA’ S R EVENGE [10], which requires a human-like avatar
to navigate a series of platforms and obstacles (the nature of which change substantially room-toroom) to collect point-scoring items. Such tasks are practically impossible using naive -greedy
exploration methods, as the number of possible action trajectories grows exponentially in the number
of frames separating rewards. For example, reaching the first environment reward in M ONTEZUMA’ S
R EVENGE takes approximately 100 environment steps, equivalent to 10018 possible action sequences.
Even if a reward is randomly encountered, γ-discounted RL struggles to learn stably if this signal is
backed-up across particularly long time horizons.
∗

denotes equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

