Hallucinating Visual Instances in Total Absentia
– Supplementary Material –
Jiayan Qiu1 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang2 , and Dacheng Tao1
1

UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{jqiu3225@uni.sydney.edu.au,dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au}
2
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
{yyang99,xinchao.wang}@stevens.edu

In this document, we provide the details and results that we can not fit into
the main manuscript due to the page limit. Specifically, we show the effect of
the mask size and that of the Autoencoder on the GCN module, comparison
with SOTA iimage inpainting method, more visual results on COCO, NYU v2,
Visual Genome and multi-instance hallucination, background hallucination, as
well as results of a generalization test.
Please note that, the aim of our work is, as discussed in the main manuscript,
to show the feasibility of hallucinating absent objects from a masked image,
rather than beating the state-of-the-art Graph Convolutional Neural Networks,
Generative Adversarial Networks, and image inpainting methods. We have thus
endeavored to develop lightweight networks for our framework. More sophisticated networks, as long as end-to-end trainable, can be readily applied to substitute the corresponding modules in the framework.
As state-of-the-art GAN models are not able to well account for semantic
constraints, like the orientation of a moving car and the legitimate pose of a
person, into the image generation process, we test our model that also relies on
GAN, on 20 out of 81 classes in COCO for all the datasets we use. Hallucinating
visual instances with explicit hard-constraint reasoning is left for our future
work.
The figures in this document follow the same layout as done for the main
manuscript: the first column corresponds to the masked image, the second shows
our restored image, and the third depicts the ground truth.

1

Effect of Mask Size

In this experiment, we test the effect of the mask size on the GCN module. For
the experiments in main paper, the mask area is determined by their groundtruth bounding box. Here, we increase the mask size gradually and show its
effect on the GCN module.
As can be seen from Tab. 1, the GCN module preserves a good accuracy
(> 80%) when the enlarging factor is smaller than 1.5. When the factor is set
larger than 1.5, however, the accuracy decreases visibly, indicating that the size
of the hallucinated object plays an important role on the prediction results.

