Supplementary Materiels:
Controllable Image Synthesis via SegVAE
Yen-Chi Cheng1,2 , Hsin-Ying Lee1 , Min Sun2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang1,3
1

A

University of California, Merced 2 National Tsing Hua University 3 Google

Overview

We provide more qualitative and quantitative results in Section B and Section C.
For a quick walkthrough of this paper, please also check the video provided in
the zip file.

B

Quantitative Results

We measure the “compatibility error” and “reconstruction error” on the ablated
models in Table 1. Adopting LSTM in the iterative prediction process helps the
model to generate more compatible and reasonable shapes, which greatly improves the performance on the compatibility and the reconstruction. Leveraging
the learned shape prior further enhances the results since the distribution varies
a lot when the input contains a different combination of classes and each shape
of the class has variations. Table 1 shows the necessity of the proposed model’s
architecture design.
Label-set length analysis. We compute FID on HumanParsing with different
length of label-sets to analyze its effect on the proposed method in Table 2. The
results show that the larger the length, the larger the FID.
Randomized prediction order. To further analyze how the prediction order
will affect the performance, we randomly shuffle the prediction order during
training and evaluate the FID in Table 3.

C

Qualitative Results

We present more generated results in this section. For multimodal generation,
please see Figure 1 and Figure 2. For comparison with baselines and the existing
method, please refer to Figure 3. Finally, more editing results are demonstrated
in Figure 4.
Failure cases. The proposed method has the following limitations. First, SegVAE fails when the shape vector of a certain class is located in an under-sampled
space. For example, hat in the CelebAMask-HQ as shown in Figure 5 (a). Second, the label-set combination is unseen. Figure 5 (b) shows the output of the
proposed model when all classes are used in a label-set. SegVAE has difficulty
to handle this input since HumanParsing do not contain this example.

