FairALM: Augmented Lagrangian
Method for Training Fair Models
with Little Regret
Vishnu Suresh Lokhande1(B) , Aditya Kumar Akash1 , Sathya N. Ravi2 ,
and Vikas Singh1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
lokhande@cs.wisc.edu, aakash@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
2
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
sathya@uic.edu

Abstract. Algorithmic decision making based on computer vision and
machine learning methods continues to permeate our lives. But issues
related to biases of these models and the extent to which they treat certain segments of the population unfairly, have led to legitimate concerns.
There is agreement that because of biases in the datasets we present to
the models, a fairness-oblivious training will lead to unfair models. An
interesting topic is the study of mechanisms via which the de novo design
or training of the model can be informed by fairness measures. Here, we
study strategies to impose fairness concurrently while training the model.
While many fairness based approaches in vision rely on training adversarial modules together with the primary classiﬁcation/regression task,
in an eﬀort to remove the inﬂuence of the protected attribute or variable,
we show how ideas based on well-known optimization concepts can provide a simpler alternative. In our proposal, imposing fairness just requires
specifying the protected attribute and utilizing our routine. We provide a
detailed technical analysis and present experiments demonstrating that
various fairness measures can be reliably imposed on a number of training
tasks in vision in a manner that is interpretable.

1

Introduction

Fairness and non-discrimination is a core tenet of modern society. Driven by
advances in vision and machine learning systems, algorithmic decision making
continues to permeate our lives in important ways. Consequently, ensuring that
the decisions taken by an algorithm do not exhibit serious biases is no longer
a hypothetical topic, rather a key concern that has started informing legislation [23] (e.g., Algorithmic Accountability act). On one extreme, some types of
biases can create inconvenience – a biometric access system could be more errorprone for faces of persons from certain skin tones [9] or a search for homemaker or
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2 22) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 365–381, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_22

