Rotational Outlier Identification in Pose
Graphs using Dual Decomposition
Arman Karimian(B) , Ziqi Yang, and Roberto Tron
Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA
{armandok,zy259,tron}@bu.edu

Abstract. In the last few years, there has been an increasing trend to
consider Structure from Motion (SfM, in computer vision) and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM, in robotics) problems from
the point of view of pose averaging (also known as global SfM, in computer vision) or Pose Graph Optimization (PGO, in robotics), where
the motion of the camera is reconstructed by considering only relative
rigid body transformations instead of including also 3-D points (as done
in a full Bundle Adjustment). At a high level, the advantage of this
approach is that modern solvers can eﬀectively avoid most of the problems of local minima, and that it is easier to reason about outlier poses
(caused by feature mismatches and repetitive structures in the images).
In this paper, we contribute to the state of the art of the latter, by
proposing a method to detect incorrect orientation measurements prior
to pose graph optimization by checking the geometric consistency of
rotation measurements. The novel aspects of our method are the use
of Expectation-Maximization to ﬁne-tune the covariance of the noise in
inlier measurements, and a new approximate graph inference procedure,
of independent interest, that is speciﬁcally designed to take advantage
of evidence on cycles with better performance than standard approaches
(Belief Propagation). The paper includes simulation and experimental
results that evaluate the performance of our outlier detection and cyclebased inference algorithms on synthetic and real-world data.
Keywords: Pose averaging · Outliers · Inference in graphical models

1

Introduction

Reconstructing a 3-D scene from a collection of ordered or unordered images or
videos is one of the most prominent classical problems in computer vision and
robotics. In computer vision, this task is known as Structure from Motion (SfM),
and is traditionally performed using images alone. The typical solution pipeline
for this problem [26,35,39] includes three steps: 1) estimate relative poses
between pairs of images using matched features [7,17,31] and robust ﬁtting
techniques [21,24]; 2) combine the pairwise estimates, either in sequential
stages [3,4,22,43,44], or by combining poses alone (without considering a 3-D
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 391–407, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_24

