18

A

A. Majumdar et al.

Supplementary Material

In this section we provide further implementation details for VLN-BERT (Section A.1) and additional qualitative analysis of performance (Section A.2) and
the pretraining curriculum (Section A.3). Code will be provided to reproduce
the results of all experiments.
A.1

Implementation Details

The experiments described in Section 5 utilize a 12-layer BERTBASE [7] architecture for both the vision and language streams in the model. Following [18], we
use 6 cross-modal attention layers to connect the two streams. To operationalize the language-only pretraining stage (Stage 1), VLN-BERT is initialized with
BERT weights that result from pretraining on English Wikipedia and BooksCorpus [34]. Similarly, for the visual grounding stage (Stage 2), VLN-BERT is initialized with ViLBERT weights, which result from pretraining on the Conceptual Captions [24] dataset. For action grounding pretraining and path-selection
finetuning (Stage 3) we use path-instruction pairs from the Room-to-Room [4]
dataset. During this stage, models are trained with the Adam optimizer with
a learning rate of 4e-5 and a batch size of 64. We use a learning rate schedule
with a linear warmup and cooldown. We train for 50 epochs in pretraining and
20 epochs in finetuning. During finetuning, we utilize early stopping based on
the success rate on the unseen split of the validation set. Using 8 Titan X GPUs
Stage 3 of training takes approximately 66 hours.
A.2

Qualitative Examples of Success and Failure

This section provides qualitative examples of the path selection performance of
VLN-BERT using the full training curriculum described in Section 4.3. To gain
insight at the region-level, we estimate region importance using the gradientbased visualization technique described in Section 5.4 (i.e. importance is calculated as the sum of the gradient of the model’s output score with respect to the
features for each region). In all examples, the model selects one path from a set
of up to 30 candidate paths for a given set of instructions. The selected path is
successful if it terminates within 3m of the goal location.
Three examples of successful path selection are illustrated in Figure 6. In
the first example, VLN-BERT selects a path that does not initially follow the
ground truth path, but correctly stops at the goal location. In this example, the
model accurately grounds the phrase ‘antelope head’, which does not appear in
the VLN [4] training dataset (the term ‘antelope’ appears 3 times). In the second
and third examples, the selected paths closely match the ground truth, and the
top 5 regions include key objects mentioned in the instructions – ‘freezers’ and
‘statue’. The term ‘freezers’ (with and without the ‘s’) does not occur the VLN
training dataset, and ‘statue’ appears 105 times. These examples suggest that
VLN-BERT is able to transfer visual grounding learned on the image-text pairs
in the Conceptual Captions [24] dataset to the embodied task of path selection.

