Learning Where to Focus for Eﬃcient
Video Object Detection
Zhengkai Jiang1,2(B) , Yu Liu3(B) , Ceyuan Yang3 , Jihao Liu3 , Peng Gao3 ,
Qian Zhang4 , Shiming Xiang1,2 , and Chunhong Pan1,2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{zhengkai.jiang,smxiang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People’s Republic of China
liuyuisanai@gmail.com
4
Horizon Robotics, Beijing, China

Abstract. Transferring existing image-based detectors to the video is
non-trivial since the quality of frames is always deteriorated by part
occlusion, rare pose, and motion blur. Previous approaches exploit to
propagate and aggregate features across video frames by using optical
ﬂow-warping. However, directly applying image-level optical ﬂow onto
the high-level features might not establish accurate spatial correspondences. Therefore, a novel module called Learnable Spatio-Temporal
Sampling (LSTS) has been proposed to learn semantic-level correspondences among adjacent frame features accurately. The sampled locations are ﬁrst randomly initialized, then updated iteratively to ﬁnd
better spatial correspondences guided by detection supervision progressively. Besides, Sparsely Recursive Feature Updating (SRFU) module
and Dense Feature Aggregation (DFA) module are also introduced to
model temporal relations and enhance per-frame features, respectively.
Without bells and whistles, the proposed method achieves state-of-theart performance on the ImageNet VID dataset with less computational
complexity and real-time speed. Code will be made available at LSTS.
Keywords: Flow-warping · Learnable Spatio-Temporal Sampling ·
Spatial correspondences · Temporal relations

1

Introduction

Object detection is a fundamental problem in computer vision and enables
various applications, e.g., robot vision and autonomous driving. Recently,
deep convolution neural networks have achieved signiﬁcant process on object
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 18–34, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_2

