Supplementary Material
SRFlow: Learning the Super-Resolution Space
with Normalizing Flow
Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich
{andreas.lugmayr,martin.danelljan,vangool,radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

1

Architecture Details

In this section, we give additional details about our SRFlow architecture. The
construction of a flow-based architecture requires the flow layers to be invertible
and have a tractable Jacobian log-determinant. Since super-resolution of diverse
images has to be able to cope with different input sizes, we also ensure that our
architecture is fully convolutional. We can therefore train our network on smaller
patches, and directly apply it to the full image during testing. The computational
time of our approach is 1.13 seconds for super-resolving one 256 × 256 input LR
image with a scale factor of 4× on an Nvidia V100 GPU.
1.1

Low-resolution Image Encoding

Our SRFlow network is conditioned on the encoding of the low-resolution image
u = gθ (x). To this end, we employ the RRDB-based architecture, described
in the paper. It employs several RRDB-blocks with a channel dimension of 64,
operating in the resolution of the input LR image. The final conditioning output
u = gθ (x) is achieved by concatenating the activations from 5 equally spaced
RRDB blocks, resulting in a dimensionality of 320.
1.2

The Affine Injector Layer

Our affine injector layer provide a direct means of conditioning all dimensions
of the flow feature-map hn on the LR encoding as,

n
hn+1 = exp fθ,s
(u) · hn + fθ,b (u) .
(1)
The scale and bias are extracted using non-invertible networks fθ,s (u) and
fθ,b (u) respectively. The input u is first bilinearly resized to the resolution of
the corresponding flow-level. A conv-ReLU block first reduces the dimensionality to 64. Another conv-ReLU block is then applied with 64-dimensional output.
The output of fθ,s (u) and fθ,b (u) are then achieved by two separate conv-layers
applied to the same 64-dimensional input. For these layers, we employ the zeroinitialization strategy proposed in [4]. All convolutions have a 3 × 3 kernel.

