Supplementary Material
Describing Unseen Videos via Multi-Modal
Cooperative Dialog Agents
Ye Zhu1 , Yu Wu2,3 , Yi Yang2 , and Yan Yan1?
1

Texas State University, San Marcos, USA
{ye.zhu, tom yan}@txstate.edu
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au,yi.yang@uts.edu.au
3
Baidu Research, Beijing, China

We mainly provide additional qualitative experimental results and analysis
in this document.
Internal Dialog Generations. Selected examples of the generated dialog interactions between two agents are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. The corresponding
round of the ground truth dialog is also given as comparisons. During the training process, the question and answer decoders are trained to imitate the ground
truth dialog by providing the ground truth words as sequence input labels, but
the entire model is optimized in the final video description task. As shown in
the figures, the generated dialog is not always natural and precise in the sense of
natural language understanding, although the generated questions and answers
sometimes do contain keywords that are later used in the final descriptions (e.g.,
kitchen, fridge, couch, dish). Q-BOT also tends to ask repeated questions in the
internal dialog generation process, especially with small starting round number.
Video Descriptions. More qualitative results about the final video description
task are presented in Fig. 2. We observe that Q-Basic tends to generate similar
descriptions for different inputs. It is a common and existing problem in the
related research fields that combine natural language processing and computer
vision [2, 1]. Other methods (i.e., Q-Strong, A-BOT and our Q-BOT with cooperative learning) alleviate the problem and include more specific details in
the generated descriptions. However, the sentence structures are not as varied
as the human (GT) performance, which leads to another diversity problem that
researchers seek to solve [3, 5, 4]. The qualitative results show that our Q-BOT
with cooperative learning is able to describe some details that are not presented
in the initial inputs (e.g., the refrigerator in the first example), which proves that
Q-BOT obtains useful information from the dialog interactions with A-BOT.
Further Analysis. We further analyze different aspects of this work. Firstly,
we believe this task setting is of great potential to provide a new perspective
that brings more secure and reliable AI systems. The task setting with implicit information sources is not only limited to the proposed video description
task, but also applicable in a wider context such as scene understanding and
segmentation. Secondly, under the overall framework of multi-modal learning
?

Corresponding author.

