Supplementary Material for Cross-domain
Structured Landmark Detection via Progressive
Topology-Adapting Deep Graph Learning
Weijian Li1,2 , Yuhang Lu1,3 , Kang Zheng1 , Haofu Liao2 , Chihung Lin5 , Jiebo
Luo2 , Chi-Tung Cheng5 , Jing Xiao4 , Le Lu1 , Chang-Fu Kuo5 , and Shun Miao1
1

PAII. Inc., Bethesda, MD, USA
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA
4
Ping An Technology, Shenzhen, China
5
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan, ROC
2

1

Additional discussions with related works:

Though some recent works [6,1,4] propose to model landmark relationship, our
problem/method has large differences from them. Tompson et al. [6] propose
to use spatial information in a post-processing step to filter outliers, while we
leverage visual-spatial joint features for landmark regression. Also, the PAF proposed by Cao et al. [1] focuses on a different task of assembling detected key
points for multi-person parsing. Zhao et al. [9] focus differently on predicting 3D
poses from 2D joints. Their 2D joints are generated by a pre-trained 2D pose
estimation network. Besides, their network structure is predefined by a fixed adjacency matrix while we actively learn the structures. Payer et al. [4], propose
a spatial configuration branch to disambiguate candidates from the heatmap
predictions. There is no explicit landmark structure modeling. In contrast, we
explicitly model shape through a graph representation with learnable connectivity.
Among the SOTA, WING [2] is pure coordinate-based, while LAB [8] and
AWING [7] integrate face boundary information via heatmap, which is their key
contributions. The gap between WING and AWING is significant on WFLW,
which is a more challenging dataset than 300W in terms of dataset scale, pose
variations, occlusions, etc. Our method performs significantly better than WING
on WFLW by reducing the failure rate by 50%, and is competitive to AWING. In
addition, WING focuses on loss design, which is orthogonal and complementary
to our novelty. By employing WING loss in our method, our performance can
be further improved (e.g., on 300W, inter-pupil NME from 4.27 to 4.21 and
inter-ocular NME from 3.04 to 3.01). While LAB and AWING utilize global
representation, human knowledge on face structure via a boundary heatmap is
injected, leading to task-specific solutions. In contrast, our method is a general
landmark detection method to model the structural information via a self-learned
graph structure.

