Learning Object Permanence from Video
Aviv Shamsian1(B) , Ofri Kleinfeld1(B) , Amir Globerson2(B) ,
and Gal Chechik1,3(B)
1
Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel
mista2311@gmail.com, ofri64@gmail.com, gal.chechik@gmail.com
2
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
amir.globerson@gmail.com
3
NVIDIA Research, Tel-Aviv, Israel

Abstract. Object Permanence allows people to reason about the location of non-visible objects, by understanding that they continue to exist
even when not perceived directly. Object Permanence is critical for building a model of the world, since objects in natural visual scenes dynamically occlude and contain each-other. Intensive studies in developmental
psychology suggest that object permanence is a challenging task that is
learned through extensive experience.
Here we introduce the setup of learning Object Permanence from
labeled videos. We explain why this learning problem should be dissected into four components, where objects are (1) visible, (2) occluded,
(3) contained by another object and (4) carried by a containing object.
The fourth subtask, where a target object is carried by a containing
object, is particularly challenging because it requires a system to reason
about a moving location of an invisible object. We then present a uniﬁed
deep architecture that learns to predict object location under these four
scenarios. We evaluate the architecture and system on a new dataset
based on CATER, with per-frame labels, and ﬁnd that it outperforms
previous localization methods and various baselines.
Keywords: Object Permanence · Reasoning · Video Analysis

1

Introduction

Understanding dynamic natural scenes is often challenged by objects that contain or occlude each other. To reason correctly about such visual scenes, systems need to develop a sense of Object Permanence (OP) [20]. Namely, the
understanding that objects continue to exist and preserve their physical characteristics, even if they are not perceived directly. For example, we want systems
A. Shamsian and O. Kleinfeld—Equal contribution.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4 3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12361, pp. 35–50, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58517-4_3

