Feature Space Augmentation
for Long-Tailed Data
Peng Chu1(B) , Xiao Bian2 , Shaopeng Liu3 , and Haibin Ling1,4
1

Temple University, Philadelphia, USA
pchu@temple.edu
2
Google Inc., Mountain View, USA
xbian@google.com
3
GE Research, Niskayuna, USA
sliu@ge.com
4
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, USA
hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract. Real-world data often follow a long-tailed distribution as the
frequency of each class is typically diﬀerent. For example, a dataset can
have a large number of under-represented classes and a few classes with
more than suﬃcient data. However, a model to represent the dataset is
usually expected to have reasonably homogeneous performances across
classes. Introducing class-balanced loss and advanced methods on data
re-sampling and augmentation are among the best practices to alleviate the data imbalance problem. However, the other part of the problem
about the under-represented classes will have to rely on additional knowledge to recover the missing information.
In this work, we present a novel approach to address the long-tailed
problem by augmenting the under-represented classes in the feature space
with the features learned from the classes with ample samples. In particular, we decompose the features of each class into a class-generic
component and a class-speciﬁc component using class activation maps.
Novel samples of under-represented classes are then generated on the
ﬂy during training stages by fusing the class-speciﬁc features from the
under-represented classes with the class-generic features from confusing
classes. Our results on diﬀerent datasets such as iNaturalist, ImageNetLT, Places-LT and a long-tailed version of CIFAR have shown the state
of the art performances.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown considerable success in a wide variety of visual
recognition tasks. Its eﬀectiveness and generalizability have been well proved by
P. Chu and X. Bian—Work was done at GE Research.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 41) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 694–710, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_41

