1

1

Experiments on OpenImage Dataset

To further evaluate the threats caused by non-local block, appearing and disappearing attacks are performed on the Faster R-CNN with the non-local block
(Faster R-CNN-WN) on Open Images Dataset V4. The object detector is trained
on COCO dataset with 80 classes of objects. 24 classes overlapping with the
object classes in Open Images Dataset V4 are selected for the following experiments.
1.1

Disappearing attack

Different from the stop sign dataset, which normally just has 1 to 2 stop signs
in each image, images in Open Images Dataset V4 usually have a lot of target
objects. The adversarial patch has to be placed with a certain distance to all
the target objects. The procedure to place Λ is given in algorithm 1. λ is used
to control the distance between Λ and the target object used as a reference
position and δ is used to control the minimum distance between Λ and other
target objects. Images which do not have enough space to place the adversarial
patch are not used in this evaluation. All the target classes have at least 100
valid images for this evaluation. α and β are both set as 1.5. δ and λ are set as 1
and 0.5 respectively. For classes with more than 2000 images, only 2000 images
are randomly sampled for the experiment. The images in each class are splitted
equally as training and testing sets. Table 1. lists the results for disappearing
attack. The average attack rate is 69.9%. Fig. 1 shows some resultant images of
disappearing attack.
1.2

Appearing attack

The same 24 object classes are used in appearing attack. For each of the class,
its appearing attack can be set as any 1 of the other 79 classes. In total, there are
1896 experiments. To reduce the number of experiments, we perform non-target
appearing attacks. It means that if a newly detected bounding box which has
not being detected before the attack, and has an IOU with the ground truth
bounding box less than 0.7, then it is considered as a success, regardless of its
class label. The objective function, which is similar as disappearing attack, aims
at minimizing the scores for all the background bounding boxes and the scores
for all the corresponding class bounding boxes. Thus, objects would be detected
in the original background and other objects would be detected at the locations
of the corresponding class objects. In this experiment, α and β are both set as
2. Table 2 lists the experimental results and some resultant images are given in
Fig. 2

