20

Teney et al.

Supplementary material
A

Application to VQA

Data. We generate the counterfactual examples by masking image features
on-the-fly, during training, according the the human attention maps of [18]. We
use image features from [3], which correspond to bounding boxes in the image.
We mask the features whose boxes overlap with a fraction of the the human
attention map above a fixed threshold. We use the precomputed overlap score
from [57], which is a scalar in [0, 1], and set the threshold at 0.2 (setting it
at 0 would mask the occasional boxes that encompass nearly the whole image,
which is not desirable). This value was set manually by verifying for the intended
effect on a few training examples (that is, masking most of the relevant visual
evidence). See Fig. 6 for examples of original questions and their counterfactual
versions.
Experimental setting. Our experiments use a validation set (8,000 questions chosen at random) held out from the original VQA-CP training set. Note
that most existing methods evaluated in VQA-CP use the extremely unsanitary
practice of using the VQA-CP test split for model selection. This is extremely
concerning since the whole purpose of VQA-CP is to evaluate generalization
to an out-of-distribution test set. The variance in evaluating the ‘number’ and
‘yes/no’ questions is moreover extremely high, because the number of reasonable
answers on each of these types is very limited. For example, a model that answers
yes or no at random, or produces constantly either answer, can fare extremely
well (upwards of 62% accuracy) on these questions. This can very well result
from a buggy implementation or a “lucky” random seed, identified by model
selection on the test set (!). This is the reason why we include an evaluation on
the ‘other’ type of questions in isolation. All of these issues have been pointed
out by a few authors [26, 16, 66].
Our focused test set is a subset of the official VQA-CP test set. It is created
in a similar manner as the counterfactual examples. We mask features that
overlap with human attention maps below (instead of above) a threshold of
0.8. This value was set manually by verifying for the intended effect on a few
examples (masking the background but not the regions necessary to answer the
question). The focused test set is much smaller than the official test set since it
only comprises questions for which a human attention map is available.
Models. Our baseline model follows the general description of Teney et al . [64].
We use the features of size 36×2048 provided by Anderson et al . [3]. Our ‘strong
baseline’ uses the additional procedure described in [17] on top of this baseline,
using the code provided by the authors.
Existing methods. The method presented in [57] could have constituted an
ideal point of comparison with ours, as it was evaluated on VQA-CP and used
human attention maps. However, after extensive discussions with the authors,

