Active Crowd Counting with Limited
Supervision
– Supplementary Material –
Zhen Zhao1? , Miaojing Shi2? , Xiaoxiao Zhao1 , and Li Li1,3
1

College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
2
King’s College London
3
Institute of Intelligent Science and Technology, Tongji University
zhenzhao0917@gmail.com; miaojing.shi@kcl.ac.uk; lili@tongji.edu.cn

This supplementary material provides more results and examples of AL-AC on
standard counting benchmarks, i.e. ShanghaiTech [11], UCF CC 50 [2], TRANCOS [1] and DCC [6], to demonstrate the generalization ability of our method.

1

More results

ShanghaiTech First, instead of using limited labeled data as in the paper, we
keep increasing M till 280 and report the MAE on SHA in Fig. 1. It can be seen
that, with about 80-100 labeled data (nearly 30%) labeled data, AL-AC already
reaches the performance close to the fully-supervised method, as in [4] (Table 3
in the paper). The performance will saturate after some point and converge to
that of baseline. This is also observed in other works [5, 8].
Second, we offer a variant of AL-AC inspired by [10] and compare to our
original AL-AC. [10] is a state of the art active learning method where a variational autoencoder (VAE) and an adversarial network are trained to play a
min-max game discriminating between unlabeled and labeled data with domain
label 0 and 1, respectively. Samples from those predicted as “unlabeled” with
the lowest probabilities (near 0) are selected for active annotations. We find this
min-max idea to be similar to the gradient reversal layer (GRL) in our proposed
distribution alignment between labeled and unlabeled data. The GRL assumes
a domain label 0 for the unlabeled data and 1 for the labeled data. It multiplies
the gradient by a negative constant (-1) during the network back propagation
which enforces the feature distributions over the labeled and unlabeled data as
indistinguishable as possible for the distribution classifier. We therefore select
unlabeled samples with the lowest probabilities from our domain classifier. In
this sense, the distribution alignment with latent MixUp is included in every
learning cycle. We denote it by AL-AC-v as a variant of AL-AC and compare
it to the full version of our AL-AC in the default setting (M = 40, m =10) on
SHA and SHB in Table 1: Left. Our AL-AC still works clearly better than this
variant.
Last, to test the generalization ability of our method, we offer the results
under the default setting M = 40, m =10 by training on SHA and testing on
?

Authors contributed equally.

