Supplementary Material
Know Your Surroundings: Exploiting Scene Information
for Object Tracking
Goutam Bhat, Martin Danelljan, Luc Van Gool, and Radu Timofte
CVL, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

The supplementary material provides additional details about the network
architecture and results. In Section S1, we provide details about our tracking architecture. Section S2 contains detailed results on the VOT2018 dataset, while
Section S3 provides qualitative comparison of our approach with the baseline
tracker DiMP-50 [2]. We also include a supplementary video for the qualitative comparison with DiMP-50.

S1

Network details

In this section, we provide more details about our tracking architecture.
State initializer Υ : Given the first frame target annotation B0 as input, the
initializer network Υ first generates a single-channel label map specifying the
target center. We use a Gaussian function to generate this label map. The label
map is passed through a single convolutional layer with 3×3 kernels. The output
is then passed through a tanh activation to obtain the initial state vectors.
State propagation: We use the features from the fourth convolutional block
of ResNet-50 [5], having a spatial stride of 16, to construct our cost volume.
Our network can process images of any input resolution. However, in all our
experiments, we resize the input search region crop to 288 × 288 for convenience.
Thus the features x used for computing the cost volume have the size W = H =
18, with Dm = 1024 channels. The maximal displacement dmax for cost volume
computation is set to 9.
The network architecture used to map the raw cost volume slices to obtain the
processed matching costs φ is shown in Table S1. Note that the network weights
are shared for all cost volume slices. We use an identical network architecture to
process the initial correspondence φ0 .
Target Confidence Score Prediction: The network architecture for our
predictor module P is shown in Table S2.
State update: The state update module Φ contain a convolutional gated
recurrent unit (ConvGRU) [1] which performs the state updates. The input
ft ∈ RW ×H×4 to the ConvGRU is obtained by concatenating the target confidence scores ςt ∈ RW ×H×1 and the appearance model output st ∈ RW ×H×1 ,
along with their maximum values along the third dimension. The propagated

