Supplementary Material: Table Structure
Recognition using Top-Down and Bottom-Up
Cues
Sachin Raja, Ajoy Mondal, and C V Jawahar
Center for Visual Information Technology,
International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
sachinraja13@gmail.com, {ajoy.mondal,jawahar}@iiit.ac.in

1

Organization

We organize our supplementary paper in the following manner:
– Section 2 contains additional details about our methodology including the
post-processing step to obtain the final xml output.
– Section 3.1 contains information about the datasets used for experiments
and explains the ground-truth unification process.
– Section 3.2 briefly explains various previously published methods in the space
of table structure recognition including the input modalities used for predictions.
– Section 3.3 talks about the very specific details of implementation for training
our model.
– Section 3.4 explains the evaluation method in greater detail which will be
useful for reproducing our results. It explains various assumptions and reasons for choosing the specific metrics.
– Section 3.5 lists out various challenges encountered for evaluating and comparing our method with the existing ones, and also talks about the ways in
which we handled them in our work.
– Section 4 presents additional quantitative and qualitative results for a detailed analysis.

2

TabStruct-Net

Our tabstruct-net is a data-driven and an end-to-end trainable architecture for
the prediction of table structure from a given table image, that combines topdown and bottom-up methods. As a first step, the input table image is broken
down into individual cells using the cell detection network of the tabstruct-net.
We call this as the top-down step of the process. After detecting individual cells,
the next step is to obtain the entire table structure by building relevant row and
column associations between the detected cells. This is done using the structure
recognition network of the tabstruct-net and we call this as the bottom-up step
of the process.

