UnionDet Supplementary Material
Bumsoo Kim1? , Taeho Choi1∗ , Jaewoo Kang1† , and Hyunwoo J. Kim1†
Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea
{meliketoy,major1965,kangj,hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Summary. In this supplement, we provide more detailed analysis and experimental evidence that has not been provided in the main paper due to the limited
space. This includes 1) Detailed explanation for our Foreground Focal Loss, 2)
More discussion for the experimental settings on HICO-DET dataset, 3) More
precise analysis of time vs. performance including the end-to-end time, and 4)
More qualitative analysis for UnionDet.

1

Foreground Focal Loss

As introduced in the main paper, one major issue of union-level detection is that
union regions often overlap over each other. This causes noisy training since a
single anchor is assigned with one ground-truth label at most during training
(see Fig.1). Different pairs with exactly identical union regions can be dealt with
ease by simply merging the overlapping ground-truth labels. However, it is very
difficult to merge all the ground-truth labels based on the portion they overlap
with each other. To this end, we propose foreground focal loss to address this
issue.
Reminding Target Object Classification Loss. Since it is not suitable to
use only the standard IoU for Union-level Detector, we propose the novel union
anchor labeling function Uij ∈ {0, 1} which indicates whether ith ground-truth
label ği and jth anchor aj are associated or not. As briefly mentioned in the main
paper, only one ground truth with the largest IoU is associated with anchor aj
when multiple ground truths are matched. We define i? as the index of the
ground-truth index associated with anchor box aj .
i? = argmax(Uij · IoU(aj , ğiloc )).

(1)

i

P
Note that i? is valid only in the positive anchor set A+ = {aj | P i Uij > 0}
because all of the Uij are zero in negative anchor set A− = {aj | i Uij = 0}.
Based on Eq.1, the detailed union anchor labeling function Uij is given as

Uij =
?

1 if i==i?
0 otherwise.

equal contribution, † corresponding author

(2)

