Supplementary Materials of
Design and Interpretation of Universal
Adversarial Patches in Face Detection
Xiao Yang1?

Fangyun Wei 2?

Hongyang Zhang3?

Jun Zhu1‡

Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua University1
Microsoft Research Asia2
TTIC3
{yangxiao19@mails, dcszj@}.tsinghua.edu.cn1
fawe@microsoft.com2
hongyanz@ttic.edu3

A

Generality Experiments

Generality of training dataset. We randomly split WIDER FACE training
dataset into two subsets, namely, split 1 and split 2, to verify the generality of
different training sources. Figure 1 shows the evolution of adversarial samples
opAs illustrated in Table 2, we reduce the patch to different proportions from
90% to 60%. As the scale of patches decreases, there exists a general downward
trend for performance. We also paste adversarial patches on different 5 locations
from top to bottom for comparisons in Table 3. The results show that it is
effective to stick on different locations.
As illustrated in Table 2, we reduce the patch to different proportions from
90% to 60%. As the scale of patches decreases, there exists a general downward
trend for performance. We also paste adversarial patches on different 5 locations
from top to bottom for comparisons in Table 3. The results show that it is
effective to stick on different locations.
timized by Patch-IoU method on each split. The final patches are face-like
and can be falsely detected by baseline face detector. The two patches look
slightly different, partially because of the non-convex properties of optimization [1, 2] and different initialization.
Attack by part of patch. To examine the attacking performance of part of
the adversarial patch that is optimized by Patch-IoU, we remove a half and
one third area of the whole patch and test the performance of the remaining
part of the patch on the WIDER FACE validation dataset. Table 1 shows the
associated numerical results. We see that removing a part of the patch hurts the
performance of the adversarial patch as an attacker.

B

Improved Patches on Different Scales and Locations

As illustrated in Table 2, we reduce the patch to different proportions from 90%
to 60%. As the scale of patches decreases, there exists a general downward trend
?

Equal contribution. ‡ corresponding author.

