1

Appendix A: TSDF generation
As described in section 4.2. our goal is to find a transformation from the triangle
space to the TSDF space. For that we explained in algorithm 1. how we calculate
the closest distance, from a point in space to each triangle. However, doing this
for each voxel in the TSDF volume is too computational expensive as this would
require for each of the 5123 = 134217728 voxels to calculate the distance to
each polygon, where there could be per scene several thousands to millions. To
achieve this several steps have to be done, which are described next.
Preprocessing
As explained in section 4.1 we transform our polygons into the camera frustum,
we then clip all polygons at the near and far plane and remove all polygons,
which are not in the camera frustum plus a boundary of b. This b is necessary to
keep the distance calculation on the boundaries consistent. A b twice the σtsdf
is sufficient, to ensure that all voxels on the boundaries have the correct value.
In the final step we filter out all polygons, which surface is nearly zero. As these
are usually artifacts from the projection and cause problems during the distance
calculation.
TSDF calculation
As computing the exact distance to the closest polygon for each voxel takes too
much time, we approximate this distance by using the fact that neighbouring
voxels often have the same closest polygon. We therefore do not loop for each
voxel over all possible polygons to find the closest one, but instead collect the
closest polygons of the already visited neighbouring voxels and then only go
through this small collection of polygons.
In more detail, the algorithm works as follows: We first efficiently look for
intersections between all voxels and polygons using an octree. Now we begin a
flood fill algorithm starting with the voxels that do intersect with at least one

p
Fig. 1. Two polygons in a top view, which share the circled edge. The distance to this
edge in blue shows the distance to the closest point on both polygons. The area in gray
shows where the object is filled.

