Modeling the Space of Point Landmark
Constrained Diﬀeomorphisms
Chengfeng Wen , Yang Guo , and Xianfeng Gu(B)
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{chwen,yangguo,gu}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract. Surface registration plays a fundamental role in shape analysis and geometric processing. Generally, there are three criteria in evaluating a surface mapping result: diﬀeomorphism, small distortion, and
feature alignment. To fulﬁll these requirements, this work proposes a
novel model of the space of point landmark constrained diﬀeomorphisms.
Based on Teichmüller theory, this mapping space is generated by the Beltrami coeﬃcients, which are inﬁnitesimally Teichmüller equivalent to 0.
These Beltrami coeﬃcients are the solutions to a linear equation group.
By using this theoretic model, optimal registrations can be achieved
by iterative optimization with linear constraints in the diﬀeomorphism
space, such as harmonic maps and Teichmüller maps, which minimize
diﬀerent types of distortion. The theoretical model is rigorous and has
practical value. Our experimental results demonstrate the eﬃciency and
eﬃcacy of the proposed method.
Keywords: Teichmüller Map · Conformal geometry · Point landmark
constrained diﬀeomorphism

1

Introduction

3D surface registration serves as a fundamental process in shape analysis and
geometric processing tasks. In computer vision areas, such as human face registration and tracking [54,55], human body registration and tracking [3,16], and
general surface registration [34], high-quality surface mappings are desirable. In
medical imaging areas, such as brain morphometry [26,36,40,44] and virtual
colonoscopy [28,48], the accuracy of shape classiﬁcation and abnormality detection relies heavily on the quality of the surface registration results.
In this work, we propose a novel approach to model the space of point landmark constrained diﬀeomorphisms for 3D surface registration. The generators of
this space are the Beltrami coeﬃcients inﬁnitesimally Teichmüller equivalent to
0. This theoretic result can be applied to optimize special energies in the point
landmark constrained diﬀeomorphism space, such as harmonic energy and angle
distortion, to obtain harmonic mappings and Teichmüller mappings. The computation of these mappings can be eﬀectively accomplished by solving quadratic
optimization problems. As shown in Fig. 6, given a male and a female facial
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 357–373, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_22

