MTI-Net: Multi-Scale Task Interaction
Networks for Multi-Task Learning
Supplementary Materials
Simon Vandenhende1 , Stamatios Georgoulis2 , and Luc Van Gool1,2
KU Leuven/ESAT-PSI1

A

ETH Zurich/CVL2

Difference with Cross-Stitch Networks

Cross-stitch networks [4] also share features at multiple scales. However, the
intended purpose, and implementation differ significantly from MTI-Net. We
analyze the most notable points here.
– Cross-stitch networks model task interactions at the encoding stage by softly
sharing features between task-specific encoders, before branching out to taskspecific decoders without further interaction. Differently, MTI-Net operates
at the decoding stage fusing task features close to the output that contain
more disentangled task information. The latter is arguably better for distilling task information in structured output tasks with co-occurring patterns.
– Cross-stitch Networks distil task information sequentially layer-by-layer, greedily modeling interactions at a local scale. In contrast, MTI-Net models task
interactions in parallel, globally fusing information across all scales (cf. FA
module). The benefits are two-fold, i.e. enabling the modeling of ‘long-term’
relationships, and allowing for the use of sufficient context information which
is crucial in dense prediction tasks [1].
– The model size of cross-stitch networks increases linearly with the number
of tasks, thus scaling poorly to multiple tasks. Instead, MTI-Net provides
a more computationally efficient alternative (see resource analysis), that is
much closer to the single-task model size.

B

Training setup

We include additional details of the training setup used for each experiment. We
considered two different multi-scale backbone networks, i.e. HRNet and FPN.
For HRNet, we use bilinear upsampling and concatenation followed by two convolutional layers to decode the multi-scale features in the feature aggregation
unit. For FPN, the feature aggregation module decodes the multi-scale features
as in panoptic feature pyramid networks [2]. In both cases, the non-linear function that produces the task attention mask in the FPM is implemented as two
basic residual blocks – that aggressively reduce the number of channels – followed
by a 1 × 1 convolutional layer.

