Instance-Aware Embedding for Point
Cloud Instance Segmentation
Tong He, Yifan Liu, Chunhua Shen(B) , Xinlong Wang, and Changming Sun
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
{tong.he,yifan.liu04,chunhua.shen,xinlong.wang}@adelaide.edu.au,
changming.sun@data61.csiro.au

Abstract. Although recent works have made signiﬁcant progress in
encoding meaningful context information for instance segmentation in 2D
images, the works for 3D point cloud counterpart lag far behind. Conventional methods use radius search or other similar methods for aggregating
local information. However, these methods are unaware of the instance
context and fail to realize the boundary and geometric information of an
instance, which are critical to separate adjacent objects. In this work,
we study the inﬂuence of instance-aware knowledge by proposing an
Instance-Aware Module (IAM). The proposed IAM learns discriminative
instance embedding features in two-fold: (1) Instance contextual regions,
covering the spatial extension of an instance, are implicitly learned and
propagated in the decoding process. (2) Instance-dependent geometric
knowledge is included in the embedding space, which is informative and
critical to discriminate adjacent instances. Moreover, the proposed IAM
is free from complicated and time-consuming operations, showing superiority in both accuracy and eﬃciency over the previous methods. To
validate the eﬀectiveness of our proposed method, comprehensive experiments have been conducted on three popular benchmarks for instance
segmentation: ScannetV2, S3DIS, and PartNet and achieve state-of-theart performance. The ﬂexibility of our method allows it to handle both
indoor scenes and CAD objects.
Keywords: 3D point cloud · Instance segmentation · Instance-aware

1

Introduction

The task of instance segmentation has recently gained popularity. As an extension to semantic segmentation, this task needs to separate pixels/points that
have identical categories into individual groups. In the 2D image domain, many
approaches [4,5,10,12,18] have been proposed and achieve promising results.
With the growth of the availability of 3D sensors, more and more researches
have focused on 3D scene understanding, which is a fundamental necessity for
robotic vision, autonomous driving, and virtual reality. Although instance segmentation in the 3D domain has started to draw attention and has been discussed
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12375, pp. 255–270, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58577-8_16

