Privacy Preserving
Structure-from-Motion
Marcel Geppert1(B) , Viktor Larsson1 , Pablo Speciale2 ,
Johannes L. Schönberger2 , and Marc Pollefeys1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
marcel.geppert@inf.ethz.ch
2
Microsoft MR & AI, Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract. Over the last years, visual localization and mapping solutions
have been adopted by an increasing number of mixed reality and robotics
systems. The recent trend towards cloud-based localization and mapping systems has raised signiﬁcant privacy concerns. These are mainly
grounded by the fact that these services require users to upload visual
data to their servers, which can reveal potentially conﬁdential information, even if only derived image features are uploaded. Recent research
addresses some of these concerns for the task of image-based localization by concealing the geometry of the query images and database maps.
The core idea of the approach is to lift 2D/3D feature points to random lines, while still providing suﬃcient constraints for camera pose
estimation. In this paper, we further build upon this idea and propose
solutions to the diﬀerent core algorithms of an incremental Structurefrom-Motion pipeline based on random line features. With this work,
we make another fundamental step towards enabling privacy preserving
cloud-based mapping solutions. Various experiments on challenging realworld datasets demonstrate the practicality of our approach achieving
comparable results to standard Structure-from-Motion systems.

1

Introduction

Driven by the quickly growing mixed reality and robotics markets, there has
been signiﬁcant commercial interest in image-based localization and mapping
solutions. Over the last years, several companies have launched their cloud services, including Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [7], Google’s Visual Positioning System [49] underlying the Google Maps AR navigation [6], 6D.AI [40], and
Scape Technologies [35]. For these services to function, they require users to
upload image information to their servers, which can reveal potentially private
user information to the service provider or an adversary. As Dosovitskiy et al. [14]
and Pittaluga et al. [26] strikingly demonstrated, this is the case even when only
uploading local features extracted from the image to the cloud.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 20) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 333–350, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_20

