Supplementary Material:
Label-Efficient Learning on Point Clouds
using Approximate Convex Decompositions
Anonymous ECCV submission
Paper ID 1148

Abstract. We include the following additional results and discussions
supporting the material presented in the main submission:
– Discussion regarding other decomposition methods (Sec. 1)
– Visualizations of ACD pre-trained features using clustering (Sec. 2)
– Per-category results for baseline and self-supervised models on fewshot part segmentation (Sec. 3)

1

On shape decomposition methods

In our current work, we have focused on ACD, which approximates shapes as
a collection of (approximately) convex parts. There are however various other
decomposition methods that might correspond better to notions of semantic
parts, and yield a better self-supervisory signal. The current section gives a brief
overview of other shape decomposition methods and connections to classical
works in early computer vision –
We refer to shape decomposition as a procedure that computes a set of simpler
proxy-shapes from complex ones. Such procedures have been extensively studied in the geometric processing literature and they operate without resorting
to any learning-based technique or human annotated labels – multiple methods
have shown that complex shapes can be reliably decomposed relying solely on
geometric cues. Biederman’s recognition-by-components theory [1] attempts to
explain object recognition in humans by the ability to assemble basic shapes
such as cylinders and cones, called geons, into the complex objects encountered
in the visual world. Early work in cognitive science [6] shows that humans are
likely to decompose a 3D shape along regions of maximum concavity, resulting
in parts that tend to be convex, often referred to as the “minima rule”. Classical approaches in computer vision have modeled three-dimensional shapes as
a composition of simpler primitives, e.g. work by Binford [2, 3] and Marr [7].
More recent work in geometric processing has developed shape decomposition
techniques that generate different types of primitives which are amenable to
tasks like editing, grasping, tracking and animation. Those have explored primitives like 3D curves [4, 5, 8], cages [11], sphere-meshes [10] and generalized cylinders [12]. Given the promising results from ACD in our experiments, exploring
other decomposition methods is a reasonable direction for future research in
self-supervised learning on point clouds.

