–Supplementary Material–
Whole-Body Human Pose Estimation in the
Wild
Sheng Jin1,2[0000−0001−5736−7434] , Lumin Xu3,2 , Jin Xu2 , Can Wang2 ,
Wentao Liu2[0000−0001−6587−9878] , Chen Qian2 , Wanli Ouyang4 , and Ping Luo1
1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 The University of Sydney
{jinsheng, xulumin, wangcan, liuwentao, qianchen}@sensetime.com
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, pluo@cs.hku.hk

1

Annotation Details

The annotation of face/hand keypoints in our COCO-WholeBody dataset follows
semi-automatic methodology. Firstly, face/hand bounding boxes are annotated
manually. Secondly, we utilize a face model and a hand model, which are trained
on large-scale face datasets and hand datasets respectively, to pre-annotate the
face and hand keypoints. Next, manual correction of the face/hand keypoints
is conducted. Foot keypoints are directly manually labeled. Note that, quality
inspections are conducted in every step.
Face and hand bounding box: To ensure the quality of face/hand bounding boxes, well-defined standards are followed. Face bounding box is labeled
only if the box is bigger than 8 pixels and the rotation angle of the face is less
than 100◦ from the frontal view. As for some special cases, faces of real persons
in photos, posters, and clothes are labeled but faces of sculptures, models, cartoons, paintings, and animals are not. The face bounding box is defined as the
minimal bounding rectangle of the face keypoints. Quality inspections are conducted by another group of annotators and bounding boxes whose positions are
inaccurate are re-annotated. Hand bounding box is labeled when the hand
image is vivid and the position of the hand keypoints can be well-determined.
The box is regarded as invalid if the corresponding hand is severely occluded or
part of the hand is out of the image. Special case settings follow those of face
bounding box and independent quality inspections are conducted. Examples of
face/hand bounding boxes are shown in Fig. 1, where only the green boxes meet
our annotation requirements. More visualization results for bounding boxes are
demonstrated in Fig. 2 Line#1. We have three types of bounding boxes, i.e.
body (green), face (purple), left hand (blue) and right hand (red).
Face Keypoints: We apply the 68-joint face model [9] as shown in Fig. 1(b).
A few occluded keypoints may be estimated by annotators if most keypoints are
visible in the image. In Fig. 2, Line#2 and Line#3 visualize more examples of
the face keypoint annotations.
Hand Keypoints: Self-occlusion is very common for hand keypoints. As a
result, the annotation for hand keypoints requires trained experts and enormous

