Supplementary Material for
“Learning Canonical Representations for
Scene Graph to Image Generation”
In this supplementary file we provide additional implementation details, empirical results, and a proof of correctness for the SGC algorithm.

1

Scene-Graph-to-Layout

In Section 3.2, we introduced the WSGC-E and WSGC-S methods, two different
procedures proposed for mapping an input scene graph into a weighted canonicalized relation graph. As mentioned in Section 3.2, although the WSGC-E is
a natural extension of the SGC procedure, it is impractical for large complex
graphs whereas the WSGC-S method adds fewer edges and is thus more practical for training. In what follows, we provide additional details about WSGC-E
and WSGC-S, as well as comparison and analysis.
1.1

Exact Weighted Scene Graph Canonicalization (WSGC-E)

Next, we describe in detail the WSGC-E method for obtaining a weighted relation graph that is a natural extension of SGC. The WSGC-E begins with the
user-specified graph E, with weights of one. Next two weighted completion steps
are performed, corresponding to the SGC steps.
Converse Completion: In SGC, this step adds all converse edges. In the
weighted case it makes sense to add the converse edge with its corresponding
converse weight. For example, if the graph E contains the edge (i, above, j, 1)
and pconv (below|above) = 0.7, we add the edge (j, below, i, 0.7). See Figure 1b.
Transitive Completion: In SGC, all transitive edges are found and added.
In the weighted case, a natural alternative is to set a weight of a path to be
the product of weights along this path, and set the weight of a completed edge
(i, r, j) to be the maximum weight of a path between i and j times the probability
ptrans (r) that the relation is transitive. See Figure 1c. The maximum path weight
problem is equivalent to maximizing the sum of log probabilities, and since these
are all negative, this can be solved in polynomial time via a shortest weight
path algorithm (e.g., FW). However, when there are many nodes and relations,
runtime can still be substantial, and thus we offer a faster approach next.
Training with WSGC-E. In the main text, we described the training loss
and optimization for WSGC-S. Optimizing the loss for WSGC-E is similar, as
we explain next. We describe the loss of the WSGC-E method for a single input
scene graph E and its ground truth layout Y . The parameters of the model
are as follows: θg are the parameters of the GCN in Section 4, θtrans are the
parameters of the transitive probability (Eq. 1), and θconv are those of the converse probability (Eq. 2). Let θ denote the set of all parameters. Denote the

