Simplicial Complex Based Point
Correspondence Between Images Warped
onto Manifolds
Charu Sharma(B) and Manohar Kaul(B)
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
{cs16resch11007,mkaul}@iith.ac.in

Abstract. Recent increase in the availability of warped images projected onto a curved manifold, especially omnidirectional spherical ones,
coupled with the success of higher-order assignment methods, has
sparked an interest in the search for improved higher-order matching algorithms on warped images due to projection. Although, currently, several existing methods “ﬂatten” such 3D images to use planar
graph/hypergraph matching methods, they still suﬀer from severe distortions and other undesired artifacts, which result in inaccurate matching.
Alternatively, current planar methods cannot be trivially extended to
eﬀectively match points on images warped on curved manifold. Hence,
matching on these warped images persists as a formidable challenge. In
this paper, we pose the assignment problem as ﬁnding a bijective map
between two graph induced simplicial complexes, which are higher-order
analogues of graphs. We propose a constrained quadratic assignment
problem (QAP) that matches each p-skeleton of the simplicial complexes, iterating from the highest to the lowest dimension. The accuracy and robustness of our approach are illustrated on both synthetic
and real-world spherical/warped (projected) images with known groundtruth correspondences. We signiﬁcantly outperform existing state-of-theart spherical matching methods on a diverse set of datasets.

1

Introduction

There exists a longstanding line of research on ﬁnding bijective correspondences
(i.e., assignments/matchings1 ) between two sets of visual features. Notable applications include stereo matching [14], structure from motion (SfM) [34], and image
registration [31], to name a few. Traditionally, when matching points between
multiple images of a ﬁxed environment from various viewpoints, most approaches
recover matchings and relative camera geometry (e.g. fundamental matrix) using
1

assignment and matching are used interchangeably in this paper.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6 4) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12374, pp. 54–70, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58526-6_4

