Supplementary Material: Amplifying Key Cues
for Human-Object-Interaction Detection
Yang Liu1[0000−0002−4259−3882] , Qingchao Chen2[0000−0002−1216−5609] , and
Andrew Zisserman1[0000−0002−8945−8573]
1

1

Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, Oxford, UK
2
Department of Engineering Science, Oxford, UK

Network Structure

Detailed network architecture can be found in Table. 1. The input of the spatial
encoder is a 4 channel layout representation, i.e., coarse (two channels) and
fine-grained (two channels) are stacked together, more detail is in the main
paper. The input of the Context Encoder is the object representation (w2v) of
the instances detected in the neighbourhood fothers and the spatial relationship
feature fR between each neighbour instance and the candidate object. The input
of the Motion Encoder is a 3 channel input, i.e., the flow prediction from the
static image. The first two channels are the motion angle sinθ and cosθ, and the
third channel is the optical flow magnitude. We provide an example in Figure 1.
We plot the flow as arrows (only the subset with large magnitude is plotted) on
the left, the corresponding 3-channel (input to motion encoder) is shown on the
right. The fusion module combines the outputs of the backbone, spatial, context
and motion encoders into a single compact feature embedding and predicts the
interaction score. Specifically, we perform a reasoning by putting the sequence
of available features f ∗ = {fH , fO , fSP , fC , fM }, one by one into GRUs (with
hidden dimension 512).

2

Ablation Studies

In this section, we empirically investigate the sensitivity of the proposed method
to different design choices. As the HICO-DET dataset is both larger and more
diverse than V-COCO, we perform all ablation studies on HICO-DET. Besides
four aspects of FCMNet we discussed in section 4.2, we also study: the feature
ordering to fusion module, object encoding mechanisms and local context aggregation approaches in the supplementary. Finally, we present some qualitative
example.
Feature Ordering to Fusion Module: Since our fusion module sequentially processes available cues, select the discriminative information and gradually generate the representation for the whole scene step by step, we compare
different feature ordering to the fusion module in Table 2. One possible setting
(specific → general) is encouraging the model to focus on the specific information
to the current candidate pair fH , fO and fSP first and then accumulate more

