AssembleNet++: Assembling Modality
Representations via Attention Connections
- Supplementary Material Michael S. Ryoo1,2 , AJ Piergiovanni1 , Juhana Kangaspunta1 , and
Anelia Angelova1
1

Robotics at Google
Stony Brook University
{mryoo,ajpiergi,juhana,anelia}@google.com
2

A

Appendix

A.1

Convolutional blocks with (2+1)D residual modules

Each convolutional block is implemented by alternating 2-D residual modules
and (2+1)D residual modules as was done in [5]. Each (2+1)D residual module
does 1D temporal convolution first, and then 2D spatial convolution followed by
1x1x1 convolution. This (2+1)D residual module is also similar the ones used in
[2]. We use the filter size of 3x3 for spatial convolutional layers, and the size of 3
for temporal convolutional layers. Temporal dilation from [5] was used to control
the temporal resolution of each (2+1)D block. 2D and (2+1)D residual modules
are repeated multiple times in each block. As a result, our residual blocks have
a total of 9, 12, 18, and 9 convolutional layers for levels 1 to 4, making the depth
of the network comparable to ResNet-50.
Since we follow the AssembleNet (2+1)D block design, the total number of
filers in each level is maintained as a constant, regardless the number of blocks
in the level. That is, our model has the number of parameters equivalent to the
two-stream version of ResNet-50.
Each RGB input block has 1 spatial convolutional layer (filter size 7x7, stride
2x2), 1 temporal convolutional layer (filter size 5, stride 1), and one max pooling
layer (pool and stride size 2x2). Each optical flow input block has 1 spatial
convolutional layer (filter size 7x7, stride 2x2) and one max pooling layer (pool
and stride size 2x2). The object input block has only one max pooling layer (pool
and stride size 4x4).
A.2

Computation overhead of peer-attention

Our approach is adding very little computation overhead. As was done in previous differentiable architecture search [1, 4], once the one-shot search is finished
and the attention connection weights (i.e., h) are obtained, only a single peer
node is selected by the softmax for each block and the others are discarded.
Figure 1(c) in the paper shows an example of the final model.

