Supplementary Material :
Colorization of Depth Map via Disentanglement
Chung-Sheng Lai1 , Zunzhi You2 , Ching-Chun Huang1 ,
Yi-Hsuan Tsai3 , Wei-Chen Chiu1
1

2

1

National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
3
Sun Yat-sen University, China
NEC Labs America

Analysis on Model Learning

In order to know whether the structure sub-network S and appearance subnetwork E can disentangle the structure and appearance information, we feed
our network with pure red, green and blue image with depth value equal to
0.2 (input depth map is normalized) as the appearance reference RGB-Depth
image-pairs for performing colorization. The results are shown in Fig. 1.
In the results, when the appearance reference is the pure color, since there
is no appearance information, the image quality is less realistic. However, our
model is still able to reconstruct the output that reflects the structure information of the depth input. When the appearance reference is the normal image,
our model is able to reconstruct the corresponding appearance and also the
structure according to the inputs. This demonstrates that our sub-networks can
disentangle the factors for appearance and structure well.

2

Network Architecture

We adopt the same structure for both the sub-network S and the appearance
sub-network E. There are four residual blocks with different spatial sizes. Except
for the first residual block, the first convolutional layer of each blocks has the
spatial size with stride equals to 2. The mixing sub-network M consists of 4
2-stride transpose convolutional layers, each followed by a normalization layer, a
ReLU activation layer and 4 residual blocks. There are skip connections between
structure sub-network S and mixing sub-network M at the same resolution. The
details are shown in Fig. 2.

3

Implementation Details

When utilizing our time invariant property in the training process, we do not
pick the frame that is only one frame away from the other. The reason is that the
structures of consecutive frames are too similar to each other or even identical,
which would not satisfy the time invariant property to perform disentanglement.

