Learning Structural Similarity of User Interface
Layouts using Graph Networks
Supplementary Materials
Dipu Manandhar1 , Dan Ruta1 , and John Collomosse1,2
1

CVSSP, University of Surrey — Guildford, UK.
Adobe Research, Creative Intelligence Lab — San Jose, CA.
{d.manandhar, d.ruta}@surrey.ac.uk, collomos@adobe.com
2

This supplementary document provides:
– A detailed description of the new GoogleUI dataset, which is included in the
supplementary material as a compressed archive and will be publicly released
on acceptance.
– Comprehensive results presenting performance of the proposed method under
various configurations and settings, to extend the configurations reported in
Table 2 of the main paper.
– Further qualitative retrieval results for user interface (UI) layouts, to complement the quantitative and qualitative results included in the main paper.
Sec. 1 discusses data collection, cleaning, and annotation procedure including
the format of the available UIs and annotations in GoogleUI dataset.
Sec. 3 provides qualitative comparisons between the proposed method and
baselines, and then provides additional retrieval results visualizing both screenshot images and their semantic UIs.

1

GoogleUI Dataset

We collected the GoogleUI Dataset which contains diverse data in the wild. Different from RICO which has clean screenshots captured by crowd-sourcing Android
apps downloaded from PlayStore, GoogleUI contains noisy images collected from
Google Images which often includes captured photos of mobile phones with diverse views and various backgrounds. GoogleUI dataset serves as a benchmark to
study the transferability of UI desgin search models as discussed in Section 4.6 of
the main paper. In the following, we discuss its collection, cleaning, annotation,
and format.
1.1

Collection

The dataset is collected from the public internet via the Google Image search
engine, using textual queries. A pool of search keywords was first created such
as “mobile ui design”, “mobile ux android”, “smartphone ui iphone”, “phone

