PL1 P - Point-line Minimal Problems, Partial Visibility in 3 Views

PL1 P - Point-line Minimal Problems under
Partial Visibility in Three Views
— Supplementary Material —
Timothy Duff1 , Kathlén Kohn2 , Anton Leykin3 , Tomas Pajdla4
1,3

Georgia Tech, Atlanta; 2 KTH Stockholm; 4 CIIRC, CTU in Prague

Here we give proofs of all results from the main paper
Duff, T., Kohn, K., Leykin, A., Pajdla, T.: PL1 P - Point-line minimal problems
under partial visibility in three views. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020,
some additional results for camera registration, and other details. On the last
page, we provide a glossary of assumptions, properties and concepts used through
the whole article; see Section 14. Our code is available at https://github.com/
timduff35/PL1P.

10

Note on partial visibility in two views

Let us recall that we consider reduced minimal and reduced camera-minimal
PL1 Ps in three views, since there is only one such PL1 P in two views, namely
the five-points problem.
To argue this, we first notice that free lines cannot occur in a reduced PL1 P
in two views. Indeed, if there was a free line – no matter if it is observed in both
views, one view, or not at all – we could forget the free line both in 3D and in
the images to reduce the PL1 P (i.e. forgetting the free line satisfies Definition 5
of reducibility).
Secondly, we argue that pins cannot appear in a reduced PL1 P in two views.
To see this we distinguish several cases, depending on how often a hypothetical
pin is observed in the views.
– If there exists a pin in 3D that is not observed in any of the two views, then
the PL1 P would be reducible by simply forgetting that pin.
– If a pin in 3D is observed in exactly one of the two views, it could either
appear as a pin or as a free line in that view (i.e. depending on if that view
also observes the point of the pin or not).
1. If the single view seeing the pin also observes its point, the PL1 P is
reducible by forgetting the pin.
2. If the single view seeing the pin does not observe its point, that view
cannot observe any of the other pins of that point either (due to our
assumptions on O at the end of Definition 1). Hence, no matter how the
other view observes that point and its other pins, the PL1 P is reducible
by forgetting the point together with all of its pins.

19

