Temporal Keypoint Matching and Reﬁnement
Network for Pose Estimation and Tracking
Chunluan Zhou

Zhou Ren

Gang Hua

Wormpex AI Research
czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg, {renzhou200622, ganghua}@gmail.com

1

Inﬂuence of temporal window size

We use a temporal window [t − τ, t + τ ] with τ = 5 for keypoint matching and
reﬁnement in all experiments in the paper. Here, we analyze the inﬂuence of
the temporal window size on the performance of human pose estimation and
tracking. We conduct this analysis on the PoseTrack 2017 dataset [1]. For this
analysis, we use ResNet-101 and ResNet-152 as detection and pose estimation
backbones respectively. Table 1 shows the results with diﬀerent values of τ .
τ = 0 indicates keypoint reﬁnement is not applied. From Table 1, we can see
that temporal keypoint reﬁnement can improve the performance for both pose
estimation and tracking (τ > 0 vs τ = 0). The performance improves with the
increase of τ . After τ > 5, further increasing τ does not help much.

2

Network structure

The deep convolutional neural network used in our approach consists of a network backbone, a keypoint prediction module, a keypoint matching module and
a keypoint reﬁnement module as shown in Fig. 1. We use either Resnet-152 [2]
or HRNet [3] as the network backbone. The structures of the three modules are
given in Table 2. Each module comprises three basic blocks followed by several
layers for producing the output. The keypoint prediction and reﬁnement modules
have the same structure.

References
1. Andriluka, M., Iqbal, U., Insafutdinov, E., Pishchulin, L.: Posetrack: A benchmark
for human pose estimation and tracking. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2018)
2. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition.
In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2016)
3. Ke, S., Xiao, B., Liu, D., Wang, J.: Deep high-resolution representation learning
for human pose estimation. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) (2019)

