Face Super-resolution Guided by 3D Facial
Priors Supplementary Material
Xiaobin Hu1,2 , Wenqi Ren2∗ , John LaMaster1 , Xiaochun Cao2,6 , Xiaoming Li3 ,
Zechao Li4 , Bjoern Menze1† , and Wei Liu5†
1

1

Informatics, Technische Universität München, Germany 2 SKLOIS, IIE, CAS
3
Harbin Institute of Technology 4 NJUST 5 Tencent AI Lab
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Cyberspace Security Research Center, China

Overview

In this supplementary document, we present additional results to complement
the main paper. Firstly, we provide the detailed configurations and parameters
of the proposed methods. Secondly, the quantitative ablation results, the result
on real world images and the comparisons of model size and performance are
added to verify the superiority of the facial rendered priors and proposed Spatial
Attention Mechanism. Thirdly, the reconstructed rendered faces of large pose
variations and occlusion are also presented here to show the stability and superior
performance of the face reconstruction. Lastly, more qualitative comparisons
with the state-of-the-art algorithms are added in the supplementary.

2

Results on Real-World Images

Quantitative and qualitative results: For real-world LR images, we provide
the quantitative analysis on 500 LR faces from the WiderFace (x4) dataset using
two no-reference image criteria (Perception Image Quality (PIQE) and Naturalness Image Quality (NIQE)). The results are sorted in Table 1 (the higher of
criteria, the worse of the image quality). These results demonstrate that the
proposed 3D priors boost the performance even in the real-world conditions by
capturing the good visual quality of facial components and restoring large pose
variations and partial occlusions. We add some visual comparisons shown in
Figure 1 to illustrate the effectiveness of our 3D priors on real-world faces.
Position deviation of rendered 3D faces: We conduct the pixel-offset
experiments on 32x32 input images (x4 scale) for the CelebA dataset to analyze
the accuracy and the robustness to the position deviation of inaccurate 3D priors.
We vertically shift the pixels of rendered 3D face priors from one pixel to twenty
pixels. The quantitative results (PSNR) are listed as: 0 pixel [29.69dB]; 1 pixel
[29.53dB]; 2 pixels [29.32dB]; 5 pixels [29.08dB]; 10 pixels [29.05dB]; 20 pixels
[29.03dB]. The performance of the inaccurate face priors also behaves better
even for 10 pixels-offset than without using the 3D facial priors (28.92dB).
∗ indicates the corresponding author.
† these authors contributed equally to this work.

