Du2 Net: Learning Depth Estimation from
Dual-Cameras and Dual-Pixels
Yinda Zhang(B) , Neal Wadhwa, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Christian Häne,
Sean Fanello, and Rahul Garg
Google Research, Mountain View, USA
yindaz@google.com

Abstract. Computational stereo has reached a high level of accuracy,
but degrades in the presence of occlusions, repeated textures, and correspondence errors along edges. We present a novel approach based on
neural networks for depth estimation that combines stereo from dual
cameras with stereo from a dual-pixel sensor, which is increasingly common on consumer cameras. Our network uses a novel architecture to fuse
these two sources of information and can overcome the above-mentioned
limitations of pure binocular stereo matching. Our method provides a
dense depth map with sharp edges, which is crucial for computational
photography applications like synthetic shallow-depth-of-ﬁeld or 3D Photos. Additionally, we avoid the inherent ambiguity due to the aperture
problem in stereo cameras by designing the stereo baseline to be orthogonal to the dual-pixel baseline. We present experiments and comparisons
with state-of-the-art approaches to show that our method oﬀers a substantial improvement over previous works.
Keywords: Dual-pixels · Stereo matching · Depth estimation ·
Computational photography

1

Introduction

Despite their maturity, modern stereo depth estimation techniques still suﬀer
from artifacts in occluded areas, around object boundaries and in regions containing edges parallel to the baseline (the so-called aperture problem). These
errors are especially problematic for applications requiring a depth map that is
accurate near object boundaries, such as synthetic shallow depth-of-ﬁeld or 3D
photos.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter (https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 34) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12346, pp. 582–598, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_34

