A Comprehensive Study of Weight Sharing in
Graph Networks for 3D Human Pose
Estimation: Supplementary Material
Kenkun Liu1? , Rongqi Ding2? , Zhiming Zou1 , Le Wang3 , and Wei Tang1??
1

University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
{kliu44,zzou6,tangw}@uic.edu
2
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
rongqiding2020@u.northwestern.edu
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, P.R. China
lewang@xjtu.edu.cn

1

Training Curves and Validation Errors

Fig. 1 plots the loss and validation error of each method in the training phase
(control model size to be 4.2 M). Compared with full-sharing, the training
losses of other methods decrease faster. As the training goes on, the validation errors of pre-aggregation, post-aggregation and no-sharing are significantly
lower than those of full-sharing and convolution-style. A larger model size
of full-sharing makes its validation errors oscillate severely.

2

Reduce Complexity

We can implement the feature update of each node of all weight sharing methods
in a unified fashion by first computing the feature transformations of neighboring nodes and then aggregating them. This makes their computational complexities the same given a fixed number of channels. In practice, we can reduce the
complexities of full-sharing, pre-aggregation and post-aggregation from
PN
D0 × D × i=1 |N̂i | to D0 × D × N by precomputing and saving the feature
transformation of each node or first aggregating the features from neighboring
nodes before feature transformation. Here D0 , D, |N̂i | and N denote the number
of output channels, the number of input channels, the number of neighboring
nodes of node i and the total number of nodes, respectively.

3

Ablation Study on 2D Detections

We compare the five weight sharing methods, Martinez et al. [4] and Zhao et al.
[10] given different 2D pose detections. Tab. 1 shows pre-aggregation achieves
the overall best performance.
?
??

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding author.

