What makes fake images detectable?
Understanding properties that generalize:
Supplementary Materials
Lucy Chai1 , David Bau1 , Ser-Nam Lim2 , and Phillip Isola1
1

MIT CSAIL, Cambridge MA, 02139
{lrchai,davidbau,phillipi}@csail.mit.edu
2
sernam@gmail.com

In the Supplementary Materials we include additional details on our dataset
extraction process for both real and fake images (Sec. 1.1–1.2) and details on
training the classifiers and visualization (Sec. 1.3–1.5). We also include a number
of additional experiments and visualizations. Namely, classifiers for generated
images are extremely sensitive to subtle differences in preprocessing, and minor
differences will allow the classifier to easily learn preprocessing artifacts rather
than forensic signals, which gives the appearance of high generalization capability
– we include results that demonstrate this effect in Sec. 2.1. We also investigate
additional training configurations and visualizations in Sec. 2.2–2.7.

1

Supplementary Methods

1.1

Dataset Construction

Real Images
CelebA-HQ: We prepare the CelebA-HQ images following the dataset preparation
pipeline in the PGAN repository.3 . This saves the images in various resolutions
from 4x4px to 1024x1024px in a tfrecord format, which are then subsequently
used to train the PGAN generators. For our real CelebA-HQ dataset, we extract
the images from the tfrecord format, similar to during PGAN training, at the
same resolution of the generator – i.e., if the fake images are generated from a
128px PGAN, then the real images used for comparison are extracted from the
128px tfrecord. This is to avoid any resizing operations that are different from
the subsampling used during GAN training. We partition the images into training
and validation images following the CelebA partitions, which yields 24183 images
for training and 2993 for validation, and 2824 for testing. All images are resized
to 128x128 resolution using Lanczos interpolation and saved in PNG format.
FFHQ: We download the prepared images in tfrecord format directly from the
FFHQ repository4 and extract them at 1024 resolution for comparison with 1024
resolution generator models. Following the suggested partition in the repository,
3
4

https://github.com/tkarras/progressive growing of gans
https://github.com/NVlabs/ffhq-dataset

