Supplemental Material
Mask2CAD: 3D Shape Prediction by Learning to
Segment and Retrieve
Weicheng Kuo1,2 , Anelia Angelova1,2 , Tsung-Yi Lin1,2 , and Angela Dai3
1

Google AI
Robotics at Google
3
Technical University of Munich
{weicheng,anelia,tsungyi}@google.com, angela.dai@tum.de
2

1

Additional Results on Pix3D

In Figure 1, we show more qualitative results of our approach on Pix3D [2]. Furthermore, we conduct ablation studies to shed light on the roles of each component in the
system. Our analysis shows that shape, pose, and translation are all important for estimating the viewer-centered geometry, with shape retrieval having the most room for
improvement, and box detection having the least. The analysis was done by replacing each predicted component with its ground truth counterpart. In terms of Mesh AP,
groundtruth shapes help by +14.6, rotation by +10.2, and translation by +7.5. Surprisingly, groundtruth 2D boxes offer no improvement because the detections on Pix3D
are very good ( 90 Box AP, similar to Mesh R-CNN) and the small advantage is offset by the distribution shift between train (jittered boxes) and test (perfect boxes) time.
This agrees with what Mesh R-CNN reports, i.e. they also observed a loss when using
ground truth boxes (6 point loss on Mesh AP50).

2

Network Architecture Details

The Mask2CAD image-stream network architecture comprises 2D detection as bounding box, class label, and instance mask prediction, as well as our 3D shape retrieval
and pose estimation. For the 2D detection, our architecture borrows from that of ShapeMask [1]. For the 3D inference with shape embedding, pose classification, and pose
regression, and object center prediction, these branches all use the same architecture as
the coarse mask prediction branch of [1] (with the exception of the output layers). The
inputs of these branches are the features from the region of interest (ROI) of detection
backbone feature pyramid network. We detail each branch in Table 1, 2, and 3.

3

t-SNE visualizations for image-CAD embeddings

Figures 2, 3, 4 show the t-SNE visualizations of the image-shape embedding spaces for
the bed, wardrobe, desk, table, tool, misc, and chair classes.

