Video Super-Resolution with Recurrent
Structure-Detail Network
Takashi Isobe1,2 , Xu Jia2(B) , Shuhang Gu3 , Songjiang Li2 , Shengjin Wang1(B) ,
and Qi Tian2
1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
jbj18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China
{x.jia,songjiang.li,tian.qi1}@huawei.com
3
School of Eie, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
shuhanggu@gmail.com

Abstract. Most video super-resolution methods super-resolve a single
reference frame with the help of neighboring frames in a temporal sliding
window. They are less eﬃcient compared to the recurrent-based methods. In this work, we propose a novel recurrent video super-resolution
method which is both eﬀective and eﬃcient in exploiting previous frames
to super-resolve the current frame. It divides the input into structure and
detail components which are fed to a recurrent unit composed of several proposed two-stream structure-detail blocks. In addition, a hidden
state adaptation module that allows the current frame to selectively use
information from hidden state is introduced to enhance its robustness to
appearance change and error accumulation. Extensive ablation study validate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed modules. Experiments on several
benchmark datasets demonstrate superior performance of the proposed
method compared to state-of-the-art methods on video super-resolution.
Code is available at https://github.com/junpan19/RSDN.
Keywords: Video super-resolution · Recurrent neural network ·
Two-stream block

1

Introduction

Super-resolution is one of the fundamental problem in image processing, which
aims at reconstructing a high resolution (HR) image from a single low-resolution
(LR) image or a sequence of LR images. According to the number of input
frames, the ﬁeld of SR can be divided into two categories, i.e., single image superresolution (SISR) and multi-frame super-resolution (MFSR). For SISR, the key
issue is to exploit natural image prior for compensating missing details; while for
MFSR, how to take full advantage from additional temporal information is of
pivotal importance. In this work, we focus on the video super-resolution (VSR)
T. Isobe—The work was done in Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
c
 Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020
A. Vedaldi et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2020, LNCS 12357, pp. 645–660, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58610-2_38

