Metalearned Neural Memory

Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Alessandro Sordoni, Tong Wang, Adam Trischler
Microsoft Research
Montréal, Québec, Canada
tsendsuren.munkhdalai@microsoft.com

Abstract
We augment recurrent neural networks with an external memory mechanism that
builds upon recent progress in metalearning. We conceptualize this memory as a
rapidly adaptable function that we parameterize as a deep neural network. Reading
from the neural memory function amounts to pushing an input (the key vector)
through the function to produce an output (the value vector). Writing to memory
means changing the function; specifically, updating the parameters of the neural
network to encode desired information. We leverage training and algorithmic techniques from metalearning to update the neural memory function in one shot. The
proposed memory-augmented model achieves strong performance on a variety of
learning problems, from supervised question answering to reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Many information processing tasks require memory, from sequential decision making to structured
prediction. As such, a host of past and recent research has focused on augmenting statistical learning
algorithms with memory modules that rapidly record task-relevant information [38, 8, 41]. A core
desideratum for a memory module is the ability to store information such that it can be recalled
from the same cue at later times; this reliability property has been called self-consistency [41].
Furthermore, a memory should exhibit some degree of generalization, by recalling useful information for cues that
v
t+1
have not been encountered before, or by recalling informaMemory f
v
tion associated with what was originally stored (the degree
𝛥𝜙
L
of association may depend on downstream tasks). Memory
Update procedure
structures should also be efficient, by scaling gracefully
k
k
with the quantity of information stored and by enabling
𝛽
v
fast read-write operations.
Output
Controller g
r

t

MSE

𝜙 t-1

w

t

up

t

r

t

w

t

t

t

w

t

t-1

vrt-1

𝜃

ht

yt

In the context of neural networks, one widely successful
Input x
memory module is the soft look-up table [8, 46, 3]. This
module stores high-dimensional key and value vectors in Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the
tabular format and is typically accessed by a controlled MNM model. Green and blue arrows indicate
and reading operations,
attention mechanism [3]. While broadly adopted, the soft data flows for writing
respectively. ktr , ktw , vtw and βt denote readlook-up table has several shortcomings. Look-up tables in key, write-in key, target value and update
are efficient to write, but they may grow without bound if rate vectors.
information is stored naïvely in additional slots. Usually,
their size is kept fixed and a more efficient writing mechanism is either learnt [8] or implemented heuristically [35].
The read operation common to most table-augmented models, which is based on soft attention, does
not scale well in terms of the number of slots used or in the dimensionality of stored information [32].
Furthermore, soft look-up tables generalize only via convex combinations of stored values. This
burdens the controller with estimating useful key and value representations.
t

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

