Generalization in Reinforcement Learning with
Selective Noise Injection and Information Bottleneck
Maximilian Igl ⇤
University of Oxford

Kamil Ciosek
Microsoft Research

Cheng Zhang
Microsoft Research

Yingzhen Li
Microsoft Research

Sam Devlin †
Microsoft Research

Sebastian Tschiatschek
Microsoft Research
Katja Hofmann †
Microsoft Research

Abstract
The ability for policies to generalize to new environments is key to the broad
application of RL agents. A promising approach to prevent an agent’s policy
from overfitting to a limited set of training environments is to apply regularization
techniques originally developed for supervised learning. However, there are stark
differences between supervised learning and RL. We discuss those differences
and propose modifications to existing regularization techniques in order to better
adapt them to RL. In particular, we focus on regularization techniques relying on
the injection of noise into the learned function, a family that includes some of
the most widely used approaches such as Dropout and Batch Normalization. To
adapt them to RL, we propose Selective Noise Injection (SNI), which maintains
the regularizing effect the injected noise has, while mitigating the adverse effects
it has on the gradient quality. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the Information
Bottleneck (IB) is a particularly well suited regularization technique for RL as
it is effective in the low-data regime encountered early on in training RL agents.
Combining the IB with SNI, we significantly outperform current state of the art
results, including on the recently proposed generalization benchmark Coinrun.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been used to successfully train policies with impressive
performance on a range of challenging tasks, including Atari [6, 16, 31], continuous control [35, 46]
and tasks with long-ranged temporal dependencies [33]. In those settings, the challenge is to be able to
successfully explore and learn policies complex enough to solve the training tasks. Consequently, the
focus of these works was to improve the learning performance of agents in the training environment
and less attention was being paid to generalization to testing environments.
However, being able to generalize is a key requirement for the broad application of autonomous agents.
Spurred by several recent works showing that most RL agents overfit to the training environment
[15, 58, 62, 65, 66], multiple benchmarks to evaluate the generalization capabilities of agents were
proposed, typically by procedurally generating or modifying levels in video games [8, 11, 20, 21,
32, 63]. How to learn generalizable policies in these environments remains an open question, but
early results have shown the use of regularization techniques (like weight decay, dropout and batch
normalization) established in the supervised learning paradigm can also be useful for RL agents
[11]. Our work builds on these results, but highlights two important differences between supervised
learning and RL which need to be taken into account when regularizing agents.
⇤
†

Work performed during an internship at Microsoft Research Cambridge
Co-Senior Authors

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

