SSRGD: Simple Stochastic Recursive Gradient
Descent for Escaping Saddle Points

Zhize Li
Tsinghua University, China and KAUST, Saudi Arabia
zhizeli.thu@gmail.com

Abstract
We analyze stochastic gradient algorithms for optimizing nonconvex problems. In
particular, our goal is to find local minima (second-order stationary points) instead
of just finding first-order stationary points which may be some bad unstable saddle
points. We show that a simple perturbed version of stochastic recursive gradient
descent algorithm (called SSRGD) can find an (, δ)-second-order stationary point
e √n/2 + √n/δ 4 + n/δ 3 ) stochastic gradient complexity for nonconvex
with O(
finite-sum problems.
√ As a by-product, SSRGD finds an -first-order stationary
point with O(n + n/2 ) stochastic gradients. These
√ results are almost optimal
since Fang et al. [11] provided a lower bound Ω( n/2 ) for finding even just an
-first-order stationary point. We emphasize that SSRGD algorithm for finding
second-order stationary points is as simple as for finding first-order stationary
points just by adding a uniform perturbation sometimes, while all other algorithms
for finding second-order stationary points with similar gradient complexity need to
combine with a negative-curvature search subroutine (e.g., Neon2 [4]). Moreover,
the simple SSRGD algorithm gets a simpler analysis. Besides, we also extend our
results from nonconvex finite-sum problems to nonconvex online (expectation)
problems, and prove the corresponding convergence results.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization is ubiquitous in machine learning applications especially for deep neural
networks. For convex optimization, every local minimum is a global minimum and it can be achieved
by any first-order stationary point, i.e., ∇f (x) = 0. However, for nonconvex problems, the point
with zero gradient can be a local minimum, a local maximum or a saddle point. To avoid converging
to bad saddle points (including local maxima), we want to find a second-order stationary point,
i.e., ∇f (x) = 0 and ∇2 f (x)  0 (this is a necessary condition for x to be a local minimum). All
second-order stationary points indeed are local minima if function f satisfies strict saddle property
[12]. Note that finding the global minimum in nonconvex problems is NP-hard in general. Also
note that it was shown that all local minima are also global minima for some nonconvex problems,
e.g., matrix sensing [5], matrix completion [13], and some neural networks [14]. Thus, our goal
in this paper is to find an approximate second-order stationary point (local minimum) with proved
convergence.
There has been extensive research for finding -first-order stationary point (i.e., k∇f (x)k ≤ ), e.g.,
GD, SGD and SVRG. See Table 1 for an overview. Although Xu et al. [33] and Allen-Zhu and Li
[4] independently proposed reduction algorithms Neon/Neon2 that can be combined with previous
-first-order stationary points finding algorithms to find an (, δ)-second-order stationary point (i.e.,
k∇f (x)k ≤  and λmin (∇2 f (x)) ≥ −δ). However, algorithms obtained by this reduction are very
complicated in practice, and they need to extract negative curvature directions from the Hessian
to escape saddle points by using a negative curvature search subroutine: given a point x, find an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

