G2SAT: Learning to Generate SAT Formulas

Jiaxuan You1∗
jiaxuan@cs.stanford.edu
Clark Barrett1
barrett@cs.stanford.edu

Haoze Wu1∗
haozewu@stanford.edu
Raghuram Ramanujan2
raramanujan@davidson.edu

Jure Leskovec1
jure@cs.stanford.edu
1

2

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Davidson College

Abstract
The Boolean Satisfiability (SAT) problem is the canonical NP-complete problem
and is fundamental to computer science, with a wide array of applications in planning, verification, and theorem proving. Developing and evaluating practical SAT
solvers relies on extensive empirical testing on a set of real-world benchmark formulas. However, the availability of such real-world SAT formulas is limited. While
these benchmark formulas can be augmented with synthetically generated ones,
existing approaches for doing so are heavily hand-crafted and fail to simultaneously
capture a wide range of characteristics exhibited by real-world SAT instances. In
this work, we present G2SAT, the first deep generative framework that learns to
generate SAT formulas from a given set of input formulas. Our key insight is
that SAT formulas can be transformed into latent bipartite graph representations
which we model using a specialized deep generative neural network. We show that
G2SAT can generate SAT formulas that closely resemble given real-world SAT
instances, as measured by both graph metrics and SAT solver behavior. Further,
we show that our synthetic SAT formulas could be used to improve SAT solver
performance on real-world benchmarks, which opens up new opportunities for
the continued development of SAT solvers and a deeper understanding of their
performance.

1

Introduction

The Boolean Satisfiability (SAT) problem is central to computer science, and finds many applications
across Artificial Intelligence, including planning [24], verification [7], and theorem proving [14].
SAT was the first problem to be shown to be NP-complete [9], and there is believed to be no general
procedure for solving arbitrary SAT instances efficiently. Nevertheless, modern solvers are able
to routinely decide large SAT instances in practice, with different algorithms proving to be more
successful than others on particular problem instances. For example, incomplete search methods such
as WalkSAT [35] and survey propagation [6] are more effective at solving large, randomly generated
formulas, while complete solvers leveraging conflict-driven clause learning (CDCL) [30] fare better
on large structured SAT formulas that commonly arise in industrial settings.
Understanding, developing and evaluating modern SAT solvers relies heavily on extensive empirical
testing on a suite of benchmark SAT formulas. Unfortunately, in many domains, availability of
∗

The two first authors made equal contributions.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

