Exploration via Hindsight Goal Generation

Zhizhou Ren†, Kefan Dong†
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{rzz16, dkf16}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Yuan Zhou
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yuanz@illinois.edu
Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Jian Peng
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
jianpeng@illinois.edu

Abstract
Goal-oriented reinforcement learning has recently been a practical framework for
robotic manipulation tasks, in which an agent is required to reach a certain goal
defined by a function on the state space. However, the sparsity of such reward
definition makes traditional reinforcement learning algorithms very inefficient.
Hindsight Experience Replay (HER), a recent advance, has greatly improved
sample efficiency and practical applicability for such problems. It exploits previous
replays by constructing imaginary goals in a simple heuristic way, acting like an
implicit curriculum to alleviate the challenge of sparse reward signal. In this paper,
we introduce Hindsight Goal Generation (HGG), a novel algorithmic framework
that generates valuable hindsight goals which are easy for an agent to achieve in
the short term and are also potential for guiding the agent to reach the actual goal
in the long term. We have extensively evaluated our goal generation algorithm on a
number of robotic manipulation tasks and demonstrated substantially improvement
over the original HER in terms of sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in deep reinforcement learning (RL), including policy gradient methods (Schulman
et al., 2015, 2017) and Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2015), have demonstrated a large number of successful
applications in solving hard sequential decision problems, including robotics (Levine et al., 2016),
games (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015), and recommendation systems (Karatzoglou et al., 2013),
among others. To train a well-behaved policy, deep reinforcement learning algorithms use neural
networks as functional approximators to learn a state-action value function or a policy distribution
to optimize a long-term expected return. The convergence of the training process, particularly in
Q-learning, is heavily dependent on the temporal pattern of the reward function (Szepesvári, 1998).
For example, if only a non-zero reward/return is provided at the end of an rollout of a trajectory
with length L, while no rewards are observed before the L-th time step, the Bellman updates of the
Q-function would become very inefficient, requiring at least L steps to propagate the final return to the
†

Work done while Zhizhou and Kefan were visiting students at UIUC.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

