MAVEN: Multi-Agent Variational Exploration
Anuj Mahajan⇤†

Tabish Rashid†

Mikayel Samvelyan‡

Shimon Whiteson†

Abstract
Centralised training with decentralised execution is an important setting for cooperative deep multi-agent reinforcement learning due to communication constraints
during execution and computational tractability in training. In this paper, we
analyse value-based methods that are known to have superior performance in
complex environments [43]. We specifically focus on QMIX [40], the current
state-of-the-art in this domain. We show that the representational constraints on the
joint action-values introduced by QMIX and similar methods lead to provably poor
exploration and suboptimality. Furthermore, we propose a novel approach called
MAVEN that hybridises value and policy-based methods by introducing a latent
space for hierarchical control. The value-based agents condition their behaviour on
the shared latent variable controlled by a hierarchical policy. This allows MAVEN
to achieve committed, temporally extended exploration, which is key to solving
complex multi-agent tasks. Our experimental results show that MAVEN achieves
significant performance improvements on the challenging SMAC domain [43].

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is a key tool for addressing many real-world
problems such as coordination of robot swarms [22] and autonomous cars [6]. However, two key
challenges stand between cooperative MARL and such real-world applications. First, scalability
is limited by the fact that the size of the joint action space grows exponentially in the number of
agents. Second, while the training process can typically be centralised, partial observability and
communication constraints often mean that execution must be decentralised, i.e., each agent can
condition its actions only on its local action-observation history, a setting known as centralised
training with decentralised execution (CTDE).
While both policy-based [13] and value-based [40, 48, 46] methods have been developed for CTDE,
the current state of the art, as measured on SMAC, a suite of StarCraft II micromanagement benchmark
tasks [43], is a value-based method called QMIX [40]. QMIX tries to address the challenges
mentioned above by learning factored value functions. By decomposing the joint value function
into factors that depend only on individual agents, QMIX can cope with large joint action spaces.
Furthermore, because such factors are combined in a way that respects a monotonicity constraint, each
agent can select its action based only on its own factor, enabling decentralised execution. However,
this decentralisation comes with a price, as the monotonicity constraint restricts QMIX to suboptimal
value approximations.
QTRAN[44], another recent method, performs this trade-off differently by formulating multi-agent
learning as an optimisation problem with linear constraints and relaxing it with L2 penalties for
tractability.
In this paper, we shed light on a problem unique to decentralised MARL that arises due to inefficient
exploration. Inefficient exploration hurts decentralised MARL, not only in the way it hurts single agent
⇤

Correspondence to: anuj.mahajan@cs.ox.ac.uk
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Oxford
‡
Russian-Armenian University
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

