Towards Hardware-Aware Tractable
Learning of Probabilistic Models

Laura I. Galindez Olascoaga† , Wannes Meert‡ , Nimish Shah†
Marian Verhelst† and Guy Van den Broeck††
†
Electrical Engineering Department, KU Leuven
‡
Computer Science Department, KU Leuven
††
Computer Science Department, University of California, Los Angeles
{laura.galindez,nimish.shah,marian.verhelst}@esat.kuleuven.be
wannes.meert@cs.kuleuven.be, guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Smart portable applications increasingly rely on edge computing due to privacy
and latency concerns. But guaranteeing always-on functionality comes with two
major challenges: heavily resource-constrained hardware; and dynamic application
conditions. Probabilistic models present an ideal solution to these challenges:
they are robust to missing data, allow for joint predictions and have small data
needs. In addition, ongoing efforts in the field of tractable learning have resulted
in probabilistic models with strict inference efficiency guarantees. However, the
current notions of tractability are often limited to model complexity, disregarding
the hardware’s specifications and constraints. We propose a novel resource-aware
cost metric that takes into consideration the hardware’s properties in determining
whether the inference task can be efficiently deployed. We use this metric to
evaluate the performance versus resource trade-off relevant to the application
of interest, and we propose a strategy that selects the device settings that can
optimally meet users’ requirements. We showcase our framework on a mobile
activity recognition scenario, and on a variety of benchmark datasets representative
of the field of tractable learning and of the applications of interest.

1

Introduction

Tractable learning aims to balance the trade-off between how well the resulting models fit the
available data and how efficiently queries are answered. Most implementations focus on maximizing
model performance and only factor in query efficiency by subjecting the learning stage to a fixed
tractability constraint (e.g. max treewidth [2]). While recent notions of tractability consider the cost
of probabilistic inference as the number of arithmetic operations involved in a query [27, 28], they
still disregard hardware implementation nuances of the target application. This is of special concern
for edge computing on embedded applications, where the target algorithm must run in resource
constrained hardware, such as a small ARM or RISC-V embedded processor, or a microcontroller.
For such architectures running a lightweight operating system, the overall compute cost is mostly
determined by the cost of fundamental arithmetic operations, the interaction with sensor interfaces
and the device’s memory transactions [18, 12].
In addition, efforts towards hardware-efficient realizations of probabilistic inference are currently
scarce [37, 22, 35]. This is in stark contrast with the tremendous progress achieved by embedded
neural network implementations [38, 19, 30] .
We address these limitations of the field of tractable learning by proposing a novel resource-aware cost
metric that takes into consideration the target embedded device’s properties (e.g. energy consumption);
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

