U-Time: A Fully Convolutional Network for Time
Series Segmentation Applied to Sleep Staging
Mathias Perslev
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
map@di.ku.dk
Sune Darkner
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
darkner@di.ku.dk

Michael Hejselbak Jensen
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
mhejselbak@gmail.com
Poul Jørgen Jennum
Danish Center for Sleep Medicine
Rigshospitalet, Denmark
poul.joergen.jennum@regionh.dk

Christian Igel
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
igel@diku.dk

Abstract
Neural networks are becoming more and more popular for the analysis of
physiological time-series. The most successful deep learning systems in this
domain combine convolutional and recurrent layers to extract useful features to
model temporal relations. Unfortunately, these recurrent models are difficult to
tune and optimize. In our experience, they often require task-specific modifications,
which makes them challenging to use for non-experts. We propose U-Time, a fully
feed-forward deep learning approach to physiological time series segmentation
developed for the analysis of sleep data. U-Time is a temporal fully convolutional
network based on the U-Net architecture that was originally proposed for image
segmentation. U-Time maps sequential inputs of arbitrary length to sequences of
class labels on a freely chosen temporal scale. This is done by implicitly classifying
every individual time-point of the input signal and aggregating these classifications
over fixed intervals to form the final predictions. We evaluated U-Time for sleep
stage classification on a large collection of sleep electroencephalography (EEG)
datasets. In all cases, we found that U-Time reaches or outperforms current state-ofthe-art deep learning models while being much more robust in the training process
and without requiring architecture or hyperparameter adaptation across tasks.

1

Introduction

During sleep our brain goes through a series of changes between different sleep stages, which are
characterized by specific brain and body activity patterns [Kales and Rechtschaffen, 1968, Iber and
AASM, 2007]. Sleep staging refers to the process of mapping these transitions over a night of sleep.
This is of fundamental importance in sleep medicine, because the sleep patterns combined with other
variables provide the basis for diagnosing many sleep related disorders [Sateia, 2014]. The stages can
be determined by measuring the neuronal activity in the cerebral cortex (via electroencephalography,
EEG), eye movements (via electrooculography, EOG), and/or the activity of facial muscles (via
electromyography, EMG) in a polysomnography (PSG) study (see Figure S.1 in the Supplementary
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

