Learning Representations for Time Series Clustering

Qianli Ma
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
qianlima@scut.edu.cn

Jiawei Zheng∗
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
csjwzheng@foxmail.com

Sen Li ∗
South China University of Technology
Guangzhou, China
awslee@foxmail.com

Garrison W. Cottrell
University of California, San Diego
CA, USA
gary@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Time series clustering is an essential unsupervised technique in cases when category
information is not available. It has been widely applied to genome data, anomaly
detection, and in general, in any domain where pattern detection is important.
Although feature-based time series clustering methods are robust to noise and
outliers, and can reduce the dimensionality of the data, they typically rely on domain
knowledge to manually construct high-quality features. Sequence to sequence
(seq2seq) models can learn representations from sequence data in an unsupervised
manner by designing appropriate learning objectives, such as reconstruction and
context prediction. When applying seq2seq to time series clustering, obtaining a
representation that effectively represents the temporal dynamics of the sequence,
multi-scale features, and good clustering properties remains a challenge. How
to best improve the ability of the encoder is still an open question. Here we
propose a novel unsupervised temporal representation learning model, named
Deep Temporal Clustering Representation (DTCR), which integrates the temporal
reconstruction and K-means objective into the seq2seq model. This approach
leads to improved cluster structures and thus obtains cluster-specific temporal
representations. Also, to enhance the ability of encoder, we propose a fake-sample
generation strategy and auxiliary classification task. Experiments conducted on
extensive time series datasets show that DTCR is state-of-the-art compared to
existing methods. The visualization analysis not only shows the effectiveness of
cluster-specific representation but also shows the learning process is robust, even if
K-means makes mistakes.

1

Introduction

Time series clustering is an important data mining technology widely applied to genome data [1],
anomaly detection [2] and in general, to any domain where pattern detection is important. Time series
clustering aids in the discovery of interesting patterns that empower data analysts to extract valuable
information from complex and massive datasets [3].
Feature-based methods typically consist of extracted features and clusters. Such an approach is robust
to noise and can filter out some irrelevant information [4], which can reduce the data dimension
and thus improve the efficiency of clustering algorithms [3, 4]. However, most existing methods are
domain-dependent, requiring domain knowledge to construct high-quality features manually [5]. In a
∗

Two authors have equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

