Globally Optimal Learning for Structured Elliptical
Losses
Yoav Wald∗
Hebrew University
yoav.wald@mail.huji.ac.il

Nofar Noy
Hebrew University
nofar.noy@mail.huji.ac.il

Ami Wiesel
Google Research and Hebrew University
awiesel@google.com

Gal Elidan
Google Research and Hebrew University
elidan@google.com

Abstract
Heavy tailed and contaminated data are common in various applications of machine
learning. A standard technique to handle regression tasks that involve such data, is
to use robust losses, e.g., the popular Huber’s loss.
In structured problems, however, where there are multiple labels and structural
constraints on the labels are imposed (or learned), robust optimization is challenging, and more often than not the loss used is simply the negative log-likelihood
of a Gaussian Markov random field. In this work, we analyze robust alternatives.
Theoretical understanding of such problems is quite limited, with guarantees on
optimization given only for special cases and non-structured settings. The core of
the difficulty is the non-convexity of the objective function, implying that standard
optimization algorithms may converge to sub-optimal critical points. Our analysis
focuses on loss functions that arise from elliptical distributions, which appealingly
include most loss functions proposed in the literature as special cases. We show
that, even though these problems are non-convex, they can be optimized efficiently.
Concretely, we prove that at the limit of infinite training data, due to algebraic
properties of the problem, all stationary points are globally optimal. Finally, we
demonstrate the empirical appeal of using these losses for regression on synthetic
and real-life data.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks require the prediction of several correlated real-valued variables. For
example, in modeling of the stock market, the price of multiple interacting stocks is of interest; in
the context of weather prediction, different locations exhibit a natural spatial dependence that is
governed by proximity as well as geographical features; in river discharge forecasting, water volume
is predicted at different locations and times; etc. In all of these tasks, the labels exhibit correlations
(e.g., nearby locations will have similar temperatures), and it seems advantageous to build prediction
models that can use these correlations to improve prediction accuracy. Such models are known as
structured prediction approaches, and they have been studied since the early works on graphical
models [2], and later in frameworks like conditional random fields [13] and maximum margin Markov
networks [25].
We are interested in capturing realistic scenarios, i.e. be able to account for heavy tailed and
contaminated data. In statistics, the prominent approach for coping with such settings is to use robust
∗

Work done during an internship at Google Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

