Code Generation as a Dual Task of
Code Summarization

†

Bolin Wei† , Ge Li†∗, Xin Xia‡ , Zhiyi Fu† , Zhi Jin†∗
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (Peking University)
Ministry of Education, China; Software Institute, Peking University, China
‡
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
†
bolin.wbl@gmail.com † {lige,ypfzy,zhijin}@pku.edu.cn
‡
xin.xia@monash.edu

Abstract
Code summarization (CS) and code generation (CG) are two crucial tasks in the
field of automatic software development. Various neural network-based approaches
are proposed to solve these two tasks separately. However, there exists a specific
intuitive correlation between CS and CG, which has not been exploited in previous
work. In this paper, we apply the relations between two tasks to improve the
performance of both tasks. In other words, exploiting the duality between the two
tasks, we propose a dual training framework to train the two tasks simultaneously.
In this framework, we consider the dualities on probability and attention weights,
and design corresponding regularization terms to constrain the duality. We evaluate
our approach on two datasets collected from GitHub, and experimental results
show that our dual framework can improve the performance of CS and CG tasks
over baselines.

1

Introduction

Code summarization (CS) is a task that generates comment for a piece of the source code, whereas
code generation (CG) aims to generate code based on natural language intent, e.g., description of
requirements. Code comments, a form of natural language description, provide a clear understanding
for users, and are very useful for software maintenance [de Souza et al., 2005]. On the other
hand, CG is an indispensable process in which programmers write code to implement specific
intents [Balzer, 1985]. Proper comments and correct code can massively improve programmers’
productivity and enhance software quality. However, generating the correct code or comments is
costly, time-consuming, and error-prone. Therefore, carrying out CS and CG automatically becomes
greatly important for software development.
Recently, many researchers, inspired by an encoder-decoder framework [Cho et al., 2014], applied
neural networks to solve these two tasks independently. For CS, the encoder uses a neural network to
represent source code as a real-valued vector, and the decoder uses another neural network to generate
comments word by word. The main difference among previous studies is the way to encode source
code. Specifically, Iyer et al. [2016] and Hu et al. [2018a,b] modeled source code as a sequence of
tokens, composed by original code tokens or abstract syntax tree (AST) nodes obtained by traversing
ASTs in a certain order. On the other hand, Wan et al. [2018] treated a code snippet as an AST. It is
worth noting that these previous models have both introduced the attention mechanism [Bahdanau
et al., 2015] to learn the alignment between the code and the comment.
∗

Corresponding authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

