Learning to Learn via Self-Critique

Antreas Antoniou
University of Edinburgh
{a.antoniou}@sms.ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
University of Edinburgh
{a.storkey}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
In few-shot learning, a machine learning system learns from a small set of labelled
examples relating to a specific task, such that it can generalize to new examples of
the same task. Given the limited availability of labelled examples in such tasks,
we wish to make use of all the information we can. Usually a model learns taskspecific information from a small training-set (support-set) to predict on an unlabelled validation set (target-set). The target-set contains additional task-specific
information which is not utilized by existing few-shot learning methods. Making use of the target-set examples via transductive learning requires approaches
beyond the current methods; at inference time, the target-set contains only unlabelled input data-points, and so discriminative learning cannot be used. In this
paper, we propose a framework called Self-Critique and Adapt or SCA, which
learns to learn an label-free loss function, parameterized as a neural network. A
base-model learns on a support-set using existing methods (e.g. stochastic gradient descent combined with the cross-entropy loss), and then is updated for the
incoming target-task using the learnt loss function. The label-free loss function is
learned such that the target-set-updated model achieves higher generalization performance. Experiments demonstrate that SCA offers substantially reduced errorrates compared to baselines which only adapt on the support-set, and results in
state of the art benchmark performance on Mini-ImageNet and Caltech-UCSD
Birds 200.

1

Introduction

Humans can learn from a few data-points and generalize very well, but also have the ability to
adapt in real-time to information from an incoming task. Given two training images for a two class
problem, one with a cat on a white sofa, and one with a dog next to a car, one can come up with two
hypothesis as to what each class describes in each case. A test image that presents a dog with a cat
would be ambiguous. However, having other unlabelled test images with cats in other contexts and
cars in other contexts enables these cases to be disambiguated, and it is possible to learn to focus on
features that help this separation. We wish to incorporate this ability to adapt into a meta-learning
context.
Few-shot learning is a learning paradigm where only a handful of samples are available to learn
from. It is a setting where deep learning methods previously demonstrated weak generalization performance. In recent years, by framing the problem of few-shot learning as a meta-learning problem
(Vinyals et al., 2016), we have observed an advent of meta-learning methods that have demonstrated
unprecedented performance on a number of few-shot learning benchmarks (Snell et al., 2017; Finn
et al., 2017; Rusu et al., 2018).
Most few-shot meta-learning methods have focused on either learning static (Finn et al., 2017; Antoniou et al., 2019; Li and Malik, 2016) or dynamic parameter initializations (Rusu et al., 2018),
learning rate schedulers (Antoniou et al., 2019), embedding functions Vinyals et al. (2016); Snell
et al. (2017), optimizers Ravi and Larochelle (2016) and other internal components. However all of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

