DeepWave: A Recurrent Neural-Network
for Real-Time Acoustic Imaging

Matthieu Simeoni ∗
IBM Zurich Research Laboratory
meo@zurich.ibm.com
Paul Hurley
Western Sydney University
paul.hurley@westernsydney.edu.au

Sepand Kashani †
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
sepand.kashani@epfl.ch
Martin Vetterli
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
martin.vetterli@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a recurrent neural-network for real-time reconstruction of acoustic
camera spherical maps. The network, dubbed DeepWave, is both physically and
algorithmically motivated: its recurrent architecture mimics iterative solvers from
convex optimisation, and its parsimonious parametrisation is based on the natural
structure of acoustic imaging problems. Each network layer applies successive
filtering, biasing and activation steps to its input, which can be interpreted as generalised deblurring and sparsification steps. To comply with the irregular geometry of
spherical maps, filtering operations are implemented efficiently by means of graph
signal processing techniques. Unlike commonly-used imaging network architectures, DeepWave is moreover capable of directly processing the complex-valued
raw microphone correlations, learning how to optimally back-project these into
a spherical map. We propose moreover a smart physically-inspired initialisation
scheme that attains much faster training and higher performance than random initialisation. Our real-data experiments show DeepWave has similar computational
speed to the state-of-the-art delay-and-sum imager with vastly superior resolution.
While developed primarily for acoustic cameras, DeepWave could easily be adapted
to neighbouring signal processing fields, such as radio astronomy, radar and sonar.

1

Introduction

Motivation An acoustic camera (AC) [26, 8, 18, 24] is a multi-modal imaging device that allows
one to visualise in real-time sound emissions from every direction in space. This is typically achieved
by overlaying on the live video from an optical camera a heatmap representing the intensity of the
ambient directional sound field, recovered from the simultaneous recordings of a microphone array
[3, 42]. Most commercial acoustic cameras recover the sound intensity field by combining linearly
the correlated microphone recordings with a Delay-And-Sum (DAS) beamformer [42, Chapter 5]. The
beamformer acts as an angular filter [20, 21], steering sequentially the array sensitivity pattern –or
beamshape– towards various directions where the sound intensity field is probed. Acoustic images
obtained this way are cheap to compute, but are blurred by the beamshape of the microphone array,
∗
Corresponding author. Matthieu Simeoni is also affiliated to the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), with email address matthieu.simeoni@epfl.ch
†
Matthieu Simeoni and Sepand Kashani have contributed equally to this work. Sepand Kashani was in part
supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation grant number 200021 181978/1, “SESAM - Sensing and
Sampling: Theory and Algorithms".

Preprint. Under review.

