Pure Exploration with Multiple Correct Answers

Rémy Degenne
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Science Park 123, Amsterdam, NL
remy.degenne@cwi.nl

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Science Park 123, Amsterdam, NL
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Abstract
We determine the sample complexity of pure exploration bandit problems with
multiple good answers. We derive a lower bound using a new game equilibrium
argument. We show how continuity and convexity properties of single-answer
problems ensure that the existing Track-and-Stop algorithm has asymptotically
optimal sample complexity. However, that convexity is lost when going to the
multiple-answer setting. We present a new algorithm which extends Track-andStop to the multiple-answer case and has asymptotic sample complexity matching
the lower bound.

1

Introduction

In pure exploration aka active testing problems the learning system interacts with its environment
by sequentially performing experiments to quickly and reliably identify the answer to a particular
pre-specified question. Practical applications range from simple queries for cost-constrained physical
regimes, i.e. clinical drug testing, to complex queries in structured environments bottlenecked
by computation, i.e. simulation-based planning. The theory of pure exploration is studied in the
multi-armed bandit framework. The scientific challenge is to develop tools for characterising the
sample complexity of new pure exploration problems, and methodologies for developing (matching)
algorithms. With the aim of understanding power and limits of existing methodology, we study an
extended problem formulation where each instance may have multiple correct answers. We find
that multiple-answer problems present a phase transition in complexity, and require a change in our
thinking about algorithms.
The existing methodology for developing asymptotically instance-optimal algorithms, Track-andStop by Garivier and Kaufmann [2016], exploits the so-called oracle weights. These probability
distributions on arms naturally arise in sample complexity lower bounds, and dictate the optimal
sampling proportions for an “oracle” algorithm that needs to be sample efficient only on exactly the
current problem instance. The main idea is to track the oracle weights computed at a converging
estimate of the instance. The analysis of Track-and-Stop requires continuity of the oracle weights as a
function of the bandit model. For the core Best Arm Identification problem, discontinuity only occurs
at degenerate instances where the sample complexity explodes. So this assumption seemed harmless.
Our contribution We show that the oracle weights may be non-unique, even for single-answer
problems, and hence need to be regarded as a set-valued mapping. We show this mapping is always
(upper hemi-)continuous. We show that each instance maps to a convex set for single-answer
problems, and this allows us to extend the Track-and-Stop methodology to all such problems. At
instances with non-singleton set-valued oracle weights more care is needed: of the two classical
tracking schemes “C” converges to the convex set, while “D” may fail entirely.
We show that for multiple-answer problems convexity is violated. There are instances where two
distinct oracle weights are optimal, while no mixture is. Unmodified tracking converges in law
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

