Regret Bounds for Learning State Representations in
Reinforcement Learning

Ronald Ortner
Montanuniversität Leoben
rortner@unileoben.ac.at
Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Matteo Pirotta
Facebook AI Research
pirotta@fb.com

Ronan Fruit
Sequel Team – INRIA Lille
ronan.fruit@inria.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
Sequel Team – INRIA Lille
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider the problem of online reinforcement learning when several state
representations (mapping histories to a discrete state space) are available to the
learning agent. At least one of these representations is assumed to induce a Markov
decision process (MDP), and the performance of the agent is measured in terms of
cumulative regret against the optimal policy giving the highest average√reward in
e T ) regret
this MDP representation. We propose an algorithm (U CB -M S) with O(
in any communicating MDP. The regret bound shows that U CB -M S automatically
adapts to the Markov model and improves over the currently known best bound of
order e
O(T 2/3 ).

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning, an agent aims to learn a task while interacting with an unknown environment. We consider online learning (i.e., non-episodic) problems where the agent has to trade off the
exploration needed to collect information about rewards and dynamics and the exploitation of the
information gathered so far. In this setting, it is commonly assumed that the agent knows a suitable
state representation which makes the process on the state space Markovian. However, designing
such a representation is often highly non-trivial since many “reasonable” representations may lead to
non-Markovian models.
The task of selecting or designing a (suitable and compact) state representation of a dynamical
system is a well-known problem in engineering, especially in robotics. This setting has received a
lot of attention in recent years due to the growing number of applications using images or videos as
observations [e.g., 1, 2, 3]. It is possible to come up with different approaches for extracting features
from such high-dimensional observation spaces, but not all of them describe the problem well or
exhibit Markovian dynamics. Indeed, the Markovian assumption that transitions and rewards are
independent of history is frequently violated in real-world applications where there is often rather
a dependence on the last k > 1 observations. To deal with this scenario Markov models have been
extended from first-order models to kth-order models. The problem of selecting the right order of the
model is a special case of the selection of the correct state representation. In both cases, the goal is to
perform as well as when the true order or compact features of the Markov model are known. For
more details and further examples we refer to [4, 5, 6].
We consider the following setting that was introduced by Hutter [7], where it was called feature
reinforcement learning. The agent is provided with a finite set Φ of representations mapping histories
(sequences of actions, observations, and rewards) to a finite set of states, such that at least one model
φ◦ ∈ Φ induces a Markov decision process (MDP) [8]. The goal of the agent is to learn to solve the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

