A Prior of a Googol Gaussians: a Tensor Ring
Induced Prior for Generative Models
Maksim Kuznetsov1,∗
1

Insilico Medicine

Daniil Polykovskiy1,∗
2

Dmitry Vetrov2

Alexander Zhebrak1

National Research University Higher School of Economics

{kuznetsov,daniil,zhebrak}@insilico.com

vetrovd@yandex.ru

Abstract
Generative models produce realistic objects in many domains, including text, image, video, and audio synthesis. Most popular models—Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)—usually employ a standard Gaussian distribution as a prior. Previous works show that the richer family
of prior distributions may help to avoid the mode collapse problem in GANs and
to improve the evidence lower bound in VAEs. We propose a new family of prior
distributions—Tensor Ring Induced Prior (TRIP)—that packs an exponential number of Gaussians into a high-dimensional lattice with a relatively small number
of parameters. We show that these priors improve Fréchet Inception Distance for
GANs and Evidence Lower Bound for VAEs. We also study generative models
with TRIP in the conditional generation setup with missing conditions. Altogether,
we propose a novel plug-and-play framework for generative models that can be
utilized in any GAN and VAE-like architectures.

1

Introduction

Modern generative models are widely applied to the generation of realistic and diverse images, text,
and audio files [1–5]. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [6], Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
[7], and their variations are the most commonly used neural generative models. Both architectures
learn a mapping from some prior distribution p(z)—usually a standard Gaussian—to the data
distribution p(x). Previous works showed that richer prior distributions might improve the generative
models—reduce mode collapse for GANs [8, 9] and obtain a tighter Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO)
for VAEs [10].
If the prior p(z) lies in a parametric family, we can learn the most suitable distribution for it during
training. In this work, we investigate Gaussian Mixture Models as prior distributions with an
exponential number of Gaussians in nodes of a multidimensional lattice. In our experiments, we
used a prior with more than a googol (10100 ) Gaussians. To handle such complex distributions,
we represent p(z) using a Tensor Ring decomposition [11]—a method for approximating highdimensional tensors with a relatively small number of parameters. We call this family of distributions
a Tensor Ring Induced Prior (TRIP). For this distribution, we can compute marginal and conditional
probabilities and sample from them efficiently.
We also extend TRIP to conditional generation, where a generative model p(x | y) produces new
objects x with specified attributes y. With TRIP, we can produce new objects conditioned only on a
subset of attributes, leaving some labels unspecified during both training and inference.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

