Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Neural Networks
Ines Chami∗‡
‡

Rex Ying∗ †

Christopher Ré†

Jure Leskovec†

†
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering, Stanford University
{chami, rexying, chrismre, jure}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Graph convolutional neural networks (GCNs) embed nodes in a graph into Euclidean space, which has been shown to incur a large distortion when embedding
real-world graphs with scale-free or hierarchical structure. Hyperbolic geometry offers an exciting alternative, as it enables embeddings with much smaller
distortion. However, extending GCNs to hyperbolic geometry presents several
unique challenges because it is not clear how to define neural network operations,
such as feature transformation and aggregation, in hyperbolic space. Furthermore,
since input features are often Euclidean, it is unclear how to transform the features
into hyperbolic embeddings with the right amount of curvature. Here we propose
Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Neural Network (HGCN), the first inductive
hyperbolic GCN that leverages both the expressiveness of GCNs and hyperbolic
geometry to learn inductive node representations for hierarchical and scale-free
graphs. We derive GCNs operations in the hyperboloid model of hyperbolic space
and map Euclidean input features to embeddings in hyperbolic spaces with different
trainable curvature at each layer. Experiments demonstrate that HGCN learns
embeddings that preserve hierarchical structure, and leads to improved performance
when compared to Euclidean analogs, even with very low dimensional embeddings:
compared to state-of-the-art GCNs, HGCN achieves an error reduction of up to
63.1% in ROC AUC for link prediction and of up to 47.5% in F1 score for node
classification, also improving state-of-the art on the Pubmed dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCNs) are state-of-the-art models for representation learning
in graphs, where nodes of the graph are embedded into points in Euclidean space [15, 21, 41, 45].
However, many real-world graphs, such as protein interaction networks and social networks, often
exhibit scale-free or hierarchical structure [7, 50] and Euclidean embeddings, used by existing GCNs,
have a high distortion when embedding such graphs [6, 32]. In particular, scale-free graphs have
tree-like structure and in such graphs the graph volume, defined as the number of nodes within some
radius to a center node, grows exponentially as a function of radius. However, the volume of balls in
Euclidean space only grows polynomially with respect to the radius, which leads to high distortion
embeddings [34, 35], while in hyperbolic space, this volume grows exponentially.
Hyperbolic geometry offers an exciting alternative as it enables embeddings with much smaller
distortion when embedding scale-free and hierarchical graphs. However, current hyperbolic embedding techniques only account for the graph structure and do not leverage rich node features. For
instance, Poincaré embeddings [29] capture the hyperbolic properties of real graphs by learning
shallow embeddings with hyperbolic distance metric and Riemannian optimization. Compared to
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

