On the Calibration of Multiclass Classification
with Rejection

1

Chenri Ni1 Nontawat Charoenphakdee1,2 Junya Honda1,2 Masashi Sugiyama2,1
The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
{nichenri, nontawat}@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{jhonda, sugi}@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We investigate the problem of multiclass classification with rejection, where a
classifier can choose not to make a prediction to avoid critical misclassification.
First, we consider an approach based on simultaneous training of a classifier and a
rejector, which achieves the state-of-the-art performance in the binary case. We
analyze this approach for the multiclass case and derive a general condition for
calibration to the Bayes-optimal solution, which suggests that calibration is hard to
achieve by general loss functions unlike the binary case. Next, we consider another
traditional approach based on confidence scores, in which the existing work focuses
on a specific class of losses. We propose rejection criteria for more general losses
for this approach and guarantee calibration to the Bayes-optimal solution. Finally,
we conduct experiments to validate the relevance of our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

In real-world classification tasks, e.g., medical diagnosis, autonomous driving, and product inspection,
misclassification can be costly and even life-threatening. Classification with rejection is a framework
aiming to prevent critical misclassification by providing an option not to make a prediction at the
expense of the pre-defined rejection cost [6, 7]. If the rejection cost is less than the misclassification
cost, there is an incentive to reject an instance. In practice, once the reject option is selected, one may
gather more information about the instance or ask experts to give the correct label.
Much research on the theoretical perspective of classification with rejection has been devoted to the
binary classification scenario [16, 1, 14, 29, 8, 9]. However, rather less attention has been paid to
the multiclass scenario, which is undoubtedly important for real-world applications and is a more
general framework. To the best of our knowledge, although there exist many methods that rely on
heuristics [11, 28, 23], only the work by Ramaswamy et al. [20] provides the theoretical guarantee
for their method. Nevertheless, the work by Ramaswamy et al. [20] only focuses on specific types of
non-differentiable losses and their method requires re-training of the classifier when the rejection
cost changes.
The key concept to validate the soundness of the method for classification with rejection lies in the
notion of calibration, i.e., infinite-sample consistency [29, 8]. Calibration suggests that the minimizer
of a surrogate risk behaves identically to the Bayes-optimal solution almost surely. The existing
methods with calibration guarantees can be divided into two categories, which we detail in the
following.
The first category is called the confidence-based approach. The main idea is to use the real-valued
output of the classifier as a confidence score [1, 14, 26]. Whether to reject the input is then determined
from the classifier’s output and a threshold depending on the rejection cost and the choice of the
surrogate loss function.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

