Parameter elimination in particle Gibbs sampling

Riccardo Sven Risuleo
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
riccardo.risuleo@it.uu.se

Anna Wigren
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
anna.wigren@it.uu.se
Lawrence Murray
Uber AI
San Francisco, CA, USA
lawrence.murray@uber.com

Fredrik Lindsten
Division of Statistics and Machine Learning
Linköping University, Sweden
fredrik.lindsten@liu.se

Abstract
Bayesian inference in state-space models is challenging due to high-dimensional
state trajectories. A viable approach is particle Markov chain Monte Carlo, combining MCMC and sequential Monte Carlo to form “exact approximations” to
otherwise intractable MCMC methods. The performance of the approximation is
limited to that of the exact method. We focus on particle Gibbs and particle Gibbs
with ancestor sampling, improving their performance beyond that of the underlying Gibbs sampler (which they approximate) by marginalizing out one or more
parameters. This is possible when the parameter prior is conjugate to the complete
data likelihood. Marginalization yields a non-Markovian model for inference, but
we show that, in contrast to the general case, this method still scales linearly in
time. While marginalization can be cumbersome to implement, recent advances in
probabilistic programming have enabled its automation. We demonstrate how the
marginalized methods are viable as efficient inference backends in probabilistic
programming, and demonstrate with examples in ecology and epidemiology.

Introduction

State-space models (SSMs) are a well-studied topic
with applications in climatology [3], robotics [8],
ecology [29], and epidemiology [31], to mention just
a few. In this paper we propose a new method for performing Bayesian inference in such models. In SSMs,
a latent (hidden) state process xt is observed through
a second process yt . The state process is assigned an
initial density x0 ∼ p(x0 ), and evolves in time according to a transition density xt ∼ p(xt |xt−1 , θ), where
θ are parameters with prior density p(θ). Given
the latent states xt , the observations are assumed
independent with density p(yt |xt , θ). We wish to infer the joint posterior, p(x0:T , θ|y1:T ), for the states
x0:T and the parameters θ, given a set of observations y1:T = {y1 , . . . , yT }. Unfortunately, computing
this posterior distribution exactly is not analytically
tractable for general non-linear, non-Gaussian models, so we must resort to approximations.

1
Autocorrelation

1

PGAS N = 50
PGAS N = 500
PGAS N = 5000
mPGAS N = 50
mPGAS N = 500

.5
0
0

5

10

15

Lag

Figure 1: The autocorrelation function (ACF)
for standard PGAS converges to that of the
hypothetical Gibbs sampler as N → ∞,
whereas mPGAS will produce iid draws in
the limit, i.e., the ACF will drop to zero at lag
one for large N . Similar results hold for PG
and mPG, see Supplementary E.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

