Comparing Unsupervised Word Translation Methods
Step by Step

Mareike Hartmann
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
hartmann@di.ku.dk

Yova Kementchedjhieva
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
yova@di.ku.dk

Anders Søgaard
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
soegaard@di.ku.dk

Abstract
Cross-lingual word vector space alignment is the task of mapping the vocabularies
of two languages into a shared semantic space, which can be used for dictionary
induction, unsupervised machine translation, and transfer learning. In the unsupervised regime, an initial seed dictionary is learned in the absence of any known
correspondences between words, through distribution matching, and the seed
dictionary is then used to supervise the induction of the final alignment in what is
typically referred to as a (possibly iterative) refinement step. We focus on the first
step and compare distribution matching techniques in the context of language pairs
for which mixed training stability and evaluation scores have been reported. We
show that, surprisingly, when looking at this initial step in isolation, vanilla GANs
are superior to more recent methods, both in terms of precision and robustness.
The improvements reported by more recent methods thus stem from the refinement
techniques, and we show that we can obtain state-of-the-art performance combining
vanilla GANs with such refinement techniques.

1

Introduction

A word vector space – sometimes referred to as a word embedding – associates similar words in a
vocabulary with similar vectors. Learning a projection of one word vector space into another, such
that similar words – across the two word embeddings – are associated with similar vectors, is useful
in many contexts, with the most prominent example being the alignment of vocabularies of different
languages, i.e., word translation. This is a key step in machine translation of low-resource languages
(Lample et al., 2018).
Projections between word vector spaces have typically been learned from seed dictionaries. In
seminal papers (Mikolov et al., 2013; Faruqui and Dyer, 2014; Gouws and Søgaard, 2015), these
seeds would comprise thousands of words, but Vulić and Korhonen (2016) showed that we can learn
reliable projections from as little as 50 words. Smith et al. (2017) and Hauer et al. (2017) subsequently
showed that the seed can be replaced with just words that are identical across languages; and Artetxe
et al. (2017) showed that numerals can also do the job, in some cases; both proposals removing the
need for an actual dictionary. Even more recently, entirely unsupervised approaches to projecting
word vector spaces onto each other have been proposed, which induce seed dictionaries in the absence
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

