PAC-Bayes under potentially heavy tails

Matthew J. Holland
Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research
Osaka University
matthew-h@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We derive PAC-Bayesian learning guarantees for heavy-tailed losses, and obtain
a novel optimal Gibbs posterior which enjoys finite-sample excess risk bounds
at logarithmic confidence. Our core technique itself makes use of PAC-Bayesian
inequalities in order to derive a robust risk estimator, which by design is easy
to compute. In particular, only assuming that the first three moments of the
loss distribution are bounded, the learning algorithm derived from this estimator
achieves nearly sub-Gaussian statistical error, up to the quality of the prior.

1

Introduction

More than two decades ago, the origins of PAC-Bayesian learning theory were developed with
the goal of strengthening traditional PAC learning guarantees1 by explicitly accounting for prior
knowledge [17, 12, 5]. Subsequent work developed finite-sample risk bounds for “Bayesian” learning
algorithms which specify a distribution over the model [13]. These bounds are controlled using
the empirical risk and the relative entropy between “prior” and “posterior” distributions, and hold
uniformly over the choice of the latter, meaning that the guarantees hold for data-dependent posteriors,
hence the naming. Furthermore, choosing the posterior to minimize PAC-Bayesian risk bounds leads
to practical learning algorithms which have seen numerous successful applications [2].
Following this framework, a tremendous amount of work has been done to refine, extend, and apply
the PAC-Bayesian framework to new learning problems. Tight risk bounds for bounded losses are
due to Seeger [15] and Maurer [11], with the former work applying them to Gaussian processes.
Bounds constructed using the loss variance in a Bernstein-type inequality were given by Seldin et al.
[16], with a data-dependent extension derived by Tolstikhin and Seldin [18]. As stated by McAllester
[14], virtually all the bounds derived in the original PAC-Bayesian theory “only apply to bounded
loss functions.” This technical barrier was solved by Alquier et al. [2], who introduce an additional
error term depending on the concentration of the empirical risk about the true risk. This technique
was subsequently applied to the log-likelihood loss in the context of Bayesian linear regression by
Germain et al. [9], and further systematized by Bégin et al. [3]. While this approach lets us deal
with unbounded losses, naturally the statistical error guarantees are only as good as the confidence
intervals available for the empirical mean deviations. In particular, strong assumptions on all of
the moments of the loss are essentially unavoidable using the traditional tools espoused by Bégin
et al. [3], which means the “heavy-tailed” regime cannot be handled, where all we assume is that a
few higher-order moments are finite (say finite variance and/or finite kurtosis). A new technique for
deriving PAC-Bayesian bounds even under heavy-tailed losses is introduced by Alquier and Guedj
[1]; their lucid procedure provides error rates even under heavy tails, but as the authors recognize, the
guarantees are sub-optimal at high confidence levels due to direct dependence on the empirical risk,
leading in turn to sub-optimal algorithms derived from these bounds.2
1

PAC: Probably approximately correct [19].
See work by Catoni [6], Devroye et al. [8] and the references within for background on the fundamental
limitations of the empirical mean for real-valued random variables.
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

