NAOMI: Non-Autoregressive Multiresolution
Sequence Imputation

Yukai Liu
Caltech
yukai@caltech.edu

Rose Yu
Northeastern University
roseyu@northeastern.edu

Eric Zhan
Caltech
ezhan@caltech.edu

Stephan Zheng∗
Caltech, Salesforce
stephan.zheng@salesforce.com
Yisong Yue
Caltech
yyue@caltech.edu

Abstract
Missing value imputation is a fundamental problem in spatiotemporal modeling,
from motion tracking to the dynamics of physical systems. Deep autoregressive
models suffer from error propagation which becomes catastrophic for imputing
long-range sequences. In this paper, we take a non-autoregressive approach and
propose a novel deep generative model: Non-AutOregressive Multiresolution
Imputation (NAOMI) to impute long-range sequences given arbitrary missing patterns. NAOMI exploits the multiresolution structure of spatiotemporal data and
decodes recursively from coarse to fine-grained resolutions using a divide-andconquer strategy. We further enhance our model with adversarial training. When
evaluated extensively on benchmark datasets from systems of both deterministic
and stochastic dynamics. In our experiments, NAOMI demonstrates significant
improvement in imputation accuracy (reducing average error by 60% compared to
autoregressive counterparts) and generalization for long-range sequences.

1

Introduction

The problem of missing values often arises in real-life sequential data. For example, in motion
tracking, trajectories often contain missing data due to object occlusion, trajectories crossing,
and the instability of camera motion [1]. Missing values can introduce observational bias into
training data, making the learning unstable. Hence, imputing missing values is of critical importance to the downstream sequence learning tasks. Sequence imputation has been studied for
decades in statistics literature [2, 3, 4, 5]. Most
statistical techniques are reliant on strong assumptions on missing patterns such as missing
at random, and do not generalize well to unseen
data. Moreover, existing methods do not work
well when the proportion of missing data is high
and the sequence is long.
Recent studies [6, 7, 8, 9] have proposed to
use deep generative models for learning flexible
missing patterns from sequence data. However,
all existing deep generative imputation methods
are autoregressive: they model the value at cur∗

Figure 1: Imputation process of NAOMI in a basketball play given two players (purple and blue) and
5 known observations (black dots). Missing values
are imputed recursively from coarse resolution to
fine-grained resolution (left to right).

This work was done while the author was at Caltech.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

