Semi-flat minima and saddle points by embedding
neural networks to overparameterization

Kenji Fukumizu†,‡

Shoichiro Yamaguchi‡

Yoh-ichi Mototake†

Mirai Tanaka†

†The Institute of Statistical Mathematics
Tachikawa, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan
{fukumizu, mototake, mirai}@ism.ac.jp

‡Preferred Networks, Inc.
Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-0004, Japan
guguchi@preferred.jp

Abstract
We theoretically study the landscape of the training error for neural networks
in overparameterized cases. We consider three basic methods for embedding a
network into a wider one with more hidden units, and discuss whether a minimum
point of the narrower network gives a minimum or saddle point of the wider one.
Our results show that the networks with smooth and ReLU activation have different
partially flat landscapes around the embedded point. We also relate these results to
a difference of their generalization abilities in overparameterized realization.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been applied to many problems with remarkable successes. On
the theoretical understanding of DNNs, however, many problems are still unsolved. Among others,
local minima are important issues on learning of DNNs; existence of many local minima is naturally
expected by its strong nonlinearity, while people also observe that, with a large network and the
stochastic gradient descent, training of DNNs may avoid this issue [8, 9]. For a better understanding
of learning, it is essential to clarify the landscape of the training error.
This paper focuses on the error landscape in overparameterized situations, where the number of units
is surplus to realize a function. This naturally occurs when a large network architecture is employed,
and has been recently discussed in connection to optimization and generalization of neural networks
([14, 2, 1] to list a few). To formulate overparameterization rigorously, this paper introduces three
basic methods, unit replication, inactive units, and inactive propagation, for embedding a network to
a network of more units in some layer. We investigate especially the landscape of the training error
around the embedded point, when we embed a minimizer of the error for a smaller model.
A relevant topic to this paper is flat minima [6, 7], which attract much attention in literature. Such
flatness of minima is often observed empirically, and is connected to generalization performance [3, 8].
There are also some works on how to define flatness appropriately and its relations to generalization
[15, 17]. Different from these works, this paper shows some embeddings cause semi-flat minima,
at which a lower dimensional affine subset in the parameter space gives a constant value of error
(see Sec. A). We will also discuss difference between smooth activation and Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU); at a semi-flat minimum obtained by embedding a network of zero training error, the ReLU
networks have more flat directions. Using PAC-Bayes arguments [11], we relate this to the difference
of generalization bounds between ReLU and smooth networks in overparameterized situations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

