Variational Bayes under Model Misspecification

Yixin Wang
Columbia University

David M. Blei
Columbia University

Abstract
Variational Bayes (VB) is a scalable alternative to Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) for Bayesian posterior inference. Though popular, VB comes with few
theoretical guarantees, most of which focus on well-specified models. However,
models are rarely well-specified in practice. In this work, we study VB under
model misspecification. We prove the VB posterior is asymptotically normal and
centers at the value that minimizes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to the true
data-generating distribution. Moreover, the VB posterior mean centers at the same
value and is also asymptotically normal. These results generalize the variational
Bernstein–von Mises theorem [31] to misspecified models. As a consequence of
these results, we find that the model misspecification error dominates the variational
approximation error in VB posterior predictive distributions. It explains the widely
observed phenomenon that VB achieves comparable predictive accuracy with
MCMC even though VB uses an approximating family. As illustrations, we study
VB under three forms of model misspecification, ranging from model over-/underdispersion to latent dimensionality misspecification. We conduct two simulation
studies that demonstrate the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Bayesian modeling uses posterior inference to discover patterns in data. Begin by positing a probabilistic model that describes the generative process; it is a joint distribution of latent variables and the
data. The goal is to infer the posterior, the conditional distribution of the latent variables given the data.
The inferred posterior reveals hidden patterns of the data and helps form predictions about new data.
For many models, however, the posterior is computationally difficult—it involves a marginal probability that takes the form of an integral. Unless that integral admits a closed-form expression (or the
latent variables are low-dimensional) it is intractable to compute.
To circumvent this intractability, investigators rely on approximate inference strategies such as variational Bayes (VB). VB approximates the posterior by solving an optimization problem. First propose
an approximating family of distributions that contains all factorizable densities; then find the member
of this family that minimizes the KL divergence to the (computationally intractable) exact posterior.
Take this minimizer as a substitute for the posterior and carry out downstream data analysis.
VB scales to large datasets and works empirically in many difficult models. However, it comes with

few theoretical guarantees, most of which focus on well-specified models. For example, Wang & Blei
[31] establish the consistency and asymptotic normality of the VB posterior, assuming the data is generated by the probabilistic model. Under a similar assumption of a well-specified model, Zhang & Gao
[36] derive the convergence rate of the VB posterior in settings with high-dimensional latent variables.
But as George Box famously quipped, “all models are wrong.” Probabilistic models are rarely wellspecified in practice. Does VB still enjoy good theoretical properties under model misspecification?
What about the VB posterior predictive distributions? These are the questions we study in this paper.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

