Policy Poisoning
in Batch Reinforcement Learning and Control
Yuzhe Ma
University of Wisconsin–Madison
yzm234@cs.wisc.edu

Xuezhou Zhang
University of Wisconsin–Madison
zhangxz1123@cs.wisc.edu

Wen Sun
Microsoft Research New York
Sun.Wen@microsoft.com

Xiaojin Zhu
University of Wisconsin–Madison
jerryzhu@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
We study a security threat to batch reinforcement learning and control where the
attacker aims to poison the learned policy. The victim is a reinforcement learner /
controller which first estimates the dynamics and the rewards from a batch data set,
and then solves for the optimal policy with respect to the estimates. The attacker
can modify the data set slightly before learning happens, and wants to force the
learner into learning a target policy chosen by the attacker. We present a unified
framework for solving batch policy poisoning attacks, and instantiate the attack
on two standard victims: tabular certainty equivalence learner in reinforcement
learning and linear quadratic regulator in control. We show that both instantiation
result in a convex optimization problem on which global optimality is guaranteed,
and provide analysis on attack feasibility and attack cost. Experiments show the
effectiveness of policy poisoning attacks.

1

Introduction

With the increasing adoption of machine learning, it is critical to study security threats to learning
algorithms and design effective defense mechanisms against those threats. There has been significant
work on adversarial attacks [2, 9]. We focus on the subarea of data poisoning attacks where the
adversary manipulates the training data so that the learner learns a wrong model. Prior work on data
poisoning targeted victims in supervised learning [17, 13, 19, 22] and multi-armed bandits [11, 16, 15].
We take a step further and study data poisoning attacks on reinforcement learning (RL). Given RL’s
prominent applications in robotics, games and so on, an intentionally and adversarially planted bad
policy could be devastating.
While there has been some related work in test-time attack on RL, reward shaping, and teaching
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL), little is understood on how to training-set poison a reinforcement
learner. We take the first step and focus on batch reinforcement learner and controller as the victims.
These victims learn their policy from a batch training set. We assume that the attacker can modify the
rewards in the training set, which we show is sufficient for policy poisoning. The attacker’s goal is to
force the victim to learn a particular target policy (hence the name policy poisoning), while minimizing
the reward modifications. Our main contribution is to characterize batch policy poisoning with a
unified optimization framework, and to study two instances against tabular certainty-equivalence
(TCE) victim and linear quadratic regulator (LQR) victim, respectively.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

