Distribution Learning of a Random Spatial Field with
a Location-Unaware Mobile Sensor
Meera Pai and Animesh Kumar
Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai 400076 India
meeravpai,animesh@ee.iitb.ac.in

Abstract
Measurement of spatial fields is of interest in environment monitoring. Recently
mobile sensing has been proposed for spatial field reconstruction, which requires a
smaller number of sensors when compared to the traditional paradigm of sensing
with static sensors. A challenge in mobile sensing is to overcome the location
uncertainty of its sensors. While GPS or other localization methods can reduce
this uncertainty, we address a more fundamental question: can a location-unaware
mobile sensor, recording samples on a directed non-uniform random walk, learn
the statistical distribution (as a function of space) of an underlying random process
(spatial field)? The answer is in the affirmative for Lipschitz continuous fields,
where the accuracy of our distribution-learning method increases with the number
of observed field samples (sampling rate). To validate our distribution-learning
method, we have created a dataset with 43 experimental trials by measuring soundlevel along a fixed path using a location-unaware mobile sound-level meter.

1

Introduction

Learning the statistical distribution of physical fields from observed values is a fundamental task in
applications like environmental monitoring and pollution control. Consider a spatio-temporal process
X(s, t) along a path, such as in a residential neighborhood or a city boulevard, where s denotes the
location and t is the time. It is of interest to the learn the statistical distribution of X(s, t) at any point
s along the path for environment monitoring. Motivated by this application, the distribution-learning
of a Lipschitz continuous spatial field at all locations from spatial samples of its realizations is studied.
In classical environment monitoring done by agencies such as the EPA (http://epa.gov), the sensing
locations are assumed to be known. This is especially true when there is a dedicated fixed sensing
location with associated equipment. Recently, mobile-sensing has been proposed as a way to increase
the spatial sampling density and reduce the cost of hardware Unnikrishnan and Vetterli [2013]. A
key challenge in mobile-sensing is to ascertain the exact location of sampling and it is of interest
to work with location-unaware sensing methods Kumar [2017]. While it is possible to use GPS or
wireless localization methods to estimate the location, it has energy and hardware overhead Che
et al. [2009], Hu and Evans [2004]. We have a more fundamental question: can recently discovered
location-unaware sensing methods be used to learn the statistical distribution of X(s, t) as a function
of s? The answer is yes, and analytical and experimental results along this theme will be presented.
Let X(s, t) be a spatial field where s ∈ P denotes the location and t ∈ R denotes time. The path P
is known, and it can be an open path or a loop. The set P represents the finite path over which the
distribution of X(s, t) has to be learned. It is assumed that |X(s, t)| ≤ b everywhere for a finite b > 0
and the field is Lipschitz continuous; that is, |X(s, t) − X(s0 , t)| ≤ α|s − s0 | for some α > 0. The
unknown sampling locations are modeled using an unknown renewal process (directed non-uniform
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

