Optimal Analysis of Subset-Selection Based `p
Low-Rank Approximation

Hong Wang∗
Princeton University
Hong.Wang1991@gmail.com

Chen Dan
Carnegie Mellon University
cdan@cs.cmu.edu
Hongyang Zhang∗
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
honyanz@ttic.edu

Yuchen Zhou∗
University of Wisconsin, Madison
yuchenzhou@stat.wisc.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the low rank approximation problem of any given matrix A over Rn×m
and Cn×m in entry-wise `p loss, that is, finding a rank-k matrix X such that
kA − Xkp is minimized. Unlike the traditional `2 setting, this particular variant is
NP-Hard. We show that the algorithm of column subset selection, which was an
algorithmic foundation of many existing algorithms, enjoys approximation ratio
(k + 1)1/p for 1 ≤ p ≤ 2 and (k + 1)1−1/p for p ≥ 2. This improves upon the
previous O(k + 1) bound for p ≥ 1 [1]. We complement our analysis with lower
bounds; these bounds match our upper bounds up to constant 1 when p ≥ 2. At the
core of our techniques is an application of Riesz-Thorin interpolation theorem from
harmonic analysis, which might be of independent interest to other algorithmic
designs and analysis more broadly.
As a consequence of our analysis, we provide better approximation guarantees
for several other algorithms with various time complexity. For example, to make
the algorithm of column subset selection computationally efficient, we analyze a
polynomial time bi-criteria algorithm which selects O(k log m) columns. We show
that this algorithm has an approximation ratio of O((k + 1)1/p ) for 1 ≤ p ≤ 2 and
O((k + 1)1−1/p ) for p ≥ 2. This improves over the best-known bound with an
O(k + 1) approximation ratio. Our bi-criteria algorithm also implies an exact-rank
method in polynomial time with a slightly larger approximation ratio.

1

Introduction

Low rank approximation has wide applications in compressed sensing, numerical linear algebra,
machine learning, and many other domains. In compressed sensing, low rank approximation serves
as an indispensable building block for data compression. In numerical linear algebra and machine
learning, low rank approximation is the foundation of many data processing algorithms, such as
PCA. Given a data matrix A ∈ Fn×m , low rank approximation aims at finding a low-rank matrix
∗

Equal Contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

