Efficiently escaping saddle points on manifolds
Chris Criscitiello
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
ccriscitiello6@gmail.com

Nicolas Boumal
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
nboumal@math.princeton.edu

Abstract
Smooth, non-convex optimization problems on Riemannian manifolds occur in machine learning as a result of orthonormality, rank or positivity constraints. First- and
second-order necessary optimality conditions state that the Riemannian gradient
must be zero, and the Riemannian Hessian must be positive semidefinite. Generalizing Jin et al.’s recent work on perturbed gradient descent (PGD) for optimization
on linear spaces [How to Escape Saddle Points Efficiently (2017) [17], Stochastic
Gradient Descent Escapes Saddle Points Efficiently (2019) [18]], we propose a
version of perturbed Riemannian gradient descent (PRGD) to show that necessary
optimality conditions can be met approximately with high probability, without
evaluating the Hessian. Specifically, for an arbitrary Riemannian manifold M of
dimension d, a sufficiently smooth (possibly non-convex) objective function f , and
under weak conditions on the retraction chosen to move on the manifold, with high
probability, our version
p of PRGD produces a point with gradient smaller than ✏
and Hessian within ✏ of being positive semidefinite in O((log d)4 /✏2 ) gradient
queries. This matches the complexity of PGD in the Euclidean case. Crucially, the
dependence on dimension is low. This matters for large-scale applications including PCA and low-rank matrix completion, which both admit natural formulations
on manifolds. The key technical idea is to generalize PRGD with a distinction
between two types of gradient steps: “steps on the manifold” and “perturbed steps
in a tangent space of the manifold.” Ultimately, this distinction makes it possible
to extend Jin et al.’s analysis seamlessly.

1

Introduction

Machine learning has stimulated interest in obtaining global convergence rates in non-convex optimization. Consider a possibly non-convex objective function f : Rd ! R. We want to solve
min f (x).

x2Rd

(1)

This is hard in general. Instead, we usually settle for approximate first-order critical (or stationary)
points where the gradient is small, or second-order critical (or stationary) points where the gradient is
small and the Hessian is nearly positive semidefinite.
One of the simplest algorithms for solving (1) is gradient descent (GD): given x0 , iterate
xt+1 = xt

⌘rf (xt ).

(2)

It is well known that if rf is Lipschitz continuous, with appropriate step-size ⌘, GD converges to
first-order critical points. However, it may take exponential time to reach an approximate secondorder critical point, thus, to escape saddle points [14]. There is an increasing amount of evidence that
saddle points are a serious obstacle to the practical success of local optimization algorithms such as
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

