Making the Cut:
A Bandit-based Approach to Tiered Interviewing
Candice Schumann?
Zhi Lang?
Jeffrey S. Foster†
John P. Dickerson?
?
†
University of Maryland
Tufts University
{schumann,zlang}@cs.umd.edu, jfoster@cs.tufts.edu, john@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Given a huge set of applicants, how should a firm allocate sequential resume
screenings, phone interviews, and in-person site visits? In a tiered interview process,
later stages (e.g., in-person visits) are more informative, but also more expensive
than earlier stages (e.g., resume screenings). Using accepted hiring models and
the concept of structured interviews, a best practice in human resources, we cast
tiered hiring as a combinatorial pure exploration (CPE) problem in the stochastic
multi-armed bandit setting. The goal is to select a subset of arms (in our case,
applicants) with some combinatorial structure. We present new algorithms in both
the probably approximately correct (PAC) and fixed-budget settings that select a
near-optimal cohort with provable guarantees. We show via simulations on real
data from one of the largest US-based computer science graduate programs that
our algorithms make better hiring decisions or use less budget than the status quo.
‘... nothing we do is more important than hiring and developing people. At the end of the
day, you bet on people, not on strategies.” – Lawrence Bossidy, The CEO as Coach (1995)

1

Introduction

Hiring workers is expensive and lengthy. The average cost-per-hire in the United States is $4,129 [Society for Human Resource Management, 2016], and with over five million hires per month on average,
total annual hiring cost in the United States tops hundreds of billions of dollars [United States Bureau
of Labor Statistics, 2018]. In the past decade, the average length of the hiring process has doubled to
nearly one month [Chamberlain, 2017]. At every stage, firms expend resources to learn more about
each applicant’s true quality, and choose to either cut that applicant or continue interviewing with the
intention of offering employment.
In this paper, we address the problem of a firm hiring a cohort of multiple workers, each with
unknown true utility, over multiple stages of structured interviews. We operate under the assumption
that a firm is willing to spend an increasing amount of resources—e.g., money or time—on applicants
as they advance to later stages of interviews. Thus, the firm is motivated to aggressively “pare down”
the applicant pool at every stage, culling low-quality workers so that resources are better spent in
more costly later stages. This concept of tiered hiring can be extended to crowdsourcing or finding a
cohort of trusted workers. At each successive stage, crowdsourced workers are given harder tasks.
Using techniques from the multi-armed bandit (MAB) and submodular optimization literature, we
present two new algorithms—in the probably approximately correct (PAC) (§3) and fixed-budget
settings (§4)—and prove upper bounds that select a near-optimal cohort in this restricted setting. We
explore those bounds in simulation and show that the restricted setting is not necessary in practice
(§5). Then, using real data from admissions to a large US-based computer science Ph.D. program,
we show that our algorithms yield better hiring decisions at equivalent cost to the status quo—or
comparable hiring decisions at lower cost (§5).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

