Adversarial Robustness through Local Linearization

Chongli Qin
DeepMind

James Martens
DeepMind

Krishnamurthy (Dj) Dvijotham
DeepMind

Sven Gowal
DeepMind

Alhussein Fawzi
DeepMind

Soham De
DeepMind

Dilip Krishnan
Google
Robert Stanforth
DeepMind

Pushmeet Kohli
DeepMind
chongliqin@google.com

Abstract
Adversarial training is an effective methodology to train deep neural networks
which are robust against adversarial, norm-bounded perturbations. However, the
computational cost of adversarial training grows prohibitively as the size of the
model and number of input dimensions increase. Further, training against less
expensive and therefore weaker adversaries produces models that are robust against
weak attacks but break down under attacks that are stronger. This is often attributed
to the phenomenon of gradient obfuscation; such models have a highly non-linear
loss surface in the vicinity of training examples, making it hard for gradient-based
attacks to succeed even though adversarial examples still exist. In this work, we
introduce a novel regularizer that encourages the loss to behave linearly in the vicinity of the training data, thereby penalizing gradient obfuscation while encouraging
robustness. We show via extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, that
models trained with our regularizer avoid gradient obfuscation and can be trained
significantly faster than adversarial training. Using this regularizer, we exceed
current state of the art and achieve 47% adversarial accuracy for ImageNet with `∞
adversarial perturbations of radius 4/255 under an untargeted, strong, white-box
attack. Additionally, we match state of the art results for CIFAR-10 at 8/255.

1

Introduction

In a seminal paper, Szegedy et al. [22] demonstrated that neural networks are vulnerable to visually
imperceptible but carefully chosen adversarial perturbations which cause them to output incorrect
predictions. After this revealing study, a flurry of research has been conducted with the focus of
making networks robust against such adversarial perturbations [14, 16, 17, 25]. Concurrently, researchers devised stronger attacks that expose previously unknown vulnerabilities of neural networks
[24, 4, 1, 3].
Of the many approaches proposed [19, 2, 6, 21, 15, 17], adversarial training [14, 16] is empirically
the best performing algorithm to train networks robust to adversarial perturbations. However, the cost
of adversarial training becomes prohibitive with growing model complexity and input dimensionality.
This is primarily due to the cost of computing adversarial perturbations, which is incurred at each step
of adversarial training. In particular, for each new mini-batch one must perform multiple iterations

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

