Cascade RPN: Delving into High-Quality Region
Proposal Network with Adaptive Convolution

Thang Vu,

Hyunjun Jang, Trung X. Pham, Chang D. Yoo
Department of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
{thangvubk,wiseholi,trungpx,cd_yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper considers an architecture referred to as Cascade Region Proposal Network (Cascade RPN) for improving the region-proposal quality and detection
performance by systematically addressing the limitation of the conventional RPN
that heuristically defines the anchors and aligns the features to the anchors. First,
instead of using multiple anchors with predefined scales and aspect ratios, Cascade
RPN relies on a single anchor per location and performs multi-stage refinement.
Each stage is progressively more stringent in defining positive samples by starting
out with an anchor-free metric followed by anchor-based metrics in the ensuing
stages. Second, to attain alignment between the features and the anchors throughout
the stages, adaptive convolution is proposed that takes the anchors in addition to the
image features as its input and learns the sampled features guided by the anchors.
A simple implementation of a two-stage Cascade RPN achieves AR 13.4 points
higher than that of the conventional RPN, surpassing any existing region proposal
methods. When adopting to Fast R-CNN and Faster R-CNN, Cascade RPN can
improve the detection mAP by 3.1 and 3.5 points, respectively. The code is made
publicly available at https://github.com/thangvubk/Cascade-RPN.

1

Introduction

Object detection has received considerable attention in recent years for its applications in autonomous
driving [13, 17], robotics [3, 11] and surveillance [9, 23]. Given an image, object detectors aim to
detect known object instances, each of which is assigned to a bounding box and a class label. Recent
high-performing object detectors, such as Faster R-CNN [34], formulate the detection problem as
a two-stage pipeline. At the first stage, a region proposal network (RPN) produces a sparse set of
proposal boxes by refining and pruning a set of anchors, and at the second stage, a region-wise
CNN detector (R-CNN) refines and classifies the proposals produced by RPN. Compared to R-CNN,
RPN has received relatively less attention for improving its performance. This paper will focus on
improving RPN by addressing its limitations that arise from heuristically defining the anchors and
heuristically aligning the features to the anchors.
An anchor is defined by its scale and aspect ratio, and a set of anchors with different scales and aspect
ratios are required to obtain a sufficient number of positive samples that have high overlap with the
target objects. Setting appropriate scales and aspect ratios is important in achieving high detection
performance, and it requires a fair amount of tuning [25, 34].
An alignment rule is “implicitly” defined to set up a correspondence between the image features
and the reference boxes. The input features of RPN and R-CNN should be well-aligned with the
bounding boxes that are to be regressed. The alignment is guaranteed in R-CNN by the RoIPool [34]
or RoIAlign [18] layer . The alignment in RPN is heuristically guaranteed: the anchor boxes are
uniformly initialized, leveraging the observation that the convolutional kernel of the RPN uniformly
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

