Extreme Classification in Log Memory using
Count-Min Sketch: A Case Study of Amazon Search
with 50M Products
Tharun Medini∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
tharun.medini@rice.edu

Qixuan Huang
Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
qh5@rice.edu

Vijai Mohan
Amazon Search
Palo Alto, CA 94301
vijaim@amazon.com

Yiqiu Wang
Computer Science
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
yiqiuw@mit.edu

Anshumali Shrivastava
Computer Science
Rice University
Houston, TX 77005
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
In the last decade, it has been shown that many hard AI tasks, especially in NLP,
can be naturally modeled as extreme classification problems leading to improved
precision. However, such models are prohibitively expensive to train due to the
memory blow-up in the last layer. For example, a reasonable softmax layer for
the dataset of interest in this paper can easily reach well beyond 100 billion
parameters (> 400 GB memory). To alleviate this problem, we present MergedAverage Classifiers via Hashing (MACH), a generic K-classification algorithm
where memory provably scales at O(log K) without any strong assumption on
the classes. MACH is subtly a count-min sketch structure in disguise, which
uses universal hashing to reduce classification with a large number of classes
to few embarrassingly parallel and independent classification tasks with a small
(constant) number of classes. MACH naturally provides a technique for zero
communication model parallelism. We experiment with 6 datasets; some multiclass
and some multilabel, and show consistent improvement over respective state-ofthe-art baselines. In particular, we train an end-to-end deep classifier on a private
product search dataset sampled from Amazon Search Engine with 70 million
queries and 49.46 million products. MACH outperforms, by a significant margin,
the state-of-the-art extreme classification models deployed on commercial search
engines: Parabel and dense embedding models. Our largest model has 6.4 billion
parameters and trains in less than 35 hours on a single p3.16x machine. Our training
times are 7-10x faster, and our memory footprints are 2-4x smaller than the best
baselines. This training time is also significantly lower than the one reported by
Google’s mixture of experts (MoE) language model on a comparable model size
and hardware.

1

Introduction

The area of extreme classification has gained significant interest in recent years [7, 19, 2]. In the
last decade, it has been shown that many hard AI problems can be naturally modeled as massive
multiclass or multilabel problems leading to a drastic improvement over prior work. For example,
popular NLP models predict the best word, given the full context observed so far. Such models are
becoming the state-of-the-art in machine translation [22], word embeddings [16], question answering,
etc. For a large dataset, the vocabulary size can quickly run into billions [16]. Similarly, Information
∗

Part of this work done while interning at Amazon Search, Palo Alto, CA

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

