Object landmark discovery through unsupervised
adaptation

Enrique Sanchez1
1

Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,2

Samsung AI Centre
Cambridge, UK
{e.lozano, georgios.t}@samsung.com

2

Computer Vision Lab
University of Nottingham, UK
yorgos.tzimiropoulos@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper proposes a method to ease the unsupervised learning of object landmark
detectors. Similarly to previous methods, our approach is fully unsupervised in
a sense that it does not require or make any use of annotated landmarks for the
target object category. Contrary to previous works, we do however assume that
a landmark detector, which has already learned a structured representation for a
given object category in a fully supervised manner, is available. Under this setting,
our main idea boils down to adapting the given pre-trained network to the target
object categories in a fully unsupervised manner. To this end, our method uses the
pre-trained network as a core which remains frozen and does not get updated during
training, and learns, in an unsupervised manner, only a projection matrix to perform
the adaptation to the target categories. By building upon an existing structured
representation learned in a supervised manner, the optimization problem solved by
our method is much more constrained with significantly less parameters to learn
which seems to be important for the case of unsupervised learning. We show that
our method surpasses fully unsupervised techniques trained from scratch as well
as a strong baseline based on fine-tuning, and produces state-of-the-art results on
several datasets. Code can be found at tiny.cc/GitHub-Unsupervised.

1

Introduction

We wish to learn to detect landmarks (also known as keypoints) on examples of a given object
category like human and animal faces and bodies, shoes, cars etc. Landmarks are important in
object shape perception and help establish correspondence across different viewpoints or different
instances of that object category. Landmark detection has been traditionally approached in machine
learning using a fully supervised approach: for each object category, a set of pre-defined landmarks
are manually annotated on (typically) several thousand object images, and then a neural network is
trained to predict these landmarks by minimizing an L2 loss. Thanks to recent advances in training
deep neural nets, supervised methods have been shown to produce good results even for the most
difficult datasets [2, 1, 37, 22]. This paper attempts to address the more challenging setting which
does not assume the existence of manually annotated landmarks (an extremely laborious task), making
our approach effortlessly applicable to any object category.
Unsupervised learning of object landmarks is a challenging learning problem for at least 4 reasons: 1)
Landmarks are by nature ambiguous; there may exist very different landmark configurations even for
simple objects like the human face. 2) Landmarks, although represented by simple x,y coordinates,
convey high-level semantic information about objects parts, which is hard to learn without manual
supervision. 3) Landmarks must be consistently detected across large changes of viewpoints and
appearance. 4) Discovered landmarks must not only be stable with viewpoint change but also fully
capture the shape of deformable objects like for the case of the human face and body.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

