Lookahead Optimizer: k steps forward, 1 step back
Michael R. Zhang, James Lucas, Geoffrey Hinton, Jimmy Ba
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{michael, jlucas, hinton,jba}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
The vast majority of successful deep neural networks are trained using variants of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms. Recent attempts to improve SGD
can be broadly categorized into two approaches: (1) adaptive learning rate schemes,
such as AdaGrad and Adam, and (2) accelerated schemes, such as heavy-ball and
Nesterov momentum. In this paper, we propose a new optimization algorithm,
Lookahead, that is orthogonal to these previous approaches and iteratively updates
two sets of weights. Intuitively, the algorithm chooses a search direction by looking
ahead at the sequence of “fast weights" generated by another optimizer. We
show that Lookahead improves the learning stability and lowers the variance of
its inner optimizer with negligible computation and memory cost. We empirically
demonstrate Lookahead can significantly improve the performance of SGD and
Adam, even with their default hyperparameter settings on ImageNet, CIFAR10/100, neural machine translation, and Penn Treebank.

1

Introduction

Despite their simplicity, SGD-like algorithms remain competitive for neural network training against
advanced second-order optimization methods. Large-scale distributed optimization algorithms
[10, 45] have shown impressive performance in combination with improved learning rate scheduling
schemes [42, 35], yet variants of SGD remain the core algorithm in the distributed systems. The
recent improvements to SGD can be broadly categorized into two approaches: (1) adaptive learning
rate schemes, such as AdaGrad [7] and Adam [18], and (2) accelerated schemes, such as Polyak
heavy-ball [33] and Nesterov momentum [29]. Both approaches make use of the accumulated past
gradient information to achieve faster convergence. However, to obtain their improved performance
in neural networks often requires costly hyperparameter tuning [28].
In this work, we present Lookahead, a new optimization method, that is orthogonal to these previous
approaches. Lookahead first updates the “fast weights” [12] k times using any standard optimizer in
its inner loop before updating the “slow weights” once in the direction of the final fast weights. We
show that this update reduces the variance. We find that Lookahead is less sensitive to suboptimal
hyperparameters and therefore lessens the need for extensive hyperparameter tuning. By using
Lookahead with inner optimizers such as SGD or Adam, we achieve faster convergence across
different deep learning tasks with minimal computational overhead.
Empirically, we evaluate Lookahead by training classifiers on the CIFAR [19] and ImageNet datasets
[5], observing faster convergence on the ResNet-50 and ResNet-152 architectures [11]. We also
trained LSTM language models on the Penn Treebank dataset [24] and Transformer-based [42]
neural machine translation models on the WMT 2014 English-to-German dataset. For all tasks, using
Lookahead leads to improved convergence over the inner optimizer and often improved generalization
performance while being robust to hyperparameter changes. Our experiments demonstrate that
Lookahead is robust to changes in the inner loop optimizer, the number of fast weight updates, and
the slow weights learning rate.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

