Margin-Based Generalization Lower Bounds for
Boosted Classifiers
Allan Grønlund ‡§

Lior Kamma §

Kasper Green Larsen §

Alexander Mathiasen §

Jelani Nelson ∗

Abstract
Boosting is one of the most successful ideas in machine learning. The most wellaccepted explanations for the low generalization error of boosting algorithms such
as AdaBoost stem from margin theory. The study of margins in the context of
boosting algorithms was initiated by Schapire, Freund, Bartlett and Lee (1998) and
has inspired numerous boosting algorithms and generalization bounds. To date,
the strongest known generalization (upper bound) is the kth margin bound of Gao
and Zhou (2013). Despite the numerous generalization upper bounds that have
been proved over the last two decades, nothing is known about the tightness of
these bounds. In this paper, we give the first margin-based lower bounds on the
generalization error of boosted classifiers. Our lower bounds nearly match the kth
margin bound and thus almost settle the generalization performance of boosted
classifiers in terms of margins.

1

Introduction

Boosting algorithms produce highly accurate classifiers by combining several less accurate classifiers
and are amongst the most popular learning algorithms, obtaining state-of-the-art performance on
several benchmark machine learning tasks [KMF+ 17, CG16]. The most famous of these boosting
algorithm is arguably AdaBoost [FS97]. For binary classification, AdaBoost takes a training set
S = h(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xm , ym )i of m labeled samples as input, with xi ∈ X and labels yi ∈ {−1, 1}.
It then produces a classifier f in iterations: in the jth iteration, a base classifier hj : X → {−1, 1}
is trained on a reweighed version of S that emphasizes data points that f struggles P
with and this
classifier is then added to f . The final classifier is obtained by taking the sign of f (x) = j αj hj (x),
where the αj ’s are non-negative coefficients carefully chosen by AdaBoost. The base classifiers hj all
come from a hypothesis set H, e.g. H could be a set of small decision trees or similar. As AdaBoost’s
training progresses, more and more base classifiers are added to f , which in turn causes the training
error of f to decrease. If H is rich enough, AdaBoost will eventually classify all the data points in
the training set correctly [FS97].
Early experiments with AdaBoost report a surprising generalization phenomenon [SFBL98]. Even
after perfectly classifying the entire training set, further iterations keeps improving the test accuracy.
This is contrary to what one would expect, as f gets more complicated with more iterations, and thus
prone to overfitting. The most prominent explanation for this phenomena is margin theory, introduced
by Schapire et al. [SFBL98]. The margin of a training point (xi , yi ) is a number in [−1, 1], which
can be interpreted,
loosely speaking, as the classifier’s confidence on that point. Formally, we say that
P
f (x) = j αj hj (x) is a voting classifier if αj ≥ 0 for all j. Note that one can additionally assume
‡

All authors contributed equally, and are presented in alphabetical order.
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, {jallan,lior.kamma,larsen,alexmath}@cs.au.dk
∗
Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, minilek@berkeley.edu
§

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

