Nonzero-sum Adversarial Hypothesis Testing Games

Sarath Yasodharan
Department of Electrical Communication Engineering
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore 560 012, India
sarath@iisc.ac.in
Patrick Loiseau
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG & MPI-SWS
700 avenue Centrale
Domaine Universitaire
38400 St Martin d’Héres, France
patrick.loiseau@inria.fr

Abstract
We study nonzero-sum hypothesis testing games that arise in the context of adversarial classification, in both the Bayesian as well as the Neyman-Pearson frameworks.
We first show that these games admit mixed strategy Nash equilibria, and then
we examine some interesting concentration phenomena of these equilibria. Our
main results are on the exponential rates of convergence of classification errors
at equilibrium, which are analogous to the well-known Chernoff-Stein lemma
and Chernoff information that describe the error exponents in the classical binary
hypothesis testing problem, but with parameters derived from the adversarial model.
The results are validated through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Classification is a simple but important task that has numerous applications in a variety of domains
such as computer vision or security. A traditional assumption that is used in the design of classification
algorithms is that the input data is generated without knowledge of the classifier being used, hence
the data distribution is independent of the classification algorithm. This assumption is no longer valid
in the presence of an adversary, as an adversarial agent can learn the classifier and deliberately alter
the data such that the classifier makes an error. This is the case in particular in security applications
where the classifier’s goal is to detect the presence of an adversary from the data it observes.
Adversarial classification has been studied in two main settings. The first focuses on adversarial
versions of a standard classification task in machine learning, where the adversary attacks the
classifier (defender/decision maker) by directly choosing vectors from a given set of data vectors;
whereas the second focuses on adversarial hypothesis testing, where the adversary (attacker) gets to
choose a distribution from a set of distributions and independent data samples are generated from
this distribution. The main differences of the latter framework from the former are that: (i) the
adversary only gets to choose a distribution (rather than the actual attack vector) and data is generated
independently from this distribution, and (ii) the defender makes a decision only once after it observes
a whole data sequence instead of making a decision for each individual data sample it receives. Both
of these frameworks have applications in a variety of domains, but prior literature has mainly focused
on the first setting; see Section 1.1 for a description of the related literature.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

