Theoretical Analysis of Adversarial Learning:
A Minimax Approach

1

Zhuozhuo Tu1 , Jingwei Zhang2,1 , Dacheng Tao1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, Hong Kong
zhtu3055@uni.sydney.edu.au, jzhangey@cse.ust.hk, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a general theoretical method for analyzing the risk
bound in the presence of adversaries. Specifically, we try to fit the adversarial
learning problem into the minimax framework. We first show that the original
adversarial learning problem can be transformed into a minimax statistical learning
problem by introducing a transport map between distributions. Then, we prove
a new risk bound for this minimax problem in terms of covering numbers under
a weak version of Lipschitz condition. Our method can be applied to multi-class
classification and popular loss functions including the hinge loss and ramp loss. As
some illustrative examples, we derive the adversarial risk bounds for SVMs and
deep neural networks, and our bounds have two data-dependent terms, which can
be optimized for achieving adversarial robustness.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models, especially deep neural networks, have achieved impressive performance
across a variety of domains including image classification, natural language processing, and speech
recognition. However, these techniques can easily be fooled by adversarial examples, i.e., carefully
perturbed input samples aimed to cause misclassification during the test phase. This phenomenon was
first studied in spam filtering [14, 31, 32] and has attracted considerable attention since 2014, when
Szegedy et al. [42] noticed that small perturbations in images can cause misclassification in neural
network classifiers. Since then, there has been considerable focus on developing adversarial attacks
against machine learning algorithms [21, 9, 8, 4, 44], and, in response, many defense mechanisms
have also been proposed to counter these attacks [22, 20, 15, 41, 33]. These works focus on creating
optimization-based robust algorithms, but their generalization performance under adversarial input
perturbations is still not fully understood.
Schmidt et al. [38] recently discussed the generalization problem in the adversarial setting and
showed that the sample complexity of√learning a specific distribution in the presence of l∞ -bounded
adversaries increases by an order of d for all classifiers. The same paper recognized that deriving
the agnostic-distribution generalization bound remained an open problem [38]. In a subsequent
study, Cullina et al. [13] extended the standard PAC-learning framework to the adversarial setting by
defining a corrupted hypothesis class and showed that the VC dimension of this corrupted hypothesis
class for halfspace classifiers which controlled the sample complexity does not increase in the
presence of an adversary. While their work provided a theoretical understanding of the problem of
learning with adversaries, it had two limitations. First, their results could only be applied to binary
problems, whereas in practice we usually need to handle multi-class problems. Second, the 0-1 loss
function used in their work is not convex and thus very hard to optimize.
In this paper, we propose a general theoretical method for analyzing generalization performance in
the presence of adversaries. In particular, we fit the adversarial learning problem into the minimax
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

