A General Framework for Symmetric Property
Estimation
Moses Charikar
Stanford University
moses@cs.stanford.edu

Kirankumar Shiragur
Stanford University
shiragur@stanford.edu

Aaron Sidford
Stanford University
sidford@stanford.edu

Abstract
In this paper we provide a general framework for estimating symmetric properties
of distributions from i.i.d. samples. For a broad class of symmetric properties we
identify the easy region where empirical estimation works and the difficult region
where more complex estimators are required. We show that by approximately
computing the profile maximum likelihood (PML) distribution [ADOS16] in this
difficult region we obtain a symmetric property estimation framework that is
sample complexity optimal for many properties in a broader parameter regime than
previous universal estimation approaches based on PML. The resulting algorithms
based on these pseudo PML distributions are also more practical.

1

Introduction

Symmetric property estimation is a fundamental and well studied problem in machine learning
and statistics. In this problem, we are given n i.i.d samples from an unknown distribution1 p and
asked to estimate f(p), where f is a symmetric property (i.e. it does not depend on the labels of the
symbols). Over the past few years, the computational and sample complexities for estimating many
symmetric properties have been extensively studied. Estimators with optimal sample complexities
have been obtained for several properties including entropy [VV11b, WY16a, JVHW15], distance to
uniformity [VV11a, JHW16], and support [VV11b, WY15].
All aforementioned estimators were property specific and therefore, a natural question is to design
a universal estimator. In [ADOS16], the authors showed that the distribution that maximizes the
profile likelihood, i.e. the likelihood of the multiset of frequencies of elements in the sample, referred
to as profile maximum likelihood (PML) distribution, can be used as a universal plug-in estimator.
[ADOS16] showed that computing the symmetric property on the PML distribution is sample
complexity optimal in estimating support, support coverage, entropy and distance to uniformity
1
within accuracy ✏ > n0.2499
. Further, this also holds for distributions that approximately optimize the
PML objective with the approximation factor affecting the values of ✏ for which it holds.
Acharya et al. [ADOS16] posed two important and natural open questions. The first was to give
an efficient algorithm for finding an approximate PML distribution, which was recently resolved
in [CSS19]. The second open question is whether PML is sample competitive in all regimes of the
accuracy parameter ✏? In this work, we make progress towards resolving this open question.
Firstly, we show that the PML distribution based plug-in estimator achieves optimal sample complexity for all ✏ for the problem of estimating support size. Next, we introduce a variation of the PML
distribution that we call the pseudo PML distribution. Using this, we give a general framework for
estimating a symmetric property. For entropy and distance to uniformity, this pseudo PML based
framework achieves optimal sample complexity for a broader regime of the accuracy parameter than
was known for the vanilla PML distribution.
1

Throughout the paper, distribution refers to discrete distribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

