Push-pull Feedback Implements Hierarchical
Information Retrieval Efficiently

Xiao Liu1
Yuanyuan Mi4

1

Xiaolong Zou1

Zilong Ji2

Tiejun Huang1

Gengshuo Tian3
K. Y. Michael Wong5

Si Wu1
School of Electronics Engineering & Computer Science, IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Peking University, Beijing, China.
2
State Key Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience and Learning, Beijing Normal University, China.
3
Department of Mathematics, Beijing Normal University, China.
4
Center for Neurointelligence, Chongqing University, China.
5
Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, China.
{xiaoliu23,xiaolz,tjhuang,siwu}@pku.edu.cn,
jizilong@mail.bnu.edu.cn, gengshuo_tian@163.com,
miyuanyuan0102@cqu.edu.cn, phkywong@ust.hk

Abstract
Experimental data has revealed that in addition to feedforward connections, there
exist abundant feedback connections in a neural pathway. Although the importance of feedback in neural information processing has been widely recognized
in the field, the detailed mechanism of how it works remains largely unknown.
Here, we investigate the role of feedback in hierarchical information retrieval.
Specifically, we consider a hierarchical network storing the hierarchical categorical
information of objects, and information retrieval goes from rough to fine, aided
by dynamical push-pull feedback from higher to lower layers. We elucidate that
the push (positive) and pull (negative) feedbacks suppress the interferences due to
neural correlations between different and the same categories, respectively, and
their joint effect improves retrieval performance significantly. Our model agrees
with the push-pull phenomenon observed in neural data and sheds light on our
understanding of the role of feedback in neural information processing.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), which mimic hierarchical information processing in the ventral visual
pathway, have achieved great success in object recognition [15]. The structure of DNNs mainly
contains feedforward connections from lower to higher layers. The experimental data, however, has
revealed that there also exist abundant feedback connections from higher to lower layers, whose
number is even larger than that of feedforward ones [23]. It has been widely suggested that these
feedback connections play an important role in visual information processing. For instance, the
theory of analysis-by-synthesis proposes that the feedback connections, in coordination with the
feedforward ones, enable the neural system to recognize an object in an interactive manner [16], that
is, the feedforward pathway extracts the object information from external inputs, while the feedback
pathway generates hypotheses about the object; and the interaction between the two pathways
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

