Generating Diverse High-Fidelity Images
with VQ-VAE-2
Ali Razavi∗
DeepMind
alirazavi@google.com

Aäron van den Oord∗
DeepMind
avdnoord@google.com

Oriol Vinyals
DeepMind
vinyals@google.com

Abstract
We explore the use of Vector Quantized Variational AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE)
models for large scale image generation. To this end, we scale and enhance the
autoregressive priors used in VQ-VAE to generate synthetic samples of much higher
coherence and fidelity than possible before. We use simple feed-forward encoder
and decoder networks, making our model an attractive candidate for applications
where the encoding and/or decoding speed is critical. Additionally, VQ-VAE
requires sampling an autoregressive model only in the compressed latent space,
which is an order of magnitude faster than sampling in the pixel space, especially
for large images. We demonstrate that a multi-scale hierarchical organization of
VQ-VAE, augmented with powerful priors over the latent codes, is able to generate
samples with quality that rivals that of state of the art Generative Adversarial
Networks on multifaceted datasets such as ImageNet, while not suffering from
GAN’s known shortcomings such as mode collapse and lack of diversity.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models have significantly improved in the past few years [5, 27, 25]. This is, in part,
thanks to architectural innovations as well as computation advances that allows training them at larger
scale in both amount of data and model size. The samples generated from these models are hard to
distinguish from real data without close inspection, and their applications range from super resolution
[21] to domain editing [44], artistic manipulation [36], or text-to-speech and music generation [25].

Figure 1: Class-conditional 256x256 image samples from a two-level model trained on ImageNet.
We distinguish two main types of generative models: likelihood based models, which include VAEs
[16, 31], flow based [9, 30, 10, 17] and autoregressive models [20, 39]; and implicit generative
∗

Equal contributions.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

