Efficient Neural Architecture Transformation Search
in Channel-Level for Object Detection

Junran Peng1,2,3

Ming Sun2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3∗ Tieniu Tan1,3 Junjie Yan2
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
SenseTime Group Limited
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA

Abstract
Recently, Neural Architecture Search has achieved great success in large-scale
image classification. In contrast, there have been limited works focusing on architecture search for object detection, mainly because the costly ImageNet pretraining
is always required for detectors. Training from scratch, as a substitute, demands
more epochs to converge and brings no computation saving. To overcome this
obstacle, we introduce a practical neural architecture transformation search(NATS)
algorithm for object detection in this paper. Instead of searching and constructing
an entire network, NATS explores the architecture space on the base of existing
network and reusing its weights. We propose a novel neural architecture search
strategy in channel-level instead of path-level and devise a search space specially
targeting at object detection. With the combination of these two designs, an architecture transformation scheme could be discovered to adapt a network designed for
image classification to task of object detection. Since our method is gradient-based
and only searches for a transformation scheme, the weights of models pretrained in
ImageNet could be utilized in both searching and retraining stage, which makes the
whole process very efficient. The transformed network requires no extra parameters
and FLOPs, and is friendly to hardware optimization, which is practical to use in
real-time application. In experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of NATS
on networks like ResNet and ResNeXt. Our transformed networks, combined with
various detection frameworks, achieve significant improvements on the COCO
dataset while keeping fast.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks have achieved significant success in recent years. With the development of better optimization and normalization methods [29, 13], many remarkable network
architectures [16, 36, 38, 8, 12, 11, 35, 40, 42] have been designed for image classification based
on hand-crafted heuristics. More recently, great efforts have been taken in neural architecture
search(NAS) that automates the architecture design process, and noticeable results that surpass
human-designed architectures have been reported in image classification [45, 46, 21, 32, 30, 24, 3].
However, there has been little works that studies NAS on backbone for object detection, mainly for
two reasons: The finetuning of backbone is always necessary for detectors to converge or achieve a
high performance in short time, otherwise detectors are required to be trained for much more epochs
with GN [39] to reach a comparative performance according to [10]. Thus it is inefficient to directly
conduct neural architecture search on object detection. Besides, the essential gap between image
classification and object detection is non-negligible. The experience of NAS in image classification
does not suffice for NAS in object detection, that the searching space may need to be re-defined.
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

