Machine Learning Estimation of Heterogeneous
Treatment Effects with Instruments
Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Victor Lei
TripAdvisor
vlei@tripadvisor.com

Maggie Hei
Microsoft Research
Maggie.Hei@microsoft.com

Keith Battocchi
Microsoft Research
kebatt@microsoft.com

Miruna Oprescu
Microsoft Research
moprescu@microsoft.com
Greg Lewis
Microsoft Research
glewis@microsoft.com

Abstract
We consider the estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects with arbitrary machine learning methods in the presence of unobserved confounders with the aid of
a valid instrument. Such settings arise in A/B tests with an intent-to-treat structure,
where the experimenter randomizes over which user will receive a recommendation
to take an action, and we are interested in the effect of the downstream action. We
develop a statistical learning approach to the estimation of heterogeneous effects,
reducing the problem to the minimization of an appropriate loss function that
depends on a set of auxiliary models (each corresponding to a separate prediction
task). The reduction enables the use of all recent algorithmic advances (e.g. neural
nets, forests). We show that the estimated effect model is robust to estimation errors
in the auxiliary models, by showing that the loss satisfies a Neyman orthogonality
criterion. Our approach can be used to estimate projections of the true effect model
on simpler hypothesis spaces. When these spaces are parametric, then the parameter estimates are asymptotically normal, which enables construction of confidence
sets. We applied our method to estimate the effect of membership on downstream
webpage engagement on TripAdvisor, using as an instrument an intent-to-treat
A/B test among 4 million TripAdvisor users, where some users received an easier
membership sign-up process. We also validate our method on synthetic data and
on public datasets for the effects of schooling on income.1

1

Introduction

A/B testing is the gold standard of causal inference. But even when A/B testing is feasible, estimating
the effect of a treatment on an outcome might not be a straightforward task. One major difficulty is
non-compliance: even if we randomize what treatment to recommend to a subject, the subject might
not comply with the recommendation due to unobserved factors and follow the alternate action. The
impact that unobserved factors might have on the measured outcome is a source of endogeneity and
can lead to biased estimates of the effect. This problem arises in large scale data problems in the
digital economy; when optimizing a digital service, we might often want to estimate the effect of
some action taken by our users on downstream metrics. However, the service cannot force users to
comply, but can only find means of incentivizing or recommending the action. The unobserved factors
of compliance can lead to biased estimates if we consider the takers and not takers as exogenously
1

Prototype code for all the algorithms presented and the synthetic data experimental study can be found at
https://github.com/Microsoft/EconML/tree/master/prototypes/dml_iv.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

