Random Tessellation Forests
Shufei Ge1
shufei_ge@sfu.ca

Shijia Wang2,1
shijia_wang@sfu.ca

Liangliang Wang1
liangliang_wang@sfu.ca

Yee Whye Teh3
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk

Lloyd T. Elliott1
lloyd_elliott@sfu.ca

1

2

Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
School of Statistics and Data Science, LPMC & KLMDASR, Nankai University, China
3
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK

Abstract
Space partitioning methods such as random forests and the Mondrian process are
powerful machine learning methods for multi-dimensional and relational data, and
are based on recursively cutting a domain. The flexibility of these methods is
often limited by the requirement that the cuts be axis aligned. The Ostomachion
process and the self-consistent binary space partitioning-tree process were recently
introduced as generalizations of the Mondrian process for space partitioning with
non-axis aligned cuts in the two dimensional plane. Motivated by the need for a
multi-dimensional partitioning tree with non-axis aligned cuts, we propose the Random Tessellation Process (RTP), a framework that includes the Mondrian process
and the binary space partitioning-tree process as special cases. We derive a sequential Monte Carlo algorithm for inference, and provide random forest methods. Our
process is self-consistent and can relax axis-aligned constraints, allowing complex
inter-dimensional dependence to be captured. We present a simulation study, and
analyse gene expression data of brain tissue, showing improved accuracies over
other methods.

1

Introduction

Bayesian nonparametric models provide flexible and accurate priors by allowing the dimensionality
of the parameter space to scale with dataset sizes [12]. The Mondrian process (MP) is a Bayesian
nonparametric prior for space partitioning and provides a Bayesian view of decision trees and random
forests [29, 19]. Inference for the MP is conducted by recursive and random axis-aligned cuts in the
domain of the observed data, partitioning the space into a hierarchical tree of hyper-rectangles.
The MP is appropriate for multi-dimensional data, and it is self-consistent (i.e., it is a projective
distribution), meaning that the prior distribution it induces on a subset of a domain is equal to the
marginalisation of the prior over the complement of that subset. Self-consistency is required in
Bayesian nonparametric models in order to insure correct inference, and prevent any bias arising
from sampling and sample population size. Recent advances in MP methods for Bayesian nonparametric space partitioning include online methods [21], and particle Gibbs inference for MP additive
regression trees [22]. These methods achieve high predictive accuracy, with improved efficiency.
However, the axis-aligned nature of the decision boundaries of the MP restricts its flexibility, which
could lead to failure in capturing inter-dimensional dependencies in the domain.
Recently, advances in Bayesian nonparametrics have been developed to allow more flexible non-axis
aligned partitioning. The Ostomachion process (OP) was introduced to generalise the MP and allow
non-axis aligned cuts. The OP is defined for two dimensional data domains [11]. In the OP, the angle
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

