FreeAnchor: Learning to Match Anchors for Visual
Object Detection

Xiaosong Zhang1 , Fang Wan1 , Chang Liu1 , Rongrong Ji2 , Qixiang Ye1,3∗
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
zhangxiaosong18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Modern CNN-based object detectors assign anchors for ground-truth objects under
the restriction of object-anchor Intersection-over-Unit (IoU). In this study, we
propose a learning-to-match approach to break IoU restriction, allowing objects
to match anchors in a flexible manner. Our approach, referred to as FreeAnchor,
updates hand-crafted anchor assignment to “free" anchor matching by formulating
detector training as a maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) procedure. FreeAnchor targets at learning features which best explain a class of objects in terms of
both classification and localization. FreeAnchor is implemented by optimizing
detection customized likelihood and can be fused with CNN-based detectors in
a plug-and-play manner. Experiments on COCO demonstrate that FreeAnchor
consistently outperforms the counterparts with significant margins1 .

1

Introduction

Over the past few years we have witnessed the success of convolution neural network (CNN) for
visual object detection [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. To represent objects with various appearance, aspect ratios,
and spatial layouts with limited convolution features, most CNN-based detectors leverage anchor
boxes at multiple scales and aspect ratios as reference points for object localization [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. By
assigning each object to a single or multiple anchors, features can be determined and two fundamental
procedures, classification and localization (i.e., bounding box regression), are carried out.
Anchor-based detectors leverage spatial alignment, i.e., Intersection over Unit (IoU) between objects
and anchors, as the criterion for anchor assignment. Each assigned anchor independently supervises
network learning for object prediction, based upon the intuition that the anchors aligned with object
bounding boxes are most appropriate for object classification and localization. However, we argue
that such intuition is implausible and the hand-crafted IoU criterion is not the best choice.
On the one hand, for objects of acentric features, e.g., slender objects, the most representative
features are not close to object centers. A spatially aligned anchor might correspond to fewer
representative features, which deteriorate classification and localization capabilities. On the other
hand, it is infeasible to match proper anchors/features for objects using IoU when multiple objects
come together.
It is hard to design a generic rule which can optimally match anchors/features with objects of various
geometric layouts. The widely used hand-crafted assignment could fail when facing acentric, slender,
and/or crowded objects. A learning-based approach requires to be explored to solve this problem in a
systematic way, which is the focus of this study.
*Corresponding Author.
1
Code is available at https://github.com/zhangxiaosong18/FreeAnchor
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

