Shape and Time Distortion Loss for Training Deep
Time Series Forecasting Models

Vincent Le Guen 1,2
vincent.le-guen@edf.fr

Nicolas Thome 2
nicolas.thome@cnam.fr

(1) EDF R&D
6 quai Watier, 78401 Chatou, France
(2) CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers
292 rue Saint-Martin, 75003 Paris, France

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of time series forecasting for non-stationary
signals and multiple future steps prediction. To handle this challenging task, we
introduce DILATE (DIstortion Loss including shApe and TimE), a new objective
function for training deep neural networks. DILATE aims at accurately predicting
sudden changes, and explicitly incorporates two terms supporting precise shape
and temporal change detection. We introduce a differentiable loss function suitable
for training deep neural nets, and provide a custom back-prop implementation for
speeding up optimization. We also introduce a variant of DILATE, which provides
a smooth generalization of temporally-constrained Dynamic Time Warping (DTW).
Experiments carried out on various non-stationary datasets reveal the very good
behaviour of DILATE compared to models trained with the standard Mean Squared
Error (MSE) loss function, and also to DTW and variants. DILATE is also agnostic
to the choice of the model, and we highlight its benefit for training fully connected
networks as well as specialized recurrent architectures, showing its capacity to
improve over state-of-the-art trajectory forecasting approaches.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting [6] consists in analyzing the dynamics and correlations between historical data
for predicting future behavior. In one-step prediction problems [39, 30], future prediction reduces to
a single scalar value. This is in sharp contrast with multi-step time series prediction [49, 2, 48], which
consists in predicting a complete trajectory of future data at a rather long temporal extent. Multi-step
forecasting thus requires to accurately describe time series evolution.
This work focuses on multi-step forecasting problems for non-stationary signals, i.e. when future data
cannot only be inferred from the past periodicity, and when abrupt changes of regime can occur. This
includes important and diverse application fields, e.g. regulating electricity consumption [63, 36],
predicting sharp discontinuities in renewable energy production [23] or in traffic flow [35, 34],
electrocardiogram (ECG) analysis [9], stock markets prediction [14], etc.
Deep learning is an appealing solution for this multi-step and non-stationary prediction problem,
due to the ability of deep neural networks to model complex nonlinear time dependencies. Many
approaches have recently been proposed, mostly relying on the design of specific one-step ahead
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

