In-Place Zero-Space Memory Protection for CNN

Hui Guan1 , Lin Ning1 , Zhen Lin1 , Xipeng Shen1 , Huiyang Zhou1 , Seung-Hwan Lim2
1
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695
2
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831
{hguan2, lning, zlin4, xshen5, hzhou}@ncsu.edu, lims1@ornl.gov

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are being actively explored for safetycritical applications such as autonomous vehicles and aerospace, where it is essential to ensure the reliability of inference results in the presence of possible memory
faults. Traditional methods such as error correction codes (ECC) and Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR) are CNN-oblivious and incur substantial memory overhead
and energy cost. This paper introduces in-place zero-space ECC assisted with
a new training scheme weight distribution-oriented training. The new method
provides the first known zero space cost memory protection for CNNs without
compromising the reliability offered by traditional ECC.

1

Introduction

As CNNs are increasingly explored for safety-critical applications such as autonomous vehicles and
aerospace, reliability of CNN inference is becoming an important concern. A key threat is memory
faults (e.g., bit flips in memory), which may result from environment perturbations, temperature
variations, voltage scaling, manufacturing defects, wear-out, and radiation-induced soft errors. These
faults change the stored data (e.g., CNN parameters), which may cause large deviations of the
inference results [13, 19, 20]. In this work, fault rate is defined as the ratio between the number of bit
flips experienced before correction is applied and the total number of bits.
Existing solutions have resorted to general memory fault protection mechanisms, such as Error
Correction Codes (ECC) hardware [24], spatial redundancy, and radiation hardening [28]. Being
CNN-oblivious, these protections incur large costs. ECC, for instance, uses eight extra bits in
protecting 64-bit memory; spatial redundancy requires at least two copies of CNN parameters to
correct one error (called Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR) [14]); radiation hardening is subject to
substantial area overhead and hardware cost. The spatial, energy, and hardware costs are especially
concerning for safety-critical CNN inferences; as they often execute on resource-constrained (mobile)
devices, the costs worsen the limit on model size and capacity, and increase the cost of the overall AI
solution.
To address the fundamental tension between the needs for reliability and the needs for
space/energy/cost efficiency, this work proposes the first zero space cost memory protection for
CNNs. The design capitalizes on the opportunities brought by the distinctive properties of CNNs.
It further amplifies the opportunities by introducing a novel training scheme, Weight DistributionOriented Training (WOT), to regularize the weight distributions of CNNs such that they become more
amenable for zero-space protection. It then introduces a novel protection method, in-place zero-space
ECC, which removes all space cost of ECC protection while preserving protection guarantees.
Experiments on VGG16, ResNet18, and SqueezeNet validate the effectiveness of the proposed
solution. Across all tested scenarios, the method provides protections consistently comparable to
those offered by existing hardware ECC logic, while removing all space costs. It hence offers a
promising replacement of existing protection schemes for CNNs.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

