Semantic Conditioned Dynamic Modulation
for Temporal Sentence Grounding in Videos

Yitian Yuan∗
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute
Tsinghua University
yyt18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Jingwen Wang
Tencent AI Lab
jaywongjaywong@gmail.com

Lin Ma
Tencent AI Lab
forest.linma@gmail.com

Wei Liu
Tencent AI Lab
wl2223@columbia.edu

Wenwu Zhu
Tsinghua University
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal sentence grounding in videos aims to detect and localize one target video
segment, which semantically corresponds to a given sentence. Existing methods
mainly tackle this task via matching and aligning semantics between a sentence and
candidate video segments, while neglect the fact that the sentence information plays
an important role in temporally correlating and composing the described contents in
videos. In this paper, we propose a novel semantic conditioned dynamic modulation
(SCDM) mechanism, which relies on the sentence semantics to modulate the
temporal convolution operations for better correlating and composing the sentencerelated video contents over time. More importantly, the proposed SCDM performs
dynamically with respect to the diverse video contents so as to establish a more
precise matching relationship between sentence and video, thereby improving
the temporal grounding accuracy. Extensive experiments on three public datasets
demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms the state-of-the-arts with clear
margins, illustrating the ability of SCDM to better associate and localize relevant
video contents for temporal sentence grounding. Our code for this paper is available
at https://github.com/yytzsy/SCDM .

1

Introduction

Detecting or localizing activities in videos [18, 30, 26, 34, 11, 29, 21, 9, 8] is a prominent while
fundamental problem for video understanding. As videos often contain intricate activities that cannot
be indicated by a predefined list of action classes, a new task, namely temporal sentence grounding
in videos (TSG) [14, 10], has recently attracted much research attention [2, 36, 3, 19, 4, 5, 35].
Formally, given an untrimmed video and a natural sentence query, the task aims to identify the start
and end timestamps of one specific video segment, which contains activities of interest semantically
corresponding to the given sentence query.
Most of existing approaches [10, 14, 19, 4] for the TSG task often sample candidate video segments
first, then fuse the sentence and video segment representations together, and thereby evaluate their
matching relationships based on the fused features. Lately, some approaches [2, 36] try to directly
fuse the sentence information with each video clip, then employ an LSTM or a ConvNet to compose
the fused features over time, and thus predict the temporal boundaries of the target video segment.
While promising results have been achieved, there are still several problems that need to be concerned.
∗

This work was done while Yitian Yuan was a Research Intern at Tencent AI Lab.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

