vGraph: A Generative Model for Joint Community
Detection and Node Representation Learning

Fan-Yun Sun1,2 , Meng Qu2 , Jordan Hoffmann2,3 , Chin-Wei Huang2,4 , Jian Tang2,5,6
1
National Taiwan University,
2
Mila-Quebec Institute for Learning Algorithms, Canada
3
Harvard University, USA
4
Element AI, Canada
5
HEC Montreal, Canada
6
CIFAR AI Research Chair
b04902045@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper focuses on two fundamental tasks of graph analysis: community detection and node representation learning, which capture the global and local structures
of graphs, respectively. In the current literature, these two tasks are usually independently studied while they are actually highly correlated. We propose a
probabilistic generative model called vGraph to learn community membership and
node representation collaboratively. Specifically, we assume that each node can
be represented as a mixture of communities, and each community is defined as a
multinomial distribution over nodes. Both the mixing coefficients and the community distribution are parameterized by the low-dimensional representations of the
nodes and communities. We designed an effective variational inference algorithm
which regularizes the community membership of neighboring nodes to be similar
in the latent space. Experimental results on multiple real-world graphs show that
vGraph is very effective in both community detection and node representation
learning, outperforming many competitive baselines in both tasks. We show that
the framework of vGraph is quite flexible and can be easily extended to detect
hierarchical communities.

1

Introduction

Graphs, or networks, are a general and flexible data structure to encode complex relationships among
objects. Examples of real-world graphs include social networks, airline networks, protein-protein
interaction networks, and traffic networks. Recently, there has been increasing interest from both
academic and industrial communities in analyzing graphical data. Examples span a variety of domains
and applications such as node classification [3, 26] and link prediction [8, 32] in social networks, role
prediction in protein-protein interaction networks [16], and prediction of information diffusion in
social and citation networks [22].
One fundamental task of graph analysis is community detection, which aims to cluster nodes into
multiple groups called communities. Each community is a set of nodes that are more closely
connected to each other than to nodes in different communities. A community level description is
able to capture important information about a graph’s global structure. Such a description is useful
in many real-world applications, such as identifying users with similar interests in social networks
[22] or proteins with similar functionality in biochemical networks [16]. Community detection has
been extensively studied in the literature, and a number of methods have been proposed, including
algorithmic approaches [1, 5] and probabilistic models [10, 20, 36, 37]. A classical approach to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

