Nonparametric Contextual Bandits
in an Unknown Metric Space

Nirandika Wanigasekara
Computer Science
National University of Singapore
nirandiw@comp.nus.edu.sg

Christina Lee Yu
Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell University
cleeyu@cornell.edu

Abstract
Consider a nonparametric contextual multi-arm bandit problem where each arm
a ∈ [K] is associated to a nonparametric reward function fa : [0, 1] → R mapping
from contexts to the expected reward. Suppose that there is a large set of arms,
yet there is a simple but unknown structure amongst the arm reward functions,
e.g. finite types or smooth with respect to an unknown metric space. We present a
novel algorithm which learns data-driven similarities amongst the arms, in order
to implement adaptive partitioning of the context-arm space for more efficient
learning. We provide regret bounds along with simulations that highlight the
algorithm’s dependence on the local geometry of the reward functions.

1

Introduction

Contextual multi-arm bandits have been used to model the task of sequential decision making in
which the rewards of different decisions must be learned over trial via trial-and-error. The decision
maker receives reward for each of the arms (i.e. actions or options) she chooses across the time
horizon T . In each trial t, the decision maker observes the context xt , which represents the set of
observable factors of the environment that could impact the performance of the action she chooses.
The decision maker must select an action based on the context and all past observations. Upon
choosing action a ∈ [K], she observes a reward, which is assumed to be a stochastic observation of
fa (x), the expected reward of action a at context x. In each trial, she faces the dilemma of whether
to choose an action in order to learn about its performance (i.e. exploration), or to choose an action
that she believes will perform well as estimated from the limited previous data (i.e. exploitation).
Consider a setting when the number of actions is very large, e.g. there is a large number of users
and products on an e-commerce platform such that fully exploring the entire space of possible
recommendations is costly. It is often the case that there is additional structure amongst the large
space of actions, which the algorithm could exploit to learn more efficiently. In real-world applications
however, this additional structure is often unknown a priori and must be learned from the data, which
itself could be costly as well. It becomes important to understand the tradeoff and costs of learning
relationships amongst the arm from data over the course of the contextual bandit time horizon. We
consider a stochastic nonparametric contextual bandit setting in which the algorithm is not given
any information a priori about the relationship between the actions. The key question is: Can an
algorithm exploit hidden structure in a nonparametric contextual bandit problem with no a priori
knowledge of the underlying metric?
Contributions To our knowledge, we propose the first nonparametric contextual multi-arm bandit
algorithm that incorporates latent arm similarities in a setting where no a priori information about
the features or metric amongst the arms is given to the algorithm. The algorithm can learn more
efficiently by sharing data across similar arms, but the tradeoff between the cost of estimating arm
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

