Tight Sample Complexity of Learning
One-hidden-layer Convolutional Neural Networks

Yuan Cao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
yuancao@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of learning one-hidden-layer convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) with non-overlapping filters. We propose a novel algorithm
called approximate gradient descent for training CNNs, and show that, with high
probability, the proposed algorithm with random initialization grants a linear convergence to the ground-truth parameters up to statistical precision. Compared with
existing work, our result applies to general non-trivial, monotonic and Lipschitz
continuous activation functions including ReLU, Leaky ReLU, Sigmod and Softplus etc. Moreover, our sample complexity beats existing results in the dependency
of the number of hidden nodes and filter size. In fact, our result matches the
information-theoretic lower bound for learning one-hidden-layer CNNs with linear
activation functions, suggesting that our sample complexity is tight. Our theoretical
analysis is backed up by numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is one of the key research areas in modern artificial intelligence. Deep neural networks
have been successfully applied to various fields including image processing [25], speech recognition
[20] and reinforcement learning [33]. Despite the remarkable success in a broad range of applications,
theoretical understandings of neural network models remain largely incomplete: the high nonconvexity of neural networks makes convergence analysis of learning algorithms very difficult;
numerous practically successful choices of the activation function, twists of the training process and
variants of the network structure make neural networks even more mysterious.
One of the fundamental problems in learning neural networks is parameter recovery, where we
assume the data are generated from a “teacher” network, and the task is to estimate the groundtruth parameters of the teacher network based on the generated data. Recently, a line of research
[41, 16, 38] gives parameter recovery guarantees for gradient descent based on the analysis of local
convexity and smoothness properties of the square loss function. The results of Zhong et al. [41] and
Fu et al. [16] hold for various activation functions except ReLU activation function, while Zhang et al.
[38] prove the corresponding result for ReLU. Their results are for fully connected neural networks
and their analysis requires accurate knowledge of second-layer parameters. For instance, Fu et al.
[16] and Zhang et al. [38] directly assume that the second-layer parameters are known, while Zhong
et al. [41] reduce the second-layer parameters to be ±1’s with the homogeneity assumption, and
then exactly recovers them with a tensor initialization algorithm. Moreover, it may not be easy to
generalize the local convexity and smoothness argument to other algorithms that are not based on the
exact gradient of the loss function. Another line of research [6, 13, 18, 10] focuses on convolutional
neural networks with ReLU activation functions. Brutzkus and Globerson [6], Du et al. [13] provide
convergence analysis for gradient descent on parameters of both layers, while Goel et al. [18], Du
and Goel [10] proposed new algorithms to learn single-hidden-layer CNNs. However, these results
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

