Direct Optimization through arg max for Discrete
Variational Auto-Encoder
Guy Lorberbom
Technion

Andreea Gane
MIT

Tommi Jaakkola
MIT

Tamir Hazan
Technion

Abstract
Reparameterization of variational auto-encoders with continuous random variables
is an effective method for reducing the variance of their gradient estimates. In the
discrete case, one can perform reparametrization using the Gumbel-Max trick, but
the resulting objective relies on an arg max operation and is non-differentiable. In
contrast to previous works which resort to softmax-based relaxations, we propose to
optimize it directly by applying the direct loss minimization approach. Our proposal
extends naturally to structured discrete latent variable models when evaluating
the arg max operation is tractable. We demonstrate empirically the effectiveness
of the direct loss minimization technique in variational autoencoders with both
unstructured and structured discrete latent variables.

1

Introduction

Models with discrete latent variables drive extensive research in machine learning applications,
including language classification and generation [42, 11, 34], molecular synthesis [19], or game
solving [25]. Compared to their continuous counterparts, discrete latent variable models can decrease
the computational complexity of inference calculations, for instance, by discarding alternatives in
hard attention models [21], they can improve interpretability by illustrating which terms contributed
to the solution [27, 42], and they can facilitate the encoding of inductive biases in the learning process,
such as images consisting of a small number of objects [8] or tasks requiring intermediate alignments
[25]. Finally, in some cases, discrete latent variables are natural choices, for instance when modeling
datasets with discrete classes [32, 12, 23].
Performing maximum likelihood estimation of latent variable models is challenging due to the
requirement to marginalize over the latent variables. Instead, one can maximize a variational lowerbound to the data log-likelihood, defined via an (approximate) posterior distribution over the latent
variables, an approach followed by latent Dirichlet allocation [3], learning hidden Markov models [28]
and variational auto-encoders [16]. The maximization can be carried out by alternatively computing
the (approximate) posterior distribution corresponding to the current model parameters estimate, and
estimating the new model parameters. Variational auto-encoders (VAEs) are generative latent variable
models where the approximate posterior is a (neural network based) parameterized distribution which
is estimated jointly with the model parameters. Maximization is performed via stochastic gradient
ascent, provided that one can compute gradients with respect to both the model parameters and the
approximate posterior parameters.
Learning VAEs with discrete n-dimensional latent variables is computationally challenging since
the size of the support of the posterior distribution is exponential in n. Although the score function
estimator (also known as REINFORCE) [39] enables computing the required gradients with respect to
the approximate posterior, in both the continuous and discrete latent variable case, it is known to have
high-variance. The reparametrization trick provides an appealing alternative to the score function
estimator and recent work has shown its effectiveness for continuous latent spaces [17, 30]. In the
discrete case, despite being able to perform reparametrization via the Gumbel-Max trick, the resulting
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

