Thinning for Accelerating the Learning of
Point Processes
Tianbo Li, Yiping Ke
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
tianbo001@e.ntu.edu.sg, ypke@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper discusses one of the most fundamental issues about point processes
that what is the best sampling method for point processes. We propose thinning
as a downsampling method for accelerating the learning of point processes. We
ﬁnd that the thinning operation preserves the structure of intensity, and is able to
estimate parameters with less time and without much loss of accuracy. Theoretical
results including intensity, parameter and gradient estimation on a thinned history
are presented for point processes with decouplable intensities. A stochastic optimization algorithm based on the thinned gradient is proposed. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of thinning in
the tasks of parameter and gradient estimation, as well as stochastic optimization.

1

Introduction

Point processes are a powerful statistical tool for modeling event sequences and have drawn massive
attention from the machine learning community. Point processes have been widely used in ﬁnance
[6], neuroscience [8], seismology [28], social network analysis [22] and many other disciplines.
Despite their popularity, applications related to point processes are often plagued by the scalability
issue. Some state-of-the-art models [37, 35, 33] have a time complexity of O(d2 n3 ), where n is the
number of events and d is the dimension. As the number of events increases, learning such a model
would be very time consuming, if not infeasible. This becomes a major obstacle in applying point
processes.
A simple strategy to address this problem is to use part of the dataset in the learning. For instance, in
mini-batch gradient descent, the gradient is computed at each iteration using a small batch instead
of full data. For point processes, however, to ﬁnd a suitable sampling method is not a easy task, at
least not as easily as it might seem. This is due to the special input data — event sequences. First
of all, event sequences are posets. An inappropriate sampling methods may spoil the order structure
of the temporal information. This is especially harmful when the intensity function depends on
its history. Second, many models built upon point processes utilize the arrival intervals between
two events. Such models are particularly useful as they take into account the interactions between
events or nodes. Examples include Hawkes processes and their variants [37, 33, 19]. An improper
sampling method may change the lengths of arrival intervals, leading to a poor estimation of model
parameters.
A commonly-used approach to the sampling of point processes is sub-interval sampling [34, 32].
Sub-interval sampling is a piecewise sampling method, which splits an event sequence into small
pieces and learns the model on these sub-intervals. At each iteration, one or several sub-intervals
are selected to compute the gradient. This method, however, has an intrinsic limitation: it cannot
capture the panoramic view of a point process. Take self-excited event sequences as an example. An
important characteristic of such sequences is that events are not evenly distributed across the time
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

