Robustness to Adversarial Perturbations
in Learning from Incomplete Data

Amir Najafi
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
najafy@ce.sharif.edu
Masanori Koyama
Preferred Networks, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
masomatics@preferred.jp

Shin-ichi Maeda
Preferred Networks, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
ichi@preferred.jp

Takeru Miyato
Preferred Networks, Inc.
Tokyo, Japan
miyato@preferred.jp

Abstract
What is the role of unlabeled data in an inference problem, when the presumed
underlying distribution is adversarially perturbed? To provide a concrete answer to
this question, this paper unifies two major learning frameworks: Semi-Supervised
Learning (SSL) and Distributionally Robust Learning (DRL). We develop a generalization theory for our framework based on a number of novel complexity measures,
such as an adversarial extension of Rademacher complexity and its semi-supervised
analogue. Moreover, our analysis is able to quantify the role of unlabeled data in the
generalization under a more general condition compared to the existing theoretical
works in SSL. Based on our framework, we also present a hybrid of DRL and
EM algorithms that has a guaranteed convergence rate. When implemented with
deep neural networks, our method shows a comparable performance to those of the
state-of-the-art on a number of real-world benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Robustness to adversarial attacks is an essential feature in the design of modern classifiers —in
particular, of deep neural networks [1, 2]. Adversarial Training (AT) [3], Virtual AT [4] and Distillation [5] are examples of promising approaches to defend against a point-wise adversary who can
alter input data-points in a separate manner. However, as shown by [6], a good defense against a
distributional adversary who shifts the input distribution instead of data-points could improve the
robustness of a classifier more effectively. This has led to the development of Distributionally Robust
Learning (DRL) [7], which has recently attracted intensive research interest [8, 9, 10, 11]. Despite
of all the advancements in supervised DRL, the number of studies that tackle this problem from a
semi-supervised angle is slim to none [12]. Motivated by this fact, we propose a distributionally
robust framework that handles Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) scenarios. Our work is an extension
of self-learning [13, 14, 15], which encompasses methods such as Expectation-Maximization (EM)
algorithm. It can also cope with any existing classifier such as neural networks. Intuitively, we first
infer soft-labels for the unlabeled data, and then search for suitable classification rules that show low
sensitivity to adversarial perturbation around these soft-label distributions.
Parts of this paper can be considered as a semi-supervised extension of [9]. Computational complexity
of our framework is comparable to those of its supervised rivals. Moreover, we design a Stochastic
Gradient Descent (SGD)-based algorithm with a guaranteed convergence rate to optimize our model.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

