Scalable Spike Source Localization in Extracellular
Recordings using Amortized Variational Inference

Cole L. Hurwitz
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
cole.hurwitz@ed.ac.uk
Akash Srivastava
MIT–IBM Watson AI Lab
Cambridge, United States
Akash.Srivastava@ibm.com

Kai Xu
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
kai.xu@ed.ac.uk
Alessio P. Buccino
Department of Informatics
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
alessiob@ifi.uio.no

Matthias H. Hennig
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
m.hennig@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Determining the positions of neurons in an extracellular recording is useful for
investigating functional properties of the underlying neural circuitry. In this work,
we present a Bayesian modelling approach for localizing the source of individual
spikes on high-density, microelectrode arrays. To allow for scalable inference,
we implement our model as a variational autoencoder and perform amortized
variational inference. We evaluate our method on both biophysically realistic
simulated and real extracellular datasets, demonstrating that it is more accurate
than and can improve spike sorting performance over heuristic localization methods
such as center of mass.

1

Introduction

Extracellular recordings, which measure local potential changes due to ionic currents flowing through
cell membranes, are an essential source of data in experimental and clinical neuroscience. The
most prominent signals in these recordings originate from action potentials (spikes), the all or none
events neurons produce in response to inputs and transmit as outputs to other neurons. Traditionally,
a small number of electrodes (channels) are used to monitor spiking activity from a few neurons
simultaneously. Recent progress in microfabrication now allows for extracellular recordings from
thousands of neurons using microelectrode arrays (MEAs), which have thousands of closely spaced
electrodes [13, 2, 14, 1, 36, 55, 32, 25, 12]. These recordings provide insights that cannot be obtained
by pooling multiple single-electrode recordings [27]. This is a significant development as it enables
systematic investigations of large circuits of neurons to better understand their function and structure,
as well as how they are affected by injury, disease, and pharmacological interventions [20].
On dense MEAs, each recording channel may record spikes from multiple, nearby neurons, while
each neuron may leave an extracellular footprint on multiple channels. Inferring the spiking activity
of individual neurons, a task called spike sorting, is therefore a challenging blind source separation
problem, complicated by the large volume of recorded data [46]. Despite the challenges presented by
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

