Non-Asymptotic Pure Exploration by Solving Games

Rémy Degenne
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Science Park 123, 1098 XG Amsterdam
remy.degenne@cwi.nl

Wouter M. Koolen
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
Science Park 123, 1098 XG Amsterdam
wmkoolen@cwi.nl

Pierre Ménard
Inria Lille
40 Avenue Halley, 59650 Villeneuve-d’Ascq
menardprr@gmail.com

Abstract
Pure exploration (aka active testing) is the fundamental task of sequentially gathering information to answer a query about a stochastic environment. Good algorithms
make few mistakes and take few samples.
Lower bounds (for multi-armed bandit models with arms in an exponential family)
reveal that the sample complexity is determined by the solution to an optimisation
problem. The existing state of the art algorithms achieve asymptotic optimality by
solving a plug-in estimate of that optimisation problem at each step.
We interpret the optimisation problem as an unknown game, and propose sampling
rules based on iterative strategies to estimate and converge to its saddle point. We
apply no-regret learners to obtain the first finite confidence guarantees that are
adapted to the exponential family and which apply to any pure exploration query
and bandit structure. Moreover, our algorithms only use a best response oracle
instead of fully solving the optimisation problem.

1

Introduction

We study fundamental trade-offs arising in sequential interactive learning. We adopt the framework
of Pure Exploration, in which the learning system interacts with its environment by performing a
sequence of experiments, with the goal of maximising information gain. We aim to design general,
efficient systems that can answer a given query with few experiments yet few mistakes.
As usual, we model the environment by a multi-armed bandit model with exponential family arms,
and work in the fixed confidence (δ-PAC) setting. Information-theoretic lower bounds [13] show that
a certain number of samples is unavoidable to reach a certain confidence. Moreover, algorithms are
developed [13] that match these lower bounds asymptotically, in the small confidence δ → 0 regime.
Our contribution is a framework for obtaining efficient algorithms with non-asymptotic guarantees.
The main object of study is the “Pure Exploration Game” [9], a two-player zero-sum game that is
central to lower bounds as well as to the widely used GLRT-based stopping rules. We develop iterative
methods that provably converge to saddle-point behaviour. The game itself is not known to the learner,
and has to be explored and estimated on the fly. Our methods are based on pairs of low-regret
algorithms, combined with optimism and tracking. We prove sample complexity guarantees for
several combinations of algorithms, and discuss their computational and statistical trade-offs.
The rest of the introduction provides more detail on pure exploration problems, the pure exploration
game, the connection between them, and expands on our contribution. We also review related work.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

