Re-examination of the Role of Latent Variables in
Sequence Modeling
Guokun Lai⇤1 , Zihang Dai⇤1 , Yiming Yang1 , Shinjae Yoo2
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Brookhaven National Laboratory
1
{guokun,dzihang,yiming}@cs.cmu.edu, 2 sjyoo@bnl.gov

1

Abstract
With latent variables, stochastic recurrent models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance in modeling sound-wave sequence. However, opposite results are also
observed in other domains, where standard recurrent networks often outperform
stochastic models. To better understand this discrepancy, we re-examine the roles
of latent variables in stochastic recurrent models for speech density estimation.
Our analysis reveals that under the restriction of fully factorized output distribution
in previous evaluations, the stochastic variants were implicitly leveraging intrastep correlation but the deterministic recurrent baselines were prohibited to do
so, resulting in an unfair comparison. To correct the unfairness, we remove such
restriction in our re-examination, where all the models can explicitly leverage
intra-step correlation with an auto-regressive structure. Over a diverse set of
univariate and multivariate sequential data, including human speech, MIDI music,
handwriting trajectory and frame-permuted speech, our results show that stochastic
recurrent models fail to deliver the performance advantage claimed in previous
work. In contrast, standard recurrent models equipped with an auto-regressive
output distribution consistently perform better, dramatically advancing the state-ofthe-art results on three speech datasets.

1 Introduction
As a fundamental problem in machine learning, probabilistic sequence modeling aims at capturing
the sequential correlations in both short and long ranges. Among many possible model choices, deep
auto-regressive models [1, 2] have become one of the most widely adopted solutions. Typically,
a deep auto-regressive model factorizes the likelihood function of sequences in an auto-regressive
Q|x|
manner, i.e., p(x) = t=1 p(xt | x<t ). Then, a neural network (e.g. RNN) is employed to encode
the conditional context x<t into a compact hidden representation ht = f (x<t ), which is then used to
define the output distribution p(xt | x<t ) , p(xt | ht ).

Despite the state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in many domains [3, 4, 5, 6], the hidden representations of standard auto-regressive models are produced in a completely deterministic way. Hence, the
stochastic aspects of the observed sequences can only be modeled by the output distribution, which
however, usually has a simple parametric form such as a unimodal distribution or a finite mixture of
unimodal distributions. A potential weakness of such simple forms is that they may not be sufficiently
expressive for modeling real-world sequential data with complex stochastic dynamics.
Recently, many efforts have been made to enrich the expressive power of auto-regressive models
by injecting stochastic latent variables into the computation of hidden states. Notably, relying
on the variational auto-encoding (VAE) framework [7, 8], stochastic recurrent models (SRNN)
have outperformed standard RNN-based auto-regressive models by a large margin in modeling raw
sound-wave sequences [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

