Minimax Optimal Estimation of Approximate
Differential Privacy on Neighboring Databases
Xiyang Liu Sewoong Oh
Allen School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Washington
{xiyangl, sewoong}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy has become a widely accepted notion of privacy, leading to
the introduction and deployment of numerous privatization mechanisms. However, ensuring the privacy guarantee is an error-prone process, both in designing
mechanisms and in implementing those mechanisms. Both types of errors will be
greatly reduced, if we have a data-driven approach to verify privacy guarantees,
from a black-box access to a mechanism. We pose it as a property estimation problem, and study the fundamental trade-offs involved in the accuracy in estimated
privacy guarantees and the number of samples required. We introduce a novel
estimator that uses polynomial approximation of a carefully chosen degree to optimally trade-off bias and variance. With n samples, we show that this estimator
achieves performance of a straightforward plug-in estimator with n ln n samples,
a phenomenon known as sample size amplification. The minimax optimality of
the estimator is proved by comparing it to a matching fundamental lower bound.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is gaining popularity as an agreed upon measure of privacy leakage, widely
used by the government to publish Census statistics [1], Google to aggregate user’s choices in webbrowser features [2, 3], Apple to aggregate mobile user data [4], and smart meters in telemetry [5].
As increasing number of privatization mechanisms are introduced and deployed in the wild, it is
critical to have countermeasures to check the fidelity of those mechanisms. Such techniques will
allow us to hold accountable the deployment of privatization mechanisms if the claimed privacy
guarantees are not met, and help us find and fix bugs in implementations of those mechanisms.
A user-friendly tool for checking privacy guarantees is necessary for several reasons. Writing a
program for a privatization mechanism is error-prone, as it involves complex probabilistic computations. Even with customized languages for differential privacy, checking the end-to-end privacy
guarantee of an implementation remains challenging [6, 7]. Furthermore, even when the implementation is error-free, there have been several cases where the mechanism designers have made errors
in calculating the privacy guarantees, and falsely reported higher level of privacy [8, 9]. This is
evidence of an alarming issue that analytically checking the proof of a privacy guarantee is a challenging process even for an expert. An automated and data-driven algorithm for checking privacy
guarantees will significantly reduce such errors in the implementation and the design. On other
cases, we are given very limited information about how the mechanism works, like Apple’s white
paper [4]. The users are left to trust the claimed privacy guarantees.
To address these issues, we propose a data-driven approach to estimate how much privacy is guaranteed, from a black-box access to a purportedly private mechanism. Our approach is based on
an optimal polynomial approximation that gracefully trades off bias and variance. We study the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

