Inherent Tradeoffs in Learning Fair Representations

Han Zhao∗
Machine Learning Department
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
han.zhao@cs.cmu.edu

Geoffrey J. Gordon
Microsoft Research, Montreal
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
geoff.gordon@microsoft.com

Abstract
With the prevalence of machine learning in high-stakes applications, especially the
ones regulated by anti-discrimination laws or societal norms, it is crucial to ensure
that the predictive models do not propagate any existing bias or discrimination. Due
to the ability of deep neural nets to learn rich representations, recent advances in
algorithmic fairness have focused on learning fair representations with adversarial
techniques to reduce bias in data while preserving utility simultaneously. In this
paper, through the lens of information theory, we provide the first result that
quantitatively characterizes the tradeoff between demographic parity and the joint
utility across different population groups. Specifically, when the base rates differ
between groups, we show that any method aiming to learn fair representations
admits an information-theoretic lower bound on the joint error across these groups.
To complement our negative results, we also prove that if the optimal decision
functions across different groups are close, then learning fair representations leads
to an alternative notion of fairness, known as the accuracy parity, which states that
the error rates are close between groups. Finally, our theoretical findings are also
confirmed empirically on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

With the prevalence of machine learning applications in high-stakes domains, e.g., criminal judgement,
medical testing, online advertising, etc., it is crucial to ensure that the automated decision making
systems do not propagate existing bias or discrimination that might exist in historical data [3, 4, 28].
Among many recent proposals for achieving different notions of algorithmic fairness [10, 14, 31–33],
learning fair representations has received increasing attention due to recent advances in learning
rich representations with deep neural networks [5, 11, 24, 26, 30, 34]. In fact, a line of work has
proposed to learn group-invariant representations with adversarial learning techniques in order to
achieve statistical parity, also known as the demographic parity in the literature. This line of work
dates at least back to Zemel et al. [33] where the authors proposed to learn predictive models that
are independent of the group membership attribute. At a high level, the underlying idea is that if
representations of instances from different groups are similar to each other, then any predictive model
on top of them will certainly make decisions independent of group membership.
On the other hand, it has long been observed that there is an underlying tradeoff between utility and
demographic parity:
“All methods have in common that to some extent accuracy must be traded-off for
lowering the dependency.” [6]
In particular, it is easy to see that in an extreme case where the group membership coincides with
the target task, a call for exact demographic parity will inevitably remove the perfect predictor [14].
∗

Part of this work was done when Han Zhao was visiting Microsoft Research, Montreal.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

