Regularized Gradient Boosting

Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
corinna@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Google & Courant Institute
New York, NY 10012
mohri@google.com

Dmitry Storcheus
Courant Institute & Google
New York, NY 10012
dstorcheus@google.com

Abstract
Gradient Boosting (GB) is a popular and very successful ensemble method for
binary trees. While various types of regularization of the base predictors are used
with this algorithm, the theory that connects such regularizations with generalization guarantees is poorly understood. We fill this gap by deriving data-dependent
learning guarantees for GB used with regularization, expressed in terms of the
Rademacher complexities of the constrained families of base predictors. We introduce a new algorithm, called RGB, that directly benefits from these generalization
bounds and that, at every boosting round, applies the Structural Risk Minimization
principle to search for a base predictor with the best empirical fit versus complexity
trade-off. Inspired by Randomized Coordinate Descent we provide a scalable
implementation of our algorithm, able to search over large families of base predictors. Finally, we provide experimental results, demonstrating that our algorithm
achieves significantly better out-of-sample performance on multiple datasets than
the standard GB algorithm used with its regularization.

1

Introduction

Ensemble methods form a powerful family of techniques in machine learning that combine multiple
base predictors to create more accurate ones. These methods are often very effective in practice and
can achieve a significant performance improvement over the individual base predictors [Quinlan
et al., 1996, Caruana et al., 2004, Freund et al., 1996, Dietterich, 2000]. A DA B OOST [Freund and
Schapire, 1997] and its variants are among the most prominent ensemble methods since they are both
very effective in practice and benefit from well-studied theoretical margin guarantees [Freund and
Schapire, 1997, Koltchinskii and Panchenko, 2002].
Gradient Boosting (GB) [Friedman, 2001] is another popular tree-based ensemble method that has
inspired a number of widely-used software libraries (e.g., XGB OOST [Chen and Guestrin, 2016],
MART [Friedman, 2002], and DART [Rashmi and Gilad-Bachrach, 2015]) and has frequently
ranked among the top in benchmark competitions such as Kaggle. But, while it is often introduced
and presented differently, GB exactly coincides with AdaBoost, when the objective function used is
the exponential function, as shown for example by [Schapire and Freund, 2012]. More generally,
both of these algorithms are instances of Functional Gradient Descent [Mason et al., 2000, Grubb and
Bagnell, 2011] when non-increasing convex and differentiable upper bounds on the zero-one loss are
used. Viewed from the Functional Gradient Descent perspective, at every boosting step, GB seeks a
predictor function h that is closest to the functional gradient of the objective within some constrained
family of base predictors H. Specifying this base predictor family H such that the selected function
does not overfit the gradient, as well as defining an efficient search procedure over H is crucial for
the success of the algorithm. In most practical instances, several types of constraints are imposed to
do so. As an example, for binary regression trees, XGB OOST bounds the number of leaves and the
norm of the leaf values vector. This can be viewed as a regularization. However, to our knowledge,
no theoretical analysis has been provided for these commonly-used constraints.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

