Rethinking Generative Mode Coverage:
A Pointwise Guaranteed Approach
Peilin Zhong⇤

Yuchen Mo⇤

Chang Xiao⇤

Pengyu Chen

Changxi Zheng

Columbia University
{peilin, chang, cxz}@cs.columbia.edu
{yuchen.mo, pengyu.chen}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Many generative models have to combat missing modes. The conventional wisdom to this end is by reducing through training a statistical distance (such as
f -divergence) between the generated distribution and provided data distribution.
But this is more of a heuristic than a guarantee. The statistical distance measures
a global, but not local, similarity between two distributions. Even if it is small,
it does not imply a plausible mode coverage. Rethinking this problem from a
game-theoretic perspective, we show that a complete mode coverage is firmly
attainable. If a generative model can approximate a data distribution moderately
well under a global statistical distance measure, then we will be able to find a
mixture of generators that collectively covers every data point and thus every mode,
with a lower-bounded generation probability. Constructing the generator mixture
has a connection to the multiplicative weights update rule, upon which we propose
our algorithm. We prove that our algorithm guarantees complete mode coverage.
And our experiments on real and synthetic datasets confirm better mode coverage
over recent approaches, ones that also use generator mixtures but rely on global
statistical distances.

1

Introduction

A major pillar of machine learning, the generative approach aims at learning a data distribution from
a provided training dataset. While strikingly successful, many generative models suffer from missing
modes. Even after a painstaking training process, the generated samples represent only a limited
subset of the modes in the target data distribution, yielding a much lower entropy distribution.
Behind the missing mode problem is the conventional wisdom of training a generative model.
Formulated as an optimization problem, the training process reduces a statistical distance between the
generated distribution and the target data distribution. The statistical distance, such as f -divergence
or Wasserstein distance, is often a global measure. It evaluates an integral of the discrepancy
between two distributions over the data space (or a summation over a discrete dataset). In practice,
reducing the global statistical distance to a perfect zero is virtually a mission impossible. Yet a
small statistical distance does not certify the generator complete mode coverage. The generator may
neglect underrepresented modes—ones that are less frequent in data space—in exchange for better
matching the distribution of well represented modes, thereby lowering the statistical distance. In
short, a global statistical distance is not ideal for promoting mode coverage (see Figure 1 for a 1D
motivating example and later Figure 2 for examples of a few classic generative models).
This inherent limitation is evident in various types of generative models (see Appendix A for the
analysis of a few classic generative models). Particularly in generative adversarial networks (GANs),
mode collapse has been known as a prominent issue. Despite a number of recent improvements
toward alleviating it [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], none of them offers a complete mode coverage. In fact, even the
⇤

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

