Revisiting the Bethe-Hessian: Improved Community
Detection in Sparse Heterogeneous Graphs

Lorenzo Dall’Amico
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP
lorenzo.dall-amico@gipsa-lab.fr
Romain Couillet
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP
L2S, CentraleSupélec, University of Paris Saclay

Nicolas Tremblay
GIPSA-lab, UGA, CNRS, Grenoble INP

Abstract
Spectral clustering is one of the most popular, yet still incompletely understood,
methods for community detection on graphs. This article studies spectral clustering based on the Bethe-Hessian matrix Hr = (r2 − 1)In + D − rA for sparse
heterogeneous graphs (following the degree-corrected stochastic block model) in a
two-class setting. For a specific value r = ζ, clustering is shown to be insensitive to
the degree heterogeneity. We then study the behavior of the informative eigenvector
of Hζ and, as a result, predict the clustering accuracy. The article concludes with
an overview of the generalization to more than two classes along with extensive
simulations on synthetic and real networks corroborating our findings.

1

Introduction

Network theory studies the interaction of connected systems of agents. Real networks tend to be
structured in affinity classes and the problem of clustering consists in retrieving these unknown
classes from the observed network pairwise interactions [1]. Belief propagation (BP) is an efficient
way to reconstruct communities and – under certain conditions (see [2]) – was proved to give optimal
reconstruction. On the negative side, BP suffers from a possibly long convergence time and a
non-trivial implementation. Among the alternative clustering algorithms, spectral techniques proved
particularly efficient in terms of speed and analytical tractability [3, 4, 5, 6]. In the dense regime, in
particular, where the average node degree scales like the size of the network, random matrix theory
[4, 7, 8] manages to predict the asymptotic spectral clustering performances and to identify transition
points beyond which asymptotic non trivial classification is achievable. This is however not the
typical condition for real networks that tend instead to be sparse. For a graph G(V, E) with |V| = n
nodes, the condition of sparsity means that the average degree d does not depend on the size of the
network and in particular d  n.
Both standard spectral clustering methods and their associated random matrix asymptotics collapse
in this regime. As an answer, many intuitions emerged from statistical physics and led to important
seminal steps. Notably, two deeply connected matrices recently proved to overcome the problem of
sparsity: the n×n Bethe-Hessian [9] Hr with r ∈ R a parameter to be fixed – the study of which is the
object of the present article–, and the non symmetric non backtracking operator B ∈ {0, 1}2|E|×2|E|
[10]. Both matrices were introduced and studied under the homogeneous degree stochastic block
model (SBM). Narrowing to the case of two communities it was proved both experimentally and
theoretically [11, 2, 12, 13] that, if there exists an algorithm able to detect communities better then
random guess, then these two matrices can be used to give non-trivial node partition. It is said that
both algorithms work down to the detectability threshold.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

