Multivariate Triangular Quantile Maps
for Novelty Detection

Jingjing Wang1 , Sun Sun2 , Yaoliang Yu1
University of Waterloo1 , National Research Council Canada2
{jingjing.wang, sun.sun, yaoliang.yu}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
Novelty detection, a fundamental task in machine learning, has drawn a lot of recent
attention due to its wide-ranging applications and the rise of neural approaches. In
this work, we present a general framework for neural novelty detection that centers
around a multivariate extension of the univariate quantile function. Our framework
unifies and extends many classical and recent novelty detection algorithms, and
opens the way to exploit recent advances in flow-based neural density estimation.
We adapt the multiple gradient descent algorithm to obtain the first efficient endto-end implementation of our framework that is free of tuning hyperparameters.
Extensive experiments over a number of real datasets confirm the efficacy of our
proposed method against state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

Novelty detection refers to the fundamental task in machine learning that detects “novel” or “unusual”
samples in a data stream. It has wide-ranging applications such as network intrusion detection [14],
medical signal processing [17], jet design [19], video surveillance [42, 43], image scene analysis
[25, 47], document classification [29, 30], reinforcement learning [39], etc.; see the review articles
[7, 31, 32, 41] for more insightful applications. Over the last two decades or so, many novelty
detection algorithms have been proposed and studied in the machine learning field, of which the
statistical approach that aims to identify low-density regions of the underlying data distribution has
been most popular [e.g. 4, 49, 51, 53]. More recently, new novelty detection algorithms based on
deep neural networks [e.g. 1, 9, 11, 18, 26, 40, 44, 46, 48, 56, 58, 59] have drawn a lot of attention as
they significantly improve their non-neural counterparts, especially in domains (such as image and
video) where complex high-dimensional structures abound.
This work offers a closer look of these recent neural novelty detection algorithms, by making a connection to recent flow-based generative modelling techniques [22]. In §2 we show that the triangular map
studied in [22] for neural density estimation serves as a natural extension of the classical univariate
quantile function to the multivariate setting. Since density estimation is extremely challenging in
high dimensions, recent neural novelty detection algorithms all extract a lower dimensional latent
representation, whose probabilistic properties can then by captured by our multivariate triangular
quantile map. Based on this observation we propose a general framework for neural novelty detection
that includes as special cases many classical approaches such as one-class SVM [49] and support
vector data description [53], as well as many recent neural approaches [e.g. 1, 40, 46, 58, 59]. This
unified view of neural novelty detection enables us to better understand the similarities and subtle differences of the many existing approaches, and provides some guidance on designing next-generation
novelty detection algorithms.
More importantly, our general framework makes it possible to effortlessly plug-in recent flow-based
neural density estimators, which have been shown to be surprisingly effective even in moderately high
dimensions. Furthermore, centering our framework around the (multivariate) triangular quantile map
(TQM) also enables us to unify the two scoring strategies in the literature [34]: we can either threshold
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

