Deep Leakage from Gradients

Ligeng Zhu Zhijian Liu Song Han
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{ligeng, zhijian, songhan}@mit.edu

Abstract
Exchanging gradients is a widely used method in modern multi-node machine
learning system (e.g., distributed training, collaborative learning). For a long time,
people believed that gradients are safe to share: i.e., the training data will not be
leaked by gradients exchange. However, we show that it is possible to obtain the
private training data from the publicly shared gradients. We name this leakage as
Deep Leakage from Gradient and empirically validate the effectiveness on both
computer vision and natural language processing tasks. Experimental results show
that our attack is much stronger than previous approaches: the recovery is pixelwise accurate for images and token-wise matching for texts. Thereby we want to
raise people’s awareness to rethink the gradient’s safety. We also discuss several
possible strategies to prevent such deep leakage. Without changes on training
setting, the most effective defense method is gradient pruning.

1

Introduction

Distributed training becomes necessary to speedup training on large-scale datasets. In a distributed
learning system, the computation is executed parallely on each worker and synchronized via exchanging gradients (both parameter server [15, 23] and all-reduce [3, 30]). The distribution of computation
naturally leads to the splitting of data: Each client has its own the training data and only communicates
gradient during training (says the training set never leaves local machine). It allows to train a model
using data from multiple sources without centralizing them. This scheme is named as collaborative
learning and widely used when the training set contains private information [18, 20]. For example,
multiple hospitals train a model jointly without sharing their patients’ medical data [17, 26].
Distributed training and collaborative learning have been widely used in large scale machine learning
tasks. However, does the “gradient sharing” scheme protect the privacy of the training datasets
of each participant? In most scenarios, people assume that gradients are safe to share and will
not expose the training data. Some recent studies show that gradients reveal some properties of
the training data, for example, property classifier [27] (whether a sample with certain property is
in the batch) and using generative adversarial networks to generate pictures that look similar to the
training images [9, 13, 27]. Here we consider a more challenging case: can we completely steal the
training data from gradients? Formally, given a machine learning model F () and its weights W , if
we have the gradients ∇w w.r.t a pair of input and label, can we obtain the training data reversely?
Conventional wisdom suggests that the answer is no, but we show that this is actually possible.
In this work, we demonstrate Deep Leakage from Gradients (DLG): sharing the gradients can leak
private training data. We present an optimization algorithm that can obtain both the training inputs
and the labels in just few iterations. To perform the attack, we first randomly generate a pair of
“dummy” inputs and labels and then perform the usual forward and backward. After deriving the
dummy gradients from the dummy data, instead of optimizing model weights as in typical training,
we optimize the dummy inputs and labels to minimize the distance between dummy gradients and
real gradients (illustrated in Fig. 2). Matching the gradients makes the dummy data close to the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

