Large Scale Adversarial Representation Learning

Jeff Donahue
DeepMind
jeffdonahue@google.com

Karen Simonyan
DeepMind
simonyan@google.com

Abstract
Adversarially trained generative models (GANs) have recently achieved compelling
image synthesis results. But despite early successes in using GANs for unsupervised representation learning, they have since been superseded by approaches based
on self-supervision. In this work we show that progress in image generation quality
translates to substantially improved representation learning performance. Our approach, BigBiGAN, builds upon the state-of-the-art BigGAN model, extending it to
representation learning by adding an encoder and modifying the discriminator. We
extensively evaluate the representation learning and generation capabilities of these
BigBiGAN models, demonstrating that these generation-based models achieve the
state of the art in unsupervised representation learning on ImageNet, as well as in
unconditional image generation. Pretrained BigBiGAN models – including image
generators and encoders – are available on TensorFlow Hub1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years we have seen rapid progress in generative models of visual data. While these models
were previously confined to domains with single or few modes, simple structure, and low resolution,
with advances in both modeling and hardware they have since gained the ability to convincingly
generate complex, multimodal, high resolution image distributions [1, 17, 18].
Intuitively, the ability to generate data in a particular domain necessitates a high-level understanding
of the semantics of said domain. This idea has long-standing appeal as raw data is both cheap –
readily available in virtually infinite supply from sources like the Internet – and rich, with images
comprising far more information than the class labels that typical discriminative machine learning
models are trained to predict from them. Yet, while the progress in generative models has been
undeniable, nagging questions persist: what semantics have these models learned, and how can they
be leveraged for representation learning?
The dream of generation as a means of true understanding from raw data alone has hardly been realized.
Instead, the most successful approaches for unsupervised learning leverage techniques adopted from
the field of supervised learning, a class of methods known as self-supervised learning [4, 35, 32, 9].
These approaches typically involve changing or holding back certain aspects of the data in some way,
and training a model to predict or generate aspects of the missing information. For example, [34, 35]
proposed colorization as a means of unsupervised learning, where a model is given a subset of the
color channels in an input image, and trained to predict the missing channels.
Generative models as a means of unsupervised learning offer an appealing alternative to selfsupervised tasks in that they are trained to model the full data distribution without requiring any
modification of the original data. One class of generative models that has been applied to representation learning is generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11]. The generator in the GAN
1
Models available at https://tfhub.dev/s?publisher=deepmind&q=bigbigan, with a Colab
notebook demo at https://colab.research.google.com/github/tensorflow/hub/blob/master/
examples/colab/bigbigan_with_tf_hub.ipynb.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

