Robust exploration in linear quadratic
reinforcement learning
Jack Umenberger
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
jack.umenberger@it.uu.se

Mina Ferizbegovic
School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
KTH, Sweden
minafe@kth.se

Thomas B. Schön
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
thomas.schon@it.uu.se

Håkan Hjalmarsson
School of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science
KTH, Sweden
hjalmars@kth.se

Abstract
This paper concerns the problem of learning control policies for an unknown
linear dynamical system to minimize a quadratic cost function. We present a
method, based on convex optimization, that accomplishes this task robustly: i.e.,
we minimize the worst-case cost, accounting for system uncertainty given the
observed data. The method balances exploitation and exploration, exciting the
system in such a way so as to reduce uncertainty in the model parameters to which
the worst-case cost is most sensitive. Numerical simulations and application to a
hardware-in-the-loop servo-mechanism demonstrate the approach, with appreciable
performance and robustness gains over alternative methods observed in both.

1

Introduction

Learning to make decisions in an uncertain and dynamic environment is a task of fundamental
importance in a number of domains. Though it has been the subject of intense research activity since
the formulation of the ‘dual control problem’ in the 1960s[17], the recent success of reinforcement
learning (RL), particularly in games [33, 37], has inspired a resurgence in interest in the topic.
Problems of this nature require decisions to be made with respect to two objectives. First, there is
a goal to be achieved, typically quantified as a reward function to be maximized. Second, due to
the inherent uncertainty there is a need to gather information about the environment, often referred
to as ‘learning’ via ‘exploration’. These two objectives are often competing, a fact known as the
exploration/exploitation trade-off in RL, and the ‘dual effect’ (of decision) in control.
It is important to recognize that the second objective (exploration) is important only in so far as it
facilitates the first (maximizing reward); there is no intrinsic value in reducing uncertainty. As a
consequence, exploration should be targeted or application specific; it should not excite the system
arbitrarily, but rather in such a way that the information gathered is useful for achieving the goal.
Furthermore, in many real-world applications, it is desirable that exploration does not compromise
the safe and reliable operation of the system.
This paper is concerned with control of uncertain linear dynamical systems, with the goal of maximizing (minimizing) rewards (costs) that are a quadratic function of states and actions; cf. §2 for
a detailed problem formulation. We derive methods to synthesize control policies that balance the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

