Provably Robust Deep Learning via Adversarially
Trained Smoothed Classifiers
Hadi Salman† , Greg Yang§ , Jerry Li,
Pengchuan Zhang∗, Huan Zhang∗, Ilya Razenshteyn∗, Sébastien Bubeck ∗
Microsoft Research AI
{hadi.salman, gregyang, jerrl,
penzhan, t-huzhan, ilyaraz, sebubeck }@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent works have shown the effectiveness of randomized smoothing as a scalable
technique for building neural network-based classifiers that are provably robust to
`2 -norm adversarial perturbations. In this paper, we employ adversarial training
to improve the performance of randomized smoothing. We design an adapted
attack for smoothed classifiers, and we show how this attack can be used in an
adversarial training setting to boost the provable robustness of smoothed classifiers.
We demonstrate through extensive experimentation that our method consistently
outperforms all existing provably `2 -robust classifiers by a significant margin on
ImageNet and CIFAR-10, establishing the state-of-the-art for provable `2 -defenses.
Moreover, we find that pre-training and semi-supervised learning boost adversarially trained smoothed classifiers even further. Our code and trained models are
available at http://github.com/Hadisalman/smoothing-adversarial2 .

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been very successful in tasks such as image classification and speech recognition, but have been shown to be extremely brittle to small, adversarially-chosen perturbations of their
inputs [33, 14]. A classifier (e.g., a neural network), which correctly classifies an image x, can be
fooled by an adversary to misclassify x + δ where δ is an adversarial perturbation so small that x
and x + δ are indistinguishable for the human eye. Recently, many works have proposed heuristic
defenses intended to train models robust to such adversarial perturbations. However, most of these
defenses were broken using more powerful adversaries [4, 2, 35]. This encouraged researchers to
develop defenses that lead to certifiably robust classifiers, i.e., whose predictions for most of the test
examples x can be verified to be constant within a neighborhood of x [39, 27]. Unfortunately, these
techniques do not immediately scale to large neural networks that are used in practice.
To mitigate this limitation of prior certifiable defenses, a number of papers [21, 22, 6] consider the
randomized smoothing approach, which transforms any classifier f (e.g., a neural network) into a
new smoothed classifier g that has certifiable `2 -norm robustness guarantees. This transformation
works as follows.
Let f be an arbitrary base classifier which maps inputs in Rd to classes in Y. Given an input x, the
smoothed classifier g(x) labels x as having class c which is the most likely to be returned by the base
classifier f when fed a noisy corruption x + δ, where δ ∼ N (x, σ 2 I) is a vector sampled according
to an isotropic Gaussian distribution.
As shown in [6], one can derive certifiable robustness for such smoothed classifiers via the NeymanPearson lemma. They demonstrate that for `2 perturbations, randomized smoothing outperforms
∗
2

Reverse alphabetical order. † Work done as part of the Microsoft AI Residency Program. § Primary mentor.
Please see http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04584 for the full and most recent version of this paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

