Einconv: Exploring Unexplored Tensor Network
Decompositions for Convolutional Neural Networks

Kohei Hayashi
Preferred Networks
hayasick@preferred.jp

Taiki Yamaguchi˚
The University of Tokyo
yamaguchi@hep-th.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yohei Sugawara
Preferred Networks
suga@preferred.jp

Shin-ichi Maeda
Preferred Networks
ichi@preferred.jp

Abstract
Tensor decomposition methods are widely used for model compression and fast inference in convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Although many decompositions
are conceivable, only CP decomposition and a few others have been applied in
practice, and no extensive comparisons have been made between available methods.
Previous studies have not determined how many decompositions are available, nor
which of them is optimal. In this study, we first characterize a decomposition class
specific to CNNs by adopting a flexible graphical notation. The class includes
such well-known CNN modules as depthwise separable convolution layers and
bottleneck layers, but also previously unknown modules with nonlinear activations. We also experimentally compare the tradeoff between prediction accuracy
and time/space complexity for modules found by enumerating all possible decompositions, or by using a neural architecture search. We find some nonlinear
decompositions outperform existing ones.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) typically process spatial data such as images using multiple
convolutional layers [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. The high performance of CNNs is often offset by
their heavy demands on memory and CPU/GPU, making them problematic to deploy on edge devices
such as mobile phones [Howard et al., 2017].
One straightforward approach to reducing costs is the introduction of a low-dimensional linear
structure into the convolutional layers [Smith et al., 1997, Rigamonti et al., 2013, Tai et al., 2015,
Kim et al., 2015, Denton et al., 2014, Lebedev et al., 2014, Wang et al., 2018]. This typically is done
through tensor decomposition, which represents the convolution filter in sum-product form, reducing
the number of parameters to save memory space and reduce the calculation cost for forwarding paths.
The manner in which this cost reduction is achieved depends heavily on the structure of the tensor
decomposition. For example, if the target is a two-way tensor, i.e., a matrix, the only meaningful
decomposition is X “ UV, because others such as X “ ABC are reduced to that form but have
more parameters. However, for higher-order tensors, there are many possible ways to perform tensor
decomposition, of which only a few have been actively studied (e.g., see [Kolda and Bader, 2009]).
Such multi-purpose decompositions have been applied to CNNs but are not necessarily optimal for
them, because of tradeoffs between prediction accuracy and time/space complexity. The need to
˚

This work was completed during an internship at Preferred Networks.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

