Uniform Error Bounds for Gaussian Process
Regression with Application to Safe Control

Armin Lederer
Technical University of Munich
armin.lederer@tum.de

Jonas Umlauft
Technical University of Munich
jonas.umlauft@tum.de

Sandra Hirche
Technical University of Munich
hirche@tum.de

Abstract
Data-driven models are subject to model errors due to limited and noisy training
data. Key to the application of such models in safety-critical domains is the
quantification of their model error. Gaussian processes provide such a measure
and uniform error bounds have been derived, which allow safe control based on
these models. However, existing error bounds require restrictive assumptions. In
this paper, we employ the Gaussian process distribution and continuity arguments
to derive a novel uniform error bound under weaker assumptions. Furthermore,
we demonstrate how this distribution can be used to derive probabilistic Lipschitz
constants and analyze the asymptotic behavior of our bound. Finally, we derive
safety conditions for the control of unknown dynamical systems based on Gaussian
process models and evaluate them in simulations of a robotic manipulator.

1

Introduction

The application of machine learning techniques in control tasks bears significant promises. The
identification of highly nonlinear systems through supervised learning techniques [1] and the automated policy search in reinforcement learning [2] enables the control of complex unknown systems.
Nevertheless, the application in safety-critical domains, like autonomous driving, robotics or aviation
is rare. Even though the data-efficiency and performance of self-learning controllers is impressive,
engineers still hesitate to rely on learning approaches if the physical integrity of systems is at risk,
in particular, if humans are involved. Empirical evaluations, e.g. for autonomous driving [3], are
available, however, this might not be sufficient to reach the desired level of reliability and autonomy.
Limited and noisy training data lead to imperfections in data-driven models [4]. This makes the
quantification of the uncertainty in the model and the knowledge about a model’s ignorance key for the
utilization of learning approaches in safety-critical applications. Gaussian process models provide this
measure for their own imprecision and therefore gained attention in the control community [5, 6, 7].
These approaches heavily rely on error bounds of Gaussian process regression and are therefore
limited by the strict assumptions made in previous works on GP uniform error bounds [8, 9, 10, 11].
The main contribution of this paper is therefore the derivation of a novel GP uniform error bound,
which requires less prior knowledge and assumptions than previous approaches and is therefore
applicable to a wider range of problems. Furthermore, we derive a Lipschitz constant for the samples
of GPs and investigate the asymptotic behavior in order to demonstrate that arbitrarily small error
bounds can be guaranteed with sufficient computational resources and data. The proposed GP bounds
are employed to derive safety guarantees for unknown dynamical systems which are controlled based
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

