Unconstrained Monotonic Neural Networks
Antoine Wehenkel
University of Liège

Gilles Louppe
University of Liège

Abstract
Monotonic neural networks have recently been proposed as a way to define invertible transformations. These transformations can be combined into powerful
autoregressive flows that have been shown to be universal approximators of continuous probability distributions. Architectures that ensure monotonicity typically
enforce constraints on weights and activation functions, which enables invertibility but leads to a cap on the expressiveness of the resulting transformations. In
this work, we propose the Unconstrained Monotonic Neural Network (UMNN)
architecture based on the insight that a function is monotonic as long as its derivative is strictly positive. In particular, this latter condition can be enforced with a
free-form neural network whose only constraint is the positiveness of its output.
We evaluate our new invertible building block within a new autoregressive flow
(UMNN-MAF) and demonstrate its effectiveness on density estimation experiments. We also illustrate the ability of UMNNs to improve variational inference.

1

Introduction

Monotonic neural networks have been known as powerful tools to build monotone models of a
response variable with respect to individual explanatory variables [Archer and Wang, 1993, Sill,
1998, Daniels and Velikova, 2010, Gupta et al., 2016, You et al., 2017]. Recently, strictly monotonic neural networks have also been proposed as a way to define invertible transformations. These
transformations can be combined into effective autoregressive flows that can be shown to be universal approximators of continuous probability distributions. Examples include Neural Autoregressive
Flows [NAF, Huang et al., 2018] and Block Neural Autoregressive Flows [B-NAF, De Cao et al.,
2019]. Architectures that ensure monotonicity typically enforce constraints on weight and activation functions, which enables invertibility but leads to a cap on the expressiveness of the resulting
transformations. For neural autoregressive flows, this does not impede universal approximation but
typically requires either complex conditioners or a composition of multiple flows.
Nevertheless, autoregressive flows defined as stacks of reversible transformations have proven
to be quite efficient for density estimation of empirical distributions [Papamakarios et al., 2019,
2017, Huang et al., 2018], as well as to improve posterior modeling in Variational Auto-Encoders
(VAE) [Germain et al., 2015, Kingma et al., 2016, Huang et al., 2018]. Practical successes of these
models include speech synthesis [van den Oord et al., 2016, Oord et al., 2018], likelihood-free inference [Papamakarios et al., 2019], probabilistic programming [Tran et al., 2017] and image generation [Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018]. While stacking multiple reversible transformations improves the
capacity of the full transformation to represent complex probability distributions, it remains unclear
which class of reversible transformations should be used.
In this work, we propose a class of reversible transformations based on a new Unconstrained Monotonic Neural Network (UMNN) architecture. We base our contribution on the insight that a function
is monotonic as long as its derivative is strictly positive. This latter condition can be enforced with
a free-form neural network whose only constraint is for its output to remain strictly positive.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

