Turbo Autoencoder: Deep learning based channel
codes for point-to-point communication channels
Yihan Jiang
ECE Department
University of Washington
Seattle, United States
yij021@uw.edu

Hyeji Kim
Samsung AI Center
Cambridge
Cambridge, United
Kingdom
hkim1505@gmail.com

Sewoong Oh
Allen School of
Sreeram Kannan
Computer Science &
ECE Department
Engineering
University of Washington
University of Washington
Seattle, United States
Seattle, United States
ksreeram@ee.washington.edu
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Himanshu Asnani
School of Technology
and Computer Science
Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research
Mumbai, India
himanshu.asnani@tifr.res.in

Pramod Viswanath
ECE Department
University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign
Illinois, United States
pramodv@illinois.edu

Abstract
Designing codes that combat the noise in a communication medium has remained
a significant area of research in information theory as well as wireless communications. Asymptotically optimal channel codes have been developed by mathematicians for communicating under canonical models after over 60 years of research.
On the other hand, in many non-canonical channel settings, optimal codes do not
exist and the codes designed for canonical models are adapted via heuristics to
these channels and are thus not guaranteed to be optimal. In this work, we make
significant progress on this problem by designing a fully end-to-end jointly trained
neural encoder and decoder, namely, Turbo Autoencoder (TurboAE), with the
following contributions: (a) under moderate block lengths, TurboAE approaches
state-of-the-art performance under canonical channels; (b) moreover, TurboAE
outperforms the state-of-the-art codes under non-canonical settings in terms of
reliability. TurboAE shows that the development of channel coding design can be
automated via deep learning, with near-optimal performance.

1

Introduction

Autoencoder is a powerful unsupervised learning framework to learn latent representations by
minimizing reconstruction loss of the input data [1]. Autoencoders have been widely used in
unsupervised learning tasks such as representation learning [1] [2], denoising [3], and generative
model [4] [5]. Most autoencoders are under-complete autoencoders, for which the latent space is
smaller than the input data [2]. Over-complete autoencoders have latent space larger than input
data. While the goal of under-complete autoencoder is to find a low dimensional representation of
input data, the goal of over-complete autoencoder is to find a higher dimensional representation of
input data so that from a noisy version of the higher dimensional representation, original data can be
reliably recovered. Over-complete autoencoders are used in sparse representation learning [3] [6] and
robust representation learning [7].
Channel coding aims at communicating a message over a noisy random channel [8]. As shown in
Figure 1 left, the transmitter maps a message to a codeword via adding redundancy (this mapping is
called encoding). A channel between the transmitter and the receiver randomly corrupts the codeword
so that the receiver observes a noisy version which is used by the receiver to estimate the transmitted
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

