Selecting causal brain features with a single
conditional independence test per feature

Atalanti A. Mastakouri
Empirical Inference Department
Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, 72076
amastakouri@tue.mpg.de

Bernhard Schölkopf
Empirical Inference Department
Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, 72076
bs@tue.mpg.de

Dominik Janzing
Amazon Research
Tübingen, 72076
janzind@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a constraint-based causal feature selection method for identifying
causes of a given target variable, selecting from a set of candidate variables, while
there can also be hidden variables acting as common causes with the target. We
prove that if we observe a cause for each candidate cause, then a single conditional
independence test with one conditioning variable is sufficient to decide whether a
candidate associated with the target is indeed causing it. We thus improve upon existing methods by significantly simplifying statistical testing and requiring a weaker
version of causal faithfulness. Our main assumption is inspired by neuroscience
paradigms where the activity of a single neuron is considered to be also caused by
its own previous state. We demonstrate successful application of our method to
simulated, as well as encephalographic data of twenty-one participants, recorded
in Max Planck Institute for intelligent Systems. The detected causes of motor performance are in accordance with the latest consensus about the neurophysiological
pathways, and can provide new insights into personalised brain stimulation.

1

Introduction

Conditional independence (CI) relations have been an important tool in the field of computational
statistics [1, 2] and play a significant role in causal inference [3]. However, causal inference through
conditional independencies in real datasets is a challenging task, since testing them is a hard task
[1], particularly when the number of conditioning variables is large. PC [4], FCI [4] and CPC [5] are
three of the most prominent CI based causal discovery methods. To recover the underlying graph
from the data they require some assumptions, which, however, are often violated. These include the
causal Markov condition, faithfulness and, in addition for PC method, also causal sufficiency, i.e., the
assumption that all common causes of observed nodes are observed. Although FCI algorithm [4] does
not assume that, it becomes unreliable because it requires many statistical tests if the connections
between the features are not sparse. Furthermore, faithfulness is a rather problematic assumption, as
typical parameter values in causal models with many variables yield distributions that are close to
being unfaithful [6].
The field of non-invasive neuroimaging, such as Electroencephalography (EEG), is one characteristic
case where the discovery of causal features is needed. There, the activity of billions of neurons is
recorded as noisy mixtures of activity reaching through several layers of cortex, skull and skin and
hence causal sufficiency cannot be assumed. Furthermore, the dimensionality of the data is large,
often comparable to the sample size. In such datasets, the need for causal inference often arises,
in order to be able to differentiate a set of causal brain features from a large number of simple
correlations between the brain activity and the observed behavioral response [7, 8, 9].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

