Bayesian Learning of Sum-Product Networks

Martin Trapp1,2 , Robert Peharz3 , Hong Ge3 ,
Franz Pernkopf1 , Zoubin Ghahramani4,3
1
Graz University of Technology, 2 OFAI,
3
University of Cambridge, 4 Uber AI
martin.trapp@tugraz.at, rp587@cam.ac.uk, hg344@cam.ac.uk
pernkopf@tugraz.at, zoubin@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Sum-product networks (SPNs) are flexible density estimators and have received
significant attention due to their attractive inference properties. While parameter
learning in SPNs is well developed, structure learning leaves something to be
desired: Even though there is a plethora of SPN structure learners, most of them are
somewhat ad-hoc and based on intuition rather than a clear learning principle. In
this paper, we introduce a well-principled Bayesian framework for SPN structure
learning. First, we decompose the problem into i) laying out a computational
graph, and ii) learning the so-called scope function over the graph. The first is
rather unproblematic and akin to neural network architecture validation. The second
represents the effective structure of the SPN and needs to respect the usual structural
constraints in SPN, i.e. completeness and decomposability. While representing
and learning the scope function is somewhat involved in general, in this paper,
we propose a natural parametrisation for an important and widely used special
case of SPNs. These structural parameters are incorporated into a Bayesian model,
such that simultaneous structure and parameter learning is cast into monolithic
Bayesian posterior inference. In various experiments, our Bayesian SPNs often
improve test likelihoods over greedy SPN learners. Further, since the Bayesian
framework protects against overfitting, we can evaluate hyper-parameters directly
on the Bayesian model score, waiving the need for a separate validation set, which
is especially beneficial in low data regimes. Bayesian SPNs can be applied to
heterogeneous domains and can easily be extended to nonparametric formulations.
Moreover, our Bayesian approach is the first, which consistently and robustly learns
SPN structures under missing data.

1

Introduction

Sum-product networks (SPNs) [29] are a prominent type of deep probabilistic model, as they are
a flexible representation for high-dimensional distributions, yet allowing fast and exact inference.
Learning SPNs can be naturally organised into structure learning and parameter learning, following
the same dichotomy as in probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) [16]. Like in PGMs, state-ofthe-art SPN parameter learning covers a wide range of well-developed techniques. In particular,
various maximum likelihood approaches have been proposed using either gradient-based optimisation
[37, 27, 3, 40] or expectation-maximisation (and related schemes) [25, 29, 46]. In addition, several
discriminative criteria, e.g. [9, 14, 39, 32], as well as Bayesian approaches to parameter learning,
e.g. [44, 33, 43], have been developed.
Concerning structure learning, however, the situation is remarkably different. Although there is a
plethora of structure learning approaches for SPNs, most of them can be described as a heuristic. For
example, the most prominent structure learning scheme, LearnSPN [10], derives an SPN structure
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

