Learning Deterministic Weighted Automata
with Queries and Counterexamples
Gail Weiss
Technion
sgailw@cs.technion.ac.il

Yoav Goldberg
Bar Ilan University
Allen Institute for AI
yogo@cs.biu.ac.il

Eran Yahav
Technion
yahave@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We present an algorithm for extraction of a probabilistic deterministic finite automaton (PDFA) from a given black-box language model, such as a recurrent
neural network (RNN). The algorithm is a variant of the exact-learning algorithm
L⇤ , adapted to a probabilistic setting with noise. The key insight is the use of
conditional probabilities for observations, and the introduction of a local tolerance
when comparing them. When applied to RNNs, our algorithm often achieves better
word error rate (WER) and normalised distributed cumulative gain (NDCG) than
that achieved by spectral extraction of weighted finite automata (WFA) from the
same networks. PDFAs are substantially more expressive than n-grams, and are
guaranteed to be stochastic and deterministic – unlike spectrally extracted WFAs.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of learning a probabilistic deterministic finite automaton (PDFA) from a
trained recurrent neural network (RNN) [17]. RNNs, and in particular their gated variants GRU [13,
14] and LSTM [21], are well known to be very powerful for sequence modelling, but are not
interpretable. PDFAs, which explicitly list their states, transitions, and weights, are more interpretable
than RNNs [20], while still being analogous to them in behaviour: both emit a single next-token
distribution from each state, and have deterministic state transitions given a state and token. They are
also much faster to use than RNNs, as their sequence processing does not require matrix operations.
We present an algorithm for reconstructing a PDFA from any given black-box distribution over
sequences, such as an RNN trained with a language modelling objective (LM-RNN). The algorithm
is applicable for reconstruction of any weighted deterministic finite automaton (WDFA), and is
guaranteed to return a PDFA when the target is stochastic – as an LM-RNN is.
Weighted Finite Automata (WFA) A WFA is a weighted non-deterministic finite automaton, capable
of encoding language models but also other, non-stochastic weighted functions. Ayache et al. [2]
and Okudono et al. [24] show how to apply spectral learning [5] to an LM-RNN to learn a weighted
finite automaton (WFA) approximating its behaviour.
Probabilistic Deterministic Finite Automata (PDFAs) are a weighted variant of DFAs where each
state defines a categorical next-token distribution. Processing a sequence in a PDFA is simple: input
tokens are processed one by one, getting the next state and probability for each token by table lookup.
WFAs are non-deterministic and so not immediately analogous to RNNs. They are also slower to use
than PDFAs, as processing each token in an input sequence requires a matrix multiplication. Finally,
spectral learning algorithms are not guaranteed to return stochastic hypotheses even when the target
is stochastic – though this can remedied by using quadratic weighted automata [3] and normalising
their weights. For these reasons we prefer PDFAs over WFAs for RNN approximation. Formally:
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

