Learning-In-The-Loop Optimization: End-To-End
Control And Co-Design of Soft Robots Through
Learned Deep Latent Representations

Andrew Spielberg, Allan Zhao, Tao Du, Yuanming Hu, Daniela Rus, Wojciech Matusik
CSAIL
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
aespielberg@csail.mit.edu, azhao@mit.edu, taodu@csail.mit.edu
yuanming@mit.edu, rus@csail.mit.edu, wojciech@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Soft robots have continuum solid bodies that can deform in an infinite number
of ways. Controlling soft robots is very challenging as there are no closed form
solutions. We present a learning-in-the-loop co-optimization algorithm in which a
latent state representation is learned as the robot figures out how to solve the task.
Our solution marries hybrid particle-grid-based simulation with deep, variational
convolutional autoencoder architectures that can capture salient features of robot
dynamics with high efficacy. We demonstrate our dynamics-aware feature learning
algorithm on both 2D and 3D soft robots, and show that it is more robust and faster
converging than the dynamics-oblivious baseline. We validate the behavior of our
algorithm with visualizations of the learned representation.

Figure 1: Our algorithm learns a latent representation of robot state which it uses as input for control. Above
are velocity field snapshots of a soft 2D biped walker moving to the right (top), the corresponding latent
representations (middle), and their reconstructions (bottom) from our algorithm. In each box, the x (left) and y
(right) components of the velocity fields are shown; red indicates negative values, blue positive.

1

Introduction

Recent breakthroughs have demonstrated capable computational methods for both controlling (Heess
et al. [2017], Schulman et al. [2017], Lillicrap et al. [2015]) and designing (Ha et al. [2017], Spielberg
et al., Wampler and Popović [2009]) rigid robots. However, control and design of soft robots have
been explored comparatively little due to the incredible computational complexity they present. Due
to their continuum solid bodies, soft robots’ state dimensionality is inherently infinite. High, but
finite dimensional approximations such as finite elements can provide robust and accurate forward
simulations; however, such representations have thousands or millions of degrees of freedom, making
them ill-suited for most control tasks. To date, few compact, closed-form models exist for describing
soft robot state, and none apply to the general case. In this paper, we address the problem of learning
low-dimensional robot state while simultaneously optimizing robot control and/or material parameters.
In particular, we require a representation applicable to physical control of real-world robots.
We propose a computer vision-inspired approach which makes use of the robot’s observed dynamics
in learning a compact observation model for soft robots. Our task-centric method interleaves
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

