Neural Taskonomy: Inferring the Similarity of
Task-Derived Representations from Brain Activity

Aria Y. Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ariawang@cmu.edu

Michael J. Tarr
Carnegie Mellon University
michaeltarr@cmu.edu

Leila Wehbe
Carnegie Mellon University
lwehbe@cmu.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained for object classification have been
widely used to account for visually-driven neural responses in both human and
primate brains. However, because of the generality and complexity of object
classification, despite the effectiveness of CNNs in predicting brain activity, it is
difficult to draw specific inferences about neural information processing using CNNderived representations. To address this problem, we used learned representations
drawn from 21 computer vision tasks to construct encoding models for predicting
brain responses from BOLD5000—a large-scale dataset comprised of fMRI scans
collected while observers viewed over 5000 naturalistic scene and object images.
Encoding models based on task features predict activity in different regions across
the whole brain. Features from 3D tasks such as keypoint/edge detection explain
greater variance compared to 2D tasks—a pattern observed across the whole brain.
Using results across all 21 task representations, we constructed a “task graph” based
on the spatial layout of well-predicted brain areas from each task. A comparison of
this brain-derived task structure to the task structure derived from transfer learning
accuracy demonstrate that tasks with higher transferability make similar predictions
for brain responses from different regions. These results—arising out of state-ofthe-art computer vision methods—help reveal the task-specific architecture of the
human visual system.

1

Introduction

Scene understanding requires the integration of space perception, visual object recognition, and the
extraction of semantic meaning. The human brain’s solution to this challenge has been elucidated
in recent years by the identification of scene-selective brain areas via comparisons between images
of places and common objects [1] . This basic contrast has been extended across a wide variety of
image manipulations that have provided evidence for the neural coding of scene-relevant properties
such as relative openness [2–4] , the distance of scenes to the viewer [2,3,5] , 3D spatial layout [6–8]
and navigational affordances [9] . Recently, to help explain such findings, Lescroart and Gallant [10]
developed an encoding model using a feature space that parametrizes 3D scene structures along the
distance and orientation dimensions and provides a computational framework to account for human
scene processing. Intriguingly, Lescroart and Gallant [10] were able to identify distance and openness
within scenes as the dimensions that best account for neural responses in scene-selective brain areas.
At a higher, semantic, level, Stansbury et al. [11] found that neural responses in scene-selective brain
areas can be predicted using scene categories that were learned from object co-occurrence statistics.
Such findings demonstrate that human scene-selective areas represent both visual and semantic scene
features. At the same time, there is still no robust model of how these different kinds of information
are integrated both within and across brain regions.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

