Sample Adaptive MCMC

Michael H. Zhu
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
mhzhu@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
For MCMC methods like Metropolis-Hastings, tuning the proposal distribution is
important in practice for effective sampling from the target distribution π. In this
paper, we present Sample Adaptive MCMC (SA-MCMC), a MCMC method based
on a reversible Markov chain for π ⊗N that uses an adaptive proposal distribution
based on the current state of N points and a sequential substitution procedure
with one new likelihood evaluation per iteration and at most one updated point
each iteration. The SA-MCMC proposal distribution automatically adapts within
its parametric family to best approximate the target distribution, so in contrast to
many existing MCMC methods, SA-MCMC does not require any tuning of the
proposal distribution. Instead, SA-MCMC only requires specifying the initial state
of N points, which can often be chosen a priori, thereby automating the entire
sampling procedure with no tuning required. Experimental results demonstrate the
fast adaptation and effective sampling of SA-MCMC.

1

Introduction

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods are a large class of sampling-based algorithms that
can be applied to solve integration problems in high-dimensional spaces [1]. The goal of MCMC
methods is to sample from a probability distribution π(θ) (known up to some normalization constant)
by constructing a Markov chain with limiting distribution π(θ) that visits points θ with a frequency
proportional to the corresponding probability π(θ).
For MCMC methods like Metropolis-Hastings [2, 3], the choice of the proposal distribution q(·|θ(k) )
is important in practice for effective sampling from the target distribution. Metropolis-Hastings
(MH) is generally used with random walk proposals where local moves based on q(·|θ(k) ) are used
to globally simulate the target distribution π(θ). A suboptimal choice for the scale or shape of
the proposal can lead to inefficient sampling, yet the design of an optimal proposal distribution is
challenging when the properties of the target distribution are unknown, especially in high-dimensional
spaces.
Gelman et al. [4, 5] recommend a two-phase approach where the covariance matrix of the proposal
distribution in phase 2 is proportional to the covariance of the posterior samples from phase 1.
Adaptive MCMC methods such as Adaptive Metropolis [6] continually adapt the proposal distribution
based on the entire history of past states. However, the method is no longer based on a valid Markov
chain, so the usual MCMC convergence theorems do not apply, and the validity of the sampler must
be proved for each specific algorithm under specific technical assumptions [7, 8]. In this paper, we
propose Sample Adaptive MCMC, a method that is adaptive based on the current state of N points
and uses an adaptive proposal which is an adaptive approximation of the target distribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

