Robust and Communication-Efficient
Collaborative Learning
Amirhossein Reisizadeh
ECE Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
reisizadeh@ucsb.edu

Hossein Taheri
ECE Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
hossein@ucsb.edu

Aryan Mokhtari
ECE Department
The University of Texas at Austin
mokhtari@austin.utexas.edu

Hamed Hassani
ESE Department
University of Pennsylvania
hassani@seas.upenn.edu

Ramtin Pedarsani
ECE Department
University of California, Santa Barbara
ramtin@ece.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We consider a decentralized learning problem, where a set of computing nodes aim
at solving a non-convex optimization problem collaboratively. It is well-known that
decentralized optimization schemes face two major system bottlenecks: stragglers’
delay and communication overhead. In this paper, we tackle these bottlenecks by
proposing a novel decentralized and gradient-based optimization algorithm named
as QuanTimed-DSGD. Our algorithm stands on two main ideas: (i) we impose a
deadline on the local gradient computations of each node at each iteration of the
algorithm, and (ii) the nodes exchange quantized versions of their local models. The
first idea robustifies to straggling nodes and the second alleviates communication
efficiency. The key technical contribution of our work is to prove that with nonvanishing noises for quantization and stochastic gradients, the proposed method
exactly converges to the global optimal for convex loss functions, and finds a
first-order stationary point in non-convex scenarios. Our numerical evaluations
of the QuanTimed-DSGD on training benchmark datasets, MNIST and CIFAR10, demonstrate speedups of up to 3⇥ in run-time, compared to state-of-the-art
decentralized optimization methods.

1

Introduction

Collaborative learning refers to the task of learning a common objective among multiple computing
agents without any central node and by using on-device computation and local communication
among neighboring agents. Such tasks have recently gained considerable attention in the context of
machine learning and optimization as they are foundational to several computing paradigms such as
scalability to larger datasets and systems, data locality, ownership and privacy. As such, collaborative
learning naturally arises in various applications such as distributed deep learning (LeCun et al., 2015;
Dean et al., 2012), multi-agent robotics and path planning (Choi and How, 2010; Jha et al., 2016),
distributed resource allocation in wireless networks (Ribeiro, 2010), to name a few.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

