Infra-slow brain dynamics as a marker for cognitive
function and decline
Shagun Ajmera
Centre for Neuroscience
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
ajmerashagun@gmail.com

Shreya Rajagopal
Centre for Neuroscience
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
shreyakr96@gmail.com

Razi Ur Rehman
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
razirmp@gmail.com

Devarajan Sridharan∗
Centre for Neuroscience &
Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore
sridhar@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables measuring human brain
activity, in vivo. Yet, the fMRI hemodynamic response unfolds over very slow
timescales (<0.1-1 Hz), orders of magnitude slower than millisecond timescales of
neural spiking. It is unclear, therefore, if slow dynamics as measured with fMRI
are relevant for cognitive function. We investigated this question with a novel
application of Gaussian Process Factor Analysis (GPFA) and machine learning to
fMRI data. We analyzed slowly sampled (1.4 Hz) fMRI data from 1000 healthy
human participants (Human Connectome Project database), and applied GPFA to
reduce dimensionality and extract smooth latent dynamics. GPFA dimensions with
slow (<1 Hz) characteristic timescales identified, with high accuracy (>95%), the
specific task that each subject was performing inside the fMRI scanner. Moreover,
functional connectivity between slow GPFA latents accurately predicted interindividual differences in behavioral scores across a range of cognitive tasks. Finally,
infra-slow (<0.1 Hz) latent dynamics predicted CDR (Clinical Dementia Rating)
scores of individual patients, and identified patients with mild cognitive impairment
(MCI) who would progress to develop Alzheimer’s dementia (AD). Slow and
infra-slow brain dynamics may be relevant for understanding the neural basis of
cognitive function, in health and disease.

1

Introduction

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is among the few techniques that enable non-invasive
measurement of activity in the living human brain (in vivo) [1]. Although state-of-the-art fMRI scans
can measure activity at high (sub-millimeter) spatial resolution, the fMRI blood-oxygenation level
dependent (BOLD) hemodynamic response occurs over very slow timescales of several seconds (~0.1
Hz), and is typically sampled at a rate of around 1 Hz or less [2] – orders of magnitude slower than
the millisecond timescales of underlying neural activity (>100 Hz). Moreover, fMRI measurements
are noisy: sources of noise include scanner noise, head movement artifacts and physiological artifacts
that systematically confound the fMRI signal [3]. Thus, fMRI BOLD activity reflects an indirect,
noisy measure of neural activity, mismatched to neural timescales by several orders of magnitude.
Previous studies have linked the BOLD response to underlying neurophysiological signals at various
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

