The Fairness of Risk Scores Beyond Classification:
Bipartite Ranking and the xAUC Metric
Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu

Angela Zhou
Cornell University
New York, NY
az434@cornell.edu

Abstract
Where machine-learned predictive risk scores inform high-stakes decisions, such
as bail and sentencing in criminal justice, fairness has been a serious concern.
Recent work has characterized the disparate impact that such risk scores can have
when used for a binary classification task. This may not account, however, for
the more diverse downstream uses of risk scores and their non-binary nature. To
better account for this, in this paper, we investigate the fairness of predictive
risk scores from the point of view of a bipartite ranking task, where one seeks
to rank positive examples higher than negative ones. We introduce the xAUC
disparity as a metric to assess the disparate impact of risk scores and define it
as the difference in the probabilities of ranking a random positive example from
one protected group above a negative one from another group and vice versa. We
provide a decomposition of bipartite ranking loss into components that involve the
discrepancy and components that involve pure predictive ability within each group.
We use xAUC analysis to audit predictive risk scores for recidivism prediction,
income prediction, and cardiac arrest prediction, where it describes disparities that
are not evident from simply comparing within-group predictive performance.

1

Introduction

Predictive risk scores support decision-making in high-stakes settings such as bail sentencing in the
criminal justice system, triage and preventive care in healthcare, and lending decisions in the credit
industry [2, 38]. In these areas where predictive errors can significantly impact individuals involved,
studies of fairness in machine learning have analyzed the possible disparate impact introduced by
predictive risk scores primarily in a binary classification setting: if predictions determine whether or
not someone is detained pre-trial, is admitted into critical care, or is extended a loan. But the “human
in the loop” with risk assessment tools often has recourse to make decisions about extent, intensity, or
prioritization of resources. That is, in practice, predictive risk scores are used to provide informative
rank-orderings of individuals with binary outcomes in the following settings:
(1) In criminal justice, the “risk-needs-responsivity” model emphasizes matching the level of
social service interventions to the specific individual’s risk of re-offending [3, 6].
(2) In healthcare and other clinical decision-making settings, risk scores are used as decision
aids for prevention of chronic disease or triage of health resources, where a variety of
interventional resource intensities are available; however, the prediction quality of individual
conditional probability estimates can be poor [9, 28, 38, 39].
(3) In credit, predictions of default risk affect not only loan acceptance/rejection decisions, but
also risk-based setting of interest rates. Fuster et al. [22] embed machine-learned credit
scores in an economic pricing model which suggests negative economic welfare impacts on
Black and Hispanic borrowers.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

