Bat-G net: Bat-inspired High-Resolution 3D Image
Reconstruction using Ultrasonic Echoes

Gunpil Hwang∗ , Seohyeon Kim∗, and Hyeon-Min Bae
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, South Korea
{gphwang, dddokman, hmbae}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, a bat-inspired high-resolution ultrasound 3D imaging system is presented. Live bats demonstrate that the properly used ultrasound can be used to
perceive 3D space. With this in mind, a neural network referred to as a Bat-G
network is implemented to reconstruct the 3D representation of target objects from
the hyperbolic FM (HFM) chirped ultrasonic echoes. The Bat-G network consists
of an encoder emulating a bat's central auditory pathway, and a 3D graphical visualization decoder. For the acquisition of the ultrasound data, a custom-made Bat-I
sensor module is used. The Bat-G network shows the uniform 3D reconstruction
results and achieves precision, recall, and F1-score of 0.896, 0.899, and 0.895, respectively. The experimental results demonstrate the implementation feasibility of
a high-resolution non-optical sound-based imaging system being used by live bats.
The project web page (https://sites.google.com/view/batgnet) contains
additional content summarizing our research.

1

Introduction

Recent improvements in sensor and information processing technologies have made significant
contributions to the progress of numerous unmanned systems (UMS) such as a drone, an autonomous
vehicle, and a robot. In order for UMS to reach full autonomous level that does not require any
human intervention, the collected data from sensors in UMS should suffice to manage the entire
environmental scenarios. Therefore, UMS commonly employs a combination of sensors including
RGB-D cameras, RADARs, LIDARs, and ultrasonic sensors that are complementary to each other.
Both RGB-D camera and LIDAR provide abundant high-resolution visual information, however, the
visibility and accuracy can be severely compromised depending on environmental/weather conditions
as shown in Fig. 1(a). On the contrary, RADAR and conventional ultrasonic sensors, measuring
the time-of-flight of the reflected signal, are relatively less sensitive to operating circumstances but
merely provide low-resolution ranging information [1, 2]. Consequently, a clear need exists for an
imaging sensor that can precisely visualize 3D space irrespective of environmental conditions.
In this paper, a high-resolution ultrasound 3D imaging system emulating the echolocation mechanism
of a live bat is presented. Among many outstanding features of a bat's sensory system that enables
accurate 3D perception, three following key points are essentials: (1) Bats localize obstacles and
discriminate prey by analyzing the echoes of emitted ultrasound pulses, which is called echolocation
[3–5]. The emitted ultrasound signal from a bat is frequency-chirped over a wide frequency range,
which plays a critical role in recognizing the shape of an object from the echo spectra [6]. Hence, the
proposed system employs a frequency-chirped broadcasting ultrasound signal in the range of 20-120
kHz as shown in Fig. 1(b). (2) Echolocation is an inverse problem where the spatial information
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

