Hindsight Credit Assignment

Anna Harutyunyan, Will Dabney, Thomas Mesnard, Nicolas Heess, Mohammad G. Azar,
Bilal Piot, Hado van Hasselt, Satinder Singh, Greg Wayne, Doina Precup, Rémi Munos
DeepMind
{harutyunyan, wdabney, munos}@google.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of efficient credit assignment in reinforcement learning.
In order to efficiently and meaningfully utilize new data, we propose to explicitly
assign credit to past decisions based on the likelihood of them having led to the
observed outcome. This approach uses new information in hindsight, rather than
employing foresight. Somewhat surprisingly, we show that value functions can
be rewritten through this lens, yielding a new family of algorithms. We study the
properties of these algorithms, and empirically show that they successfully address
important credit assignment challenges, through a set of illustrative tasks.

1

Introduction

A reinforcement learning (RL) agent is tasked with two fundamental, interdependent problems:
exploration (how to discover useful data), and credit assignment (how to incorporate it). In this work,
we take a careful look at the problem of credit assignment. The instrumental learning object in RL –
the value function – quantifies the following question: “how does choosing an action a in a state x
affect future return?”. This is a challenging question for several reasons.
Issue 1: Variance. The simplest way of estimating the value function is by averaging returns
(future discounted sums of rewards) starting from taking a in x. This Monte Carlo style of estimation
is inefficient, since there can be a lot of randomness in trajectories.
Issue 2: Partial observability. To amortize the search and reduce variance, temporal difference
(TD) methods, like Sarsa and Q-learning, use a learned approximation of the value function and
bootstrap. This introduces bias due to the approximation, as well as a reliance on the Markov
assumption, which is especially problematic when the agent operates outside of a Markov Decision
Process (MDP), for example if the state is partially observed, or if there is function approximation.
Bootstrapping may then cause the value function to not converge at all, or to remain permanently
biased [19].
Issue 3: Time as a proxy. TD(λ) methods control this bias-variance trade-off, but they rely on
time as the sole metric for relevance: the more recent the action, the more credit or blame it receives
from a future reward [20, 21]. Although time is a reasonable proxy for cause-and-effect (especially
in MDPs), in general it is a heuristic, and can hence be improved by learning.
Issue 4: No counterfactuals. The only data used for estimating an action’s value are trajectories
that contain that action, while ideally we would like to be able to use the same trajectory to update all
relevant actions, not just the ones that happened to (serendipitously) occur.
Figure 1 illustrates these issues concretely. At the high-level, we wish to achieve credit assignment
mechanisms that are both sample-efficient (issues 1 and 4), and expressive (issues 2 and 3). To this
end, we propose to reverse the key learning question, and learn estimators that measure: “given
the future outcome (reward or state), how relevant was the choice of a in x to achieve it?”, which
is essentially the credit assignment question itself. Although eligibility traces consider the same
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

