PRNet: Self-Supervised Learning for
Partial-to-Partial Registration
Yue Wang
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
yuewangx@mit.edu

Justin Solomon
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
jsolomon@mit.edu

Abstract
We present a simple, flexible, and general framework titled Partial Registration Network (PRNet), for partial-to-partial point cloud registration. Inspired by recentlyproposed learning-based methods for registration, we use deep networks to tackle
non-convexity of the alignment and partial correspondence problems. While previous learning-based methods assume the entire shape is visible, PRNet is suitable for
partial-to-partial registration, outperforming PointNetLK, DCP, and non-learning
methods on synthetic data. PRNet is self-supervised, jointly learning an appropriate
geometric representation, a keypoint detector that finds points in common between
partial views, and keypoint-to-keypoint correspondences. We show PRNet predicts
keypoints and correspondences consistently across views and objects. Furthermore,
the learned representation is transferable to classification.

1

Introduction

Registration is the problem of predicting a rigid motion aligning one point cloud to another. Algorithms for this task have steadily improved, using machinery from vision, graphics, and optimization.
These methods, however, are usually orders of magnitude slower than “vanilla” Iterative Closest
Point (ICP), and some have hyperparameters that must be tuned case-by-case. The trade-off between
efficiency and effectiveness is steep, reducing generalizability and/or practicality.
Recently, PointNetLK [1] and Deep Closest Point (DCP) [2] show that learning-based registration
can be faster and more robust than classical methods, even when trained on different datasets. These
methods, however, cannot handle partial-to-partial registration, and their one-shot constructions
preclude refinement of the predicted alignment.
We introduce the Partial Registration Network (PRNet), a sequential decision-making framework
designed to solve a broad class of registration problems. Like ICP, our method is designed to be
applied iteratively, enabling coarse-to-fine refinement of an initial registration estimate. A critical
new component of our framework is a keypoint detection sub-module, which identifies points that
match in the input point clouds based on co-contextual information. Partial-to-partial point cloud
registration then boils down to detecting keypoints the two point clouds have in common, matching
these keypoints to one another, and solving the Procrustes problem.
Since PRNet is designed to be applied iteratively, we use Gumbel–Softmax [3] with a straight-through
gradient estimator to sample keypoint correspondences. This new architecture and learning procedure
modulates the sharpness of the matching; distant point clouds given to PRNet can be coarsely matched
using a diffuse (fuzzy) matching, while the final refinement iterations prefer sharper maps. Rather
than introducing another hyperparameter, PRNet uses a sub-network to predict the temperature [4] of
the Gumbel–Softmax correspondence, which can be cast as a simplified version of the actor-critic
method. That is, PRNet learns to modulate the level of map sharpness each time it is applied.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

