PC-Fairness: A Unified Framework for Measuring
Causality-based Fairness

Yongkai Wu
University of Arkansas
yw009@uark.edu
Xintao Wu
University of Arkansas
xintaowu@uark.edu

Lu Zhang
University of Arkansas
lz006@uark.edu
Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
htong@illinois.edu

Abstract
A recent trend of fair machine learning is to define fairness as causality-based
notions which concern the causal connection between protected attributes and
decisions. However, one common challenge of all causality-based fairness notions
is identifiability, i.e., whether they can be uniquely measured from observational
data, which is a critical barrier to applying these notions to real-world situations.
In this paper, we develop a framework for measuring different causality-based fairness. We propose a unified definition that covers most of previous causality-based
fairness notions, namely the path-specific counterfactual fairness (PC fairness).
Based on that, we propose a general method in the form of a constrained optimization problem for bounding the path-specific counterfactual fairness under all
unidentifiable situations. Experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets show
the correctness and effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Fair machine learning is now an important research field which studies how to develop predictive
machine learning models such that decisions made with their assistance fairly treat all groups of
people irrespective of their protected attributes such as gender, race, etc. A recent trend in this field is
to define fairness as causality-based notions which concern the causal connection between protected
attributes and decisions. Based on Pearl’s structural causal models [8], a number of causality-based
fairness notions have been proposed for capturing fairness in different situations, including total effect
[19, 16, 20], direct/indirect discrimination [19, 16, 7, 20], and counterfactual fairness [5, 14, 15, 9].
One common challenge of all causality-based fairness notions is identifiability, i.e., whether they can
be uniquely measured from observational data. As causality-based fairness notions are defined based
on different types of causal effects, such as total effect on interventions, direct/indirect discrimination
on path-specific effects, and counterfactual fairness on counterfactual effects, their identifiability
depends on the identifiability of these causal effects. Unfortunately, in many situations these causal
effects are in general unidentifiable, referred to as unidentifiable situations [12]. Identifiability is a
critical barrier for the causality-based fairness to be applied to real applications. In previous works,
simplifying assumptions are proposed to evade this problem [5, 19, 4]. However, these simplifications
may severely damage the performance of predictive models. In [20] the authors propose a method
to bound indirect discrimination as the path-specific effect in unidentifiable situations, and in [14] a
method is proposed to bound counterfactual fairness. Nevertheless, the tightness of these methods is
not analyzed. In addition, it is not clear whether these methods can be applied to other unidentifiable
situations, and more importantly, a combination of multiple unidentifiable situations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

