Learning to Predict Without Looking Ahead:
World Models Without Forward Prediction
C. Daniel Freeman, Luke Metz, David Ha
Google Brain
{cdfreeman, lmetz, hadavid}@google.com

Abstract
Much of model-based reinforcement learning involves learning a model of an
agent’s world, and training an agent to leverage this model to perform a task more
efficiently. While these models are demonstrably useful for agents, every naturally
occurring model of the world of which we are aware—e.g., a brain—arose as the
byproduct of competing evolutionary pressures for survival, not minimization of a
supervised forward-predictive loss via gradient descent. That useful models can
arise out of the messy and slow optimization process of evolution suggests that
forward-predictive modeling can arise as a side-effect of optimization under the
right circumstances. Crucially, this optimization process need not explicitly be a
forward-predictive loss. In this work, we introduce a modification to traditional
reinforcement learning which we call observational dropout, whereby we limit
the agents ability to observe the real environment at each timestep. In doing so,
we can coerce an agent into learning a world model to fill in the observation gaps
during reinforcement learning. We show that the emerged world model, while
not explicitly trained to predict the future, can help the agent learn key skills
required to perform well in its environment. Videos of our results available at
https://learningtopredict.github.io/

1

Introduction

Much of the motivation of model-based reinforcement learning (RL) derives from the potential utility
of learned models for downstream tasks, like prediction [13, 15], planning [1, 35, 40, 41, 43, 64], and
counterfactual reasoning [9, 28]. Whether such models are learned from data, or created from domain
knowledge, there’s an implicit assumption that an agent’s world model [21, 52, 66] is a forward model
for predicting future states. While a perfect forward model will undoubtedly deliver great utility, they
are difficult to create, thus much of the research has been focused on either dealing with uncertainties
of forward models [11, 16, 21], or improving their prediction accuracy [22, 28]. While progress has
been made with current approaches, it is not clear that models trained explicitly to perform forward
prediction are the only possible or even desirable solution.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Figure 1: Our agent is given only infrequent observations of its environment (e.g., frames 1, 8),
and must learn a world model to fill in the observation gaps. The colorless cart-pole represents the
predicted observations seen by the policy. Under such constraints, we show that world models can
emerge so that the policy can still perform well on a swing-up cart-pole environment.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

