Multi-Resolution Weak Supervision
for Sequential Data

Frederic Sala∗ Paroma Varma∗ Jason Fries Daniel Y. Fu
Shiori Sagawa Saelig Khattar Ashwini Ramamoorthy
Ke Xiao Kayvon Fatahalian James Priest Christopher Ré
{fredsala, paroma, jfries, danfu, sagawas, saelig, ashwinir, ˙
k̇ayvonf, jpriest, chrismre}@stanford.edu, kexiao@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Since manually labeling training data is slow and expensive, recent industrial and scientific research efforts have turned to weaker or noisier forms of supervision sources.
However, existing weak supervision approaches fail to model multi-resolution
sources for sequential data, like video, that can assign labels to individual elements
or collections of elements in a sequence. A key challenge in weak supervision is
estimating the unknown accuracies and correlations of these sources without using
labeled data. Multi-resolution sources exacerbate this challenge due to complex
correlations and sample complexity that scales in the length of the sequence. We
propose Dugong, the first framework to model multi-resolution weak supervision
sources with complex correlations to assign probabilistic labels to training data.
Theoretically, we prove that Dugong, under mild conditions, can uniquely recover
the unobserved accuracy and correlation parameters and use parameter sharing
to improve sample complexity. Our method assigns clinician-validated labels to
population-scale biomedical video repositories, helping outperform traditional
supervision by 36.8 F1 points and addressing a key use case where machine learning
has been severely limited by the lack of expert labeled data. On average, Dugong improves over traditional supervision by 16.0 F1 points and existing weak supervision
approaches by 24.2 F1 points across several video and sensor classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning models rely on a large amount of labeled data for their success. However,
since hand-labeling training sets is slow and expensive, domain experts are turning to weaker, or noisier
forms of supervision sources like heuristic patterns [10], distant supervision [18], and user-defined
programmatic functions [22] to generate training labels. The goal of weak supervision frameworks is
to automatically generate training labels to supervise arbitrary machine learning models by estimating
unknown source accuracies [8, 13, 21, 24, 28, 29].
Using these frameworks, practitioners can leverage the power of complex, discriminative models
without hand-labeling large training sets by encoding domain knowledge in supervision sources.
This approach has achieved state-of-the-art performance in many applications [19, 28] and has been
deployed by several large companies [2, 4, 5, 11, 15, 16]. However, current techniques do not account
for sources that assign labels at multiple resolutions (e.g. labeling individual elements and collections
of elements), which is common in sequential modalities like sensor data and video.
Consider training a deep learning model to detect interviews in TV news videos [7]. As shown in
Figure 1, supervision sources used to generate training labels can draw on indirect signals from closed
caption transcripts (per-scene), bounding box movement between frames (per-window), and pixels
in the background of each frame (per-frame). However, existing weak supervision frameworks cannot
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

