A Domain Agnostic Measure for Monitoring and
Evaluating GANs

Paulina Grnarova∗
ETH Zurich

Kfir Y. Levy
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology

Nathanaël Perraudin
Swiss Data Science Center

Ian Goodfellow

Thomas Hofmann
ETH Zurich

Aurelien Lucchi
ETH Zurich
Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown remarkable results in modeling complex distributions, but their evaluation remains an unsettled issue. Evaluations are essential for: (i) relative assessment of different models and (ii) monitoring
the progress of a single model throughout training. The latter cannot be determined
by simply inspecting the generator and discriminator loss curves as they behave
non-intuitively. We leverage the notion of duality gap from game theory to propose
a measure that addresses both (i) and (ii) at a low computational cost. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of this measure to rank different GAN
models and capture the typical GAN failure scenarios, including mode collapse
and non-convergent behaviours. This evaluation metric also provides meaningful
monitoring on the progression of the loss during training. It highly correlates with
FID on natural image datasets, and with domain specific scores for text, sound
and cosmology data where FID is not directly suitable. In particular, our proposed
metric requires no labels or a pretrained classifier, making it domain agnostic.

1

Introduction

In recent years, a large body of research has focused on practical and theoretical aspects of Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [9]. This has led to the development of several GAN variants [24, 2]
as well as some evaluation metrics such as FID or the Inception score that are both data-dependent
and dedicated to images. A domain independent quantitative metric is however still a key missing
ingredient that hinders further developments.
One of the main reasons behind the lack of such a metric originates from the nature of GANs that
implement an adversarial game between two players, namely a generator and a discriminator. Let us
denote the data distribution by pdata (x), the model distribution by pu (x) and the prior over latent
variables by pz . A probabilistic discriminator is denoted by Dv : x 7→ [0; 1] and a generator by
Gu : z 7→ x. The GAN objective is:
1
1
(1)
Ex∼pdata log Dv (x) + Ez∼pz log(1 − Dv (Gu (z))).
2
2
Each of the two players tries to optimize their own objective, which is exactly balanced by the loss
of the other player, thus yielding a two-player zero-sum minimax game. The minimax nature of the
objective and the use of neural networks as players make the process of learning a generative model
challenging. We focus our attention on two of the central open issues behind these difficulties and
how they translate to a need for an assessment metric.
min max M (u, v) =
u

∗

v

Correspondence to paulina.grnarova@inf.ethz.ch

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

