Fixing Implicit Derivatives: Trust-Region Based
Learning of Continuous Energy Functions

Matteo Toso
CVSSP,
University of Surrey

Neill D. F. Campbell
University of Bath

Chris Russell
CVSSP, University of Surrey
and The Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
We present a new technique for the learning of continuous energy functions that
we refer to as Wibergian Learning. One common approach to inverse problems
is to cast them as an energy minimisation problem, where the minimum cost
solution found is used as an estimator of hidden parameters. Our new approach
formally characterises the dependency between weights that control the shape of
the energy function, and the location of minima, by describing minima as fixed
points of optimisation methods. This allows for the use of gradient-based end-toend training to integrate deep-learning and the classical inverse problem methods.
We show how our approach can be applied to obtain state-of-the-art results in the
diverse applications of tracker fusion and multiview 3D reconstruction.

1

Introduction

Although deep networks are now ubiquitous in machine learning and computer vision, prior to this,
there was a strong and established literature on inverse problems that made use of geometric and
probabilistic models to reason about the world. These models remain much easier for humans to
interpret than deep learning approaches, as they perform a small number of complex operations while
deep learning involves many simple operations. This is further aided by the geometric nature of many
of the models that makes them easier to visualise.
Continuous inverse problems - like SfM, tomography, and EEG signal analysis - often have a strong
theoretical basis, being built upon explicit Bayesian models of physical phenomena. These methods
have strong and robust performances, thanks to decades of refinement, experience, and hand-crafted
priors. However, they have fallen out of favour to deep-learning methods that allow for end-to-end
fitting of parameters that tailor the model to directly maximise performance over a specified loss.
Coupling parameters and solutions: Arguably the primary factor in their decline, is that inverse
problems are much harder to train owing to the numerical optimisation that lies at the core of their
use. Internally, the solution to an inverse problem is generated by fitting a model to a single instance
of data as part of a search for a Maximum a Posteriori estimate. This step creates an extra layer of
indirection between the solution found and the parameters that define the probabilistic model.
Without a direct coupling between the solution and the parameters it is not possible to perform
end-to-end learning and these classical methods have been relegated to ad hoc post-processing of
deep learning results. By formally characterising the dependency between these parameters and the
resulting MAP estimates, we show how end-to-end training can integrate deep learning and classical
inverse problem methods, giving rise to high-performant and interpretable models.
End-to-end learning with inverse problems: This work shows how to integrate continuous energy
minimisation in a general learning framework, combining models developed over decades and deep
learning methods, and jointly training them end-to-end. We provide a straightforward derivation for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

