Are Anchor Points Really Indispensable
in Label-Noise Learning?
Xiaobo Xia1,2 Tongliang Liu1 Nannan Wang2
Bo Han3 Chen Gong4 Gang Niu3 Masashi Sugiyama3,5
4

1
University of Sydney 2 Xidian University 3 RIKEN
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 5 University of Tokyo

Abstract
In label-noise learning, the noise transition matrix, denoting the probabilities that
clean labels flip into noisy labels, plays a central role in building statistically
consistent classifiers. Existing theories have shown that the transition matrix can be
learned by exploiting anchor points (i.e., data points that belong to a specific class
almost surely). However, when there are no anchor points, the transition matrix
will be poorly learned, and those previously consistent classifiers will significantly
degenerate. In this paper, without employing anchor points, we propose a transitionrevision (T -Revision) method to effectively learn transition matrices, leading to
better classifiers. Specifically, to learn a transition matrix, we first initialize it by
exploiting data points that are similar to anchor points, having high noisy class
posterior probabilities. Then, we modify the initialized matrix by adding a slack
variable, which can be learned and validated together with the classifier by using
noisy data. Empirical results on benchmark-simulated and real-world label-noise
datasets demonstrate that without using exact anchor points, the proposed method
is superior to state-of-the-art label-noise learning methods.

1

Introduction

Label-noise learning can be dated back to [1] but becomes a more and more important topic recently.
The reason is that, in this era, datasets are becoming bigger and bigger. Often, large-scale datasets
are infeasible to be annotated accurately due to the expensive cost, which naturally brings us cheap
datasets with noisy labels.
Existing methods for label-noise learning can be generally divided into two categories: algorithms that
result in statistically inconsistent/consistent classifiers. Methods in the first category usually employ
heuristics to reduce the side-effect of noisy labels. For example, many state-of-the-art approaches
in this category are specifically designed to, e.g., select reliable examples [45, 14, 24], reweight
examples [33, 15], correct labels [23, 17, 37, 32], employ side information [39, 21], and (implicitly)
add regularization [13, 12, 43, 39, 21]. All those methods were reported to work empirically very
well. However, the differences between the learned classifiers and the optimal ones for clean data are
not guaranteed to vanish, i.e., no statistical consistency has been guaranteed.
The above issue motivates researchers to explore algorithms in the second category: risk-/classifierconsistent algorithms. In general, risk-consistent methods possess statistically consistent estimators
to the clean risk (i.e., risk w.r.t. the clean data), while classifier-consistent methods guarantee the
classifier learned from the noisy data is consistent to the optimal classifier (i.e., the minimizer of the
clean risk) [42]. Methods in this category utilize the noise transition matrix, denoting the probabilities
that clean labels flip into noisy labels, to build consistent algorithms. Let Y denote the variable
for the clean label, Ȳ the noisy label, and X the instance/feature. The basic idea is that given the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

