Sampling Sketches for
Concave Sublinear Functions of Frequencies

Edith Cohen
Google Research, CA
Tel Aviv University, Israel
edith@cohenwang.com

Ofir Geri
Stanford University, CA
ofirgeri@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider massive distributed datasets that consist of elements modeled as keyvalue pairs and the task of computing statistics or aggregates where the contribution
of each key is weighted by a function of its frequency (sum of values of its elements).
This fundamental problem has a wealth of applications in data analytics and
machine learning, in particular, with concave sublinear functions of the frequencies
that mitigate the disproportionate effect of keys with high frequency. The family
of concave sublinear functions includes low frequency moments (𝑝 ≤ 1), capping,
logarithms, and their compositions. A common approach is to sample keys, ideally,
proportionally to their contributions and estimate statistics from the sample. A
simple but costly way to do this is by aggregating the data to produce a table of keys
and their frequencies, apply our function to the frequency values, and then apply
a weighted sampling scheme. Our main contribution is the design of composable
sampling sketches that can be tailored to any concave sublinear function of the
frequencies. Our sketch structure size is very close to the desired sample size and
our samples provide statistical guarantees on the estimation quality that are very
close to that of an ideal sample of the same size computed over aggregated data.
Finally, we demonstrate experimentally the simplicity and effectiveness of our
methods.

1

Introduction

We consider massive distributed datasets that consist of elements that are key-value pairs 𝑒 =
(𝑒.key, 𝑒.val ) with 𝑒.val > 0. The elements are generated or stored on a large number of servers
or devices. A key 𝑥 may repeat in multiple elements, ∑︀
and we define its frequency 𝜈𝑥 to be the
sum of values of the elements with that key, i.e., 𝜈𝑥 := 𝑒|𝑒.key=𝑥 𝑒.val . For example, the keys
can be search queries, videos, terms, users, or tuples of entities (such as video co-watches or term
co-occurrences) and each data element can correspond to an occurrence or an interaction involving
this key: the search query was issued, the video was watched, or two terms co-occurred in a typed
sentence. An instructive common special case is when all elements have the same value 1 and the
frequency 𝜈𝑥 of each key 𝑥 in the dataset is simply the number of elements with key 𝑥.
A common task is to compute statistics or aggregates, which are sums over key contributions.
The contribution of each key 𝑥 is weighted by a function
∑︀ of its frequency 𝜈𝑥 . One example of
such sum aggregates are queries of domain statistics 𝑥∈𝐻 𝜈𝑥 for some domain (subset of keys)
𝐻. The domains of interest are often overlapping and specified at query time. Sum aggregates
also arise as components of a larger pipeline, such as the training of a machine learning model
with parameters
∑︀ 𝜃, labeled examples 𝑥 ∈ 𝒳 with frequencies 𝜈𝑥 , and a loss objective of the form
ℓ(𝒳 ; 𝜃) = 𝑥 𝑓 (𝜈𝑥 )𝐿(𝑥; 𝜃). The function 𝑓 that is applied to the frequencies can be any concave
sublinear function. Concave sublinear functions, which we discuss further below, are used in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

