Graph-Based Semi-Supervised Learning with
Nonignorable Nonresponses

Fan Zhou1 , Tengfei Li2 , Haibo Zhou2 , Jieping Ye3 , Hongtu Zhu3,2
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics1 , zhoufan@mail.shufe.edu.cn
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill2 , tengfei_li@med.unc.edu,zhou@bios.unc.edu
AI Labs, Didi Chuxing 3 , {yejieping,zhuhongtu}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
Graph-based semi-supervised learning is very important for many classification
tasks, but most existing methods assume that all labelled nodes are randomly
sampled. With the presence of nonignorable nonresponse, ignoring all missing
nodes can lead to significant estimation bias and handicap the classifiers. To solve
this issue, we propose a Graph-based joint model with Nonignorable Missingness
(GNM) and develop an imputation and inverse probability weighting estimation
approach. We further use graphical neural networks to model nonlinear link
functions and then use a gradient descent (GD) algorithm to estimate all the
parameters of GNM. We prove the identifiability of the GNM model and validate
their predictive performance in both simulations and real data analysis through
comparing with models ignoring or misspecifying the missingness mechanism.
Our method can achieve up to 7.5% improvement than the baseline model for the
document classification task on the Cora dataset.

1

Introduction

Graph-based semi-supervised learning problem has been increasingly studied due to more and more
real graph datasets. The problem is to predict all the unlabelled nodes in the graph based on only a
small subset of nodes being observed. A popular method is to use the graph Laplacian regularization
to learn node representations, such as label propagation [25] and manifold regularization [3]. Recently,
attention has shifted to the learning of network embeddings [12, 13, 20, 7, 23, 10, 6]. Almost all
existing methods assume that the labelled nodes are randomly selected. However, the probability of
missingness may depend on the unobserved data after conditioning on the observed data in the real
world. For example, when predicting the traffic volume of a road network, sensors used to collect
data are usually set up at intersections with large traffic flow. A researcher is more likely to label
the documents in a citation network that fall into the categories which he or she is more familiar
with. In these cases, non-responses may be missing not at random (MNAR). Ignoring nonignorable
nonresponses may be unable to capture the representativeness of remaining samples, leading to
significant estimation bias.
Modeling non-ignorable missingness is challenging because the MNAR mechanism is usually
unknown and may require additional model identifiability assumptions [5, 14, 21]. A popular method
assigns the inverse of estimated response probabilities as weights to the observed nodes [16, 4],
but these procedures are designed for the missing at random (MAR) mechanism instead of MNAR.
Another method is to impute missing data by using observed data [18, 19, 11]. Some more advanced
methods [24, 21] have been proposed to estimate the non-ignorable missingness using external
data [8], but such data is often unavailable in many applications, making these methods infeasible.
Moreover, all these methods are built on simple regressions and are not directly applied to graphs.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

