Selecting Optimal Decisions via Distributionally
Robust Nearest-Neighbor Regression

Ruidi Chen
Division of Systems Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
rchen15@bu.edu

Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis ∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Division of Systems Engineering
and Department of Biomedical Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
yannisp@bu.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a prediction-based prescriptive model for optimal decision
making that (i) predicts the outcome under each action using a robust nonlinear
model, and (ii) adopts a randomized prescriptive policy determined by the predicted
outcomes. The predictive model combines a new regularized regression technique,
which was developed using Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) with
an ambiguity set constructed from the Wasserstein metric, with the K-Nearest
Neighbors (K-NN) regression, which helps to capture the nonlinearity embedded in
the data. We show theoretical results that guarantee the out-of-sample performance
of the predictive model, and prove the optimality of the randomized policy in terms
of the expected true future outcome. We demonstrate the proposed methodology
on a hypertension dataset, showing that our prescribed treatment leads to a larger
reduction in the systolic blood pressure compared to a series of alternatives. A
clinically meaningful threshold level used to activate the randomized policy is also
derived under a sub-Gaussian assumption on the predicted outcome.

1

Introduction

Suppose we are given a discrete set of available actions [M ] , {1, . . . , M }, and our goal is to choose
m ∈ [M ] such that the future outcome y is optimized. We are interested in finding the optimal
decision with the aid of auxiliary data x ∈ Rp that are concurrently observed, and correlated with
the uncertain outcome y. A main challenge with learning from observational data lies in the lack of
counterfactual information. One solution is to estimate/predict the effects of counterfactual policies
by learning an action-dependent predictive model that groups the training samples based on their
actions, and fits a model in each group between the outcome y and the feature x. The predictions
from this composite model can be used to determine the optimal action to take. The performance of
the prescribed decision hinges on the quality of the predictive model. We have observed that (i) there
are often “outliers” in the data, especially in the medical applications motivating this work, caused
by recording errors, missing values, and factors not captured in the data, and (ii) the underlying
relationship we try to learn is usually nonlinear and its parametric form is not known a priori. To deal
with these issues, a nonparametric robust learning procedure is in need.
Motivated by the observation that individuals with similar features x would have similar outcomes y
if they were to take the same action, we propose a predictive model that makes predictions based
on the outcomes of similar individuals/neighbors in each group of the training set. It is a nonlinear
and nonparametric estimator which constructs locally linear (constant) curves based on the similarity
between individuals. To find reasonable neighbors, we need to accurately identify the set of features
that are predictive of the outcome. We propose a regularized regression procedure for this task in
∗

http://sites.bu.edu/paschalidis

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

