Adversarial Music: Real World Audio Adversary
Against Wake-word Detection System

Juncheng B. Li1
junchenl@cs.cmu.edu

Shuhui Qu3
shuhuiq@stanford.edu

Xinjian Li1
xinjianl@cs.cmu.edu

Joseph Szurley2
jszurley@bosch.com

J. Zico Kolter1,2
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Florian Metze1
fmetze@cs.cmu.edu

1

Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, 3 Stanford University

Abstract
Voice Assistants (VAs) such as Amazon Alexa or Google Assistant rely on wakeword detection to respond to people’s commands, which could potentially be
vulnerable to audio adversarial examples. In this work, we target our attack on
the wake-word detection system, jamming the model with some inconspicuous
background music to deactivate the VAs while our audio adversary is present.
We implemented an emulated wake-word detection system of Amazon Alexa
based on recent publications. We validated our models against the real Alexa in
terms of wake-word detection accuracy. Then we computed our audio adversaries
with consideration of expectation over transform and we implemented our audio
adversary with a differentiable synthesizer. Next we verified our audio adversaries
digitally on hundreds of samples of utterances collected from the real world. Our
experiments show that we can effectively reduce the recognition F1 score of our
emulated model from 93.4% to 11.0%. Finally, we tested our audio adversary over
the air, and verified it works effectively against Alexa, reducing its F1 score from
92.5% to 11.0%.1 We also verified that non-adversarial music does not disable
Alexa as effectively as our music at the same sound level. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first real-world adversarial attack against a commercial grade
VA wake-word detection system.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks on machine learning systems are a topic of growing importance. As machine
learning becomes ever more prevalent in all aspects of modern life, concerns about safety tend to gain
prominence as well. Recent demonstrations of the ease with which machine learning systems can be
“fooled” have caused a strong impact in the field and in the general media. Systems that use voice
and audio such as Amazon Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple Siri and Microsoft Cortana are growing
in popularity, and their applications maybe safety critical in cases like in a car. The hidden risk of
those advancements is that those systems are potentially vulnerable to adversarial attacks from an
ill-intended third-party. Despite the recent growth in consumer presence of audio-based artificial
intelligence products, attacks on audio and speech systems have received much less attention than the
image and language domains so far.
1

Our code and demo videos can be accessed at https://www.junchengbillyli.com/
AdversarialMusic; F1 score is the metric we chose here since detection and false alarms are equally
damaging
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

