On Tractable Computation of Expected Predictions

Pasha Khosravi, YooJung Choi, Yitao Liang, Antonio Vergari, and Guy Van den Broeck
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
{pashak,yjchoi,yliang,aver,guyvdb}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Computing expected predictions of discriminative models is a fundamental task
in machine learning that appears in many interesting applications such as fairness,
handling missing values, and data analysis. Unfortunately, computing expectations
of a discriminative model with respect to a probability distribution defined by an
arbitrary generative model has been proven to be hard in general. In fact, the
task is intractable even for simple models such as logistic regression and a naive
Bayes distribution. In this paper, we identify a pair of generative and discriminative
models that enables tractable computation of expectations, as well as moments of
any order, of the latter with respect to the former in case of regression. Specifically,
we consider expressive probabilistic circuits with certain structural constraints
that support tractable probabilistic inference. Moreover, we exploit the tractable
computation of high-order moments to derive an algorithm to approximate the
expectations for classification scenarios in which exact computations are intractable.
Our framework to compute expected predictions allows for handling of missing
data during prediction time in a principled and accurate way and enables reasoning
about the behavior of discriminative models. We empirically show our algorithm
to consistently outperform standard imputation techniques on a variety of datasets.
Finally, we illustrate how our framework can be used for exploratory data analysis.

1

Introduction

Learning predictive models like regressors or classifiers from data has become a routine exercise
in machine learning nowadays. Nevertheless, making predictions and reasoning about classifier
behavior on unseen data is still a highly challenging task for many real-world applications. This is
even more true when data is affected by uncertainty, e.g., in the case of noisy or missing observations.
A principled way to deal with this kind of uncertainty would be to probabilistically reason about the
expected outcomes of a predictive model on a particular feature distribution. That is, to compute
mathematical expectations of the predictive model w.r.t. a generative model representing the feature
distribution. This is a common need that arises in many scenarios including dealing with missing
data [20, 14], performing feature selection [37, 4, 7], handling sensor failure and resource scaling [12],
seeking explanations [25, 21, 3] or determining how “fair” the learned predictor is [38, 39, 8].
While dealing with the above expectations is ubiquitous in machine learning, computing the expected
predictions of an arbitrary discriminative models w.r.t. an arbitrary generative model is in general
computationally intractable [14, 26]. As one would expect, the more expressive these models
become, the harder it is to compute the expectations. More interestingly, even resorting to simpler
discriminative models like logistic regression does not help reducing the complexity of such a task:
computing the first moment of its predictions w.r.t. a naive Bayes model is known to be NP-hard [14].
In this work, we introduce a pair of expressive generative and discriminative models for regression,
for which it is possible to compute not only expectations, but any moment efficiently. We leverage
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

