Learning Neural Networks with
Adaptive Regularization

Han Zhao∗† , Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai∗† , Ruslan Salakhutdinov† , Geoffrey J. Gordon†‡
†
Carnegie Mellon University, ‡ Microsoft Research Montreal
{han.zhao,yaohungt,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu
geoff.gordon@microsoft.com

Abstract
Feed-forward neural networks can be understood as a combination of an intermediate representation and a linear hypothesis. While most previous works aim to
diversify the representations, we explore the complementary direction by performing an adaptive and data-dependent regularization motivated by the empirical Bayes
method. Specifically, we propose to construct a matrix-variate normal prior (on
weights) whose covariance matrix has a Kronecker product structure. This structure is designed to capture the correlations in neurons through backpropagation.
Under the assumption of this Kronecker factorization, the prior encourages neurons
to borrow statistical strength from one another. Hence, it leads to an adaptive
and data-dependent regularization when training networks on small datasets. To
optimize the model, we present an efficient block coordinate descent algorithm
with analytical solutions. Empirically, we demonstrate that the proposed method
helps networks converge to local optima with smaller stable ranks and spectral
norms. These properties suggest better generalizations and we present empirical
results to support this expectation. We also verify the effectiveness of the approach
on multiclass classification and multitask regression problems with various network structures. Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/
yaohungt/Adaptive-Regularization-Neural-Network.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks have been widely applied in various domains [19, 25, 27], usually its
parameters are learned via the principle of maximum likelihood, hence its success crucially hinges
on the availability of large scale datasets. When training rich models on small datasets, explicit
regularization techniques are crucial to alleviate overfitting. Previous works have explored various
regularization [39] and data augmentation [19, 38] techniques to learn diversified representations.
In this paper, we look into an alternative direction by proposing an adaptive and data-dependent
regularization method to encourage neurons of the same layer to share statistical strength through
exploiting correlations between data and gradients. The goal of our method is to prevent overfitting
when training (large) networks on small dataset. Our key insight stems from the famous argument
by Efron [8] in the literature of the empirical Bayes method: It is beneficial to learn from the
experience of others. The empirical Bayes methods provide us a guiding principle to learn model
parameters even if we do not have complete information about prior distribution. From an algorithmic
perspective, we argue that the connection weights of neurons in the same layer (row/column vectors
of the weight matrix) will be correlated with each other through the backpropagation learning. Hence,
by learning the correlations of the weight matrix, a neuron can “borrow statistical strength” from
other neurons in the same layer, which essentially increases the effective sample size during learning.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

