Regret Minimization for Reinforcement Learning
with Vectorial Feedback and Complex Objectives

Wang Chi Cheung
Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management
National University of Singapore
isecwc@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider an agent who is involved in an online Markov Decision Process, and
receives a vector of outcomes every round. The agent optimizes an aggregate
reward function on the multi-dimensional outcomes. Due to state transitions, it
is challenging to balance the contribution from each dimension for achieving
near-optimality. Contrary to the single objective case, stationary policies are
generally sub-optimal. We propose a no-regret algorithm based on the Frank-Wolfe
algorithm (Frank and Wolfe 1956, Agrawal and Devanur 2014) , UCRL2 (Jaksch
et al. 2010), as well as a crucial and novel Gradient Threshold Procedure (GTP).
GTP involves carefully delaying gradient updates, and returns a non-stationary
policy that diversifies the outcomes for optimizing the aggregate reward.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) model sequential optimization problems with changes in the
state of the underlying environment. At each time, an agent performs an action, contingent upon the
current state. Influenced by the present state and action, the agent transits to another state and receives
some form of feedback. Typically, the feedback is a scalar reward, and the agent aims to maximize
the total reward. Nevertheless, in many settings, the feedback is a vector of multiple outcomes, and
the agent’s goal depend on each of these outcomes. Moreover, the underlying MDP model is usually
not known to the agent, and is to be learned on-the-fly. Motivated by these situations, we consider the
Complex-Objective Online MDP (CO-OMDP) problem, which maximizes an aggregate function on
the average vectorial outcome.
Solving the CO-OMDP problem requires overcoming the following subtle challenges. To maximize
the aggregate function, an agent has to balance the contributions from the outcomes’ different
components by alternating among different actions, which are generally associated with different
states. Consequently, the agent has to traverse the state space, which could require visiting suboptimal states that do not contribute to the maximization of the aggregate function. Altogether, the
maximization can be hindered by undesirable state transitions, which is worsened by the agent’s
model uncertainty.
We overcome the mentioned challenges by proposing TFW-UCRL2, a near-optimal online algorithm
for the CO-OMDP problem. The algorithm is built upon the Frank-Wolfe algorithm (FW) [21, 2],
UCRL2 [28], as well as our novel Gradient Threshold Procedure (GTP). FW balances the objectives
by scalarizing the outcomes, and UCRL2 solves scalarized online MDP problems under model
uncertainty. However, FW and UCRL2 are not enough for overcoming the challenges in balancing the
outcomes while avoiding sub-optimal states. GTP overcomes the challenges by judiciously delaying
the gradient updates in FW. The procedure approximately maintains the balancing effect by FW, while
limits the visits to sub-optimal states by switching among different stationary policies adaptively and
infrequently, despite the model uncertainty.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

