On Mixup Training: Improved Calibration and
Predictive Uncertainty for Deep Neural Networks
Sunil Thulasidasan⇤,1,2 , Gopinath Chennupati1 , Jeff Bilmes2 ,
Tanmoy Bhattacharya1 , Sarah Michalak1
2

1
Los Alamos National Laboratory
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington

Abstract
Mixup [40] is a recently proposed method for training deep neural networks
where additional samples are generated during training by convexly combining
random pairs of images and their associated labels. While simple to implement,
it has been shown to be a surprisingly effective method of data augmentation
for image classification: DNNs trained with mixup show noticeable gains in
classification performance on a number of image classification benchmarks. In this
work, we discuss a hitherto untouched aspect of mixup training – the calibration
and predictive uncertainty of models trained with mixup. We find that DNNs
trained with mixup are significantly better calibrated – i.e., the predicted softmax
scores are much better indicators of the actual likelihood of a correct prediction –
than DNNs trained in the regular fashion. We conduct experiments on a number
of image classification architectures and datasets – including large-scale datasets
like ImageNet – and find this to be the case. Additionally, we find that merely
mixing features does not result in the same calibration benefit and that the label
smoothing in mixup training plays a significant role in improving calibration.
Finally, we also observe that mixup-trained DNNs are less prone to over-confident
predictions on out-of-distribution and random-noise data. We conclude that the
typical overconfidence seen in neural networks, even on in-distribution data is likely
a consequence of training with hard labels, suggesting that mixup be employed for
classification tasks where predictive uncertainty is a significant concern.

1

Introduction: Overconfidence and Uncertainty in Deep Learning

Machine learning algorithms are replacing or expected to increasingly replace humans in decisionmaking pipelines. With the deployment of AI-based systems in high risk fields such as medical
diagnosis [26], autonomous vehicle control [21] and the legal sector [1], the major challenges of
the upcoming era are thus going to be in issues of uncertainty and trust-worthiness of a classifier.
With deep neural networks having established supremacy in many pattern recognition tasks, it is the
predictive uncertainty of these types of classifiers that will be of increasing importance. The DNN
must not only be accurate, but also indicate when it is likely to get the wrong answer. This allows
the decision-making to be routed as needed to a human or another more accurate, but possibly more
expensive, classifier, with the assumption being that the additional cost incurred is greatly surpassed
by the consequences of a wrong prediction.
For this reason, quantifying the predictive uncertainty for deep neural networks has seen increased
attention in recent years [6, 19, 7, 20, 16, 31]. One of the first works to examine the issue of
calibration for modern neural networks was [9]; noting that in a well-calibrated classifier, predictive
⇤

Correspondence to sunil@lanl.gov

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

