Multi-label Co-regularization for Semi-supervised
Facial Action Unit Recognition

1

Xuesong Niu1,3 , Hu Han1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3,4 , Xilin Chen1,3
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
xuesong.niu@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {hanhu, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Facial action units (AUs) recognition is essential for emotion analysis and has
been widely applied in mental state analysis. Existing work on AU recognition
usually requires big face dataset with accurate AU labels. However, manual
AU annotation requires expertise and can be time-consuming. In this work, we
propose a semi-supervised approach for AU recognition utilizing a large number
of web face images without AU labels and a small face dataset with AU labels
inspired by the co-training methods. Unlike traditional co-training methods that
require provided multi-view features and model re-training, we propose a novel cotraining method, namely multi-label co-regularization, for semi-supervised facial
AU recognition. Two deep neural networks are used to generate multi-view features
for both labeled and unlabeled face images, and a multi-view loss is designed to
enforce the generated features from the two views to be conditionally independent
representations. In order to obtain consistent predictions from the two views, we
further design a multi-label co-regularization loss aiming to minimize the distance
between the predicted AU probability distributions of the two views. In addition,
prior knowledge of the relationship between individual AUs is embedded through
a graph convolutional network (GCN) for exploiting useful information from the
big unlabeled dataset. Experiments on several benchmarks show that the proposed
approach can effectively leverage large datasets of unlabeled face images to improve
the AU recognition robustness and outperform the state-of-the-art semi-supervised
AU recognition methods. Code is available1 .

1

Introduction

Facial action units coded by the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [5] refer to a set of facial
muscle movements defined by their appearance on the face. These facial movements can be used for
coding nearly any anatomically possible facial expression and have wide potential applications in
mental state analysis, i.e., deception detection [10], diagnosing mental health [28], and improving
e-learning experiences [22].
Most of the existing AU recognition methods are in a supervised fashion [3, 16, 21, 29, 40], for which
a large number of facial images with AU labels are required. However, since AUs are subtle, local
and have significant subject-dependent variations, qualified FACS experts are required to annotate
facial AUs. In addition, labeling AUs is time-consuming and labor-intensive, making it impractical to
1

https://github.com/nxsEdson/MLCR

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

