Policy Optimization Provably Converges to Nash
Equilibria in Zero-Sum Linear Quadratic Games

Kaiqing Zhang
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Zhuoran Yang
ORFE
Princeton University

kzhang66@illinois.edu

zy6@princeton.edu

Tamer Başar
ECE and CSL
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
basar1@illinois.edu

Abstract
We study the global convergence of policy optimization for finding the Nash equilibria (NE) in zero-sum linear quadratic (LQ) games. To this end, we first investigate the landscape of LQ games, viewing it as a nonconvex-nonconcave saddlepoint problem in the policy space. Specifically, we show that despite its nonconvexity and nonconcavity, zero-sum LQ games have the property that the stationary
point of the objective function with respect to the linear feedback control policies
constitutes the NE of the game. Building upon this, we develop three projected
nested-gradient methods that are guaranteed to converge to the NE of the game.
Moreover, we show that all these algorithms enjoy both globally sublinear and locally linear convergence rates. Simulation results are also provided to illustrate the
satisfactory convergence properties of the algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this work appears to be the first one to investigate the optimization landscape
of LQ games, and provably show the convergence of policy optimization methods
to the NE. Our work serves as an initial step toward understanding the theoretical
aspects of policy-based reinforcement learning algorithms for zero-sum Markov
games in general.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [1] has achieved sensational progress recently in several prominent decisionmaking problems, e.g., playing the game of Go [2, 3], and playing real-time strategy games [4,
5]. Interestingly, all of these problems can be formulated as zero-sum Markov games involving
two opposing players or teams. Moreover, their algorithmic frameworks are all based upon policy
optimization (PO) methods such as actor-critic [6] and proximal policy optimization (PPO) [7],
where the policies are parametrized and iteratively updated. Such popularity of PO methods are
mainly attributed to the facts that: (i) they are easy to implement and can handle high-dimensional
and continuous action spaces; (ii) they can readily incorporate advanced optimization results to
facilitate the algorithm design [7, 8, 9]. Moreover, empirically, some observations have shown that
PO methods usually converge faster than value-based ones [9, 10].
In contrast to the tremendous empirical success, theoretical understanding of policy optimization
methods for zero-sum Markov games lags behind. Although the convergence of policy optimization
algorithms to locally optimal policies has been established in the classical reinforcement learning
setting with a single agent/player [11, 6, 12, 7, 13, 14], extending those theoretical guarantees to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

