A Primal-Dual Formulation for Deep Learning with
Constraints
Yatin Nandwani, Abhishek Pathak, Mausam and Parag Singla
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
{yatin.nandwani,abhishek.pathak.cs115,mausam,parags}@cse.iitd.ac.in

Abstract
For several problems of interest, there are natural constraints which exist over the
output label space. For example, for the joint task of NER and POS labeling, these
constraints might specify that the NER label ‘organization’ is consistent only with
the POS labels ‘noun’ and ‘preposition’. These constraints can be a great way of
injecting prior knowledge into a deep learning model, thereby improving overall
performance. In this paper, we present a constrained optimization formulation for
training a deep network with a given set of hard constraints on output labels. Our
novel approach first converts the label constraints into soft logic constraints over
probability distributions outputted by the network. It then converts the constrained
optimization problem into an alternating min-max optimization with Lagrangian
variables defined for each constraint. Since the constraints are independent of
the target labels, our framework easily generalizes to semi-supervised setting.
We experiment on the tasks of Semantic Role Labeling (SRL), Named Entity
Recognition (NER) tagging, and fine-grained entity typing and show that our
constraints not only significantly reduce the number of constraint violations, but
can also result in state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural models have become the state of the art in many domains including vision, NLP and
speech processing. In the vanilla setting, they are trained end to end from data and without additional
knowledge about the task (other than neural architecture and loss function). However, for many
problems of interest (e.g., structured prediction or multi-task learning), there is a set of natural
constraints which need to be satisfied over the output variables. For example, for the task of NER and
POS labeling, the constraint might specify that a word which is given the NER label ‘institution’ must
have the POS label ‘noun’ or a ‘preposition’. Or in 3D human pose estimation from a single view, one
may impose symmetry constraints, like equal length of two arms, equal distance of shoulders from
the spine etc. (Márquez-Neila et al. [2017]). These constraints can be seen as additional background
knowledge made available by the domain experts. Incorporating these constraints into a model can
presumably regularize the output space resulting in improved predictions.
One line of work trains the neural models without this knowledge, but imposes constraints at inference
time (e.g., Lee et al. [2019]). We argue in this paper that this is bound to be sub-optimal since the
original training of the network was done oblivious to the constraints. Though the deep network, in
principle, could learn these directly from the data, but, in practice, this is true only when the available
training data is large. Our experiments reveal a large number of constraint violations from such
unconstrained models, when trained in low data settings. Rather, modeling the constraints explicitly
during training gives a strong prior to the model – it not only reduces constraint violations but can
also result in significantly improved predictions by making the training constraint-aware.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

