Time-series Generative Adversarial Networks
Jinsung Yoon∗
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
jsyoon0823@g.ucla.edu

Daniel Jarrett∗
University of Cambridge, UK
daniel.jarrett@maths.cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge, UK
University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Alan Turing Institute, UK
mv472@cam.ac.uk, mihaela@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
A good generative model for time-series data should preserve temporal dynamics,
in the sense that new sequences respect the original relationships between variables
across time. Existing methods that bring generative adversarial networks (GANs)
into the sequential setting do not adequately attend to the temporal correlations
unique to time-series data. At the same time, supervised models for sequence
prediction—which allow finer control over network dynamics—are inherently
deterministic. We propose a novel framework for generating realistic time-series
data that combines the flexibility of the unsupervised paradigm with the control
afforded by supervised training. Through a learned embedding space jointly
optimized with both supervised and adversarial objectives, we encourage the
network to adhere to the dynamics of the training data during sampling. Empirically,
we evaluate the ability of our method to generate realistic samples using a variety of
real and synthetic time-series datasets. Qualitatively and quantitatively, we find that
the proposed framework consistently and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
benchmarks with respect to measures of similarity and predictive ability.

1

Introduction

What is a good generative model for time-series data? The temporal setting poses a unique challenge
to generative modeling. A model is not only tasked with capturing the distributions of features
within each time point, it should also capture the potentially complex dynamics of those variables
across time. Specifically, in modeling multivariate sequential data x1:T = (x1 , ..., xT ), we wish to
accurately capture the conditional distribution p(xt |x1:t−1 ) of temporal transitions as well.
On the one hand, a great deal of work has focused on improving the temporal dynamics of autoregressive models for sequence prediction. These primarily tackle the problem of compounding
errors during multi-step sampling, introducing various training-time modifications to more accurately
reflect testing-time conditions [1, 2, 3]. Autoregressive
models explicitly factor the distribution of
Q
sequences into a product of conditionals t p(xt |x1:t−1 ). However, while useful in the context of
forecasting, this approach is fundamentally deterministic, and is not truly generative in the sense that
new sequences can be randomly sampled from them without external conditioning. On the other
hand, a separate line of work has focused on directly applying the generative adversarial network
(GAN) framework to sequential data, primarily by instantiating recurrent networks for the roles
of generator and discriminator [4, 5, 6]. While straightforward, the adversarial objective seeks to
model p(x1:T ) directly, without leveraging the autoregressive prior. Importantly, simply summing
∗

indicates equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

