Blow: a single-scale hyperconditioned flow for
non-parallel raw-audio voice conversion

Joan Serrà
Telefónica Research

Santiago Pascual
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

Carlos Segura
Telefónica Research

joan.serra@telefonica.com

santi.pascual@upc.edu

carlos.seguraperales
@telefonica.com

Abstract
End-to-end models for raw audio generation are a challenge, specially if they have
to work with non-parallel data, which is a desirable setup in many situations. Voice
conversion, in which a model has to impersonate a speaker in a recording, is one
of those situations. In this paper, we propose Blow, a single-scale normalizing
flow using hypernetwork conditioning to perform many-to-many voice conversion
between raw audio. Blow is trained end-to-end, with non-parallel data, on a frameby-frame basis using a single speaker identifier. We show that Blow compares
favorably to existing flow-based architectures and other competitive baselines,
obtaining equal or better performance in both objective and subjective evaluations.
We further assess the impact of its main components with an ablation study, and
quantify a number of properties such as the necessary amount of training data or
the preference for source or target speakers.

1

Introduction

End-to-end generation of raw audio waveforms remains a challenge for current neural systems.
Dealing with raw audio is more demanding than dealing with intermediate representations, as it
requires a higher model capacity and a usually larger receptive field. In fact, producing high-level
waveform structure was long thought to be intractable, even at a sampling rate of 16 kHz, and is
only starting to be explored with the help of autoregressive models [1–3], generative adversarial
networks [4, 5] and, more recently, normalizing flows [6, 7]. Nonetheless, generation without longterm context information still leads to sub-optimal results, as existing architectures struggle to capture
such information, even if they employ a theoretically sufficiently large receptive field (cf. [8]).
Voice conversion is the task of replacing a source speaker identity by a targeted different one while
preserving spoken content [9, 10]. It has multiple applications, the main ones being in the medical,
entertainment, and education domains (see [9, 10] and references therein). Voice conversion systems
are usually one-to-one or many-to-one, in the sense that they are only able to convert from a single or,
at most, a handful of source speakers to a unique target one. While this may be sufficient for some
cases, it limits their applicability and, at the same time, it prevents them from learning from multiple
targets. In addition, voice conversion systems are usually trained with parallel data, in a strictly
supervised fashion. To do so, one needs input/output pairs of recordings with the corresponding
source/target speakers pronouncing the same underlying content with a relatively accurate temporal
alignment. Collecting such data is non-scalable and, in the best of cases, problematic. Thus,
researchers are shifting towards the use of non-parallel data [11–15]. However, non-parallel voice
conversion is still an open issue, with results that are far from those using parallel data [10].
In this work, we explore the use of normalizing flows for non-parallel, many-to-many, raw-audio voice
conversion. We propose Blow, a normalizing flow architecture that learns to convert voice recordings
end-to-end with minimal supervision. It only employs individual audio frames, together with an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

