A Uniﬁed Bellman Optimality Principle Combining
Reward Maximization and Empowerment
Felix Leibfried, Sergio Pascual-Díaz, Jordi Grau-Moya
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, UK
{felix,sergio.diaz,jordi}@prowler.io

Abstract
Empowerment is an information-theoretic method that can be used to intrinsically
motivate learning agents. It attempts to maximize an agent’s control over the
environment by encouraging visiting states with a large number of reachable
next states. Empowered learning has been shown to lead to complex behaviors,
without requiring an explicit reward signal. In this paper, we investigate the use
of empowerment in the presence of an extrinsic reward signal. We hypothesize
that empowerment can guide reinforcement learning (RL) agents to ﬁnd good
early behavioral solutions by encouraging highly empowered states. We propose a
uniﬁed Bellman optimality principle for empowered reward maximization. Our
empowered reward maximization approach generalizes both Bellman’s optimality
principle as well as recent information-theoretical extensions to it. We prove
uniqueness of the empowered values and show convergence to the optimal solution.
We then apply this idea to develop off-policy actor-critic RL algorithms which
we validate in high-dimensional continuous robotics domains (MuJoCo). Our
methods demonstrate improved initial and competitive ﬁnal performance compared
to model-free state-of-the-art techniques.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning [62] (RL), agents identify policies to collect as much reward as possible in
a given environment. Recently, leveraging parametric function approximators has led to tremendous
success in applying RL to high-dimensional domains such as Atari games [40] or robotics [56]. In
such domains, inspired by the policy gradient theorem [63, 13], actor-critic approaches [36, 41] attain
state-of-the-art results by learning both a parametric policy and a value function.
Empowerment is an information-theoretic framework where agents maximize the mutual information
between an action sequence and the state that is obtained after executing this action sequence from
some given initial state [26, 27, 53]. It turns out that the mutual information is highest for such initial
states where the number of reachable next states is largest. Policies that aim for high empowerment
can lead to complex behavior, e.g. balancing a pole in the absence of any explicit reward signal [23].
Despite progress on learning empowerment values with function approximators [42, 12, 49], there has
been little attempt in the combination with reward maximization, let alone in utilizing empowerment
for RL in the high-dimensional domains it has become applicable just recently. We therefore propose
a uniﬁed principle for reward maximization and empowerment, and demonstrate that empowered
signals can boost RL in large-scale domains such as robotics. In short, our contributions are:
• a generalized Bellman optimality principle for joint reward maximization and empowerment,
• a proof for unique values and convergence to the optimal solution for our novel principle,
• empowered actor-critic methods boosting RL in MuJoCo compared to model-free baselines.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

