Practical Deep Learning with Bayesian Principles
Kazuki Osawa,1 Siddharth Swaroop,2,⇤ Anirudh Jain,3,⇤,† Runa Eschenhagen,4,†
Richard E. Turner,2 Rio Yokota,1 Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan5,‡ .
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
3
Indian Institute of Technology (ISM), Dhanbad, India
4
University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany
5
RIKEN Center for AI Project, Tokyo, Japan
1

2

Abstract
Bayesian methods promise to fix many shortcomings of deep learning, but they
are impractical and rarely match the performance of standard methods, let alone
improve them. In this paper, we demonstrate practical training of deep networks
with natural-gradient variational inference. By applying techniques such as batch
normalisation, data augmentation, and distributed training, we achieve similar
performance in about the same number of epochs as the Adam optimiser, even on
large datasets such as ImageNet. Importantly, the benefits of Bayesian principles
are preserved: predictive probabilities are well-calibrated, uncertainties on outof-distribution data are improved, and continual-learning performance is boosted.
This work enables practical deep learning while preserving benefits of Bayesian
principles. A PyTorch implementation1 is available as a plug-and-play optimiser.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been extremely successful in many fields such as computer vision [29], speech
processing [17], and natural-language processing [39], but it is also plagued with several issues
that make its application difficult in many other fields. For example, it requires a large amount of
high-quality data and it can overfit when dataset size is small. Similarly, sequential learning can cause
forgetting of past knowledge [27], and lack of reliable confidence estimates and other robustness
issues can make it vulnerable to adversarial attacks [6]. Ultimately, due to such issues, application of
deep learning remains challenging, especially for applications where human lives are at risk.
Bayesian principles have the potential to address such issues. For example, we can represent uncertainty using the posterior distribution, enable sequential learning using Bayes’ rule, and reduce
overfitting with Bayesian model averaging [19]. The use of such Bayesian principles for neural
networks has been advocated from very early on. Bayesian inference on neural networks were all proposed in the 90s, e.g., by using MCMC methods [41], Laplace’s method [35], and variational inference
(VI) [18, 2, 49, 1]. Benefits of Bayesian principles are even discussed in machine-learning textbooks
[36, 3]. Despite this, they are rarely employed in practice. This is mainly due to computational
concerns, unfortunately overshadowing their theoretical advantages.
The difficulty lies in the computation of the posterior distribution, which is especially challenging for
deep learning. Even approximation methods, such as VI and MCMC, have historically been difficult
* These two authors contributed equally.
† This work is conducted during an internship at RIKEN Center for AI project.
‡ Corresponding author: emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp
1
The code is available at https://github.com/team-approx-bayes/dl-with-bayes.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

