Unsupervised Emergence of Egocentric Spatial
Structure from Sensorimotor Prediction
Alban Laflaquière
AI Lab, SoftBank Robotics Europe
Paris, France
alaflaquiere@softbankrobotics.com

Michael Garcia Ortiz
AI Lab, SoftBank Robotics Europe
Paris, France
mgarciaortiz@softbankrobotics.com

Abstract
Despite its omnipresence in robotics application, the nature of spatial knowledge
and the mechanisms that underlie its emergence in autonomous agents are still
poorly understood. Recent theoretical works suggest that the Euclidean structure of
space induces invariants in an agent’s raw sensorimotor experience. We hypothesize
that capturing these invariants is beneficial for sensorimotor prediction and that,
under certain exploratory conditions, a motor representation capturing the structure
of the external space should emerge as a byproduct of learning to predict future
sensory experiences. We propose a simple sensorimotor predictive scheme, apply
it to different agents and types of exploration, and evaluate the pertinence of these
hypotheses. We show that a naive agent can capture the topology and metric
regularity of its sensor’s position in an egocentric spatial frame without any a priori
knowledge, nor extraneous supervision.

1

Introduction

Current model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches have proven to be very successful at
solving difficult problems, but seem to lack the ability to extrapolate and transfer already acquired
knowledge to new circumstances [7, 33]. One way to overcome this limitation would be for learning
agents to abstract from the data a model of the world that could support such extrapolation. For
agents acting in the world, such an acquired model should include a concept of space, such that the
spatial properties of the data they collect could be disentangled and extrapolated upon.
This problem naturally raises the question of the nature of space and how this abstract concept
can be acquired. This question has already been addressed philosophically by great minds of the
past [18, 36, 31], among which the approach proposed by H.Poincaré is of particular interest, as it
naturally lends itself to a mathematical formulation and concrete experimentation. He was interested
in understanding why we perceive ourselves as being immersed in a 3D and isotropic (Euclidean)
space when our actual sensory experiences live in a multidimensional space of a different nature and
structure (for instance, when the environment is projected on the flat heterogeneous surface of our
retina). He suggested that the concept of space emerges via the discovery of compensable sensory
changes that are generated by a change in the environment but can be canceled-out by a motor change.
This compensability property applies specifically to displacements of objects in the environment
and of the sensor, but not to non-spatial changes (object changing color, agent changing its camera
aperture...). For instance, one can compensate the sensory change due to an object moving 1 meter
away by moving 1 meter toward the object. Moreover, this compensability property is invariant to
the content of the environment, as the displacement of an object can be compensated by the same
motor change regardless of the type of the object. One can thus theoretically derive from the structure
underlying these compensatory motor changes a notion of space abstracted from the specific sensory
inputs that any given environment’s content induces.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

