A Bayesian Theory of Conformity in Collective
Decision Making

Koosha Khalvati
Paul G. Allen School of CSE
University of Washington
koosha@cs.washington.edu

Saghar Mirbagheri
Department of Psychology
New York University
sm7369@nyu.edu

Jean-Claude Dreher
Neuroeconomics Lab
Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod
dreher@isc.cnrs.fr

Seongmin A. Park
Center for Mind and Brain
University of California, Davis
park@isc.cnrs.fr

Rajesh P. N. Rao
Paul G. Allen School of CSE &
Center for Neurotechnology
University of Washington
rao@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In collective decision making, members of a group need to coordinate their actions
in order to achieve a desirable outcome. When there is no direct communication
between group members, one must decide based on inferring others’ intentions
from their actions. The inference of others’ intentions is called "theory of mind"
and can involve different levels of reasoning, from a single inference of a hidden
variable to considering others partially or fully optimal and reasoning about their
actions conditioned on one’s own actions (levels of “theory of mind”). In this
paper, we present a new Bayesian theory of collective decision making based on a
simple yet most commonly observed behavior: conformity. We show that such a
Bayesian framework allows one to achieve any level of theory of mind in collective
decision making. The viability of our framework is demonstrated on two different
experiments, a consensus task with 120 subjects and a volunteer’s dilemma task
with 29 subjects, each with multiple conditions.

1

Introduction

Collective decision making is critical for survival in animals that forage as a group [1]. Even though
humans are not "hunter-gatherers" any more, collective decision making has remained a crucial
element of modern human society, as exemplified by the practice of trial by jury [2, 3]. Group
decision making can become extremely challenging when there is no communication between group
members, such as in tasks requiring anonymous consensus or volunteers. In these situations, players
have to infer the intentions of others from their actions before making their own decisions.
Conformity or aligning one’s actions with other group members is a behavior that has been widely observed in group decision making by biologists and psychologists [4, 5, 6], for example, in developing
social norms [7, 8]. In fact, even in competitive situations, humans may mimic their opponent’s behavior unintentionally [9]. In a collective decision making task, by definition, at least some amount of
cooperation between different group members is required for producing utility. Conformity provides
a mechanism for cooperation. However, in many situations, there is also some amount of competition
between group members, making them cooperate strategically. For example, different players might
prefer different outcomes. In these cases, additional processes, such as prediction of the effect of
one’s action on others, are required for utility maximization.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

