Thresholding Bandit with Optimal Aggregate Regret

Chao Tao
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington

Saúl A. Blanco
Computer Science Department
Indiana University at Bloomington

Jian Peng
Computer Science Department
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Yuan Zhou
Computer Science Department, Indiana University at Bloomington
Department of ISE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
We consider the thresholding bandit problem, whose goal is to find arms of mean
rewards above a given threshold θ, with a fixed budget of T trials. We introduce
LSA, a new, simple and anytime algorithm that aims to minimize the aggregate
regret (or the expected number of mis-classified arms). We prove that our algorithm is instance-wise asymptotically optimal. We also provide comprehensive
empirical results to demonstrate the algorithm’s superior performance over existing
algorithms under a variety of different scenarios.

1

Introduction

The stochastic Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) problem has been extensively studied in the past decade
(Auer, 2002; Audibert et al., 2010; Bubeck et al., 2009; Gabillon et al., 2012; Karnin et al., 2013;
Jamieson et al., 2014; Garivier and Kaufmann, 2016; Chen et al., 2017). In the classical framework,
at each trial of the game, a learner faces a set of K arms, pulls an arm and receives an unknown
stochastic reward. Of particular interest is the fixed budget setting, in which the learner is only given
a limited number of total pulls. Based on the received rewards, the learner will recommend the best
arm, i.e., the arm with the highest mean reward. In this paper, we study a variant of the MAB problem,
called the Thresholding Bandit Problem (TBP). In TBP, instead of finding the best arm, we expect
the learner to identify all the arms whose mean rewards θi (i ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . , K}) are greater than or
equal to a given threshold θ. This is a very natural setting with direct real-world applications to active
binary classification and anomaly detection (Locatelli et al., 2016; Steinwart et al., 2005).
In this paper, we propose to study TBP under the notion of aggregate regret, which is defined as the
expected number of errors after T samples of the bandit game. Specifically, for a given algorithm A
and a TBP instance I with K arms, if we use ei to denote the probability that the algorithm makes an
incorrect decision corresponding to arm i after T rounds of samples, the aggregate regret is defined
def PK
as RA (I; T ) =
i=1 ei . In contrast, most previous works on TBP aim to minimize the simple
regret, which is the probability that at least one of the arms is incorrectly labeled. Note that the
definition of aggregate regret directly reflects the overall classification accuracy of the TBP algorithm,
which is more meaningful than the simple regret in many real-world applications. For example, in
the crowdsourced binary labeling problem, the learner faces K binary classification tasks, where
each task i is associated with a latent true label zi ∈ {0, 1}, and a latent soft-label θi . The soft-label
θi may be used to model the labeling difficulty/ambiguity of the task, in the sense that θi fraction
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

