Group Retention when Using Machine Learning in
Sequential Decision Making: the Interplay between
User Dynamics and Fairness

Xueru Zhang∗
University of Michigan, AnnArbor, USA
xueru@umich.edu
Cem Tekin
Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey
cemtekin@ee.bilkent.edu.tr

Mohammad Mahdi Khalili∗
University of Michigan, AnnArbor, USA
khalili@umich.edu
Mingyan Liu
University of Michigan, AnnArbor, USA
mingyan@umich.edu

Abstract
Machine Learning (ML) models trained on data from multiple demographic groups
can inherit representation disparity [7] that may exist in the data: the model
may be less favorable to groups contributing less to the training process; this in
turn can degrade population retention in these groups over time, and exacerbate
representation disparity in the long run. In this study, we seek to understand the
interplay between ML decisions and the underlying group representation, how they
evolve in a sequential framework, and how the use of fairness criteria plays a role in
this process. We show that the representation disparity can easily worsen over time
under a natural user dynamics (arrival and departure) model when decisions are
made based on a commonly used objective and fairness criteria, resulting in some
groups diminishing entirely from the sample pool in the long run. It highlights
the fact that fairness criteria have to be defined while taking into consideration the
impact of decisions on user dynamics. Toward this end, we explain how a proper
fairness criterion can be selected based on a general user dynamics model.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models developed from real-world data can inherit pre-existing bias in the dataset.
When these models are used to inform decisions involving humans, it may exhibit similar discrimination against sensitive attributes (e.g., gender and race) [6, 14, 15]. Moreover, these decisions can
influence human actions, such that bias in the decision is then captured in the dataset used to train
future models. This closed feedback loop becomes self-reinforcing and can lead to highly undesirable
outcomes over time by allowing biases to perpetuate. For example, speech recognition products such
as Amazon’s Alexa and Google Home are shown to have accent bias against non-native speakers [6],
with native speakers experience much higher quality than non-native speakers. If this difference leads
to more native speakers using such products while driving away non-native speakers, then over time
the data used to train the model may become even more skewed toward native speakers, with fewer
and fewer non-native samples. Without intervention, the resulting model becomes even more accurate
for the former and less for the latter, which then reinforces their respective user experience [7].
To address the fairness issues, one commonly used approach is to impose fairness criteria such that
certain statistical measures (e.g., positive classification rate, false positive rate, etc.) across different
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

