Flexible information routing in neural populations
through stochastic comodulation

Caroline Haimerl
Center for Neural Science
New York University
ch2880@nyu.edu

Cristina Savin
Center for Neural Science
Center for Data Science
New York University
csavin@nyu.edu

Eero P. Simoncelli
Center for Neural Science, and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
New York University
eero.simoncelli@nyu.edu

Abstract
Humans and animals are capable of flexibly switching between a multitude of
tasks, each requiring rapid, sensory-informed decision making. Incoming stimuli
are processed by a hierarchy of neural circuits consisting of millions of neurons
with diverse feature selectivity. At any given moment, only a small subset of these
carry task-relevant information. In principle, downstream processing stages could
identify the relevant neurons through supervised learning, but this would require
many training trials. Such extensive learning periods are inconsistent with the
observed flexibility of humans or animals, both of whom can adjust to changes in
task parameters or structure almost immediately. Here, we propose a novel solution
based on functionally-targeted stochastic modulation. It has been observed that trialto-trial neural activity is modulated by a shared, low-dimensional, stochastic signal
that introduces task-irrelevant noise. Counter-intuitively, this noise appears to be
preferentially targeted towards task-informative neurons, corrupting the encoded
signal. We hypothesize that this modulation offers a solution to the identification
problem, labeling task-informative neurons so as to facilitate decoding. We simulate
an encoding population of spiking neurons whose rates are modulated by a shared
stochastic signal, and show that a linear decoder with readout weights estimated
from neuron-specific modulation strength can achieve near-optimal accuracy. Such
a decoder allows fast and flexible task-dependent information routing without
relying on hardwired knowledge of the task-informative neurons (as in maximum
likelihood) or unrealistically many supervised training trials (as in regression).

1

Introduction

Our survival depends on the actions we take, which are derived from internal states and sensory
input. Accurate decisions require reliable encoding and flexible task-specific decoding of sensory
information. Take for instance the perceptual task of detecting a change in orientation of a grating
within a small aperture, placed at a particular location in the visual field (Fig. 1). Neurons in primary
visual cortex (V1) that respond selectively to features at different spatial locations and orientations
encode the visual stimulus. However, only a small fraction of those neurons would show a change
in response when the grating changes orientation (Fig. 1, red); the overwhelming majority will not
respond at all or their responses would not change significantly (Fig. 1, gray). Since nearly all visual
information passes through V1, any downstream areas’ sole source of information is contained in
the responses of those few V1 cells. Thus, solving this task relies on the ability to properly gather
and combine the responses of these task-relevant neurons, while ignoring the background chatter
of activity emanating from the remainder of the population. Furthermore, if the task changes (e.g.,
due to a change in stimulus position or orientation), the informative sub-population within V1 will
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

