Logarithmic Regret for Online Control

Naman Agarwal1

Elad Hazan1 2
Karan Singh1 2
Google AI Princeton
2
Computer Science, Princeton University
namanagarwal@google.com, {ehazan,karans}@princeton.edu
1

Abstract
We study optimal regret bounds for control in linear dynamical systems under
adversarially changing strongly convex cost functions, given the knowledge of transition dynamics. This includes several well studied and fundamental frameworks
such as the Kalman filter and the linear
√ quadratic regulator. State of the art methods
achieve regret which scales as O( T ), where T is the time horizon.
We show that the optimal regret in this setting can be significantly smaller, scaling
as O(poly(log T )). This regret bound is achieved by two different efficient iterative
methods, online gradient descent and online natural gradient.

1

Introduction

Algorithms for regret minimization typically attain one of two performance guarantees. For general
convex losses, regret scales as square root of the number of iterations, and this is tight. However, if
the loss function exhibit more curvature, such as quadratic loss functions, there exist algorithms that
attain poly-logarithmic regret. This distinction is also known as “fast rates” in statistical estimation.
Despite their ubiquitous use in online learning and statistical estimation, logarithmic regret algorithms
are almost non-existent in control of dynamical systems. This can be attributed to fundamental
challenges in computing the optimal controller in the presence of noise.
Time-varying cost functions in dynamical systems can be used to model unpredictable dynamic
resource constraints, and the tracking of a desired sequence of exogenous states. At a pinch, if we
have changing (even, strongly) convex loss functions, the optimal controller for a linear dynamical
system is not immediately computable via a convex program. For the special case of quadratic loss,
some previous works [9] remedy the situation by taking a semi-definite relaxation, and thereby obtain
a controller which has provable guarantees on regret and computational requirements. However, this
semi-definite relaxation reduces the problem to regret minimization over linear costs, and removes
the curvature which is necessary to obtain logarithmic regret.
In this paper we give the first efficient poly-logarithmic regret algorithms for controlling a linear
dynamical system with noise in the dynamics (i.e. the standard model). Our results apply to general
convex loss functions that are strongly convex, and not only to quadratics.
Reference
[1]
[4]
[9]
here

Noise
none
adversarial
stochastic
stochastic

Regret
2
O(log
√ T)
O(√T )
O( T )
O(log7 T )

loss functions
quadratic (fixed hessian)
convex
quadratic
strongly convex

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

