Adaptive Gradient-Based Meta-Learning Methods

Mikhail Khodak
Carnegie Mellon University
khodak@cmu.edu

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Ameet Talwalkar
Carnegie Mellon University
& Determined AI
talwalkar@cmu.edu

Abstract
We build a theoretical framework for designing and understanding practical metalearning methods that integrates sophisticated formalizations of task-similarity with
the extensive literature on online convex optimization and sequential prediction
algorithms. Our approach enables the task-similarity to be learned adaptively,
provides sharper transfer-risk bounds in the setting of statistical learning-to-learn,
and leads to straightforward derivations of average-case regret bounds for efficient
algorithms in settings where the task-environment changes dynamically or the
tasks share a certain geometric structure. We use our theory to modify several
popular meta-learning algorithms and improve their meta-test-time performance
on standard problems in few-shot learning and federated learning.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning, or learning-to-learn (LTL) [52], has recently re-emerged as an important direction
for developing algorithms for multi-task learning, dynamic environments, and federated settings.
By using the data of numerous training tasks, meta-learning methods seek to perform well on new,
potentially related test tasks without using many samples. Successful modern approaches have
also focused on exploiting the capabilities of deep neural networks, whether by learning multi-task
embeddings passed to simple classifiers [51] or by neural control of optimization algorithms [46].
Because of its simplicity and flexibility, a common approach is parameter-transfer, where all tasks
use the same class of Θ-parameterized functions fθ : X 7→ Y; often a shared model φ ∈ Θ is
learned that is used to train within-task models. In gradient-based meta-learning (GBML) [23],
φ is a meta-initialization for a gradient descent method over samples from a new task. GBML is
used in a variety of LTL domains such as vision [38, 44, 35], federated learning [16], and robotics
[20, 1]. Its simplicity also raises many practical and theoretical questions about the task-relations
it can exploit and the settings in which it can succeed. Addressing these issues has naturally led
several authors to online convex optimization (OCO) [55], either directly [24, 34] or from online-tobatch conversion [34, 19]. These efforts study how to find a meta-initialization, either by proving
algorithmic learnability [24] or giving meta-test-time performance guarantees [34, 19].
However, this recent line of work has so far considered a very restricted, if natural, notion of tasksimilarity – closeness to a single fixed point in the parameter space. We introduce a new theoretical
framework, Average Regret-Upper-Bound Analysis (ARUBA), that enables the derivation of metalearning algorithms that can provably take advantage of much more sophisticated structure. ARUBA
treats meta-learning as the online learning of a sequence of losses that each upper bounds the regret
on a single task. These bounds often have convenient functional forms that are (a) sufficiently nice, so
that we can draw upon the existing OCO literature, and (b) strongly dependent on both the task-data
and the meta-initialization, thus encoding task-similarity in a mathematically accessible way. Using
ARUBA we introduce or dramatically improve upon GBML results in the following settings:
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

