Neural Similarity Learning

Weiyang Liu1,* Zhen Liu2,* James M. Rehg1 Le Song1,3
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Mila, Université de Montréal 3 Ant Financial * Equal Contribution
wyliu@gatech.edu, zhen.liu.2@umontreal.ca, rehg@gatech.edu, lsong@cc.gatech.edu

1

Abstract
Inner product-based convolution has been the founding stone of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), enabling end-to-end learning of visual representation. By
generalizing inner product with a bilinear matrix, we propose the neural similarity
which serves as a learnable parametric similarity measure for CNNs. Neural similarity naturally generalizes the convolution and enhances flexibility. Further, we
consider the neural similarity learning (NSL) in order to learn the neural similarity
adaptively from training data. Specifically, we propose two different ways of
learning the neural similarity: static NSL and dynamic NSL. Interestingly, dynamic
neural similarity makes the CNN become a dynamic inference network. By regularizing the bilinear matrix, NSL can be viewed as learning the shape of kernel and
the similarity measure simultaneously. We further justify the effectiveness of NSL
with a theoretical viewpoint. Most importantly, NSL shows promising performance
in visual recognition and few-shot learning, validating the superiority of NSL over
the inner product-based convolution counterparts.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the unprecedented success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in
supervised learning tasks such as image recognition [20], object detection [47], semantic segmentation [40], etc. As the core of CNN, a standard convolution operator typically contains two components:
a learnable template (i.e., kernel) and a similarity measure (i.e., inner product). One active stream
of works [13, 63, 25, 61, 8, 53, 24, 59, 26] aims to improve the flexibility of the convolution kernel
and increases its receptive field in a data-driven way. Another stream of works [39, 36] focuses on
finding a better similarity measure to replace the inner product. However, there still lacks a unified
formulation that can take both the shape of kernel and the similarity measure into consideration.
To bridge this gap, we propose the neural similarity
learning (NSL) for CNNs. NSL first defines the
Kernel
neural similarity by generalizing the inner product
Input
with a parametric bilinear matrix and then learns the
Placeholder
neural similarity jointly with the convolution kernels.
Input 1
A graphical comparison between inner product and
Input 2
neural similarity is given in Figure 1. With certain
Dynamic Neural
Static Neural
Inner Product
Similarity
Similarity
regularities on the neural similarity, NSL can be
viewed as learning the shape of the kernel and the Figure 1: Bipartite graph comparison of inner prodsimilarity measure simultaneously. Based on the uct, static neural similarity and dynamic neural simneural similarity, we propose the neural similarity ilarity. A line represents a multiplication operation
network (NSN) by stacking convolution layers with and a circle denotes an element in a vector. Green
neural similarity. We consider two distinct ways to color denotes kernel and yellow denotes input.
learn the neural similarity in CNN. First, we learn
a static neural similarity which is essentially a (regularized) bilinear similarity. By having more
parameters, the static neural similarity becomes a natural generalization of the standard inner product.
Second and more interestingly, we also consider to learn the neural similarity in a dynamic fashion.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

