Limiting Extrapolation in
Linear Approximate Value Iteration
Andrea Zanette
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University, CA
zanette@stanford.edu
Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Stanford University, CA
mykel@stanford.edu

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
lazaric@fb.com

Emma Brunskill
Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, CA
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study linear approximate value iteration (LAVI) with a generative model. While
linear models may accurately represent the optimal value function using a few
parameters, several empirical and theoretical studies show the combination of leastsquares projection with the Bellman operator may be expansive, thus leading LAVI
to amplify errors over iterations and eventually diverge. We introduce an algorithm
that approximates value functions by combining Q-values estimated at a set of
anchor states. Our algorithm tries to balance the generalization and compactness
of linear methods with the small amplification of errors typical of interpolation
methods. We prove that if the features at any state can be represented as a convex
combination of features at the anchor points, then errors are propagated linearly
over iterations (instead of exponentially) and our method achieves a polynomial
sample complexity bound in the horizon and the number of anchor points. These
findings are confirmed in preliminary simulations in a number of simple problems
where a traditional least-square LAVI method diverges.

1

Introduction

Impressive empirical successes [Mni+13; Sil+16; Sil+17] in using deep neural networks in reinforcement learning (RL) often use sample inefficient algorithms. Despite recent advances in the theoretical
analysis of value-based batch RL with function approximation [MS08; ASM08; FSM10; YXW19;
CJ19], designing provably sample-efficient approximate RL algorithms with function approximation
remains an open challenge.
In this paper, we study value iteration with linear approximation (LAVI for short). Linear function
approximators represent action-value functions as the inner product between a weight vector w
and a d-dimensional feature map evaluated at each state-action pair, i.e., b
Q(s, a) = w> (s, a).
Linear models are common and powerful because they allow to compactly represent functions with
a small number of parameters, and therefore have promise for requiring a small sample size to
learn such functions. Unfortunately, it is well known that the Bellman operator combined with the
projection onto a linear space in, e.g., `2 -norm, may result in an expansive operator. As a result, even
when the features are expressive enough so that the optimal state-action value function Q? can be
accurately represented (i.e., Q? (s, a) ⇡ (w? )> (s, a)), combining linear function approximation
with value iteration may lead to divergence [Bai95; TV96]. Munos [Mun05] derived bounds on the
error propagation for general approximate value iteration (AVI) and later Munos and Szepesvári
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

