Thompson Sampling for Multinomial Logit
Contextual Bandits
Min-hwan Oh
Columbia University
New York, NY
m.oh@columbia.edu

Garud Iyengar
Columbia University
New York, NY
garud@ieor.columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider a dynamic assortment selection problem where the goal is to offer
a sequence of assortments that maximizes the expected cumulative revenue, or
alternatively, minimize the expected regret. The feedback here is the item that the
user picks from the assortment. The distinguishing feature in this work is that this
feedback is given by a multinomial logit choice model. The utility of each item is
a dynamic function of contextual information of both the item and the user. We
refer to this problem as the multinomial logit contextual bandit. We propose two
Thompson sampling algorithms for this multinomial logit contextual bandit. Our
first algorithm maintains
a posterior distribution of the unknown parameter and
p
establishes e
O(d T )1 Bayesian regret over T rounds with d dimensional context
vector. The second algorithm approximates the posterior by a Gaussian distribution
and uses a new optimistic sampling procedure to address the p
issues that arise
e 3/2 T ) worst-case
in worst-case regret analysis. This algorithm achieves O(d
(frequentist) regret bound. The numerical experiments show that the practical
performance of both methods is in line with the theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

In the stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem [10, 27], the learning agent selects one of
N actions (or items) and receives a revenue feedback corresponding to the chosen action in each
round. The objective is to maximize the cumulative revenue over a finite horizon of length T , or
alternatively, to minimize the cumulative regret defined as the difference in cumulative revenues of the
optimal strategy and the agent’s strategy. The main challenge in MAB problems is to appropriately
balance the trade-off between exploitation, i.e., pulling the best empirical arm, and exploration,
i.e., experimenting with arms which are not sufficiently pulled. The balancing strategies for this
exploration-exploitation trade-off typically fall into two categories: upper confidence bound (UCB)
methods [9, 18] and Thompson sampling (TS) based methods [42]. (Besides UCB and TS, one may
also consider ✏-greedy approach [24].)
UCB methods maintain a confidence set for the unknown true parameter, and in each step, choose the
most optimistic parameter from this set, and pull the optimal arm corresponding to this optimistic
parameter value. The confidence set is updated based on the revenue feedback which is revealed
after an arm is pulled. TS assumes a prior distribution over the parameters defining the reward
distribution. At each step, a parameter value is sampled from the posterior distribution, and an
optimal arm corresponding to a sampled parameter is pulled. Upon observing the reward for each
round, the posterior distribution is updated via Bayes rule. TS has been successfully applied in a wide
range of settings [40, 13, 38].
1 e

O suppresses logarithmic dependence.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

