Oblivious Sampling Algorithms for
Private Data Analysis

Sajin Sasy∗
University of Waterloo

Olga Ohrimenko
Microsoft Research

Abstract
We study secure and privacy-preserving data analysis based on queries executed
on samples from a dataset. Trusted execution environments (TEEs) can be used
to protect the content of the data during query computation, while supporting
differential-private (DP) queries in TEEs provides record privacy when query
output is revealed. Support for sample-based queries is attractive due to privacy
amplification since not all dataset is used to answer a query but only a small subset.
However, extracting data samples with TEEs while proving strong DP guarantees
is not trivial as secrecy of sample indices has to be preserved. To this end, we
design efficient secure variants of common sampling algorithms. Experimentally
we show that accuracy of models trained with shuffling and sampling is the same for
differentially private models for MNIST and CIFAR-10, while sampling provides
stronger privacy guarantees than shuffling.

1

Introduction

Sensitive and proprietary datasets (e.g., health, personal and financial records, laboratory experiments,
emails, and other personal digital communication) often come with strong privacy and access control
requirements and regulations that are hard to maintain and guarantee end-to-end. The fears of
data leakage may block datasets from being used by data scientists and prevent collaboration and
information sharing between multiple parties towards a common good (e.g., training a disease
detection model across data from multiple hospitals). For example, the authors of [11, 14, 37] show
that machine learning models can memorize individual data records, while information not required
for the agreed upon learning task may be leaked in collaborative learning [28]. To this end, we are
interested in designing the following secure data query framework:
• A single or multiple data owners contribute their datasets to the platform while expecting
strong security privacy guarantees on the usage of their data;
• The framework acts as a gatekeeper of the data and a computing resource of the data scientist:
it can compute queries on her behalf while ensuring that data is protected from third parties;
• Data scientist queries the data via the framework via a range of queries varying from
approximating sample statistics to training complex machine learning models.
The goal of the framework is to allow data scientist to query the data while providing strong privacy
guarantees to data owners on their data. The framework aims to protect against two classes of
attackers: the owner of the computing infrastructure of the framework and the data scientist.
The data scientist may try to infer more information about the dataset than what is available through
a (restricted) class of queries supported by the framework. We consider the following two collusion
scenarios. As the framework may be hosted in the cloud or on premise of the data scientist’s
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

