Identification of Conditional Causal Effects
under Markov Equivalence

Amin Jaber
Purdue University
jaber0@purdue.edu

Jiji Zhang
Lingnan University
jijizhang@ln.edu.hk

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Causal identification is the problem of deciding whether a post-interventional
distribution is computable from a combination of qualitative knowledge about the
data-generating process, which is encoded in a causal diagram, and an observational
distribution. A generalization of this problem restricts the qualitative knowledge to
a class of Markov equivalent causal diagrams, which, unlike a single, fully-specified
causal diagram, can be inferred from the observational distribution. Recent work
by (Jaber et al., 2019a) devised a complete algorithm for the identification of
unconditional causal effects given a Markov equivalence class of causal diagrams.
However, there are identifiable conditional causal effects that cannot be handled by
that algorithm. In this work, we derive an algorithm to identify conditional effects,
which are particularly useful for evaluating conditional plans or policies.

1

Introduction

The graphical approach to causal inference is becoming an important tool for assessing the efficacy
of actions or policies (Pearl, 2000; Bareinboim and Pearl, 2016). In this approach, data from an
observational probability distribution P is associated with a causal diagram (e.g., Fig. 1a) in which
nodes correspond to measured variables, directed edges represent direct causal relations, and bidirected edges encode spurious associations due to unmeasured confounding variables. Performing
an action do(X = x) eliminates the impact of other variables on those in X by fixing the values of
the latter and induces an interventional distribution, denoted Px . Whether, and if so how, aspects of
Px can be determined from the observational distribution together with the causal diagram is known
as the problem of causal identification.
In this work, we focus on conditional causal effects, of the form Px (y|z), which denotes the
conditional probability of Y = y given Z = z according to the interventional distribution Px . Such
conditional effects are particularly useful when what is at stake is the consequence of conditional
plans or policies, in which what value or probability distribution to impose on X is contingent on
the value of Z (Pearl and Robins, 1995). When the available knowledge is sufficient to delineate
the causal diagram, a number of criteria, including a complete algorithm, for identifying conditional
effects are known (Pearl, 1995; Spirtes et al., 2000; Tian, 2004; Shpitser and Pearl, 2006). However,
we are usually in a position where background knowledge is not nearly enough to give us confidence
on a single causal diagram. In such situations, forcing a single diagram easily leads to false modeling
assumptions and, consequently, misleading inferences.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

