Triad Constraints for Learning Causal Structure of
Latent Variables
∗1

Ruichu Cai , Feng Xie
1

∗1

2

, Clark Glymour , Zhifeng Hao

1,3

, Kun Zhang

2

School of Computer Science, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
3
School of Mathematics and Big Data, Foshan University, Foshan, China
cairuichu@gdut.edu.cn,xiefeng009@gmail.com,cg09@andrew.cmu.edu
zfhao@gdut.edu.cn,kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Learning causal structure from observational data has attracted much attention,
and it is notoriously challenging to find the underlying structure in the presence
of confounders (hidden direct common causes of two variables). In this paper,
by properly leveraging the non-Gaussianity of the data, we propose to estimate
the structure over latent variables with the so-called Triad constraints: we design
a form of "pseudo-residual" from three variables, and show that when causal
relations are linear and noise terms are non-Gaussian, the causal direction between
the latent variables for the three observed variables is identifiable by checking a
certain kind of independence relationship. In other words, the Triad constraints
help us to locate latent confounders and determine the causal direction between
them. This goes far beyond the Tetrad constraints and reveals more information
about the underlying structure from non-Gaussian data. Finally, based on the
Triad constraints, we develop a two-step algorithm to learn the causal structure
corresponding to measurement models. Experimental results on both synthetic and
real data demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of our method.

1

Introduction

Traditional methods for causal discovery, which aims to find causal relations from (purely) observational data, can be roughly divided into two categories, namely constraint-based methods including
PC [Spirtes and Glymour, 1991] and FCI [Spirtes et al., 1995; Colombo et al., 2012], and score-based
ones such as GES [Chickering, 2002] and GES with generalized scores [Huang et al., 2018]. A number of methods focus on estimating causal relationships between observed variables and fail to recover
the underlying causal structure of latent variables. For example, from large enough data generated by
the structure in Figure 1, where Li are latent variables and Xi are observed ones, we may only get a
complete graph using the PC algorithm [Spirtes and Glymour, 1991], a widely-used constraint-based
method, since there is no d-separation relation among the observed variables (although {X1 } and
{X2 , X3 } are d-separated by L1 , which is latent). Besides, in reality we can measure only a limited
number of variables and the causal influences may happen at the level of latent variables, so we are
often concerned about the causal structure of latent variables; see e.g., Bartholomew et al. [2008].
There exist several methods for causal discovery in the case with confounders. Spirtes et al. [2000]
attempt to resolve this problem using the so-called Tetrad constraints [Spearman, 1928]. Inspired
by Tetrad constraints, various contributions have been made towards estimating structure over latent
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

