Low-Complexity Nonparametric Bayesian
Online Prediction with Universal Guarantees
Frédéric Cazals
Université Côte d’Azur
Inria
F-06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France
frederic.cazals@inria.fr

Alix Lhéritier
Amadeus SAS
F-06902 Sophia-Antipolis, France
alix.lheritier@amadeus.com

Abstract
We propose a novel nonparametric online predictor for discrete labels conditioned
on multivariate continuous features. The predictor is based on a feature space
discretization induced by a full-fledged k-d tree with randomly picked directions
and a recursive Bayesian distribution, which allows to automatically learn the
most relevant feature scales characterizing the conditional distribution. We prove
its pointwise universality, i.e., it achieves a normalized log loss performance
asymptotically as good as the true conditional entropy of the labels given the
features. The time complexity to process the n-th sample point is O (log n) in
probability with respect to the distribution generating the data points, whereas other
exact nonparametric methods require to process all past observations. Experiments
on challenging datasets show the computational and statistical efficiency of our
algorithm in comparison to standard and state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Universal online predictors. An online (or sequential) probability predictor processes sequentially
input symbols l1 , l2 , . . . belonging to some alphabet L. Before observing the next symbol in the
sequence, it predicts it by estimating the probability of observing each symbol of the alphabet. Then,
it observes the symbol and some loss is incurred depending on the estimated probability of the
current symbol. Subsequently, it adapts its model in order to better predict future symbols. The
goal of universal prediction is to achieve an asymptotically optimal performance independently of
the generating mechanism (see, e.g., the survey of Merhav and Feder [22]). When performance
is measured in terms of the logarithmic loss, prediction is intimately related to data compression,
gambling and investing (see, e.g., [7, 6]).
Barron’s theorem [3] (see also [10, Ch.15]) establishes a fundamental link between prediction under
logarithmic loss and learning: the better we can sequentially predict data from a probabilistic source,
the faster we can identify a good approximation of it. This is of paramount importance when applied
to nonparametric models of infinite dimensionality, where overfitting is a serious concern. This is our
case, since the predictor observes some associated side information (i.e. features) zi ∈ Rd before
predicting li ∈ L, where L = {λ1 , . . . , λ|L| }. We consider the probabilistic setup where the pairs
of observations (zi , li ) are i.i.d. realizations of some random variables (Z, L) with joint probability
measure P. Therefore, we aim at estimating a nonparametric model of the conditional measure PL|Z .
Nonparametric distributions can be approximated by universal distributions over countable unions
of parametric models (see e.g., [10, Ch. 13]). This approach requires defining parametric models
that can arbitrarily approximate the nonparametric distribution as the number of parameters tend to
infinity. For example, models based on histograms with arbitrarily many bins have been proposed to
approximate univariate nonparametric densities (e.g., [13, 26, 36]).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

