Locally Private Learning without Interaction
Requires Separation

Amit Daniely
Hebrew University and Google Research

Vitaly Feldman∗
Google Research

Abstract
We consider learning under the constraint of local differential privacy (LDP). For
many learning problems known efficient algorithms in this model require many
rounds of communication between the server and the clients holding the data points.
Yet multi-round protocols are prohibitively slow in practice due to network latency
and, as a result, currently deployed large-scale systems are limited to a single round.
Despite significant research interest, very little is known about which learning
problems can be solved by such non-interactive systems. The only lower bound we
are aware of is for PAC learning an artificial class of functions with respect to a
uniform distribution [39].
We show that the margin complexity of a class of Boolean functions is a lower
bound on the complexity of any non-interactive LDP algorithm for distributionindependent PAC learning of the class. In particular, the classes of linear separators
and decision lists require exponential number of samples to learn non-interactively
even though they can be learned in polynomial time by an interactive LDP algorithm. This gives the first example of a natural problem that is significantly harder
to solve without interaction and also resolves an open problem of Kasiviswanathan
et al. [39]. We complement this lower bound with a new efficient learning algorithm whose complexity is polynomial in the margin complexity of the class. Our
algorithm is non-interactive on labeled samples but still needs interactive access
to unlabeled samples. All of our results also apply to the statistical query model
and any model in which the number of bits communicated about each data point is
constrained.

1

Overview

We consider learning in distributed systems where each client i (or user) holds a data point zi ∈ Z
drawn i.i.d. from some unknown distribution P and the goal of the server is to solve some statistical
learning problem using the data stored at the clients. In addition, the communication from the client
to the server is constrained. The primary model we consider is that of local differential privacy (LDP)
[39]. In this model each user i applies a differentially-private algorithm to their point zi and then
sends the result to the server. The specific algorithm applied by each user is determined by the server.
In the general version of the model the server can determine which algorithm the user should apply
on the basis of all the previous communications the server has received. In practice, however waiting
for the client’s response often takes a relatively large amount of time. Therefore in such systems it is
necessary to limit the number of rounds of interaction. That is, the queries of the server need to be
split into a small number of batches such that the LDP algorithms used in each batch depend only on
responses to queries in previous batches (a query specifies the algorithm to apply). Indeed, currently
∗
1

Part of this work was done while the author was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
Extended abstract. Full version appears as [16].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

