Better transfer learning with inferred successor maps

Tamas J. Madarasz
University of Oxford
tamas.madarasz@ndcn.ox.ac.uk

Timothy E. Behrens
University of Oxford
behrens@fmrib.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Humans and animals show remarkable flexibility in adjusting their behaviour when
their goals, or rewards in the environment change. While such flexibility is a
hallmark of intelligent behaviour, these multi-task scenarios remain an important
challenge for machine learning algorithms and neurobiological models alike. We
investigated two approaches that could enable this flexibility: factorized representations, which abstract away general aspects of a task from those prone to change,
and nonparametric, memory-based approaches, which can provide a principled
way of using similarity to past experiences to guide current behaviour. In particular, we combine the successor representation (SR), that factors the value of
actions into expected outcomes and corresponding rewards, with evaluating task
similarity through clustering the space of rewards. The proposed algorithm inverts
a generative model over tasks, and dynamically samples from a flexible number
of distinct SR maps while accumulating evidence about the current task context
through amortized inference. It improves SR’s transfer capabilities and outperforms
competing algorithms and baselines in settings with both known and unsignalled
rewards changes. Further, as a neurobiological model of spatial coding in the
hippocampus, it explains important signatures of this representation, such as the
"flickering" behaviour of hippocampal maps, and trajectory-dependent place cells
(so-called splitter cells) and their dynamics. We thus provide a novel algorithmic
approach for multi-task learning, as well as a common normative framework that
links together these different characteristics of the brain’s spatial representation.

1

Introduction

Despite recent successes seen in reinforcement learning (RL) [1, 2], some important gulfs remain
between sophisticated reward-driven learning algorithms, and the behavioural flexibility observed in
biological agents. Humans and animals seem especially apt at the efficient transfer of knowledge
between different tasks, and the adaptive reuse of successful past behaviours in new situations, an
ability that has sparked renewed interest in machine learning in recent years.
Several frameworks have been proposed to help move the two forms of learning closer together, by
incorporating transfer and generalisation capabilities into RL agents. Here we focus on two such ideas:
abstracting away the general aspects of a family of tasks and combining it with specific task features
on the fly through factorisation [3, 4]. And nonparametric, memory-based approaches [5, 6, 7, 8] that
may help transfer learning by providing a principled framework for reusing information, based on
inference about the similarity between the agent’s current situation, and situations observed in the
past.
We focus in particular on a specific instance of the transfer learning problem, where the agent acts in
an environment with fixed dynamics, but changing reward function or goal locations (but see section
5 for more involved changes in a task). This setting is especially useful for developing an intuition
about how an algorithm balances the retention of knowledge about the environment shared between
tasks, while specializing its policy for the current instantiation at hand. This is also a central challenge
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

