Compositional generalization through meta
sequence-to-sequence learning
Brenden M. Lake
New York University
Facebook AI Reasearch
brenden@nyu.edu

Abstract
People can learn a new concept and use it compositionally, understanding how to
“blicket twice” after learning how to “blicket.” In contrast, powerful sequence-tosequence (seq2seq) neural networks fail such tests of compositionality, especially
when composing new concepts together with existing concepts. In this paper,
I show how memory-augmented neural networks can be trained to generalize
compositionally through meta seq2seq learning. In this approach, models train on
a series of seq2seq problems to acquire the compositional skills needed to solve
new seq2seq problems. Meta se2seq learning solves several of the SCAN tests for
compositional learning and can learn to apply implicit rules to variables.

1

Introduction

People can learn new words and use them immediately in a rich variety of ways, thanks to their skills
in compositional learning. Once a person learns the meaning of the verb “to Facebook”, she or he
can understand how to “Facebook slowly,” “Facebook eagerly,” or “Facebook while walking.” These
abilities are due to systematic compositionality, or the algebraic capacity to understand and produce
novel utterances by combining familiar primitives [5, 27]. The “Facebook slowly” example depends
on knowledge of English, yet the ability is more general; people can also generalize compositionally
when learning to follow instructions in artificial languages [18]. Despite its importance, systematic
compositionality has unclear origins, including the extent to which it is inbuilt versus learned. A
key challenge for cognitive science and artificial intelligence is to understand the computational
underpinnings of human compositional learning and to build machines with similar capabilities.
Neural networks have long been criticized for lacking compositionality, leading critics to argue they
are inappropriate for modeling language and thought [8, 24, 25]. Nonetheless neural architectures
have advanced and made important contributions in natural language processing (NLP) [20]. Recent
work has revisited these classic critiques through studies of modern neural architectures [10, 16, 3, 21,
23, 2, 6], with a focus on the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models used successfully in machine
translation and other NLP tasks [34, 4, 38]. These studies show that powerful seq2seq approaches
still have substantial difficulties with compositional generalization, especially when combining a new
concept (“to Facebook”) with previous concepts (“slowly” or “eagerly”) [16, 3, 21].
New benchmarks have been proposed to encourage progress [10, 16, 2], including the SCAN dataset
for compositional learning [16]. SCAN involves learning to follow instructions such as “walk twice
and look right” by performing a sequence of appropriate output actions; in this case, the correct
response is to “WALK WALK RTURN LOOK.” A range of SCAN examples are shown in Table
1. Seq2seq models are trained on thousands of instructions built compositionally from primitives
(“look”, “walk”, “run”, “jump”, etc.), modifiers (“twice”, “around right,” etc.) and conjunctions
(“and” and “after”). After training, the aim is to execute, zero-shot, novel instructions such as
“walk around right after look twice.” Previous studies show that seq2seq recurrent neural networks
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

