On the Utility of Learning about Humans
for Human-AI Coordination
Micah Carroll
UC Berkeley
mdc@berkeley.edu

Rohin Shah
UC Berkeley
rohinmshah@berkeley.edu

Thomas L. Griffiths
Princeton University

Sanjit A. Seshia
UC Berkeley

Mark K. Ho
Princeton University
mho@princeton.edu

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Anca Dragan
UC Berkeley

Abstract
While we would like agents that can coordinate with humans, current algorithms
such as self-play and population-based training create agents that can coordinate
with themselves. Agents that assume their partner to be optimal or similar to them
can converge to coordination protocols that fail to understand and be understood
by humans. To demonstrate this, we introduce a simple environment that requires
challenging coordination, based on the popular game Overcooked, and learn a
simple model that mimics human play. We evaluate the performance of agents
trained via self-play and population-based training. These agents perform very
well when paired with themselves, but when paired with our human model, they
are significantly worse than agents designed to play with the human model. An
experiment with a planning algorithm yields the same conclusion, though only
when the human-aware planner is given the exact human model that it is playing
with. A user study with real humans shows this pattern as well, though less strongly.
Qualitatively, we find that the gains come from having the agent adapt to the
human’s gameplay. Given this result, we suggest several approaches for designing
agents that learn about humans in order to better coordinate with them. Code is
available at https://github.com/HumanCompatibleAI/overcooked_ai.

1

Introduction

An increasingly effective way to tackle two-player games is to train an agent to play with a set of
other AI agents, often past versions of itself. This powerful approach has resulted in impressive
performance against human experts in games like Go [33], Quake [20], Dota [29], and Starcraft [34].
Since the AI agents never encounter humans during training, when evaluated against human experts,
they are undergoing a distributional shift. Why doesn’t this cause the agents to fail? We hypothesize
that it is because of the competitive nature of these games. Consider the canonical case of a two-player
zero-sum game, as shown in Figure 1 (left). When humans play the minimizer role but take a branch
in the search tree that is suboptimal, this only increases the maximizer’s score.
However, not all settings are competitive. Arguably, one of the main goals of AI is to generate agents
that collaborate, rather than compete, with humans. We would like agents that help people with
the tasks they want to achieve, augmenting their capabilities [10, 6]. Looking at recent results, it
is tempting to think that self-play-like methods extend nicely to collaboration: AI-human teams
performed well in Dota [28] and Capture the Flag [20]. However, in these games, the advantage may
come from the AI system’s individual ability, rather than from coordination with humans. We claim
that in general, collaboration is fundamentally different from competition, and will require us to go
beyond self-play to explicitly account for human behavior.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

