Communication-efficient Distributed SGD with
Sketching

Nikita Ivkin ∗ †
Amazon
ivkin@amazon.com
Vladimir Braverman ‡
Johns Hopkins University
vova@cs.jhu.edu

Daniel Rothchild ∗
UC Berkeley
drothchild@berkeley.edu

Enayat Ullah ∗
Johns Hopkins University
enayat@jhu.edu

Ion Stoica
UC Berkeley
istoica@berkeley.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
Large-scale distributed training of neural networks is often limited by network bandwidth, wherein the communication time overwhelms the local computation time.
Motivated by the success of sketching methods in sub-linear/streaming algorithms,
we introduce S KETCHED -SGD4 , an algorithm for carrying out distributed SGD by
communicating sketches instead of full gradients. We show that S KETCHED -SGD
has favorable convergence rates on several classes of functions. When considering
all communication – both of gradients and of updated model weights – S KETCHED SGD reduces the amount of communication required compared to other gradient
compression methods from O(d) or O(W ) to O(log d), where d is the number
of model parameters and W is the number of workers participating in training.
We run experiments on a transformer model, an LSTM, and a residual network,
demonstrating up to a 40x reduction in total communication cost with no loss in
final model performance. We also show experimentally that S KETCHED -SGD
scales to at least 256 workers without increasing communication cost or degrading
model performance.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning training workloads are commonly distributed across many machines using
data-parallel synchronous stochastic gradient descent. At each iteration, W worker nodes split a
mini-batch of size B; each worker computes the gradient of the loss on its portion of the data, and then
a parameter server sums each worker’s gradient to yield the full mini-batch gradient. After using this
gradient to update the model parameters, the parameter server must send back the updated weights to
each worker. We emphasize that our method can naturally be extended to other topologies as well
(e.g. ring, complete, etc.) – in particular we would then communicate sketches over a minimum
spanning tree of the communication graph. However, for ease of exposition, in this work we focus
exclusively on the star topology. For a fixed batch size B, the amount of data each worker processes
– and therefore the amount of computation required – is inversely proportional to W . On the other
hand, the amount of communication required per worker is independent of W . Even with optimal
interleaving of the communication and computation, the total training time is at least the maximum
∗

equal contribution
This work was done while the author was at Johns Hopkins University.
‡
This work was done, in part, while the author was visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.
4
Code is available at https://github.com/dhroth/sketchedsgd
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

