Few-shot Video-to-Video Synthesis

Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Andrew Tao, Guilin Liu, Jan Kautz, Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA Corporation
{tingchunw,mingyul,atao,guilinl,jkautz,bcatanzaro}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Video-to-video synthesis (vid2vid) aims at converting an input semantic video,
such as videos of human poses or segmentation masks, to an output photorealistic
video. While the state-of-the-art of vid2vid has advanced significantly, existing
approaches share two major limitations. First, they are data-hungry. Numerous
images of a target human subject or a scene are required for training. Second, a
learned model has limited generalization capability. A pose-to-human vid2vid
model can only synthesize poses of the single person in the training set. It does not
generalize to other humans that are not in the training set. To address the limitations,
we propose a few-shot vid2vid framework, which learns to synthesize videos of
previously unseen subjects or scenes by leveraging few example images of the target
at test time. Our model achieves this few-shot generalization capability via a novel
network weight generation module utilizing an attention mechanism. We conduct
extensive experimental validations with comparisons to strong baselines using
several large-scale video datasets including human-dancing videos, talking-head
videos, and street-scene videos. The experimental results verify the effectiveness
of the proposed framework in addressing the two limitations of existing vid2vid
approaches. Code is available at our website.

1

Introduction

Video-to-video synthesis (vid2vid) refers to the task of converting an input semantic video to an
output photorealistic video. It has a wide range of applications, including generating a human-dancing
video using a human pose sequence [7, 12, 57, 67], or generating a driving video using a segmentation
mask sequence [57]. Typically, to obtain such a model, one begins with collecting a training dataset
for the target task. It could be a set of videos of a target person performing diverse actions or a set
of street-scene videos captured by using a camera mounted on a car driving in a city. The dataset is
then used to train a model that converts novel input semantic videos to corresponding photorealistic
videos at test time. In other words, we expect a vid2vid model for humans can generate videos of
the same person performing novel actions that are not in the training set and a street-scene vid2vid
model can videos of novel street-scenes with the same style as those in the training set. With the
advance of the generative adversarial networks (GANs) framework [13] and its image-conditional
extensions [22, 58], existing vid2vid approaches have shown promising results.
We argue that generalizing to novel input semantic videos is insufficient. One should also aim for
a model that can generalize to unseen domains, such as generating videos of human subjects that
are not included in the training dataset. More ideally, a vid2vid model should be able to synthesize
videos of unseen domains by leveraging just a few example images given at test time. If a vid2vid
model cannot generalize to unseen persons or scene styles, then we must train a model for each new
subject or scene style. Moreover, if a vid2vid model cannot achieve this domain generalization
capability with only a few example images, then one has to collect many images for each new subject
or scene style. This would make the model not easily scalable. Unfortunately, existing vid2vid
approaches suffer from these drawbacks as they do not consider such generalization.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

