Learning to Correlate in Multi-Player General-Sum
Sequential Games
Andrea Celli∗
Politecnico di Milano
andrea.celli@polimi.it

Alberto Marchesi∗
Politecnico di Milano
alberto.marchesi@polimi.it

Tommaso Bianchi
Politecnico di Milano
tommaso4.bianchi@mail.polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Abstract
In the context of multi-player, general-sum games, there is a growing interest in
solution concepts involving some form of communication among players, since
they can lead to socially better outcomes with respect to Nash equilibria and may
be reached through learning dynamics in a decentralized fashion. In this paper,
we focus on coarse correlated equilibria (CCEs) in sequential games. First, we
complete the picture on the complexity of finding social-welfare-maximizing CCEs
by proving that the problem is not in Poly-APX, unless P = NP, in games with
three or more players (including chance). Then, we provide simple arguments
showing that CFR—working with behavioral strategies—may not converge to a
CCE in multi-player, general-sum sequential games. In order to amend this issue,
we devise two variants of CFR that provably converge to a CCE. The first one
(CFR-S) is a simple stochastic adaptation of CFR which employs sampling to
build a correlated strategy, whereas the second variant (called CFR-Jr) enhances
CFR with a more involved reconstruction procedure to recover correlated strategies
from behavioral ones. Experiments on a rich testbed of multi-player, general-sum
sequential games show that both CFR-S and CFR-Jr are dramatically faster than
the state-of-the-art algorithms to compute CCEs, with CFR-Jr being also a good
heuristic to find socially-optimal CCEs.

1

Introduction

A number of recent studies explore relaxations of the classical notion of equilibrium (i.e., the
Nash equilibrium (NE) [30]), allowing to model communication among the players [3, 14, 34].
Communication naturally brings about the possibility of playing correlated strategies. These are
customarily modeled through a trusted external mediator who privately recommends actions to the
players [1]. In particular, a correlated strategy is a correlated equilibrium (CE) if each player has
no incentive to deviate from the recommendation, assuming the other players would not deviate
either. A popular variation of the CE is the coarse correlated equilibrium (CCE), which only prevents
deviations before knowing the recommendation [28]. In sequential games, CEs and CCEs are
well-suited for scenarios where the players have limited communication capabilities and can only
communicate before the game starts, such as, e.g., military settings where field units have no time or
means of communicating during a battle, collusion in auctions where communication is illegal during
bidding, and, in general, any setting with costly communication channels or blocking environments.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

