Global Convergence of Gradient Descent
for Deep Linear Residual Networks

Lei Wu∗ Qingcan Wang∗ Chao Ma
Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
{leiwu,qingcanw,chaom}@princeton.edu

Abstract
We analyze the global convergence of gradient descent for deep linear residual
networks by proposing a new initialization: zero-asymmetric (ZAS) initialization.
It is motivated by avoiding stable manifolds of saddle points. We prove that under
the ZAS initialization, for an arbitrary 
target matrix, gradient descent converges
to an ε-optimal point in O L3 log(1/ε) iterations, which scales polynomially
with the network depth L. Our result and the exp(Ω(L)) convergence time for
the standard initialization (Xavier or near-identity) [18] together demonstrate the
importance of the residual structure and the initialization in the optimization for
deep linear neural networks, especially when L is large.

1

Introduction

It is widely observed that simple gradient-based optimization algorithms are efficient for training deep
neural networks [21], whose landscape is highly non-convex. To explain the efficiency, traditional
optimization theories cannot be directly applied and the special structures of neural networks must be
taken into consideration. Recently many researches are devoted to this topic [13, 21, 4, 7, 6, 1, 23,
15, 16], but the theoretical understanding is still far from sufficient.
In this paper, we focus on a simplified case: the deep linear neural network
f (x; W1 , . . . , WL ) = WL WL−1 · · · W1 x,
(1.1)
where W1 , . . . , WL are the weight matrices and L is the depth. Linear networks are simple since
they can only represent linear transformation, but they preserve one of the most important aspects of
deep neural networks, the layered structure. Therefore, analysis of linear networks will be helpful for
understanding nonlinear cases. For example, the random orthogonal initialization proposed in [17]
that analyzes the gradient descent dynamics of deep linear networks was later shown to be useful for
training recurrent networks with long term dependences [19].
Despite the simplicity, the optimization of deep linear neural networks is still far from being well
understood, especially the global convergence. [18] proves that the number of iterations required for
convergence could scales exponentially with the depth L. The result requires two conditions: (1) the
width of each layer is 1; (2) the gradient descent starts from the standard Xavier [9] or near-identity
[11] initialization. If these conditions break, the negative results does not imply that gradient descent
cannot efficiently learn deep linear networks in general. [5] shows that if the width of every layer
increases with the network depth, gradient descent with the Gaussian random initialization does find
the global minima while the convergence time only scales polynomially with the depth. Here we
attempt to circumvent the negative result in [18] by using better initialization strategies instead of
increasing the width.
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

