N-Gram Graph: Simple Unsupervised Representation
for Graphs, with Applications to Molecules

Shengchao Liu, Mehmet Furkan Demirel, Yingyu Liang
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
{shengchao, demirel, yliang}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Machine learning techniques have recently been adopted in various applications
in medicine, biology, chemistry, and material engineering. An important task is
to predict the properties of molecules, which serves as the main subroutine in
many downstream applications such as virtual screening and drug design. Despite
the increasing interest, the key challenge is to construct proper representations
of molecules for learning algorithms. This paper introduces N-gram graph, a
simple unsupervised representation for molecules. The method first embeds the
vertices in the molecule graph. It then constructs a compact representation for the
graph by assembling the vertex embeddings in short walks in the graph, which we
show is equivalent to a simple graph neural network that needs no training. The
representations can thus be efficiently computed and then used with supervised
learning methods for prediction. Experiments on 60 tasks from 10 benchmark
datasets demonstrate its advantages over both popular graph neural networks and
traditional representation methods. This is complemented by theoretical analysis
showing its strong representation and prediction power.

1

Introduction

Increasingly, sophisticated machine learning methods have been used in non-traditional application
domains like medicine, biology, chemistry, and material engineering [14, 11, 16, 9]. This paper
focuses on a prototypical task of predicting properties of molecules. A motivating example is
virtual screening for drug discovery. Traditional physical screening for drug discovery (i.e., selecting
molecules based on properties tested via physical experiments) is typically accurate and valid, but
also very costly and slow. In contrast, virtual screening (i.e., selecting molecules based on predicted
properties via machine learning methods) can be done in minutes for predicting millions of molecules.
Therefore, it can be a good filtering step before the physical experiments, to help accelerate the drug
discovery process and significantly reduce resource requirements. The benefits gained then depend
on the prediction performance of the learning algorithms.
A key challenge is that raw data in these applications typically are not directly well-handled by existing
learning algorithms and thus suitable representations need to be constructed carefully. Unlike image
or text data where machine learning (in particular deep learning) has led to significant achievements,
the most common raw inputs in molecule property prediction problems provide only highly abstract
representations of chemicals (i.e., graphs on atoms with atom attributes).
To address the challenge, various representation methods have been proposed, mainly in two categories. The first category is chemical fingerprints, the most widely used feature representations
in aforementioned domains. The prototype is the Morgan fingerprints [42] (see Figure S1 for an
example). The second category is graph neural networks (GNN) [25, 2, 33, 47, 26, 58]. They view
molecules as graphs with attributes, and build a computational network tailored to the graph structure
that constructs an embedding vector for the input molecule and feeds it into a predictor (classifier or
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

