Amortized Bethe Free Energy Minimization for
Learning MRFs

Sam Wiseman
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA
swiseman@ttic.edu

Yoon Kim
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
yoonkim@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We propose to learn deep undirected graphical models (i.e., MRFs) with a nonELBO objective for which we can calculate exact gradients. In particular, we
optimize a saddle-point objective deriving from the Bethe free energy approximation to the partition function. Unlike much recent work in approximate inference,
the derived objective requires no sampling, and can be efficiently computed even
for very expressive MRFs. We furthermore amortize this optimization with trained
inference networks. Experimentally, we find that the proposed approach compares
favorably with loopy belief propagation, but is faster, and it allows for attaining
better held out log likelihood than other recent approximate inference schemes.

1

Introduction

There has been much recent work on learning deep generative models of discrete data, in both the
case where all the modeled variables are observed [35, 58, inter alia], and in the case where they are
not [37, 36, inter alia]. Most of this recent work has focused on directed graphical models, and when
approximate inference is necessary, on variational inference. Here we consider instead undirected
models, that is, Markov Random Fields (MRFs), which we take to be interesting for at least two
reasons: first, some data are more naturally modeled using MRFs [25]; second, unlike their directed
counterparts, many intractable MRFs of interest admit a learning objective which both approximates
the log marginal likelihood, and which can be computed exactly (i.e., without sampling). In particular,
log marginal likelihood approximations that make use of the Bethe Free Energy (BFE) [4] can be
computed in time that effectively scales linearly with the number of factors in the MRF, provided that
the factors are of low degree. Indeed, loopy belief propagation (LBP) [33], the classic approach to
approximate inference in MRFs, can be viewed as minimizing the BFE [66]. However, while often
quite effective, LBP is also an iterative message-passing algorithm, which is less amenable to GPU
parallelization and can therefore slow down the training of deep generative models.
To address these shortcomings of LBP in the context of training deep models, we propose to train
MRFs by minimizing the BFE directly during learning, without message-passing, using inference
networks trained to output approximate minimizers. This scheme gives rise to a saddle-point learning
problem, and we show that learning in this way allows for quickly training MRFs that are competitive
with or outperform those trained with LBP.
We also consider the setting where the discrete latent variable model to be learned admits both
directed and undirected variants. For example, we might be interested in learning an HMM-like
model, but we are free to parameterize transition factors in a variety of ways, including such that all the
transition factors are unnormalized and of low-degree (see Figure 1). Such a parameterization makes
BFE minimization particularly convenient, and indeed we show that learning such an undirected
model with BFE minimization allows for outperforming the directed variant learned with amortized
variational inference in terms of both held out log likelihood and speed. Thus, when possible, it may
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

