Arbicon-Net: Arbitrary Continuous Geometric
Transformation Networks for Image Registration

Jianchun Chen ∗
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University
Brooklyn, NY 11201
jc7009@nyu.edu

Lingjing Wang ∗
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University
Brooklyn, NY 11201
lw1474@nyu.edu

Xiang Li
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University
Brooklyn, NY 11201
xl845@nyu.edu

Yi Fang †
NYU Multimedia and Visual Computing Lab
New York University Abu Dhabi
Abu Dhabi, UAE
yfang@nyu.edu

Abstract
This paper concerns the undetermined problem of estimating geometric transformation between image pairs. Recent methods introduce deep neural networks
to predict the controlling parameters of hand-crafted geometric transformation
models (e.g. thin-plate spline) for image registration and matching. However the
low-dimension parametric models are incapable of estimating a highly complex
geometric transform with limited flexibility to model the actual geometric deformation from image pairs. To address this issue, we present an end-to-end trainable
deep neural networks, named Arbitrary Continuous Geometric Transformation
Networks (Arbicon-Net), to directly predict the dense displacement field for pairwise image alignment. Arbicon-Net is generalized from training data to predict the
desired arbitrary continuous geometric transformation in a data-driven manner for
unseen new pair of images. Particularly, without imposing penalization terms, the
predicted displacement vector function is proven to be spatially continuous and
smooth. To verify the performance of Arbicon-Net, we conducted semantic alignment tests over both synthetic and real image dataset with various experimental
settings. The results demonstrate that Arbicon-Net outperforms the previous image
alignment techniques in identifying the image correspondences.

1

Introduction

Image registration plays a fundamental role in many computer vision applications such as medical
image processing [1], camera pose estimation [2], visual tracking [3]. Fig.1 shows the image
registration process, which includes geometric transformation estimation and image warping. To
formulate the problem of image registration, traditional methods often approach the task in two steps:
1) they firstly compute the hand-crafted image features such as SIFT and HOG [4, 5] to capture
pixel-level descriptions, 2) and then iteratively search the optimal geometric transformation model
to register a pair of images, driven by minimizing an alignment loss function. The alignment loss
is usually pre-defined as a certain type of similarity metric (e.g. correlation scores) between two
∗
†

Equal contribution to this paper
Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

