Metric Learning for Adversarial Robustness

Chengzhi Mao
Columbia University
cm3797@columbia.edu
Junfeng Yang
Columbia University
junfeng@cs.columbia.edu

Ziyuan Zhong
Columbia University
ziyuan.zhong@columbia.edu

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
vondrick@cs.columbia.edu

Baishakhi Ray
Columbia University
rayb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Deep networks are well-known to be fragile to adversarial attacks. We conduct an
empirical analysis of deep representations under the state-of-the-art attack method
called PGD, and find that the attack causes the internal representation to shift
closer to the “false” class. Motivated by this observation, we propose to regularize the representation space under attack with metric learning to produce more
robust classifiers. By carefully sampling examples for metric learning, our learned
representation not only increases robustness, but also detects previously unseen
adversarial samples. Quantitative experiments show improvement of robustness
accuracy by up to 4% and detection efficiency by up to 6% according to Area
Under Curve score over prior work. The code of our work is available at https:
//github.com/columbia/Metric_Learning_Adversarial_Robustness.

1

Introduction

Deep networks achieve impressive accuracy and wide adoption in computer vision [17], speech
recognition [14], and natural language processing [21]. Nevertheless, their performance degrades
under adversarial attacks, where natural examples are perturbed with human-imperceptible, carefully
crafted noises [35, 23, 12, 18]. This degradation raises serious concern — especially when we
deploy deep networks to safety and reliability critical applications [29, 43, 41, 20, 36]. Extensive
efforts [37, 31, 47, 7, 25, 12, 35, 48] have been made to study and enhance the robustness of deep
networks against adversarial attacks, where a defense method called adversarial training achieves the
state-of-the-art adversarial robustness [19, 16, 46, 49].
To better understand adversarial attacks, we first conduct an empirical analysis of the latent representations under attack for both defended [19, 16] and undefended image classification models. Following
the visualization technique in [28, 30, 33], we investigate what happens to the latent representations
as they undergo attack. Our results show that the attack shifts the latent representations of adversarial
samples away from their true class and closer to the false class. The adversarial representations
often spread across the false class distribution in such a way that the natural images of the false class
become indistinguishable from the adversarial images.
Motivated by this empirical observation, we propose to add an additional constraint to the model
using metric learning [15, 32, 44] to produce more robust classifiers. Specifically, we add a triplet
loss term on the latent representations of adversarial samples to the original loss function. However,
the naïve implementation of triplet loss is not effective because the pairwise distances of a natural
sample xa , its adversarial sample x′a , and a randomly selected natural sample of the false class xn are
hugely uneven. Specifically, given considerable data variance in the false class, xn is often far from
the decision boundary where x′a resides, therefore xn is too easy as a negative sample. To address this
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

