Structure Learning with Side Information:
Sample Complexity

Saurabh Sihag

Ali Tajer

Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract
Graphical models encode the stochastic dependencies among random variables (RVs). The vertices represent the RVs, and the edges signify the conditional
dependencies among the RVs. Structure learning is the process of inferring the
edges by observing realizations of the RVs, and it has applications in a wide range
of technological, social, and biological networks. Learning the structure of graphs
when the vertices are treated in isolation from inferential information known about
them is well-investigated. In a wide range of domains, however, often there exist
additional inferred knowledge about the structure, which can serve as valuable side
information. For instance, the gene networks that represent different subtypes of
the same cancer share similar edges across all subtypes and also have exclusive
edges corresponding to each subtype, rendering partially similar graphical models
for gene expression in different cancer subtypes. Hence, an inferential decision
regarding a gene network can serve as side information for inferring other related
gene networks. When such side information is leveraged judiciously, it can translate
to significant improvement in structure learning. Leveraging such side information can be abstracted as inferring structures of distinct graphical models that are
partially similar. This paper focuses on Ising graphical models, and considers the
problem of simultaneously learning the structures of two partially similar graphs,
where any inference about the structure of one graph offers side information for
the other graph. The bounded edge subclass of Ising models is considered, and
necessary conditions (information-theoretic ), as well as sufficient conditions (algorithmic) for the sample complexity for achieving a bounded probability of error,
are established. Furthermore, specific regimes are identified in which the necessary
and sufficient conditions coincide, rendering the optimal sample complexity.

1

Introduction

Graphical models are widely used to compactly model the conditional interdependence among
multiple random variables Lauritzen [1996] and Pearl [2009]. The vertices of the graph represent
the random variables (RVs), while the edges encode the inter-dependence among the RVs. The
complete structure of the graph is analytically captured by the joint probability distribution of the
random variables. Graphical models offer effective and tractable solutions to various inferential
and decision-making solutions in different domains, e.g., computer vision Won and Derin [1992],
genetics Chen et al. [2013], Fang et al. [2016], Dobra et al. [2004], social networks Jacob et al.
[2014], and power systems Dvijotham et al. [2017]. In this paper, we focus on Ising models and
consider the problem of joint model selection of a pair of graphs with partially identical structures
using the samples from their joint distributions.
Graphical models with partially similar structures arise in the domains that consist of multiple layered
networks of information sources. In such an application, each layer shares some of its vertices
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

