Private Hypothesis Selection

Mark Bun
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
mbun@bu.edu
Thomas Steinke
IBM Research
phs@thomas-steinke.net

Gautam Kamath
Cheriton School of Computer Science
University of Waterloo
g@csail.mit.edu
Zhiwei Steven Wu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Minnesota
zsw@umn.edu

Abstract
We provide a differentially private algorithm for hypothesis selection. Given
samples from an unknown probability distribution P and a set of m probability distributions H, the goal is to output, in a ε-differentially private manner, a distribution
from H whose total variation distance to P is comparable to that of the best such
distribution
(which we
 denote by α). The sample complexity of our basic algorithm

m
log m
is O log
+
, representing a minimal cost for privacy when compared to
α2
αε
the non-private algorithm. We also can handle infinite hypothesis classes H by
relaxing to (ε, δ)-differential privacy.
We apply our hypothesis selection algorithm to give learning algorithms for a
number of natural distribution classes, including Gaussians, product distributions,
sums of independent random variables, piecewise polynomials, and mixture classes.
Our hypothesis selection procedure allows us to generically convert a cover for a
class to a learning algorithm, complementing known learning lower bounds which
are in terms of the size of the packing number of the class. As the covering and
packing numbers are often closely related, for constant α, our algorithms achieve
the optimal sample complexity for many classes of interest. Finally, we describe
an application to private distribution-free PAC learning.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of hypothesis selection: given samples from an unknown probability
distribution, select a distribution from some fixed set of candidates which is “close” to the unknown
distribution in some appropriate distance measure. Such situations can arise naturally in a number
of settings. For instance, we may have a number of different methods which work under various
circumstances, which are not known in advance. One option is to run all the methods to generate a
set of hypotheses, and pick the best from this set afterwards. Relatedly, an algorithm may branch
its behavior based on a number of “guesses,” which will similarly result in a set of candidates,
corresponding to the output at the end of each branch. Finally, if we know that the underlying
distribution belongs to some (parametric) class, it is possible to essentially enumerate the class (also
known as a cover) to create a collection of hypotheses. Observe that this last example is quite general,
and this approach can give generic learning algorithms for many settings of interest.
A full version of the paper, with additional details and proofs, appears in the supplement, or on arXiv [9].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

