Efficiently Learning Fourier Sparse Set Functions

Andisheh Amrollahi ∗
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
amrollaa@ethz.ch

Amir Zandieh ∗
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
amir.zandieh@epfl.ch

Michael Kapralov†
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
michael.kapralov@epfl.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Learning set functions is a key challenge arising in many domains, ranging from
sketching graphs to black-box optimization with discrete parameters. In this paper
we consider the problem of efficiently learning set functions that are defined over a
ground set of size n and that are sparse (say k-sparse) in the Fourier domain. This
is a wide class, that includes graph and hypergraph cut functions, decision trees and
more. Our central contribution is the first algorithm that allows learning functions
whose Fourier support only contains low degree (say degree d = o(n)) polynomials
using O(kd log n) sample complexity and runtime O(kn log2 k log n log d). This
implies that sparse graphs with k edges can, for the first time, be learned from
O(k log n) observations of cut values and in linear time in the number of vertices.
Our algorithm can also efficiently learn (sums of) decision trees of small depth.
The algorithm exploits techniques from the sparse Fourier transform literature and
is easily implementable. Lastly, we also develop an efficient robust version of
our algorithm and prove `2 /`2 approximation guarantees without any statistical
assumptions on the noise.

1

Introduction

How can we learn the structure of a graph by observing the values of a small number of cuts? Can we
learn a decision tree efficiently by observing its evaluation on a few samples? Both of these important
applications are instances of the more general problem of learning set functions.
Consider a set function which maps subsets of a ground set V of size n to real numbers, x : 2V → R.
Set functions that arise in applications often exhibit structure, which can be effectively captured in
the Fourier (also called Walsh-Hadamard) basis. One common studied structure for set functions
is Fourier sparsity [2]. A k-Fourier-sparse set function contains no more than k nonzero Fourier
coefficients. A natural example for k-Fourier-sparse set functions are cut functions of graphs with
k edges or evaluations of a decision tree of depth d [7, 8, 12]. The cut function of a graph only
contains polynomials of degree at most two in the Fourier basis and in the general case, the cut
function of a hypergraph of degree d only contains polynomials of degree at most d in the Fourier
basis [12]. Intuitively this means that these set functions can be written as sums of terms where each
term depends on at most d elements in the ground set. Also a decision tree of depth d only contains
polynomials of degree at most d in the Fourier basis [7][8]. Learning such functions has recently
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally
Supported by ERC Starting Grant SUBLINEAR.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

