Regularization Matters: Generalization and
Optimization of Neural Nets v.s. their Induced Kernel
Colin Wei
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
colinwei@stanford.edu

Jason D. Lee
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
jasonlee@princeton.edu

Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
lqiang@cs.texas.edu

Tengyu Ma
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recent works have shown that on sufficiently over-parametrized neural nets, gradient descent with relatively large initialization optimizes a prediction function
in the RKHS of the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). This analysis leads to global
convergence results but does not work when there is a standard `2 regularizer,
which is useful to have in practice. We show that sample efficiency can indeed
depend on the presence of the regularizer: we construct a simple distribution in d
dimensions which the optimal regularized neural net learns with O(d) samples but
the NTK requires Ω(d2 ) samples to learn. To prove this, we establish two analysis
tools: i) for multi-layer feedforward ReLU nets, we show that the global minimizer
of a weakly-regularized cross-entropy loss is the max normalized margin solution
among all neural nets, which generalizes well; ii) we develop a new technique for
proving lower bounds for kernel methods, which relies on showing that the kernel
cannot focus on informative features. Motivated by our generalization results,
we study whether the regularized global optimum is attainable. We prove that
for infinite-width two-layer nets, noisy gradient descent optimizes the regularized
neural net loss to a global minimum in polynomial iterations.

1

Introduction

In deep learning, over-parametrization refers to the widely-adopted technique of using more parameters than necessary [35, 40]. Over-parametrization is crucial for successful optimization,
and a large body of work has been devoted towards understanding why. One line of recent
works [17, 37, 22, 21, 2, 76, 31, 6, 16, 72] offers an explanation that invites analogy with kernel methods, proving that with sufficient over-parameterization and a certain initialization scale
and learning rate schedule, gradient descent essentially learns a linear classifier on top of the initial
random features. For this same setting, Daniely [17], Du et al. [22, 21], Jacot et al. [31], Arora et al.
[6, 5] make this connection explicit by establishing that the prediction function found by gradient
descent is in the span of the training data in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) induced by
the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK). The generalization error of the resulting network can be analyzed
via the Rademacher complexity of the kernel method.
These works provide some of the first algorithmic results for the success of gradient descent in
optimizing neural nets; however, the resulting generalization error is only as good as that of fixed
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

