Breaking the Glass Ceiling for Embedding-Based
Classifiers for Large Output Spaces
Chuan Guo⇤ †
Cornell University
cg563@cornell.edu
Xiang Wu†
ByteDance
xiang.wu@bytedance.com

Ali Mousavi⇤
Google Research
alimous@google.com

Daniel Holtmann-Rice
Google Research
dhr@google.com

Sashank Reddi
Google Research
sashank@google.com

Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyenkale@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
In extreme classification settings, embedding-based neural network models are
currently not competitive with sparse linear and tree-based methods in terms of
accuracy. Most prior works attribute this poor performance to the low-dimensional
bottleneck in embedding-based methods. In this paper, we demonstrate that theoretically there is no limitation to using low-dimensional embedding-based methods,
and provide experimental evidence that overfitting is the root cause of the poor performance of embedding-based methods. These findings motivate us to investigate
novel data augmentation and regularization techniques to mitigate overfitting. To
this end, we propose GLaS, a new regularizer for embedding-based neural network
approaches. It is a natural generalization from the graph Laplacian and spread-out
regularizers, and empirically it addresses the drawback of each regularizer alone
when applied to the extreme classification setup. With the proposed techniques, we
attain or improve upon the state-of-the-art on most widely tested public extreme
classification datasets with hundreds of thousands of labels.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of multi-label classification with large output space, which has garnered
significant attention in recent years [36, 6, 14, 3, 33, 23]. This problem differs from the traditional
classification setting insofar that the number of labels is potentially in the millions, presenting
significant computational challenges. Many real world applications such as product recommendation
and text retrieval can be formulated under this framework and thus, practical solutions to this problem
can have significant and far-reaching impact.
In this unusual yet practical setting, both the number of input feature dimensions D and the number of
labels K could be upwards of hundreds of thousands or even millions. This renders most traditional
machine learning models, such as logistic regression and SVM, infeasible due to excessive number
of model parameters — approximately O(DK). Most recent approaches resort to using sparse linear
⇤
†

Equal Contribution
Work done at Google

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

