Learning Object Bounding Boxes for
3D Instance Segmentation on Point Clouds

Bo Yang 1 Jianan Wang 2 Ronald Clark 3 Qingyong Hu 1
Sen Wang 4 Andrew Markham 1 Niki Trigoni 1
1

University of Oxford

2

DeepMind

3

Imperial College London

4

Heriot-Watt University

firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel, conceptually simple and general framework for instance segmentation on 3D point clouds. Our method, called 3D-BoNet, follows the simple
design philosophy of per-point multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). The framework
directly regresses 3D bounding boxes for all instances in a point cloud, while
simultaneously predicting a point-level mask for each instance. It consists of a
backbone network followed by two parallel network branches for 1) bounding box
regression and 2) point mask prediction. 3D-BoNet is single-stage, anchor-free
and end-to-end trainable. Moreover, it is remarkably computationally efficient
as, unlike existing approaches, it does not require any post-processing steps such
as non-maximum suppression, feature sampling, clustering or voting. Extensive
experiments show that our approach surpasses existing work on both ScanNet and
S3DIS datasets while being approximately 10× more computationally efficient.
Comprehensive ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of our design.

1

Introduction

Enabling machines to understand 3D scenes is a fundamental necessity for autonomous driving,
augmented reality and robotics. Core problems on 3D geometric data such as point clouds include
semantic segmentation, object detection and instance segmentation. Of these problems, instance
segmentation has only started to be tackled in the literature. The primary obstacle is that point clouds
are inherently unordered, unstructured and non-uniform. Widely used convolutional neural networks
require the 3D point clouds to be voxelized, incurring high computational and memory costs.
The first neural algorithm to directly tackle 3D instance segmentation is SGPN [51], which learns to
group per-point features through a similarity matrix. Similarly, ASIS [52], JSIS3D [35], MASC [31],
3D-BEVIS [8] and [29] apply the same per-point feature grouping pipeline to segment 3D instances.
Mo et al. formulate the instance segmentation as a per-point feature classification problem in PartNet
[33]. However, the learnt segments of these proposal-free methods do not have high objectness as they
do not explicitly detect the object boundaries. In addition, they inevitably require a post-processing
step such as mean-shift clustering [6] to obtain the final instance labels, which is computationally
heavy. Another pipeline is the proposal-based 3D-SIS [15] and GSPN [59], which usually rely on
two-stage training and the expensive non-maximum suppression to prune dense object proposals.
In this paper, we present an elegant, efficient and novel framework for 3D instance segmentation,
where objects are loosely but uniquely detected through a single-forward stage using efficient MLPs,
and then each instance is precisely segmented through a simple point-level binary classifier. To this
end, we introduce a new bounding box prediction module together with a series of carefully designed
loss functions to directly learn object boundaries. Our framework is significantly different from the
existing proposal-based and proposal-free approaches, since we are able to efficiently segment all
instances with high objectness, but without relying on expensive and dense object proposals. Our
code and data are available at https://github.com/Yang7879/3D-BoNet.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

