Exact inference in structured prediction

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue Univeristy
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Kevin Bello
Department of Computer Science
Purdue Univeristy
West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA
kbellome@purdue.edu

Abstract
Structured prediction can be thought of as a simultaneous prediction of multiple
labels. This is often done by maximizing a score function on the space of labels,
which decomposes as a sum of pairwise and unary potentials. The above is naturally
modeled with a graph, where edges and vertices are related to pairwise and unary
potentials, respectively. We consider the generative process proposed by Globerson
et al. (2015) and apply it to general connected graphs. We analyze the structural
conditions of the graph that allow for the exact recovery of the labels. Our results
show that exact recovery is possible and achievable in polynomial time for a large
class of graphs. In particular, we show that graphs that are bad expanders can
be exactly recovered by adding small edge perturbations coming from the ErdősRényi model. Finally, as a byproduct of our analysis, we provide an extension of
Cheeger’s inequality.

1

Introduction

Throughout the years, structured prediction has been continuously used in multiple domains such as
computer vision, natural language processing, and computational biology. Examples of structured
prediction problems include dependency parsing, image segmentation, part-of-speech tagging, named
entity recognition, and protein folding. In this setting, the input X is some observation, e.g., social
network, an image, a sentence. The output is a labeling y, e.g., an assignment of each individual of a
social network to a cluster, or an assignment of each pixel in the image to foreground or background,
or the parse tree for the sentence. A common approach to structured prediction is to exploit local
features to infer the global structure. For instance, one could include a feature that encourages
two individuals of a social network to be assigned to different clusters whenever there is a strong
disagreement in opinions about a particular subject. Then, one can define a posterior distribution
over the set of possible labelings conditioned on the input. Some classical methods for learning the
parameters of the model are conditional random fields (Lafferty et al. 2001) and structured support
vector machines (Taskar et al. 2003, Tsochantaridis et al. 2005, Altun & Hofmann 2003). In this
work we will focus in the inference problem and assume that the model parameters have been already
learned.
In the context of Markov random fields (MRFs), for an undirected graph G = (V, E), one is interested
in finding a solution to the following inference problem:
X
X
max
cv (m)1[yv = m] +
cu,v (m, n)1[yu = m, yv = n] ,
(1)
y∈M|V|

v∈V,m∈M

(u,v)∈E,m1 ,m2 ∈M

where M is the set of possible labels, cu (m) is the cost of assigning label m to node v, and cu,v (m, n)
is the cost of assigning m and n to the neighbors u, v respectively.1 Similar inference problems arise
1

In the literature, the cost functions cv and cu,v are also known as unary and pairwise potentials respectively.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

