Recurrent Kernel Networks
Dexiong Chen
Inria∗
dexiong.chen@inria.fr

Laurent Jacob
CNRS†
laurent.jacob@univ-lyon1.fr

Julien Mairal
Inria∗
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Abstract
Substring kernels are classical tools for representing biological sequences or text.
However, when large amounts of annotated data are available, models that allow
end-to-end training such as neural networks are often preferred. Links between
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and substring kernels have recently been drawn,
by formally showing that RNNs with specific activation functions were points
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS). In this paper, we revisit this link
by generalizing convolutional kernel networks—originally related to a relaxation
of the mismatch kernel—to model gaps in sequences. It results in a new type of
recurrent neural network which can be trained end-to-end with backpropagation, or
without supervision by using kernel approximation techniques. We experimentally
show that our approach is well suited to biological sequences, where it outperforms
existing methods for protein classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Learning from biological sequences is important for a variety of scientific fields such as evolution [8]
or human health [16]. In order to use classical statistical models, a first step is often to map sequences
to vectors of fixed size, while retaining relevant features for the considered learning task. For a long
time, such features have been extracted from sequence alignment, either against a reference or between
each others [3]. The resulting features are appropriate for sequences that are similar enough, but they
become ill-defined when sequences are not suited to alignment. This includes important cases such as
microbial genomes, distant species, or human diseases, and calls for alternative representations [7].
String kernels provide generic representations for biological sequences, most of which do not require
global alignment [34]. In particular, a classical approach maps sequences to a huge-dimensional
feature space by enumerating statistics about all occuring subsequences. These subsequences may be
simple classical k-mers leading to the spectrum kernel [21], k-mers up to mismatches [22], or gapallowing subsequences [24]. Other approaches involve kernels based on a generative model [17, 35],
or based on local alignments between sequences [36] inspired by convolution kernels [11, 37].
The goal of kernel design is then to encode prior knowledge in the learning process. For instance,
modeling gaps in biological sequences is important since it allows taking into account short insertion
and deletion events, a common source of genetic variation. However, even though kernel methods are
good at encoding prior knowledge, they provide fixed task-independent representations. When large
amounts of data are available, approaches that optimize the data representation for the prediction task
∗

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.
Univ. Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, 69000
Lyon, France
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

