Predicting the Politics of an Image Using Webly
Supervised Data

Christopher Thomas
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{chris,kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract
The news media shape public opinion, and often, the visual bias they contain is
evident for human observers. This bias can be inferred from how different media
sources portray different subjects or topics. In this paper, we model visual political
bias in contemporary media sources at scale, using webly supervised data. We
collect a dataset of over one million unique images and associated news articles
from left- and right-leaning news sources, and develop a method to predict the
image’s political leaning. This problem is particularly challenging because of
the enormous intra-class visual and semantic diversity of our data. We propose
a two-stage method to tackle this problem. In the first stage, the model is forced
to learn relevant visual concepts that, when joined with document embeddings
computed from articles paired with the images, enable the model to predict bias.
In the second stage, we remove the requirement of the text domain and train a
visual classifier from the features of the former model. We show this two-stage
approach facilitates learning and outperforms several strong baselines. We also
present extensive qualitative results demonstrating the nuances of the data.

1

Introduction

One of the goals of the media is to inform, but in practice, the media also shapes opinions [23,
53, 2, 20, 57, 44]. The same issue can be presented from multiple perspectives, both in terms of
the text written in an article, and the visual content chosen to illustrate the article. For example,
when speaking of immigration, left-leaning sources might showcase the struggles of well-meaning
immigrants, while right-leaning sources might portray the misdeeds of criminal immigrants. The
type of topics portrayed is also strong cue for the left or right bias of the source media (e.g. tradition
is primarily seen as a value on the right, while diversity is seen as a value on the left [15]).
In this paper, we present a method for recognizing the political bias of an image, which we define
as whether the image came from a left- or right-leaning media source. This requires understanding:
1) what visual concepts to look for in images, and 2) how these visual concepts are portrayed
across the spectrum. Note that this is a very challenging task because many of the concepts that we
aim to learn show serious visual variability within the left and right. For example, the concept of
“immigration” can be illustrated with a photo of a border wall, children crying behind bars while
detained, immigration agents, protests and demonstrations about the issue, politicians giving speeches,
etc. Human viewers account for such within-class variance by generalizing what they see into broader
semantic concepts or themes using prior knowledge, deduction, and reasoning.
On the other hand, modern CNN architectures learn by discovering recurring textures or edges
representing objects in the images through backpropagation. However, the same objects might appear
and be discussed across the political spectrum, meaning that the simple presence or absence of objects
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

