Accurate Uncertainty Estimation and Decomposition
in Ensemble Learning
Jeremiah Zhe Liu∗
Google Research & Harvard University
zhl112@mail.harvard.edu

John Paisley
Columbia University
jpaisley@columbia.edu

Marianthi-Anna Kioumourtzoglou
Columbia University
mk3961@cumc.columbia.edu

Brent A. Coull
Harvard University
bcoull@hsph.harvard.edu

Abstract
Ensemble learning is a standard approach to building machine learning systems
that capture complex phenomena in real-world data. An important aspect of
these systems is the complete and valid quantification of model uncertainty. We
introduce a Bayesian nonparametric ensemble (BNE) approach that augments an
existing ensemble model to account for different sources of model uncertainty.
BNE augments a model’s prediction and distribution functions using Bayesian
nonparametric machinery. It has a theoretical guarantee in that it robustly estimates
the uncertainty patterns in the data distribution, and can decompose its overall
predictive uncertainty into distinct components that are due to different sources of
noise and error. We show that our method achieves accurate uncertainty estimates
under complex observational noise, and illustrate its real-world utility in terms of
uncertainty decomposition and model bias detection for an ensemble in predict air
pollution exposures in Eastern Massachusetts, USA.

1

Introduction

Ensemble learning has a long history in areas such as robust engineering system design [4], financial
investment management [20], and weather and climate forecasting [35], where high-risk decisions
and critical projections are made in the presence of noise and uncertainty. Failure to accurately
quantify the predictive uncertainty in these ensemble systems can lead to severe consequences [1],
such as the market crash of 2008.
Overall Uncertainty
To properly quantify predictive uncertainty, it is important
for an ensemble learning system to recognize different types
of uncertainties that arise in the modeling process. In maEpistemic
Aleatoric
chine learning modeling, two distinct types of uncertainties exist: aleatoric uncertainty and epistemic uncertainty
Structural
Parametric
[22] (see Figure 1). Aleatoric uncertainty arises due to the
(i.e. Model Misspecification)
ω
stochastic variability inherent in the data generating process,
for example due to an imperfect sensor, and is described
Prediction
Distribution
Function
Function
by the cumulative distribution function (CDF) F(y|x, Θ) of
δ
G
the data specified by a given model. On the other hand,
epistemic uncertainty arises due to our lack of knowledge
about the data generating mechanism. A model’s epistemic Figure 1: A decomposition of different
types of uncertainty by the Bayesian
∗ Work done at Harvard University.
Nonparametric Ensemble (BNE).

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

