Learning Positive Functions with Pseudo Mirror Descent

Yingxiang Yang∗
UIUC
yyang172@illinois.edu

Haoxiang Wang
UIUC
hwang264@illinois.edu

Negar Kiyavash
EPFL
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Niao He
UIUC
niaohe@illinois.edu

Abstract
The nonparametric learning of positive-valued functions appears widely in machine
learning, especially in the context of estimating intensity functions of point processes. Yet, existing approaches either require computing expensive projections or
semidefinite relaxations, or lack convexity and theoretical guarantees after introducing nonlinear link functions. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm, pseudo
mirror descent, that performs efficient estimation of positive functions within a
Hilbert space without expensive projections. The algorithm guarantees positivity
by performing mirror descent with an appropriately selected Bregman divergence,
and a pseudo-gradient is adopted to speed up the gradient evaluation procedure
in practice. We analyze both asymptotic and nonasymptotic convergence of the
algorithm. Through simulations, we show that pseudo mirror descent outperforms
the state-of-the-art benchmarks for learning intensities of Poisson and multivariate
Hawkes processes, in terms of both computational efficiency and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Learning positive-valued functions (or positive functions for short) in Hilbert spaces is pervasive
in machine learning, especially when estimating intensity functions of point processes. In recent
years, there has been a surge of interest and demand for modeling large-scale time-series and discrete
event data using point processes. This is fueled by a wide spectrum of applications ranging from
modeling financial activities [Embrechts et al., 2011], to modeling network diffusion such as in
disease propagation [Yang and Zha, 2013] and spread of news on social networks [Farajtabar et al.,
2015, 2017], to tracking and control of large-scale and real-time systems [Craciun et al., 2015].
Despite this, progress has been slow on nonparametric learning of positive functions (or positive
intensities in case of point processes).
1.1

Learning Positive Functions: Existing Results

Semi-infinite/Semi-definite relaxations. In regularized empirical risk minimization over a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), the representer theorem [Schölkopf et al., 2001] allows one
to write the estimate as a linear combination of reproducing kernels. Therefore, the optimization
∗

This work was supported in part by MURI grant ARMY W911NF-15-1-0479, ONR grant W911NF-15-10479, NSF CCF-1755829 and NSF CMMI-1761699.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

