Backprop with Approximate Activations
for Memory-efficient Network Training

Ayan Chakrabarti
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130
ayan@wustl.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Training convolutional neural network models is memory intensive since backpropagation requires storing activations of all intermediate layers. This presents a
practical concern when seeking to deploy very deep architectures in production,
especially when models need to be frequently re-trained on updated datasets. In this
paper, we propose a new implementation for back-propagation that significantly
reduces memory usage, by enabling the use of approximations with negligible
computational cost and minimal effect on training performance. The algorithm
reuses common buffers to temporarily store full activations and compute the forward pass exactly. It also stores approximate per-layer copies of activations, at
significant memory savings, that are used in the backward pass. Compared to simply approximating activations within standard back-propagation, our method limits
accumulation of errors across layers. This allows the use of much lower-precision
approximations without affecting training accuracy. Experiments on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet show that our method yields performance close to exact
training, while storing activations compactly with as low as 4-bit precision.

1

Introduction

The use of deep convolutional neural networks has become prevalent for a variety of visual and other
inference tasks [9], with a trend to employ increasingly larger and deeper network architectures [8, 10]
that are able to express more complex functions. While deeper architectures have delivered significant
improvements in performance, they have also increased demand on computational resources. In
particular, training such networks requires a significant amount of on-device GPU memory—much
more so than during inference—in order to store activations of all intermediate layers of the network
that are needed for gradient computation during back-propagation.
This leads to large memory footprints during training for state-of-the-art deep architectures, especially
when training on high-resolution images with a large number of activations per layer. This in-turn
can lead to the computation being inefficient and “memory-bound”: it forces the use of smaller
training batches for each GPU leading to under-utilization of available GPU cores (smaller batches
also complicate the use of batch-normalization [12] with batch statistics computed over fewer
samples). Consequently, practitioners are forced to either use a larger number of GPUs for parallelism,
or contend with slower training. This makes it expensive to deploy deep architectures for many
applications, especially when networks need to be continually trained as more data becomes available.
Prior work to address this has traded-off memory for computation [2, 4, 5, 14], but with a focus on
enabling exact gradient computation. However, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) inherently works
with noisy gradients at each iteration and, in the context of distributed training, has been shown to
succeed when using approximate and noisy parameter gradients when aggregating across multiple
devices [3, 16, 19, 20]. Motivated by this, we propose a method that uses approximate activations
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

