Imitation Learning from Observations by
Minimizing Inverse Dynamics Disagreement

Chao Yang1∗ , Xiaojian Ma12∗ , Wenbing Huang1∗,
Fuchun Sun1 , Huaping Liu1 , Junzhou Huang3 , Chuang Gan4
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy, Department of Computer Science, UCLA
3
Tencent AI Lab, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
yangchao18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, maxiaojian@ucla.edu
hwenbing@126.com, fcsun@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies Learning from Observations (LfO) for imitation learning with
access to state-only demonstrations. In contrast to Learning from Demonstration
(LfD) that involves both action and state supervision, LfO is more practical in
leveraging previously inapplicable resources (e.g. videos), yet more challenging
due to the incomplete expert guidance. In this paper, we investigate LfO and its
difference with LfD in both theoretical and practical perspectives. We first prove
that the gap between LfD and LfO actually lies in the disagreement of inverse
dynamics models between the imitator and the expert, if following the modeling
approach of GAIL [15]. More importantly, the upper bound of this gap is revealed
by a negative causal entropy which can be minimized in a model-free way. We
term our method as Inverse-Dynamics-Disagreement-Minimization (IDDM) which
enhances the conventional LfO method through further bridging the gap to LfD.
Considerable empirical results on challenging benchmarks indicate that our method
attains consistent improvements over other LfO counterparts.

1

Introduction

A crucial aspect of intelligent robots is their ability to perform a task of interest by imitating
expert behaviors from raw sensory observations [5]. Towards this goal, GAIL [15] is one of the
most successful imitation learning methods, which adversarially minimizes the discrepancy of the
occupancy measure between the agent and the expert for policy optimization. However, along with
many other methods [31, 3, 29, 30, 1, 23, 6, 9, 13, 2], GAIL adopts a heavily supervised training
mechanism, which demands not only the expert’s state (e.g. observable spatial locations), but also its
accurate action (e.g. controllable motor commands) performed at each time step.
Whereas providing expert action indeed enriches the information and hence facilitates the imitation
learning process, collecting them could be difficult and sometimes infeasible for some certain practical
cases, particularly when we would like to learn skills from a large number of internet videos. Besides,
imitation learning under action guidance is not biologically reasonable [39], as our human can imitate
skills through adjusting the action to match the demonstrators’ state, without knowing what exact
action the demonstrator has performed. To address these concerns, several methods have been
proposed [35, 39, 5, 21, 36], including the one named GAIfO [40] that extends the idea of GAIL to
∗

Denotes equal contributions. Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

