Multi-source Domain Adaptation for
Semantic Segmentation

Sicheng Zhao1∗ †, Bo Li23† , Xiangyu Yue1† , Yang Gu2 ,
Pengfei Xu2 , Runbo Hu2 , Hua Chai2 , Kurt Keutzer1
1
University of California, Berkeley, USA 2 Didi Chuxing, China
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, China
schzhao@gmail.com, drluodian@gmail.com, {xyyue,keutzer}@berkeley.edu
{guyangdavid,xupengfeipf,hurunbo,chaihua}@didiglobal.com

Abstract
Simulation-to-real domain adaptation for semantic segmentation has been actively
studied for various applications such as autonomous driving. Existing methods
mainly focus on a single-source setting, which cannot easily handle a more practical
scenario of multiple sources with different distributions. In this paper, we propose
to investigate multi-source domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. Specifically, we design a novel framework, termed Multi-source Adversarial Domain
Aggregation Network (MADAN), which can be trained in an end-to-end manner.
First, we generate an adapted domain for each source with dynamic semantic
consistency while aligning at the pixel-level cycle-consistently towards the target.
Second, we propose sub-domain aggregation discriminator and cross-domain cycle
discriminator to make different adapted domains more closely aggregated. Finally,
feature-level alignment is performed between the aggregated domain and target
domain while training the segmentation network. Extensive experiments from
synthetic GTA and SYNTHIA to real Cityscapes and BDDS datasets demonstrate
that the proposed MADAN model outperforms state-of-the-art approaches. Our
source code is released at: https://github.com/Luodian/MADAN.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation assigns a semantic label (e.g. car, cyclist, pedestrian, road) to each pixel
in an image. This computer vision kernel plays a crucial role in many applications, ranging from
autonomous driving [1] and robotic control [2] to medical imaging [3] and fashion recommendation [4]. With the advent of deep learning, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs), several
end-to-end approaches have been proposed for semantic segmentation [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
Although these methods have achieved promising results, they suffer from some limitations. On the
one hand, training these methods requires large-scale labeled data with pixel-level annotations, which
is prohibitively expensive and time-consuming to obtain. For example, it takes about 90 minutes to
label each image in the Cityscapes dataset [15]. On the other hand, they cannot well generalize their
learned knowledge to new domains, because of the presence of domain shift or dataset bias [16, 17].
To sidestep the cost of data collection and annotation, unlimited amounts of synthetic labeled data can
be created from simulators like CARLA and GTA-V [18, 19, 20], thanks to the progress in graphics
and simulation infrastructure. To mitigate the gap between different domains, domain adaptation
(DA) or knowledge transfer techniques have been proposed [21] with both theoretical analysis [22,
∗
†

Corresponding Author.
Equal Contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

