Competitive Gradient Descent

Florian Schäfer
Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
florian.schaefer@caltech.edu

Anima Anandkumar
Computing and Mathematical Sciences
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
anima@caltech.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new algorithm for the numerical computation of Nash equilibria of
competitive two-player games. Our method is a natural generalization of gradient
descent to the two-player setting where the update is given by the Nash equilibrium
of a regularized bilinear local approximation of the underlying game. It avoids
oscillatory and divergent behaviors seen in alternating gradient descent. Using
numerical experiments and rigorous analysis, we provide a detailed comparison to
methods based on optimism and consensus and show that our method avoids making
any unnecessary changes to the gradient dynamics while achieving exponential
(local) convergence for (locally) convex-concave zero sum games. Convergence
and stability properties of our method are robust to strong interactions between the
players, without adapting the stepsize, which is not the case with previous methods.
In our numerical experiments on non-convex-concave problems, existing methods
are prone to divergence and instability due to their sensitivity to interactions
among the players, whereas we never observe divergence of our algorithm. The
ability to choose larger stepsizes furthermore allows our algorithm to achieve faster
convergence, as measured by the number of model evaluations.

1

Introduction

Competitive optimization: Whereas traditional optimization is concerned with a single agent trying
to optimize a cost function, competitive optimization extends this problem to the setting of multiple
agents each trying to minimize their own cost function, which in general depends on the actions of all
agents. The present work deals with the case of two such agents:
min f (x, y),

x∈Rm

min g(x, y)

y∈Rn

(1)

for two functions f, g : Rm × Rn −→ R.
In single agent optimization, the solution of the problem consists of the minimizer of the cost function.
In competitive optimization, the right definition of solution is less obvious, but often one is interested
in computing Nash– or strategic equilibria: Pairs of strategies, such that no player can decrease
their costs by unilaterally changing their strategies. If f and g are not convex, finding a global Nash
equilibrium is typically impossible and instead we hope to find a "good" local Nash equilibrium.
The benefits of competition: While competitive optimization problems arise naturally in mathematical economics and game/decision theory (Nisan et al., 2007), they also provide a highly expressive
and transparent language to formulate algorithms in a wide range of domains. In optimization
(Bertsimas et al., 2011) and statistics (Huber and Ronchetti, 2009) it has long been observed that
competitive optimization is a natural way to encode robustness requirements of algorithms. More
recently, researchers in machine learning have been using multi-agent optimization to design highly
flexible objective functions for reinforcement learning (Liu et al., 2016; Pfau and Vinyals, 2016;
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

