MCP: Learning Composable Hierarchical Control
with Multiplicative Compositional Policies

Xue Bin Peng, Michael Chang, Grace Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
{xbpeng, mbchang, grace.zhang}@berkeley.edu
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Humans are able to perform a myriad of sophisticated tasks by drawing upon skills
acquired through prior experience. For autonomous agents to have this capability,
they must be able to extract reusable skills from past experience that can be recombined in new ways for subsequent tasks. Furthermore, when controlling complex
high-dimensional morphologies, such as humanoid bodies, tasks often require
coordination of multiple skills simultaneously. Learning discrete primitives for
every combination of skills quickly becomes prohibitive. Composable primitives
that can be recombined to create a large variety of behaviors can be more suitable
for modeling this combinatorial explosion. In this work, we propose multiplicative
compositional policies (MCP), a method for learning reusable motor skills that
can be composed to produce a range of complex behaviors. Our method factorizes
an agent’s skills into a collection of primitives, where multiple primitives can be
activated simultaneously via multiplicative composition. This flexibility allows the
primitives to be transferred and recombined to elicit new behaviors as necessary
for novel tasks. We demonstrate that MCP is able to extract composable skills
for highly complex simulated characters from pre-training tasks, such as motion
imitation, and then reuse these skills to solve challenging continuous control tasks,
such as dribbling a soccer ball to a goal, and picking up an object and transporting
it to a target location. (Video1 )

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning is commonly applied to solve tasks from scratch. While tabula rasa learning
can achieve state-of-the-art performance on a broad range of tasks [4, 13, 27, 29, 39], this approach
can incur significant drawbacks in terms of sample efficiency and limits the complexity of skills that
an agent can acquire. The ability to transfer and re-purpose skills learned from prior experiences
to new domains is a hallmark of intelligent agents. Transferable skills can enable agents to solve
tasks that would otherwise be prohibitively challenging to learn from scratch, by leveraging prior
experiences to provide structured exploration and more effective representations. However, learning
versatile and reusable skills that can be applied to a diverse set of tasks remains a challenging problem,
particularly when controlling systems with large numbers of degrees-of-freedom.
In this work, we propose multiplicative compositional policies (MCP), a method for learning reusable
motor primitives that can be composed to produce a continuous spectrum of skills. Once learned, the
primitives can be transferred to new tasks and combined to yield different behaviors as necessary
in the target domain. Standard hierarchical models [10, 41] often activate only a single primitive at
each timestep, which can limit the diversity of behaviors that can be produced by the agent. MCP
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
1

Supplementary video: xbpeng.github.io/projects/MCP/

