Self-Supervised Deep Learning on Point Clouds by
Reconstructing Space

Jonathan Sauder
Hasso Plattner Institute
Potsdam, Germany
jonathan.sauder@student.hpi.de

Bjarne Sievers
Hasso Plattner Institute
Potsdam, Germany
bjarne.sievers@student.hpi.de

Abstract
Point clouds provide a flexible and natural representation usable in countless
applications such as robotics or self-driving cars. Recently, deep neural networks
operating on raw point cloud data have shown promising results on supervised
learning tasks such as object classification and semantic segmentation. While
massive point cloud datasets can be captured using modern scanning technology,
manually labelling such large 3D point clouds for supervised learning tasks is a
cumbersome process. This necessitates methods that can learn from unlabelled
data to significantly reduce the number of annotated samples needed in supervised
learning. We propose a self-supervised learning task for deep learning on raw point
cloud data in which a neural network is trained to reconstruct point clouds whose
parts have been randomly rearranged. While solving this task, representations
that capture semantic properties of the point cloud are learned. Our method is
agnostic of network architecture and outperforms current unsupervised learning
approaches in downstream object classification tasks. We show experimentally, that
pre-training with our method before supervised training improves the performance
of state-of-the-art models and significantly improves sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

Point clouds provide a natural and flexible representation of objects in metric spaces. They can also be
easily captured by modern scanning devices and techniques. Algorithms that can recognize objects in
point clouds are crucial to countless applications such as robotics and self-driving cars. Traditionally,
systems for such tasks have relied on the approximate computation of geometric features such as
faces, edges or corners [31, 11] and hand-crafted features encoding statistical properties [3, 27].
However, these approaches are often tailored to specific tasks, thus not providing the necessary
flexibility for modern applications. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) which are
domain-independent have shown promising performance on point clouds in supervised learning tasks
such as object classification and semantic segmentation, outperforming conventional approaches
[23, 24, 33, 16].
The advent of scalable 3D point cloud scanning technologies such as LiDAR scanners and stereo
cameras gives rise to massive point cloud datasets, possibly spanning large entities such as entire
cities or regions. However, manually annotating such massive amounts of data for supervised learning
tasks such as semantic segmentation poses problems due to typical real-world point clouds reaching
billions of points and petabytes of data, opposing the innate limitations of user-interfaces for 3D data
labelling (e.g. drawing bounding boxes) on 2D screens. Therefore, it is of large interest to develop
methods which can reduce the number of annotated samples required for strong performance on
supervised learning tasks.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

