Algorithm-Dependent Generalization Bounds for
Overparameterized Deep Residual Networks

Spencer Frei∗ and

Yuan Cao† and

Quanquan Gu‡

Abstract
The skip-connections used in residual networks have become a standard architecture choice in deep learning due to the increased training stability and generalization
performance with this architecture, although there has been limited theoretical understanding for this improvement. In this work, we analyze overparameterized deep
residual networks trained by gradient descent following random initialization, and
demonstrate that (i) the class of networks learned by gradient descent constitutes a
small subset of the entire neural network function class, and (ii) this subclass of
networks is sufficiently large to guarantee small training error. By showing (i) we
are able to demonstrate that deep residual networks trained with gradient descent
have a small generalization gap between training and test error, and together with
(ii) this guarantees that the test error will be small. Our optimization and generalization guarantees require overparameterization that is only logarithmic in the
depth of the network, while all known generalization bounds for deep non-residual
networks have overparameterization requirements that are at least polynomial in
the depth. This provides an explanation for why residual networks are preferable
to non-residual ones.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen an incredible amount of success in a variety of settings over the past eight
years, from image recognition [15] to audio recognition [20] and more. Compared with its rapid
and widespread adoption, the theoretical understanding of why deep learning works so well has
lagged significantly. This is particularly the case in the common setup of an overparameterized
network, where the number of parameters in the network greatly exceeds the number of training
examples and input dimension. In this setting, networks have the capacity to perfectly fit training
data, regardless of if it is labeled with real labels or random ones [25]. However, when trained on real
data, these networks also have the capacity to truly learn patterns in the data, as evidenced by the
impressive performance of overparameterized networks on a variety of benchmark datasets. This
suggests the presence of certain mechanisms underlying the data, neural network architectures, and
training algorithms which enable the generalization performance of neural networks. A theoretical
analysis that seeks to explain why neural networks work so well would therefore benefit from careful
attention to the specific properties that neural networks have when trained under common optimization
techniques.
Many recent attempts at uncovering the generalization ability of deep learning focused on general
properties of neural network function classes with fixed weights and training losses. For instance,
∗

Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; e-mail:
spencerfrei@ucla.edu
†
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; e-mail:
yuancao@cs.ucla.edu
‡
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; e-mail:
qgu@cs.ucla.edu
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

