A Normative Theory for Causal Inference and Bayes
Factor Computation in Neural Circuits

Wen-Hao Zhang1,2 , Si Wu3 , Brent Doiron2 , Tai Sing Lee1
wenhao.zhang@pitt.edu; siwu@pku.edu.cn; bdoiron@pitt.edu; tai@cnbc.cmu.edu
1
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Carnegie Mellon University.
2
Department of Mathematics, University of Pittsburgh.
3
School of Electronics Engineering & Computer Science, IDG/McGovern
Institute for Brain Research, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University.

Abstract
This study provides a normative theory for how Bayesian causal inference can
be implemented in neural circuits. In both cognitive processes such as causal
reasoning and perceptual inference such as cue integration, the nervous systems
need to choose different models representing the underlying causal structures
when making inferences on external stimuli. In multisensory processing, for
example, the nervous system has to choose whether to integrate or segregate inputs
from different sensory modalities to infer the sensory stimuli, based on whether
the inputs are from the same or different sources. Making this choice is a model
selection problem requiring the computation of Bayes factor, the ratio of likelihoods
between the integration and the segregation models. In this paper, we consider
the causal inference in multisensory processing and propose a novel generative
model based on neural population code that takes into account both stimulus feature
and stimulus reliability in the inference. In the case of circular variables such as
heading direction, our normative theory yields an analytical solution for computing
the Bayes factor, with a clear geometric interpretation, which can be implemented
by simple additive mechanisms with neural population code. Numerical simulation
shows that the tunings of the neurons computing Bayes factor are consistent with
the "opposite neurons" discovered in dorsal medial superior temporal (MSTd) and
the ventral intraparietal (VIP) areas for visual-vestibular processing. This study
illuminates a potential neural mechanism for causal inference in the brain.

1

Introduction

Numerous psychological studies have demonstrated that perception can be formulated as Bayesian
inference of the underlying causes in the world that give rise to our sensations [1–6]. These causes
could be the sensory variables such as heading direction and orientation of edge, but often are causal
structures from which the observations are generated. In multisensory integration, as an example,
when we move around the world, the optical flows we see and the vestibular signals we experience are
concordant. In this case, an integration model will be selected so that multiple cues can be weighed
and combined together to form a unified estimate of head direction of self-motion [7, 8]. However,
when we wear a goggle to navigate in a virtual reality world while sitting on a spinning chair, the
visual and the vestibular signals would be quite discordant and it would be wrong to integrate them
during inference [9]. In this case, a segregation model should be selected so that each cue will remain
separated and their sources can be inferred independently. The selection of these models or latent
causal structures during inference is called causal inference [10, 11].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

