DATA: Differentiable ArchiTecture Approximation

Jianlong Chang1,2,3

Xinbang Zhang1,2
Yiwen Guo4,5
Gaofeng Meng1
1,2
1
Shiming Xiang
Chunhong Pan
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Samsung Research China - Beijing, 4 Intel Labs China, 5 Bytedance AI Lab
{jianlong.chang, xinbang.zhang, gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
guoyiwen.ai@bytedance.com

Abstract
Neural architecture search (NAS) is inherently subject to the gap of architectures
during searching and validating. To bridge this gap, we develop Differentiable
ArchiTecture Approximation (DATA) with an Ensemble Gumbel-Softmax (EGS)
estimator to automatically approximate architectures during searching and validating in a differentiable manner. Technically, the EGS estimator consists of a
group of Gumbel-Softmax estimators, which is capable of converting probability
vectors to binary codes and passing gradients from binary codes to probability
vectors. Benefiting from such modeling, in searching, architecture parameters
and network weights in the NAS model can be jointly optimized with the standard back-propagation, yielding an end-to-end learning mechanism for searching
deep models in a large enough search space. Conclusively, during validating, a
high-performance architecture that approaches to the learned one during searching
is readily built. Extensive experiments on a variety of popular datasets strongly
evidence that our method is capable of discovering high-performance architectures
for image classification, language modeling and semantic segmentation, while
guaranteeing the requisite efficiency during searching.

1

Introduction

In the era of deep learning, how to design proper network architectures for specific problems is
a crucial but challenging task. However, designing architecture with state-of-the-art performance
typically requires substantial efforts from human experts. In order to eliminate such exhausting
engineering, many neural architecture search (NAS) methods have been devoted to accomplishing
the task automatically [14, 27, 55], i.e., evolution-based NAS [13, 18, 26, 41, 43, 44, 45, 47],
reinforcement learning-based NAS [2, 3, 21, 42, 56, 59, 60], and gradient-based NAS [11, 34, 35, 46,
53], which has achieved significant successes in a multitude of fields, including image classification [4,
12, 21, 30, 31, 34, 44, 53, 60], semantic segmentation [8, 32] and object detection [9, 15, 50, 52, 60].
Although the achievements in the literature are brilliant, these methods are still hard to effectively
bridge the gap between architectures during searching and validating. That is, feasible paths in a
learned architecture are dependent on each other and become deeply coupled during searching. In
validating, however, the inherited architectures from searching always decouple the dependent paths
rudely, such as DARTS [34] and SNAS [53] that choose only one path in validating. As a result, the
effectiveness of the searched architectures are unclear although they could surpass the random ones.
In order to eliminate the limitation, Differentiable ArchiTecture Approximation (DATA) is proposed
to elegantly minimize the gap of architectures during searching and validating. For this purpose, we
develop the Ensemble Gumbel-Softmax (EGS) estimator, an ensemble of a group of Gumbel-Softmax
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

