Successor Uncertainties: Exploration and
Uncertainty in Temporal Difference Learning

David Janz∗†
University of Cambridge
dj343@cam.ac.uk
Katja Hofmann
Microsoft Research

Jiri Hron∗
University of Cambridge
jh2084@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
Alan Turing Institute
Microsoft Research

Przemysław Mazur
Wayve Technologies

Sebastian Tschiatschek
Microsoft Research

Abstract
Posterior sampling for reinforcement learning (PSRL) is an effective method for
balancing exploration and exploitation in reinforcement learning. Randomised
value functions (RVF) can be viewed as a promising approach to scaling PSRL.
However, we show that most contemporary algorithms combining RVF with neural
network function approximation do not possess the properties which make PSRL
effective, and provably fail in sparse reward problems. Moreover, we find that
propagation of uncertainty, a property of PSRL previously thought important for exploration, does not preclude this failure. We use these insights to design Successor
Uncertainties (SU), a cheap and easy to implement RVF algorithm that retains key
properties of PSRL. SU is highly effective on hard tabular exploration benchmarks.
Furthermore, on the Atari 2600 domain, it surpasses human performance on 38
of 49 games tested (achieving a median human normalised score of 2.09), and
outperforms its closest RVF competitor, Bootstrapped DQN, on 36 of those.

1

Introduction

Perhaps the most important open question within reinforcement learning is how to effectively balance
exploration of an unknown environment with exploitation of the already accumulated knowledge
(Kaelbling et al., 1996; Sutton et al., 1998; Busoniu et al., 2010). In this paper, we study this in the
classic setting where the unknown environment is modelled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP).
Specifically, we focus on developing an algorithm that combines effective exploration with neural
network function approximation. Our approach is inspired by Posterior Sampling for Reinforcement
Learning (PSRL; Strens, 2000; Osband et al., 2013). PSRL approaches the exploration/exploitation
trade-off by explicitly accounting for uncertainty about the true underlying MDP. In tabular settings,
PSRL achieves impressive results and close to optimal regret (Osband et al., 2013; Osband & Van Roy,
2016). However, many existing attempts to scale PSRL and combine it with neural network function
approximation sacrifice the very aspects that make PSRL effective. In this work, we examine several
of these algorithms in the context of PSRL and:
1. Prove that a previous avenue of research, propagation of uncertainty (O’Donoghue et al.,
2018), is neither sufficient nor necessary for effective exploration under posterior sampling.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Work partly done during an internship at Microsoft Research Cambridge

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

