Glyce: Glyph-vectors for Chinese Character
Representations

Yuxian Meng*, Wei Wu*, Fei Wang*, Xiaoya Li*, Ping Nie, Fan Yin
Muyu Li, Qinghong Han, Xiaofei Sun and Jiwei Li
Shannon.AI
{yuxian meng, wei wu, fei wang, xiaoya li, ping nie, fan yin,
muyu li, qinghong han, xiaofei sun, jiwei li}@shannonai.com

Abstract
It is intuitive that NLP tasks for logographic languages like Chinese should benefit
from the use of the glyph information in those languages. However, due to the
lack of rich pictographic evidence in glyphs and the weak generalization ability of
standard computer vision models on character data, an effective way to utilize the
glyph information remains to be found.
In this paper, we address this gap by presenting Glyce, the glyph-vectors for
Chinese character representations. We make three major innovations: (1) We use
historical Chinese scripts (e.g., bronzeware script, seal script, traditional Chinese,
etc) to enrich the pictographic evidence in characters; (2) We design CNN structures
(called tianzege-CNN) tailored to Chinese character image processing; and (3)
We use image-classification as an auxiliary task in a multi-task learning setup to
increase the model’s ability to generalize.
We show that glyph-based models are able to consistently outperform word/char
ID-based models in a wide range of Chinese NLP tasks. We are able to set new stateof-the-art results for a variety of Chinese NLP tasks, including tagging (NER, CWS,
POS), sentence pair classification, single sentence classification tasks, dependency
parsing, and semantic role labeling. For example, the proposed model achieves an
F1 score of 80.6 on the OntoNotes dataset of NER, +1.5 over BERT; it achieves an
almost perfect accuracy of 99.8% on the Fudan corpus for text classification. 1 2

1

Introduction

Chinese is a logographic language. The logograms of Chinese characters encode rich information of
their meanings. Therefore, it is intuitive that NLP tasks for Chinese should benefit from the use of
the glyph information. Taking into account logographic information should help semantic modeling.
Recent studies indirectly support this argument: Radical representations have proved to be useful
in a wide range of language understanding tasks [Shi et al., 2015, Li et al., 2015, Yin et al., 2016,
Sun et al., 2014, Shao et al., 2017]. Using the Wubi scheme — a Chinese character encoding method
that mimics the order of typing the sequence of radicals for a character on the computer keyboard
—- is reported to improve performances on Chinese-English machine translation [Tan et al., 2018].
Cao et al. [2018] gets down to units of greater granularity, and proposed stroke n-grams for character
modeling.
Recently, there have been some efforts applying CNN-based algorithms on the visual features of
characters. Unfortunately, they do not show consistent performance boosts [Liu et al., 2017, Zhang
1
2

* indicates equal contribution.
code is available at https://github.com/ShannonAI/glyce.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

