Cross-channel Communication Networks
Jianwei Yang1 Zhile Ren1 Chuang Gan3 Hongyuan Zhu4 Devi Parikh1,2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Facebook AI Research,
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 Institute for Infocomm Research, A*Star, Singapore

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) process input data by feed-forwarding
responses to subsequent layers. While a lot of progress has been made by making
networks deeper, filters at each layer independently generate responses given the
input and do not communicate with each other. In this paper, we introduce a
novel network unit called Cross-channel Communication (C3) block, a simple yet
effective module to encourage the communication across filters within the same
layer. The C3 block enables filters to exchange information through a micro neural
network, which consists of a feature encoder, a message passer, and a feature
decoder, before sending the information to the next layer. With C3 block, each
channel response is modulated by accounting for the responses at other channels.
Extensive experiments on multiple vision tasks show that our proposed block
brings improvements for different CNN architectures, and learns more diverse and
complementary representations.

1

Introduction

The standard deep networks pass feature responses from lower-level layers to higher-level layers in
a hierarchical fashion. With improved computational powers and novel network designs, stacking
more layers has become a common and effective practice – the number of layers can be significantly
large [9] and the connections between layers can be significantly dense [12]. Studies [29, 1] show that
learned filters in the first few layers typically capture low-level texture in images, while the last few
layers encode higher-level semantics. This structure is typically very effective for solving computer
vision tasks, such as image classification [22], object detection [20, 9], semantic segmentation [8, 2]
and video classification [14, 7, 24, 18].
Consider a conventional convolutional neural network, filters at each layer typically respond to
the input response independently. As a result, redundant information could be accumulated across
different channels in the same convolutional layer. As a pioneer, Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE)
block [10] (Figure.1 (a)) is an architecture to explicitly model the channel-wise interaction, and
demonstrates superiority on various vision tasks. However, SE block average each channel into a
single scalar and modulate the responses through a simple multiplication. Therefore, it has a relatively
limited bandwidth for the channel-wise communication.
In this paper, we introduce a network unit called Cross-channel Communication (C3) block, a simple
yet effective operator that encourages information exchange across different channels at the same
convolutional layer. In the C3 block, we first pass the response from each channel to a feature encoder,
and then use a message passer to pass the information of one channel to all other channels. Then,
we use a feature decoder to decode the message for each channel. The updated feature responses
will then be passed to future layers and help perform down-stream tasks. We provide a high-level
overview of the C3 block in Figure.1 (b).
The proposed module allows channels in each layer to communicate with each other before passing
information to the next layer. Different from related network designs [10, 3, 6] where channels
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

