Large Memory Layers with Product Keys

Guillaume Lample∗†, Alexandre Sablayrolles∗, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato∗,
Ludovic Denoyer∗†, Hervé Jégou∗
{glample,asablayrolles,ranzato,denoyer,rvj}@fb.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a structured memory which can be easily integrated into a
neural network. The memory is very large by design and significantly increases
the capacity of the architecture, by up to a billion parameters with a negligible computational overhead. Its design and access pattern is based on product
keys, which enable fast and exact nearest neighbor search. The ability to increase
the number of parameters while keeping the same computational budget lets the
overall system strike a better trade-off between prediction accuracy and computation efficiency both at training and test time. This memory layer allows us to
tackle very large scale language modeling tasks. In our experiments we consider
a dataset with up to 30 billion words, and we plug our memory layer in a stateof-the-art transformer-based architecture. In particular, we found that a memory
augmented model with only 12 layers outperforms a baseline transformer model
with 24 layers, while being twice faster at inference time. We release our code for
reproducibility purposes.3

1

Introduction

Neural networks are commonly employed to address many complex tasks such as machine translation [43], image classification [27] or speech recognition [16]. As more and more data becomes
available for training, these networks are increasingly larger [19]. For instance, recent models both
in vision [29] and in natural language processing [20, 36, 28] have more than a billion parameters. The higher-capacity enables better modeling of data like natural text or images, and it also
improves generalization [41, 33]. Unfortunately, increasing capacity has led to a dramatic increase
of computational complexity, both at training and inference time [20].
There is a growing interest in developing architectures with reasonable computational complexity.
Recently, there has been some efforts to develop high capacity architectures that operate on a limited
computational budget [40, 18]. This is well illustrated by the “On-device Visual Intelligence Challenge” [5], which specifically focuses on the complexity/accuracy trade-off for image classification.
Some researchers have attempted to increase the capacity of a network without increasing its computational complexity. Most notably, Rae et al. [37] incorporate fast nearest neighbor search within
a neural network architecture to leverage large key-value layers with sparse reads and writes. Their
approach relies on an external indexing structure [32], which is approximate and needs to be relearned regularly while training the neural network to avoid a catastrophic drift.
In this work, we propose a key-value memory layer that can scale to very large sizes while keeping
exact search on the key space. This layer dramatically increases the capacity of the overall system
for a negligible computational overhead. Unlike existing models based on key-value memories (see
∗

Facebook AI Research
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606, LIP6
3
https://github.com/facebookresearch/XLM

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

