Quantum Wasserstein GANs
Shouvanik Chakrabarti1,2,4,⇤, Yiming Huang3,1,5,⇤, Tongyang Li1,2,4
Soheil Feizi2,4 , Xiaodi Wu1,2,4
1
Joint Center for Quantum Information and Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
3
School of Information and Software Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
4
{shouv,tongyang,sfeizi,xwu}@cs.umd.edu
5
yiminghwang@gmail.com

Abstract
The study of quantum generative models is well motivated, not only because
of its importance in quantum machine learning and quantum chemistry but also
because of the perspective of its implementation on near-term quantum machines.
Inspired by previous studies on the adversarial training of classical and quantum
generative models, we propose the first design of quantum Wasserstein Generative
Adversarial Networks (WGANs), which has been shown to improve the robustness
and the scalability of the adversarial training of quantum generative models even on
noisy quantum hardware. Specifically, we propose a definition of the Wasserstein
semimetric between quantum data, which inherits a few key theoretical merits of
its classical counterpart. We also demonstrate how to turn the quantum Wasserstein
semimetric into a concrete design of quantum WGANs that can be efficiently
implemented on quantum machines. Our numerical study, via classical simulation
of quantum systems, shows the more robust and scalable numerical performance
of our quantum WGANs over other quantum GAN proposals. As a surprising
application, our quantum WGAN has been used to generate a 3-qubit quantum
circuit of ⇠50 gates that well approximates a 3-qubit 1-d Hamiltonian simulation
circuit that requires over 10k gates using standard techniques.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19] represent a power tool of training deep generative
models, which have a profound impact on machine learning. In GANs, a generator tries to generate
fake samples resembling the true data, while a discriminator tries to discriminate between the true and
the fake data. The learning process for generator and discriminator can be deemed as an adversarial
game that converges to some equilibrium point under reasonable assumptions.
Inspired by the success of GANs and classical generative models, developing their quantum counterparts is a natural and important topic in the emerging field of quantum machine learning [5, 37].
There are at least two appealing reasons for which quantum GANs are extremely interesting. First,
quantum GANs could provide potential quantum speedups due to the fact that quantum generators
and discriminators (i.e., parameterized quantum circuits) cannot be efficiently simulated by classical
generators/discriminators. In other words, there might exist distributions that can be efficiently
generated by quantum GANs, while otherwise impossible with classical GANs. Second, simple
prototypes of quantum GANs (i.e., executing simple parameterized quantum circuits), similar to
those of the variational methods (e.g., [16, 27, 30]), are likely to be implementable on near-term
noisy-intermediate-scale-quantum (NISQ) machines [33]. Since the seminal work of [25], there are
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

