A New Perspective on Pool-Based Active
Classification and False-Discovery Control

Lalit Jain, Kevin Jamieson
{lalitj, jamieson}@cs.washington.edu
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington, Seattle, WA

Abstract
In many scientific settings there is a need for adaptive experimental design to guide
the process of identifying regions of the search space that contain as many true
positives as possible subject to a low rate of false discoveries (i.e. false alarms).
Such regions of the search space could differ drastically from a predicted set
that minimizes 0/1 error and accurate identification could require very different
sampling strategies. Like active learning for binary classification, this experimental
design cannot be optimally chosen a priori, but rather the data must be taken
sequentially and adaptively. However, unlike classification with 0/1 error, collecting
data adaptively to find a set with high true positive rate and low false discovery
rate (FDR) is not as well understood. In this paper we provide the first provably
sample efficient adaptive algorithm for this problem. Along the way we highlight
connections between classification, combinatorial bandits, and FDR control making
contributions to each.

1

Introduction

As machine learning has become ubiquitous in the biological, chemical, and material sciences, it
has become irresistible to use these techniques not only for making inferences about previously
collected data, but also for guiding the data collection process, closing the loop on inference and
data collection [10, 38, 41, 39, 33, 31]. However, though collecting data randomly or non-adaptively
can be inefficient, ill-informed ways of collecting data adaptively can be catastrophic: a procedure
could collect some data, adopt an incorrect belief, collect more data based on this belief, and leave
the practitioner with insufficient data in the right places to infer anything with confidence.
In a recent high-throughput protein synthesis experiment [33], thousands of short amino acid sequences (length less than 60) were evaluated with the goal of identifying and characterizing a subset
of the pool of all possible sequences ( ≈ 1080 ) containing many sequences that will fold into stable
proteins. That is, given an evaluation budget that is just a minuscule proportion of the total number
of sequences, the researchers sought to make predictions about individual sequences that would
never be evaluated. An initial first round of sequences uniformly sampled from a predefined subset
were synthesized to observe whether each sequence was in the set of sequences that will fold, H1 ,
or in H0 = H1c . Treating this as a classification problem, a linear logistic regression classifier was
trained, using these labels and physics based features. Then a set of sequences to test in the next
round were chosen to maximize the probability of folding according to this empirical model - a
procedure repeated twice more. This strategy suffers two flaws. First, selecting a set to maximize
the likelihood of hits given past rounds’ data is effectively using logistic regression to perform
optimization similar to follow-the-leader strategies [14]. While more of the sequences evaluated
may fold, these observations may provide little information about whether sequences that were not
evaluated will fold or not. Second, while it is natural to employ logistic regression or the SVM
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

