Optimal Best Markovian Arm Identification with
Fixed Confidence
Vrettos Moulos
University of California Berkeley
vrettos@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We give a complete characterization of the sampling complexity of best Markovian
arm identification in one-parameter Markovian bandit models. We derive instance
specific nonasymptotic and asymptotic lower bounds which generalize those of
the IID setting. We analyze the Track-and-Stop strategy, initially proposed for the
IID setting, and we prove that asymptotically it is at most a factor of four apart
from the lower bound. Our one-parameter Markovian bandit model is based on the
notion of an exponential family of stochastic matrices for which we establish many
useful properties. For the analysis of the Track-and-Stop strategy we derive a novel
concentration inequality for Markov chains that may be of interest in its own right.

1

Introduction

This paper is about optimal best Markovian arm identification with fixed confidence. There are K
independent options which are referred to as arms. Each arm a is associated with a discrete time
stochastic process, which is characterized by a parameter θa and it’s governed by the probability law
Pθa . At each round we select one arm, without any prior knowledge of the statistics of the stochastic
processes. The stochastic process that corresponds to the selected arm evolves by one time step, and
we observe this evolution through a reward function, while the stochastic processes for the rest of the
arms stay still. A confidence level δ ∈ (0, 1) is prescribed, and our goal is to identify the arm that
corresponds to the process with the highest stationary mean with probability at least 1 − δ, and using
as few samples as possible.
1.1

Contributions

In the work of Garivier and Kaufmann (2016) the discrete time stochastic process associated with
each arm a is assumed to be an IID process. Here we go one step further and we study more
complicated dependent processes, which allow us to use more expressive models in the stochastic
multi-armed bandits framework. More specifically we consider the case that each Pθa is the law of an
irreducible finite state Markov chain associated with a stationary mean µ(θa ). We establish a lower
bound (Theorem 1) for the expected sample complexity, as well as an analysis of the Track-and-Stop
strategy, proposed for the IID setting in Garivier and Kaufmann (2016), which shows (Theorem 3)
that asymptotically the Track-and-Stop strategy in the Markovian dependence setting attains a sample
complexity which is at most a factor of four apart from our asymptotic lower bound. Both our lower
and upper bounds extend the work of Garivier and Kaufmann (2016) in the more complicated and
more general Markovian dependence setting.
The abstract framework of multi-armed bandits has numerous applications in areas like clinical trials,
ad placement, adaptive routing, resource allocation, gambling etc. For more context we refer the
interested reader to the survey of Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi (2012). Here we generalize this model to
allow for the presence of Markovian dependence, enabling this way the practitioner to use richer and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

