Spectral Modification of Graphs
for Improved Spectral Clustering

Ioannis Koutis
Department of Computer Science
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ 07102
ikoutis@njit.edu

Huong Le
Department of Computer Science
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ 07102
hyl4@njit.edu

Abstract
Spectral clustering algorithms provide approximate solutions to hard optimization
problems that formulate graph partitioning in terms of the graph conductance. It
is well understood that the quality of these approximate solutions is negatively
affected by a possibly significant gap between the conductance and the second
eigenvalue of the graph. In this paper we show that for any graph G, there exists
a ‘spectral maximizer’ graph H which is cut-similar to G, but has eigenvalues
that are near the theoretical limit implied by the cut structure of G. Applying then
spectral clustering on H has the potential to produce improved cuts that also exist
in G due to the cut similarity. This leads to the second contribution of this work:
we describe a practical spectral modification algorithm that raises the eigenvalues
of the input graph, while preserving its cuts. Combined with spectral clustering on
the modified graph, this yields demonstrably improved cuts.

1

Introduction

Spectral Clustering is a widely known family of algorithms that use eigenvectors to partition the
vertices of a graph into meaningful clusters. The introduction of spectral partitioning methods goes
back to the work of Donath and Hoffman [8] who used eigenvectors for partitioning logic circuits,
but owes its popularity to the work of Shi and Malik [25] who brought it in the realm of computer
vision and machine learning, subsequently leading to a vast amount of related works. Several other
clustering methods have since emerged, including of course methods based on neural networks. But
spectral clustering remains a frequently used baseline, and a serious contender to state-of-the-art
graph embedding methods, e.g. [20, 11, 28, 22].
The remarkable performance of spectral clustering is possibly due to the fact that it produces outputs
with theoretically understood approximation properties. Roughly speaking, spectral clustering
computes the second eigenvalue λ of the normalized graph Laplacian as an approximation to the
graph conductance, i.e. the value of the optimal cut. Cheeger inequality shows that while λ is never
greater than φ, it can be as small as φ2 [6]. That implies that the approximation can be a factor of
(φ/λ) away from the optimal value, which can be up to O(n) even for unweighted graphs. While
this may be often a pessimistic estimate, there are known families of graphs where the estimate is
realized; in such graphs, spectral clustering computes cuts that are far from optimal [12]. It is thus
understood that the ratio (φ/λ) affects directly the quality of spectral clustering, a fact that is viewed
as an inherent limitation.
This paper shows that this limitation can be greatly alleviated via spectral modification: a set of
operations that approximately preserve the cut structure of the input while ‘raising’ its spectrum, in
effect suppressing the ratio (φ/λ) and improving the output.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

