Nonconvex Low-Rank Symmetric Tensor Completion
from Noisy Data

Changxiao Cai
Princeton University

Gen Li

Tsinghua University

H. Vincent Poor
Princeton University

Yuxin Chen
Princeton University

Abstract
We study a completion problem of broad practical interest: the reconstruction
of a low-rank symmetric tensor from highly incomplete and randomly corrupted
observations of its entries. While a variety of prior work has been dedicated to
this problem, prior algorithms either are computationally too expensive for largescale applications, or come with sub-optimal statistical guarantees. Focusing on
“incoherent” and well-conditioned tensors of a constant CP rank, we propose a
two-stage nonconvex algorithm — (vanilla) gradient descent following a rough
initialization — that achieves the best of both worlds. Specifically, the proposed
nonconvex algorithm faithfully completes the tensor and retrieves individual tensor
factors within nearly linear time, while at the same time enjoying near-optimal
statistical guarantees (i.e. minimal sample complexity and optimal `2 and `∞
statistical accuracy). The insights conveyed through our analysis of nonconvex
optimization might have implications for other tensor estimation problems.

1

Introduction

1.1

Tensor completion from noisy entries

Estimation of low-complexity models from highly incomplete observations is a fundamental task
that spans a diverse array of engineering applications. Arguably one of the most extensively studied
problems of this kind is matrix completion, where one wishes to recover a low-rank matrix given
only partial entries [21, 14]. Moving beyond matrix-type data, a natural higher-order generalization
is low-rank tensor completion, which aims to reconstruct a low-rank tensor when the vast majority of
its entries are unseen. There is certainly no shortage of applications that motivate the investigation of
tensor completion, examples including seismic data analysis [44, 24], visual data in-painting [47, 46],
medical imaging [25, 58, 19], multi-dimensional harmonic retrieval [13, 72], to name just a few.
For the sake of clarity, we phrase the problem formally before we proceed, focusing on a simple
model that already captures the intrinsic difficulty of tensor completion in many aspects.1 Imagine
we are asked to estimate a symmetric order-three tensor2 T ? ∈ Rd×d×d from a few noisy entries
?
Tj,k,l = Tj,k,l
+ Ej,k,l ,
∀(j, k, l) ∈ Ω,
(1)
where Tj,k,l is the observed noisy entry at location (j, k, l), Ej,k,l stands for the associated noise, and
Ω ⊆ {1, · · · , d}3 is a symmetric index subset to sample from. For notational simplicity, we set T =
[Tj,k,l ]1≤j,k,l≤d and E = [Ej,k,l ]1≤j,k,l≤d , with Tj,k,l = Ej,k,l = 0 for any (j, k, l) ∈
/ Ω. We adopt a
random sampling model such that each index (j, k, l) (j ≤ k ≤ l) is included in Ω independently with
probability p. In addition, we know a priori that the unknown tensor T ? ∈ Rd×d×d is a superposition
of r rank-one tensors (often termed canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition if r is minimal)
Xr
Xr
T? =
u?i ⊗ u?i ⊗ u?i ,
or more concisely,
T? =
u?i ⊗3 ,
(2)
i=1

i=1

1

We focus on symmetric order-3 tensors primarily for simplicity of presentation. Many of our findings
naturally extend to the more general case with asymmetric tensors of possibly higher order.
2
Here, a tensor T ∈ Rd×d×d is said to be symmetric if Tj,k,l = Tk,j,l = Tk,l,j = Tl,k,j = Tj,l,k = Tl,j,k .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

