MonoForest framework for tree ensemble analysis

Igor Kuralenok
Yandex / JetBrains Research
solar@yandex-team.ru

Vasily Ershov
Yandex
noxoomo@yandex-team.ru

Igor Labutin
Yandex / SPb HSE
Labutin.IgorL@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we introduce a new decision tree ensemble representation framework:
instead of using a graph model we transform each tree into a well-known polynomial form. We apply the new representation to three tasks: theoretical analysis,
model reduction, and interpretation. The polynomial form of a tree ensemble
allows a straightforward interpretation of the original model. In our experiments,
it shows comparable results with state-of-the-art interpretation techniques. Another application of the framework is the ensemble-wise pruning: we can drop
monomials from the polynomial, based on train data statistics. This way we reduce
the model size up to 3 times without loss of its quality. It is possible to show the
equivalence of tree shape classes that share the same polynomial. This fact gives
us the ability to train a model in one tree’s shape and exploit it in another, which
is easier for computation or interpretation. We formulate a problem statement for
optimal tree ensemble translation from one form to another and build a greedy
solution to this problem.

1

Introduction

Industry and science combined efforts in the field of machine learning give us powerful techniques
and tools to solve different kinds of supervised learning tasks. Just a few lines of code could train
a model that solves classification, regression, ranking, and other problems. Modern techniques,
like deep neural networks He et al. (11) learn complex models, but for many practical applications
we need to understand why and how the model makes a prediction. This knowledge allows us to
improve quality, protect from adversarial attacks, make a model resistant to data corruptions and
so on. Recent efforts in deep learning models interpretation allow us to understand the decision for
particular examples Ribeiro et al. (26); Shrikumar et al. (27); Štrumbelj, Kononenko (31); Koh, Liang
(15); Lundberg, Lee (19), but understanding the logic behind a complex model is still a challenging
task.
Unlike neural networks, decision trees are supposed to be easy to understand, which is true in case of
shallow trees, but becomes a complicated task if we start using ensembles or increase the depth of a
tree. Ensemble methods, especially gradient boosted decision trees, show state-of-the-art results on
structured and categorical data Prokhorenkova et al. (25). For well-engineered input features decision
tree ensembles significantly outperform deep networks: in competitions held by Kaggle ensemble
models built by GBDT libraries often outperform their rivals.
One way to work with the interpretation problem is to make a clearer representation of a model or an
optimization setup. An example of such perspective change is (4): the results of this paper allow us
to use known facts and intuitions from differential equations for neural networks analysis.
Our work proposes a new framework for tree ensemble representation, learned by techniques like
Random Forest (2) or Gradient Boosted Decision Tree Friedman (9). We call it MonoForest as sum
of trees is converted to forest of monomials. The proposed framework can be used for both theoretical
Preprint. Under review.

