Region Mutual Information Loss for Semantic
Segmentation

Shuai Zhao1 , Yang Wang2 , Zheng Yang3 , Deng Cai1,4∗
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
4
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
zhaoshuaimcc@gmail.com, wangyang_sky@hust.edu.cn, yangzheng@fabu.ai, dcai@zju.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It is considered as a pixel-wise classification problem in practice, and most segmentation
models use a pixel-wise loss as their optimization criterion. However, the pixelwise loss ignores the dependencies between pixels in an image. Several ways to
exploit the relationship between pixels have been investigated, e.g., conditional
random fields (CRF) and pixel affinity based methods. Nevertheless, these methods
usually require additional model branches, large extra memories, or more inference
time. In this paper, we develop a region mutual information (RMI) loss to model
the dependencies among pixels more simply and efficiently. In contrast to the
pixel-wise loss which treats the pixels as independent samples, RMI uses one pixel
and its neighbour pixels to represent this pixel. Then for each pixel in an image,
we get a multi-dimensional point that encodes the relationship between pixels, and
the image is cast into a multi-dimensional distribution of these high-dimensional
points. The prediction and ground truth thus can achieve high order consistency
through maximizing the mutual information (MI) between their multi-dimensional
distributions. Moreover, as the actual value of the MI is hard to calculate, we
derive a lower bound of the MI and maximize the lower bound to maximize the
real value of the MI. RMI only requires a few extra computational resources in
the training stage, and there is no overhead during testing. Experimental results
demonstrate that RMI can achieve substantial and consistent improvements in
performance on PASCAL VOC 2012 and CamVid datasets. The code is available
at https://github.com/ZJULearning/RMI.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision, and its goal is to assign semantic
labels to every pixel in an image. Recently, much progress has been made with powerful convolutional
neural networks (e.g., VGGNet [33], ResNet [14], Xception [8]) and fancy segmentation models
(e.g., FCN [23], PSPNet [40], SDN [11], DeepLab [5, 6, 7], ExFuse [39], EncNet [38]). These
segmentation approaches treat semantic segmentation as a pixel-wise classification problem and solve
it by minimizing the average pixel-wise classification loss over the image. The most commonly used
pixel-wise loss for semantic segmentation is the softmax cross entropy loss:
N

Lce (y, p) = −
∗

C

1 XX
yn,c log(pn,c ),
N n=1 c=1

Deng Cai is the corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

