Learning Erdős-Rényi Random Graphs
via Edge Detecting Queries

Zihan Li
National University of Singapore
lizihan@u.nus.edu

Matthias Fresacher
University of Adelaide
matthias.fresacher@adelaide.edu.au

Jonathan Scarlett
National University of Singapore
scarlett@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of learning an unknown graph via queries
on groups of nodes, with the result indicating whether or not at least one edge is
present among those nodes. While learning arbitrary graphs with n nodes and k
edges is known to be hard in the sense of requiring Ω(min{k 2 log n, n2 }) tests
(even when a small probability of error is allowed), we show that learning an
Erdős-Rényi random graph with an average of k edges is much easier; namely, one
can attain asymptotically vanishing error probability with only O(k log n) tests.
We establish such bounds for a variety of algorithms inspired by the group testing
problem, with explicit constant factors indicating a near-optimal number of tests,
and in some cases asymptotic optimality including constant factors. In addition,
we present an alternative design that permits a near-optimal sublinear decoding
time of O(k log2 k + k log n).

1

Introduction

Graphs are a ubiquitous tool in modern statistics and machine learning for depicting interactions,
relations, and physical connections in networks, such as social networks, biological networks, sensor
networks, and so on. Often, the graph is not known a priori, and must be learned via queries to the
network. In this paper, we consider the problem of graph learning via edge detecting queries, where
each query contains a subset of the nodes, and the binary outcome indicates whether or not there is at
least one edge among these nodes. See Section 1.1 for previous work on this problem.
An application of this problem highlighted in previous works such as [16] is that of learning which
chemicals react with each other, using tests that are able to detect whether any reaction occurs.
Another potential application is learning connectivity in large wireless networks: Each node has a
unique identifier, and in response to a query, a node sends feedback to a central unit if the query
includes both itself and at least one of its neighbors. Then, to attain the query outcome, the central
unit only has to detect whether any feedback signal was received.
We consider the fundamental question of how many queries are needed to learn the graph. Under
adaptive testing (i.e., tests can be designed based on previous outcomes), this question is wellunderstood [30], as outlined below. However, an impossibility result of [1] indicates that considerably
more non-adaptive tests are needed in the worst-case sense for the class of graphs with a bounded
number of edges. We show that this picture is much more positive in the average-case sense by
studying the average performance with respect to Erdős-Rényi graphs [14]. In addition, to demonstrate
that these findings are not overly reliant on the specific random graph model, we also present similar
findings assuming only bounds on the number of edges and the maximum degree (see Appendix H).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

