No Pressure! Addressing the Problem of Local
Minima in Manifold Learning Algorithms

Max Vladymyrov
Google Research
mxv@google.com

Abstract
Nonlinear embedding manifold learning methods provide invaluable visual insights into the structure of high-dimensional data. However, due to a complicated
nonconvex objective function, these methods can easily get stuck in local minima
and their embedding quality can be poor. We propose a natural extension to several manifold learning methods aimed at identifying pressured points, i.e. points
stuck in poor local minima and have poor embedding quality. We show that the
objective function can be decreased by temporarily allowing these points to make
use of an extra dimension in the embedding space. Our method is able to improve
the objective function value of existing methods even after they get stuck in a poor
local minimum.

1

Introduction

Given a dataset Y ∈ RD×N of N points in some high-dimensional space with dimensionality D,
manifold learning algorithms try to find a low-dimensional embedding X ∈ Rd×N of every point
from Y in some space with dimensionality d  D. These algorithms play an important role in highdimensional data analysis, specifically for data visualization, where d = 2 or d = 3. The quality of
the methods have come a long way in recent decades, from classic linear methods (e.g. PCA, MDS),
to more nonlinear spectral methods, such as Laplacian Eigenmaps [Belkin and Niyogi, 2003], LLE
[Saul and Roweis, 2003] and Isomap [de Silva and Tenenbaum, 2003], finally followed by even more
general nonlinear embedding (NLE) methods, which include Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (SNE,
Hinton and Roweis, 2003), t-SNE [van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008], NeRV [Venna et al., 2010]
and Elastic Embedding (EE, Carreira-Perpiñán, 2010). This last group of methods is considered as
state-of-the-art in manifold learning and became a go-to tool for high-dimensional data analysis in
many domains (e.g. to compare the learning states in Deep Reinforcement Learning [Mnih et al.,
2015] or to visualize learned vectors of an embedding model [Kiros et al., 2015]).
While the results of NLE have improved in quality, their algorithmic complexity has increased as
well. NLE methods are defined using a nonconvex objective that requires careful iterative minimization. A lot of effort has been spent on improving the convergence of NLE methods, including
Spectral Direction [Vladymyrov and Carreira-Perpiñán, 2012] that uses partial-Hessian information
in order to define a better search direction, or optimization using a Majorization-Minimization approach [Yang et al., 2015]. However, even with these sophisticated custom algorithms, it is still
often necessary to perform a few random restarts in order to achieve a decent solution. Sometimes
it is not even clear whether the learned embedding represents the structure of the input data, noise,
or the artifacts of an embedding algorithm [Wattenberg et al., 2016].
Consider the situation in fig. 1. There we run the EE 100 times on the same dataset with the same
parameters, varying only the initialization. The dataset, COIL-20, consists of photos of 20 different
objects as they are rotated on a platform with new photo taken every 5 degrees (72 images per object).
Good embedding should separate objects one from another and also reflect the rotational sequence
of each object (ideally via a circular embedding). We see in the left plot that for virtually every
run the embedding gets stuck in a distinct local minima. The other two figures show the difference
between the best and the worst embedding depending on how lucky we get with the initialization.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

