A state-space model for inferring effective
connectivity of latent neural dynamics from
simultaneous EEG/fMRI
Tao Tu
Columbia University
tt2531@columbia.edu

John Paisley
Columbia University
jpaisley@columbia.edu

Stefan Haufe
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin
stefan.haufe@charite.de

Paul Sajda
Columbia University
psajda@columbia.edu

Abstract
Inferring effective connectivity between spatially segregated brain regions is important for understanding human brain dynamics in health and disease. Non-invasive
neuroimaging modalities, such as electroencephalography (EEG) and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), are often used to make measurements and
infer connectivity. However most studies do not consider integrating the two modalities even though each is an indirect measure of the latent neural dynamics and
each has its own spatial and/or temporal limitations. In this study, we develop a
linear state-space model to infer the effective connectivity in a distributed brain
network based on simultaneously recorded EEG and fMRI data. Our method first
identifies task-dependent and subject-dependent regions of interest (ROI) based
on the analysis of fMRI data. Directed influences between the latent neural states
at these ROIs are then modeled as a multivariate autogressive (MVAR) process
driven by various exogenous inputs. The latent neural dynamics give rise to the observed scalp EEG measurements via a biophysically informed linear EEG forward
model. We use a mean-field variational Bayesian approach to infer the posterior
distribution of latent states and model parameters. The performance of the model
was evaluated on two sets of simulations. Our results emphasize the importance
of obtaining accurate spatial localization of ROIs from fMRI. Finally, we applied
the model to simultaneously recorded EEG-fMRI data from 10 subjects during a
Face-Car-House visual categorization task and compared the change in connectivity
induced by different stimulus categories.

1

Introduction

Identifying the spatiotemporal dependence among distributed cortical regions is often seen as crucial
for understanding the macro-scale neural dynamics underlying human cognition. Such spatiotemporal
dependencies can be quantified statistically by the modeling of effective connectivity, which is defined
as the time-lagged influence of one brain region over another [1]. Effective connectivity has been
introduced in the framework of dynamic causal modeling (DCM). DCM uses a state-space model with
hidden state variables to describe task-dependent "causal" interactions between latent neural states
and how the activity of regional neural states translates into observed neural measurements [2, 3].
Estimating effective connectivity between anatomically segregated brain regions is a challenging
problem for several reasons: 1) the inference is made on unobserved latent states rather than directly
on the observations; 2) latent neural dynamics often evolve on a fast time scale so it requires the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

