Nonlinear scaling of resource allocation
in sensory bottlenecks

Laura R. Edmondson1,3 , Alejandro Jiménez-Rodriguez2,3 , Hannes P. Saal1,3
1
Department of Psychology
2
Department of Computer Science
3
Sheffield Robotics
The University of Sheffield
{lredmondson1,a.jimenez-rodriguez,h.saal}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
In many sensory systems, information transmission is constrained by a bottleneck,
where the number of output neurons is vastly smaller than the number of input
neurons. Efficient coding theory predicts that in these scenarios the brain should
allocate its limited resources by removing redundant information. Previous work
has typically assumed that receptors are uniformly distributed across the sensory
sheet, when in reality these vary in density, often by an order of magnitude. How,
then, should the brain efficiently allocate output neurons when the density of input
neurons is nonuniform? Here, we show analytically and numerically that resource
allocation scales nonlinearly in efficient coding models that maximize information
transfer, when inputs arise from separate regions with different receptor densities.
Importantly, the proportion of output neurons allocated to a given input region
changes depending on the width of the bottleneck, and thus cannot be predicted
from input density or region size alone. Narrow bottlenecks favor magnification of
high density input regions, while wider bottlenecks often cause contraction. Our
results demonstrate that both expansion and contraction of sensory input regions
can arise in efficient coding models and that the final allocation crucially depends
on the neural resources made available.

1

Introduction

In biological sensory systems, information transmission is often constrained by a neural bottleneck,
where the number of output neurons is vastly smaller than the number of input neurons. For example,
there are many more photoreceptors in the retina than there are retinal ganglion cells in the optic
nerve. Sensory bottlenecks force compression of information [20], and their presence and narrowness
affects the layout of receptive fields [17]. Efficient coding theory has been used to predict how the
brain should allocate its limited resources in these scenarios by removing redundant information
[1–4].
Prior work has typically assumed that the density of input receptors is constant [1, 6]. However, in
biological sensory systems, receptors are often not distributed uniformly across the sensory sheet, but
vary in their density. In vision, the density of cones in the retina differs by an order of magnitude
between the fovea and the periphery [9, 22]. In touch, mechanoreceptors are much more densely
packed in the fingertips than they are in the palm [14].
How, then, should the brain efficiently allocate output neurons when the density of input neurons is
nonuniform and a sensory bottleneck constrains the total number of output neurons (see Fig. 1A for an
illustration)? A plausible solution might simply prescribe a constant ratio of input to output neurons,
and therefore preserve proportional allocation, independent of the width of the bottleneck. However,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

