Scalable Global Optimization via
Local Bayesian Optimization

David Eriksson
Uber AI
eriksson@uber.com

Michael Pearce
University of Warwick
m.a.l.pearce@warwick.ac.uk

Ryan Turner
Uber AI
ryan.turner@uber.com

Jacob R Gardner
Uber AI
jake.gardner@uber.com

Matthias Poloczek
Uber AI
poloczek@uber.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization has recently emerged as a popular method for the sampleefficient optimization of expensive black-box functions. However, the application
to high-dimensional problems with several thousand observations remains challenging, and on difficult problems Bayesian optimization is often not competitive
with other paradigms. In this paper we take the view that this is due to the implicit
homogeneity of the global probabilistic models and an overemphasized exploration
that results from global acquisition. This motivates the design of a local probabilistic approach for global optimization of large-scale high-dimensional problems. We
propose the TuRBO algorithm that fits a collection of local models and performs a
principled global allocation of samples across these models via an implicit bandit
approach. A comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that TuRBO outperforms stateof-the-art methods from machine learning and operations research on problems
spanning reinforcement learning, robotics, and the natural sciences.

1

Introduction

The global optimization of high-dimensional black-box functions—where closed form expressions
and derivatives are unavailable—is a ubiquitous task arising in hyperparameter tuning [36]; in
reinforcement learning, when searching for an optimal parametrized policy [7]; in simulation, when
calibrating a simulator to real world data; and in chemical engineering and materials discovery, when
selecting candidates for high-throughput screening [18]. While Bayesian optimization (BO) has
emerged as a highly competitive tool for problems with a small number of tunable parameters (e.g.,
see [13, 35]), it often scales poorly to high dimensions and large sample budgets. Several methods
have been proposed for high-dimensional problems with small budgets of a few hundred samples (see
the literature review below). However, these methods make strong assumptions about the objective
function such as low-dimensional subspace structure. The recent algorithms of Wang et al. [45]
and Hernández-Lobato et al. [18] are explicitly designed for a large sample budget and do not make
these assumptions. However, they do not compare favorably with state-of-the-art methods from
stochastic optimization like CMA-ES [17] in practice.
The optimization of high-dimensional problems is hard for several reasons. First, the search space
grows exponentially with the dimension, and while local optima may become more plentiful, global
optima become more difficult to find. Second, the function is often heterogeneous, making the task of
fitting a global surrogate model challenging. For example, in reinforcement learning problems with
sparse rewards, we expect the objective function to be nearly constant in large parts of the search
space. For the latter, note that the commonly used global Gaussian process (GP) models [13, 46]
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

