Adversarial Fisher Vectors for Unsupervised
Representation Learning

Shuangfei Zhai Walter Talbott Carlos Guestrin Joshua M. Susskind
Apple Inc.
{szhai, wtalbott, guestrin, jsusskind}@apple.com

Abstract
We examine Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) through the lens of deep
Energy Based Models (EBMs), with the goal of exploiting the density model
that follows from this formulation. In contrast to a traditional view where the
discriminator learns a constant function when reaching convergence, here we show
that it can provide useful information for downstream tasks, e.g., feature extraction
for classification. To be concrete, in the EBM formulation, the discriminator learns
an unnormalized density function (i.e., the negative energy term) that characterizes
the data manifold. We propose to evaluate both the generator and the discriminator
by deriving corresponding Fisher Score and Fisher Information from the EBM.
We show that by assuming that the generated examples form an estimate of the
learned density, both the Fisher Information and the normalized Fisher Vectors
are easy to compute. We also show that we are able to derive a distance metric
between examples and between sets of examples. We conduct experiments showing
that the GAN-induced Fisher Vectors demonstrate competitive performance as
unsupervised feature extractors for classification and perceptual similarity tasks.
Code is available at https://github.com/apple/ml-afv.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] are state-of-the-art generative modeling methods, where a
discriminator network is jointly trained with a generator network to solve a minimax game. According
to the original theory in [1], the discriminator reduces to a constant function that assigns a score of
0.5 everywhere when Nash Equilibrium is reached, making the discriminator useless for anything
beyond training the generator. Moreover, the generator models the data density, but in an implicit
form that precludes its application to scenarios where an explicit density estimate would be useful.
Recently, [2, 3, 4] show that training an energy-based model (EBM) with a parameterized variational
distribution reduces to a similar minimax GAN game. This EBM view, in contrast to the original
GAN formulation, leads to an interpretation where the discriminator itself is an explicit density model
of the data.
We show that under certain approximations, the deep EBMs can be trained with a modern GAN
implementation (see Sec. 2.2). We then focus on exploring the utility of the density models learned
according to the EBM interpretation. Inspired by the approach in [5], we show how to use the Fisher
Score and Fisher Information induced by the learned density model to compute representations of
data samples. Namely, we derive normalized Fisher Vectors and Fisher Distance measure to estimate
similarities both between individual data samples and between sets of samples. We call these derived
representations Adversarial Fisher Vectors (AFVs).
We propose to apply the density model and derived AFV representation in several ways. First, we
show that the learned AFV representations are useful as pre-trained features for linear classification
tasks, and that the similarity function induced by the learned density model can be used as a perceptual
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

