Heterogeneous Graph Learning for Visual
Commonsense Reasoning

Weijiang Yu1 , Jingwen Zhou1 , Weihao Yu1 , Xiaodan Liang2,∗, Nong Xiao1
1
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
weijiangyu8@gmail.com, zhoujw57@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, weihaoyu6@gmail.com,
xdliang328@gmail.com, xiaon6@sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual commonsense reasoning task aims at leading the research field into solving cognition-level reasoning with the ability of predicting correct answers and
meanwhile providing convincing reasoning paths, resulting in three sub-tasks i.e.,
Q→A, QA→R and Q→AR. It poses great challenges over the proper semantic
alignment between vision and linguistic domains and knowledge reasoning to
generate persuasive reasoning paths. Existing works either resort to a powerful
end-to-end network that cannot produce interpretable reasoning paths or solely
explore intra-relationship of visual objects (homogeneous graph) while ignoring the
cross-domain semantic alignment among visual concepts and linguistic words. In
this paper, we propose a new Heterogeneous Graph Learning (HGL) framework for
seamlessly integrating the intra-graph and inter-graph reasoning in order to bridge
vision and language domain. Our HGL consists of a primal vision-to-answer heterogeneous graph (VAHG) module and a dual question-to-answer heterogeneous graph
(QAHG) module to interactively refine reasoning paths for semantic agreement.
Moreover, our HGL integrates a contextual voting module to exploit long-range
visual context for better global reasoning. Experiments on the large-scale Visual
Commonsense Reasoning benchmark demonstrate the superior performance of
our proposed modules on three tasks (improving 5% accuracy on Q→A, 3.5% on
QA→R, 5.8% on Q→AR)2 .

1

Introduction

Visual and language tasks have attracted more and more researches, which contains visual question
answering (VQA) [29, 35, 36], visual dialogue [15, 10], visual question generation (VQG) [20, 30],
visual grounding [17, 11, 41] and visual-language navigation [39, 21]. These tasks can roughly
be divided into two types. One type is to explore a powerful end-to-end network. Devlin et al.
have introduced a powerful end-to-end network named BERT [12] for learning more discriminative
representation of languages. Anderson et al [2]. utilized the attention mechanisms [42] and presented
a bottom-up top-down end-to-end architecture. While these works resorted to a powerful endto-end network that cannot produce interpretable reasoning paths. The other type is to explore
intra-relationship of visual objects (homogeneous graph). Norcliffe-Brown et al. [32] presented a
spatial graph and a semantic graph to model object location and semantic relationships. Tang et
al. [37] modeled the intra-relationship of visual objects by composing dynamic tree structures that
place the visual objects into a visual context. However, all of them solely consider intra-relationship
limited to homogeneous graphs, which is not enough for visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) due
∗
2

Corresponding author is Xiaodan Liang
Our code is released in https://github.com/yuweijiang/HGL-pytorch

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

