Improving Black-box Adversarial Attacks with a
Transfer-based Prior
Shuyu Cheng∗ , Yinpeng Dong∗ , Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu†
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{chengsy18, dyp17, pty17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss, dcszj}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We consider the black-box adversarial setting, where the adversary has to generate adversarial perturbations without access to the target models to compute
gradients. Previous methods tried to approximate the gradient either by using a
transfer gradient of a surrogate white-box model, or based on the query feedback.
However, these methods often suffer from low attack success rates or poor query
efficiency since it is non-trivial to estimate the gradient in a high-dimensional space
with limited information. To address these problems, we propose a prior-guided
random gradient-free (P-RGF) method to improve black-box adversarial attacks,
which takes the advantage of a transfer-based prior and the query information
simultaneously. The transfer-based prior given by the gradient of a surrogate model
is appropriately integrated into our algorithm by an optimal coefficient derived by
a theoretical analysis. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method requires
much fewer queries to attack black-box models with higher success rates compared
with the alternative state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success on various tasks [12], they
have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [2, 33, 13], which are crafted to fool the
models by modifying normal examples with human imperceptible perturbations. Many efforts have
been devoted to studying the generation of adversarial examples, which is crucial to identify the
weaknesses of deep learning algorithms [33, 1], serve as a surrogate to evaluate robustness [5], and
consequently contribute to the design of robust deep learning models [24].
In general, adversarial attacks can be categorized into white-box attacks and black-box attacks. In
the white-box setting, the adversary has full access to the model, and can use various gradient-based
methods [13, 20, 5, 24] to generate adversarial examples. In the more challenging black-box setting,
the adversary has no or limited knowledge about the model, and crafts adversarial examples without
any gradient information. The black-box setting is more practical in many real-world situations.
Many methods [30, 6, 3, 7, 18, 27, 35, 19, 9] have been proposed to perform black-box adversarial
attacks. A common idea is to use an approximate gradient instead of the true gradient for crafting
adversarial examples. The approximate gradient could be either the gradient of a surrogate model
(termed as transfer-based attacks) or numerically estimated by the zeroth-order optimization methods
(termed as query-based attacks). In transfer-based attacks, adversarial examples generated for a
different model are probable to remain adversarial for the target model due to the transferability [29].
Although various methods [7, 23, 8] have been introduced to improve the transferability, the attack
success rate is still unsatisfactory. The reason is that there lacks an adjustment procedure in transferbased attacks when the gradient of the surrogate model points to a non-adversarial region of the
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

