The Step Decay Schedule: A Near Optimal,
Geometrically Decaying Learning Rate Procedure
For Least Squares
Rong Ge 1 , Sham M. Kakade 2 , Rahul Kidambi3 and Praneeth Netrapalli4
1

Duke University, 2 University of Washington, 3 Cornell University, 4 Microsoft Research, India.
rongge@cs.duke.edu, sham@cs.washington.edu, rkidambi@cornell.edu,
praneeth@microsoft.com

Abstract
Minimax optimal convergence rates for numerous classes of stochastic convex
optimization problems are well characterized, where the majority of results utilize
iterate averaged stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with polynomially decaying
step sizes. In contrast, the behavior of SGD’s final iterate has received much less
attention despite the widespread use in practice. Motivated by this observation, this
work provides a detailed study of the following question: what rate is achievable
using the final iterate of SGD for the streaming least squares regression problem
with and without strong convexity?
First, this work shows that even if the time horizon T (i.e. the number of iterations
that SGD is run for) is known in advance, the behavior of SGD’s final iterate with
any polynomially decaying learning rate scheme is highly sub-optimal compared
to the statistical minimax
√ rate (by a condition number factor in the strongly convex
case and a factor of T in the non-strongly convex case). In contrast, this paper
shows that Step Decay schedules, which cut the learning rate by a constant factor
every constant number of epochs (i.e., the learning rate decays geometrically)
offer significant improvements over any polynomially decaying step size schedule.
In particular, the behavior of the final iterate with step decay schedules is off
from the statistical minimax rate by only log factors (in the condition number
for the strongly convex case, and in T in the non-strongly convex case). Finally,
in stark contrast to the known horizon case, this paper shows that the anytime
(i.e. the limiting) behavior of SGD’s final iterate is poor (in that it queries iterates
with highly sub-optimal function value infinitely often, i.e. in a limsup sense)
irrespective of the stepsize scheme employed. These results demonstrate the
subtlety in establishing optimal learning rate schedules (for the final iterate) for
stochastic gradient procedures in fixed time horizon settings.

1

Introduction

Large scale machine learning relies almost exclusively on stochastic optimization methods [BB07],
which include stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [RM51] and its variants [DHS11, JZ13]. In this
work, we restrict our attention to the SGD algorithm where we are concerned with the behavior of the
final iterate (i.e. the last point when we terminate the algorithm). A majority of (minimax optimal)
theoretical results for SGD focus on polynomially decaying stepsizes [DGBSX12, RSS12, LJSB12,
Bub14] (or constant stepsizes [BM13, DB15a, JKK+ 16] for the case of least squares regression)
coupled with iterate averaging [Rup88, PJ92] to achieve minimax optimal rates of convergence.
However, practical SGD implementations typically return the final iterate of a stochastic gradient
procedure. This line of work in theory (based on iterate averaging) and its discrepancy with regards to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

