On two ways to use determinantal point processes
for Monte Carlo integration
Guillaume Gautier†⇤
g.gautier@inria.fr
†

Rémi Bardenet†
remi.bardenet@gmail.com

Michal Valko‡⇤†
valkom@deepmind.com

Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 – CRIStAL, 59651 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
⇤
Inria Lille-Nord Europe, 40 avenue Halley 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
‡
DeepMind Paris, 14 Rue de Londres, 75009 Paris, France

Abstract
When approximating an integral by a weighted sum of function evaluations, determinantal point processes (DPPs) provide a way to enforce repulsion between
the evaluation points. This negative dependence is encoded by a kernel. Fifteen
years before the discovery of DPPs, Ermakov & Zolotukhin (EZ, 1960) had the
intuition of sampling a DPP and solving a linear system to compute an unbiased
Monte Carlo estimator of the integral. In the absence of DPP machinery to derive
an efficient sampler and analyze their estimator, the idea of Monte Carlo integration
with DPPs was stored in the cellar of numerical integration. Recently, Bardenet &
Hardy (BH, 2019) came up with a more natural estimator with a fast central limit
theorem (CLT). In this paper, we first take the EZ estimator out of the cellar, and analyze it using modern arguments. Second, we provide an efficient implementation1
to sample exactly a particular multidimensional DPP called multivariate Jacobi
ensemble. The latter satisfies the assumptions of the aforementioned CLT. Third,
our new implementation lets us investigate the behavior of the two unbiased Monte
Carlo estimators in yet unexplored regimes. We demonstrate experimentally good
properties when the kernel is adapted to basis of functions in which the integrand is
sparse or has fast-decaying coefficients. If such a basis and the level of sparsity are
known (e.g., we integrate a linear combination of kernel eigenfunctions), the EZ
estimator can be the right choice, but otherwise it can display an erratic behavior.

1

Introduction

Numerical integration is a core task of many machine learning applications, including most Bayesian
methods (Robert, 2007). Both deterministic (Davis & Rabinowitz, 1984; Dick & Pillichshammer,
2010) and random (Robert & Casella, 2004) algorithms have been proposed; see also (Evans &
Swartz, 2000) for a survey. All methods require evaluating the integrand at carefully chosen points,
called quadrature nodes, and combining these evaluations to minimize the approximation error.
Recently, a stream of work has made use of prior knowledge on the smoothness of the integrand using
kernels. Oates et al. (2017) and Liu & Lee (2017) used kernel-based control variates, splitting the
computational budget into regressing the integrand and integrating the residual. Bach (2017) looked
for the best way to sample i.i.d. nodes and combine the resulting evaluations. Finally, Bayesian
quadrature (O’Hagan, 1991; Huszár & Duvenaud, 2012; Briol et al., 2015), herding (Chen et al.,
2010; Bach et al., 2012), or the biased importance sampling estimate of Delyon & Portier (2016) all
favor dissimilar nodes, where dissimilarity is measured by a kernel. Our work falls in this last cluster.
We build on the particular approach of Bardenet & Hardy (2019) for Monte Carlo integration based
on projection determinantal point processes (DPPs, Hough et al., 2006; Kulesza & Taskar, 2012).
DPPs are a repulsive distribution over configurations of points, where repulsion is again parametrized
by a kernel. In a sense, DPPs are the kernel machines of point processes.
1

github.com/guilgautier/DPPy

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

