Equipping Experts/Bandits with Long-term Memory

Kai Zheng1,2
zhengk92@pku.edu.cn

Haipeng Luo3
haipengl@usc.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas4
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com

Liwei Wang1,2
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose the first reduction-based approach to obtaining long-term memory
guarantees for online learning in the sense of Bousquet and Warmuth [8], by
reducing the problem to achieving typical switching regret. Specifically, for the
classical expert problem with K actions and T rounds, using
p our framework we
develop various algorithms with a regret bound of order O( T (S ln T + n ln K))
compared to any sequence of experts with S − 1 switches among n ≤ min{S, K}
distinct experts. In addition, by plugging specific adaptive algorithms into our
framework we also achieve the best of both stochastic and adversarial environments
simultaneously. This resolves an open problem of Warmuth and Koolen [35].
Furthermore, we extend our results to the sparse multi-armed bandit setting and
show both negative and positive results for long-term memory guarantees. As a
side result, our lower bound also implies that sparse losses do not help improve the
worst-case regret for contextual bandits, a sharp contrast with the non-contextual
case.

1

Introduction

In this work, we propose a black-box reduction for obtaining long-term memory guarantees for
two fundamental problems in online learning: the expert problem [17] and the multi-armed bandit
(MAB) problem [6]. In both problems, a learner interacts with the environment for T rounds, with
K fixed available actions. At each round, the environment decides the loss for each action while
simultaneously the learner selects one of the actions and suffers the loss of this action. In the expert
problem, the learner observes the loss of every action at the end of each round (a.k.a. full-information
feedback), while in MAB, the learner only observes the loss of the selected action (a.k.a. bandit
feedback).
For both problems, the classical performance measure is the learner’s (static) regret, defined as
the difference between the learner’s total loss√and the loss of the best
√ fixed action. It is wellknown that the minimax optimal regret is Θ( T ln K) [17] and Θ( T K) [6, 4] for the expert
problem and MAB respectively. Comparing against a fixed action, however, does not always lead
to meaningful guarantees, especially when the environment is non-stationary and no single fixed
action performs well. To address this issue, prior work has considered a stronger measure called
switching/tracking/shifting regret, which is the difference between the learner’s total loss and the loss
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
3
University of Southern California
4
University of Wisconsin-Madison
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

