On the Expressive Power of
Deep Polynomial Neural Networks
Joe Kileel⇤
Princeton University

Matthew Trager⇤
New York University

Joan Bruna
New York University

Abstract
We study deep neural networks with polynomial activations, particularly their
expressive power. For a fixed architecture and activation degree, a polynomial
neural network defines an algebraic map from weights to polynomials. The image
of this map is the functional space associated to the network, and it is an irreducible
algebraic variety upon taking closure. This paper proposes the dimension of this
variety as a precise measure of the expressive power of polynomial neural networks.
We obtain several theoretical results regarding this dimension as a function of
architecture, including an exact formula for high activation degrees, as well as
upper and lower bounds on layer widths in order for deep polynomials networks to
fill the ambient functional space. We also present computational evidence that it is
profitable in terms of expressiveness for layer widths to increase monotonically and
then decrease monotonically. Finally, we link our study to favorable optimization
properties when training weights, and we draw intriguing connections with tensor
and polynomial decompositions.

1

Introduction

A fundamental problem in the theory of deep learning is to study the functional space of deep neural
networks. A network can be modeled as a composition of elementary maps, however the family of
all functions that can be obtained in this way is extremely complex. Many recent papers paint an
accurate picture for the case of shallow networks (e.g., using mean field theory [7, 27]) and of deep
linear networks [2, 3, 21], however a similar investigation of deep nonlinear networks appears to be
significantly more challenging, and require very different tools.
In this paper, we consider a general model for deep polynomial neural networks, where the activation
function is a polynomial (r-th power) exponentiation. The advantage of this framework is that
the functional space associated with a network architecture is algebraic, so we can use tools from
algebraic geometry [17] for a precise investigation of deep neural networks. Indeed, for a fixed
activation degree r and architecture d = (d0 , . . . , dh ) (expressed as a sequence of widths), the family
of all networks with varying weights can be identified with an algebraic variety Vd,r , embedded
in a finite-dimensional Euclidean space. In this setting, an algebraic variety can be thought of as a
manifold that may have singularities.
In this paper, our main object of study is the dimension of Vd,r as a variety (in practice, as a manifold),
which may be regarded as a precise measure of the architecture’s expressiveness. Specifically, we
prove that this dimension stabilizes when activations are high degree, and we provide an exact
dimension formula for this case (Theorem 14). We also investigate conditions under which Vd,r
fills its ambient space. This question is important from the vantage point of optimization, since an
architecture is “filling” if and only if it corresponds to a convex functional space (Proposition 6). In
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

