Online Prediction of Switching Graph Labelings with
Cluster Specialists
Mark Herbster
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London
United Kingdom
m.herbster@cs.ucl.ac.uk

James Robinson
Department of Computer Science
University College London
London
United Kingdom
j.robinson@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We address the problem of predicting the labeling of a graph in an online setting
when the labeling is changing over time. We present an algorithm based on a
specialist [11] approach; we develop the machinery of cluster specialists which
probabilistically exploits the cluster structure in the graph. Our algorithm has
two variants, one of which surprisingly only requires O(log n) time on any trial
t on an n-vertex graph, an exponential speed up over existing methods. We
prove switching mistake-bound guarantees for both variants of our algorithm.
Furthermore these mistake bounds smoothly vary with the magnitude of the change
between successive labelings. We perform experiments on Chicago Divvy Bicycle
Sharing data and show that our algorithms significantly outperform an existing
algorithm (a kernelized Perceptron) as well as several natural benchmarks.

1 Introduction
We study the problem of predicting graph labelings that evolve over time. Consider the following
game for predicting the labeling of a graph in the online setting. Nature presents a graph G; Nature
queries a vertex i1 2 V = {1, 2, . . . , n}; the learner predicts the label of the vertex ŷ1 2 { 1, 1};
Nature presents a label y1 ; Nature queries a vertex i2 ; the learner predicts ŷ2 ; and so forth. The
learner’s goal is to minimize the total number of mistakes M = |{t : yˆt 6= yt }|. If Nature is
strictly adversarial, the learner will incur a mistake on every trial, but if Nature is regular or
simple, there is hope that the learner may incur only a few mistakes. Thus, a central goal of
mistake-bounded online learning is to design algorithms whose total mistakes can be bounded relative
to the complexity of Nature’s labeling. This (non-switching) graph labeling problem has been
studied extensively in the online learning literature [16, 15, 7, 34, 17]. In this paper we generalize
the setting to allow the underlying labeling to change arbitrarily over time. The learner has no
knowledge of when a change in labeling will occur and therefore must be able to adapt quickly to
these changes.
Consider an example of services placed throughout a city, such as public bicycle sharing stations.
As the population uses these services the state of each station–such as the number of available
bikes–naturally evolves throughout the day, at times gradually and others abruptly, and we might
want to predict the state of any given station at any given time. Since the location of a given station
as well as the state of nearby stations will be relevant to this learning problem it is natural to use a
graph-based approach. Another setting might be a graph of major road junctions (vertices) connected
by roads (edges), in which one wants to predict whether or not a junction is congested at any given
time. Traffic congestion is naturally non-stationary and also exhibits both gradual and abrupt changes
to the structure of the labeling over time [24].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

