Policy Continuation with Hindsight Inverse Dynamics

Hao Sun1 , Zhizhong Li1 , Xiaotong Liu2 , Dahua Lin1 , Bolei Zhou1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Peking University

Abstract
Solving goal-oriented tasks is an important but challenging problem in reinforcement learning (RL). For such tasks, the rewards are often sparse, making it difficult
to learn a policy effectively. To tackle this difficulty, we propose a new approach
called Policy Continuation with Hindsight Inverse Dynamics (PCHID). This approach learns from Hindsight Inverse Dynamics based on Hindsight Experience
Replay. Enabling the learning process in a self-imitated manner and thus can be
trained with supervised learning. This work also extends it to multi-step settings
with Policy Continuation. The proposed method is general, which can work in
isolation or be combined with other on-policy and off-policy algorithms. On two
multi-goal tasks GridWorld and FetchReach, PCHID significantly improves the
sample efficiency as well as the final performance1 .

1

Introduction

Imagine you are given the task of Tower of Hanoi with ten disks, what would you probably do to
solve this complex problem? This game looks daunting at the first glance. However through trials
and errors, one may discover the key is to recursively relocate the disks on the top of the stack from
one pod to another, assisted by an intermediate one. In this case, you are actually learning skills
from easier sub-tasks and those skills help you to learn more. This case exemplifies the procedure
of self-imitated curriculum learning, which recursively develops the skills of solving more complex
problems.
Tower of Hanoi belongs to an important kind of challenging problems in Reinforcement Learning
(RL), namely solving the goal-oriented tasks. In such tasks, rewards are usually very sparse. For
example, in many goal-oriented tasks, a single binary reward is provided only when the task is
completed [1, 2, 3]. Previous works attribute the difficulty of the sparse reward problems to the low
efficiency in experience collection [4]. Thus many approaches have been proposed to tackle this problem, including automatic goal generation [5], self-imitation learning [6], hierarchical reinforcement
learning [7], curiosity driven methods [8, 9], curriculum learning [1, 10], and Hindsight Experience
Replay (HER) [11]. Most of these works guide the agent by demonstrating on successful choices
based on sufficient exploration to improve learning efficiency. Differently, HER opens up a new way
to learn more from failures, assigning hindsight credit to primal experiences. However, it is limited
by only applicable when combined with off-policy algorithms[3].
In this paper we propose an approach of goal-oriented RL called Policy Continuation with Hindsight
Inverse Dynamics (PCHID), which leverages the key idea of self-imitate learning. In contrast to HER,
our method can work as an auxiliary module for both on-policy and off-policy algorithms, or as an
isolated controller itself. Moreover, by learning to predict actions directly from back-propagation
through self-imitation [12], instead of temporal difference [13] or policy gradient [14, 15, 16, 17],
the data efficiency is greatly improved.
The contributions of this work lie in three aspects: (1) We introduce the state-goal space partition
for multi-goal RL and thereon define Policy Continuation (PC) as a new approach to such tasks.
1

Code and related materials are available at https://sites.google.com/view/neurips2019pchid

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

