iSplit LBI: Individualized Partial Ranking
with Ties via Split LBI

Qianqian Xu1
Xinwei Sun2
Zhiyong Yang3,4
3,4,7
1,5,6,7
Xiaochun Cao
Qingming Huang
Yuan Yao8
1
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
7
Peng Cheng Laboratory
8
Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, xinsun@microsoft.com, yangzhiyong@iie.ac.cn
caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, yuany@ust.hk

Abstract
Due to the inherent uncertainty of data, the problem of predicting partial ranking
from pairwise comparison data with ties has attracted increasing interest in recent
years. However, in real-world scenarios, different individuals often hold distinct
preferences. It might be misleading to merely look at a global partial ranking
while ignoring personal diversity. In this paper, instead of learning a global ranking which is agreed with the consensus, we pursue the tie-aware partial ranking
from an individualized perspective. Particularly, we formulate a unified framework which not only can be used for individualized partial ranking prediction, but
also be helpful for abnormal user selection. This is realized by a variable splittingbased algorithm called iSplitLBI. Specifically, our algorithm generates a sequence of estimations with a regularization path, where both the hyperparameters
and model parameters are updated. At each step of the path, the parameters can be
decomposed into three orthogonal parts, namely, abnormal signals, personalized
signals and random noise. The abnormal signals can serve the purpose of abnormal user selection, while the abnormal signals and personalized signals together
are mainly responsible for individual partial ranking prediction. Extensive experiments on simulated and real-world datasets demonstrate that our new approach
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art alternatives.

1

Introduction

The flourish of various online crowdsourcing services (e.g., Amazon Mechanical Turk), presents us
an effective way to distribute tasks to human workers around the world, on-demand and at scale.
Recently, there arises a plethora of pairwise comparison data in crowdsourcing experiments on the
Internet [16, 2], ranging from marketing and advertisements to competitions and election. Information of this kind is all around us: which college a student selected, who won the chess match,
which movie a user watched, etc. How to aggregate the massive amount of personalized pairwise
comparison data to reveal the global preference function has been one important topic in the last
decades [4, 11, 26, 20, 2, 22].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

