Learning GANs and Ensembles Using Discrepancy
Ben Adlam
Google Research
New York, NY 10011

Corinna Cortes
Google Research
New York, NY 10011

adlam@google.com

corinna@google.com

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research & CIMS
New York, NY 10012

Ningshan Zhang
New York University
New York, NY 10012

mohri@google.com

nzhang@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) generate data based on minimizing a
divergence between two distributions. The choice of that divergence is therefore
critical. We argue that the divergence must take into account the hypothesis set
and the loss function used in a subsequent learning task, where the data generated
by a GAN serves for training. Taking that structural information into account
is also important to derive generalization guarantees. Thus, we propose to use
the discrepancy measure, which was originally introduced for the closely related
problem of domain adaptation and which precisely takes into account the hypothesis
set and the loss function. We show that discrepancy admits favorable properties for
training GANs and prove explicit generalization guarantees. We present efficient
algorithms using discrepancy for two tasks: training a GAN directly, namely
DGAN, and mixing previously trained generative models, namely EDGAN. Our
experiments on toy examples and several benchmark datasets show that DGAN
is competitive with other GANs and that EDGAN outperforms existing GAN
ensembles, such as AdaGAN.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) consist of a family of methods for unsupervised learning. A
GAN learns a generative model that can easily output samples following a distribution P✓ , which
aims to mimic the real data distribution Pr . The parameter ✓ of the generator is learned by minimizing
a divergence between Pr and P✓ , and different choices of this divergence lead to different GAN
algorithms: the Jensen-Shannon divergence gives the standard GAN [Goodfellow et al., 2014,
Salimans et al., 2016], the Wasserstein distance gives the WGAN [Arjovsky et al., 2017, Gulrajani
et al., 2017], the squared maximum mean discrepancy gives the MMD GAN [Li et al., 2015, Dziugaite
et al., 2015, Li et al., 2017], and the f -divergence gives the f -GAN [Nowozin et al., 2016], just to
name a few. There are many other GANs that have been derived using other divergences in the past,
see [Goodfellow, 2017] and [Creswell et al., 2018] for more extensive studies.
The choice of the divergence seems to be critical in the design of a GAN. But, how should that
divergence be selected or defined? We argue that its choice must take into consideration the structure
of a learning task and include, in particular, the hypothesis set and the loss function considered. In
contrast, divergences that ignore the hypothesis set typically cannot benefit from any generalization
guarantee (see for example Arora et al. [2017]). The loss function is also crucial: while many GAN
applications aim to generate synthetic samples indistinguishable from original ones, for example
images [Karras et al., 2018, Brock et al., 2019] or Anime characters [Jin et al., 2017], in many other
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

