Strategizing against No-regret Learners

Yuan Deng
Duke University
ericdy@cs.duke.edu

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Balasubramanian Sivan
Google Research
balusivan@google.com

Abstract
How should a player who repeatedly plays a game against a no-regret learner
strategize to maximize his utility? We study this question and show that under
some mild assumptions, the player can always guarantee himself a utility of at least
what he would get in a Stackelberg equilibrium of the game. When the no-regret
learner has only two actions, we show that the player cannot get any higher utility
than the Stackelberg equilibrium utility. But when the no-regret learner has more
than two actions and plays a mean-based no-regret strategy, we show that the
player can get strictly higher than the Stackelberg equilibrium utility. We provide
a characterization of the optimal game-play for the player against a mean-based
no-regret learner as a solution to a control problem. When the no-regret learner’s
strategy also guarantees him a no-swap regret, we show that the player cannot get
anything higher than a Stackelberg equilibrium utility.

1

Introduction

Consider a two player bimatrix game with a finite number of actions for each player repeated over T
rounds. When playing a repeated game, a widely adopted strategy is to employ a no-regret learning
algorithm: a strategy that guarantees the player that in hindsight no single action when played
throughout the game would have performed significantly better. Knowing that one of the players (the
learner) is playing a no-regret learning strategy, what is the optimal gameplay for the other player
(the optimizer)? This question is the focus of our work.
If this were a single-shot strategic game where learning is not relevant, a (pure or mixed strategy)
Nash equilibrium is a reasonable prediction of the game’s outcome. In the T rounds game with
learning, can the optimizer guarantee himself a per-round utility of at least what he could get in a
single-shot game? Is it possible to get significantly more utility than this? Does this utility depend on
the specific choice of learning algorithm of the learner? What gameplay the optimizer should adopt
to achieve maximal utility? None of these questions are straightforward, and indeed none of these
have unconditional answers.
Our results. Central to our results is the idea of the Stackelberg equilibrium of the underlying
game. The Stackelberg variant of our game is a single-shot two-stage game where the optimizer is
the first player and can publicly commit to a mixed strategy; the learner then best responds to this
strategy. The Stackelberg equilibrium is the resulting equilibrium of this game when both players
play optimally. Note that the optimizer’s utility in the Stackelberg equilibrium is always weakly
larger than his utility in any (pure or mixed strategy) Nash equilibrium, and is often strictly larger.
Let V be the utility of the optimizer in the Stackelberg equilibrium. With some mild assumptions on
the game, we show that the optimizer can always guarantee himself a utility of at least (V −ε)T −o(T )
in T rounds for any ε > 0, irrespective of the learning algorithm used by the learner as long as it has
the no-regret guarantee (Theorem 4). This means that if one of the players is a learner the other player
can already profit over the Nash equilibrium regardless of the specifics of the learning algorithm
employed or the structure of the game. Further, if any one of the following conditions is true:
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

