Envy-Free Classification
Maria-Florina Balcan
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Travis Dick
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
tdick@cs.cmu.edu

Ritesh Noothigattu
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
riteshn@cmu.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
In classic fair division problems such as cake cutting and rent division, envyfreeness requires that each individual (weakly) prefer his allocation to anyone
else’s. On a conceptual level, we argue that envy-freeness also provides a compelling notion of fairness for classification tasks, especially when individuals have
heterogeneous preferences. Our technical focus is the generalizability of envy-free
classification, i.e., understanding whether a classifier that is envy free on a sample
would be almost envy free with respect to the underlying distribution with high
probability. Our main result establishes that a small sample is sufficient to achieve
such guarantees, when the classifier in question is a mixture of deterministic
classifiers that belong to a family of low Natarajan dimension.

1

Introduction

The study of fairness in machine learning is driven by an abundance of examples where learning
algorithms were perceived as discriminating against protected groups [29, 6]. Addressing this problem
requires a conceptual — perhaps even philosophical — understanding of what fairness means in
this context. In other words, the million dollar question is (arguably1 ) this: What are the formal
constraints that fairness imposes on learning algorithms?
In this paper, we propose a new measure of algorithmic fairness. It draws on an extensive body of
work on rigorous approaches to fairness, which — modulo one possible exception (see Section 1.2)
— has not been tapped by machine learning researchers: the literature on fair division [3, 20]. The
most prominent notion is that of envy-freeness [10, 31], which, in the context of the allocation of
goods, requires that the utility of each individual for his allocation be at least as high as his utility
for the allocation of any other individual; for six decades, it has been the gold standard of fairness
for problems such as cake cutting [25, 24] and rent division [28, 12]. In the classification setting,
envy-freeness would simply mean that the utility of each individual for his distribution over outcomes
is at least as high as his utility for the distribution over outcomes assigned to any other individual.
It is important to say upfront that envy-freeness is not suitable for several widely-studied problems
where there are only two possible outcomes, one of which is ‘good’ and the other ‘bad’; examples
include predicting whether an individual would default on a loan, and whether an offender would
recidivate. In these degenerate cases, envy-freeness would require that the classifier assign each and
every individual the exact same probability of obtaining the ‘good’ outcome, which, clearly, is not a
reasonable constraint.
1

Certain papers take a somewhat different view [17].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

