An Improved Analysis of Training
Over-parameterized Deep Neural Networks

Difan Zou
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
knowzou@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
A recent line of research has shown that gradient-based algorithms with random
initialization can converge to the global minima of the training loss for overparameterized (i.e., sufficiently wide) deep neural networks. However, the condition on the width of the neural network to ensure the global convergence is very
stringent, which is often a high-degree polynomial in the training sample size
n (e.g., O(n24 )). In this paper, we provide an improved analysis of the global
convergence of (stochastic) gradient descent for training deep neural networks,
which only requires a milder over-parameterization condition than previous work
in terms of the training sample size and other problem-dependent parameters. The
main technical contributions of our analysis include (a) a tighter gradient lower
bound that leads to a faster convergence of the algorithm, and (b) a sharper characterization of the trajectory length of the algorithm. By specializing our result
to two-layer (i.e., one-hidden-layer) neural networks, it also provides a milder
over-parameterization condition than the best-known result in prior work.

1

Introduction

Recent study [20] has revealed that deep neural networks trained by gradient-based algorithms can
fit training data with random labels and achieve zero training error. Since the loss landscape of
training deep neural network is highly nonconvex or even nonsmooth, conventional optimization
theory cannot explain why gradient descent (GD) and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) can find
the global minimum of the loss function (i.e., achieving zero training error). To better understand
the training of neural networks, there is a line of research [18, 5, 10, 16, 23, 8, 22, 12] studying
two-layer (i.e., one-hidden-layer) neural networks, where it assumes there exists a teacher network
(i.e., an underlying ground-truth network) generating the output given the input, and casts neural
network learning as weight matrix recovery for the teacher network. However, these studies not
only make strong assumptions on the training data (existence of ground-truth network with the
same architecture as the learned network), but also need special initialization methods that are very
different from the commonly used initialization method [13] in practice. Li and Liang [15], Du et al.
[11] advanced this line of research by proving that under much milder assumptions on the training
data, (stochastic) gradient descent can attain a global convergence for training over-parameterized
(i.e.,sufficiently wide) two-layer ReLU network with widely used random initialization method [13].
More recently, Allen-Zhu et al. [2], Du et al. [9], Zou et al. [24] generalized the global convergence
results from two-layer networks to deep neural networks. However, there is a huge gap between the
theory and practice since all these work Li and Liang [15], Du et al. [11], Allen-Zhu et al. [2], Du
et al. [9], Zou et al. [24] require unrealistic over-parameterization conditions on the width of neural
networks, especially for deep networks. In specific, in order to establish the global convergence for
training two-layer ReLU networks, Du et al. [11] requires the network width, i.e., number of hidden
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

