A Debiased MDI Feature Importance Measure for
Random Forests
Xiao Li∗
Statistics Department
UC Berkeley
sxli@berkeley.edu

Yu Wang
Statistics Department
UC Berkeley
wang.yu@berkeley.edu

Karl Kumbier
Statistics Department
UC Berkeley
kkumbier@berkeley.edu

Sumanta Basu
Statistics and Data Science Department
Computational Biology Department
Cornell University
sumbose@cornell.edu
Bin Yu
EECS, Statistics Department
UC Berkeley
binyu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Tree ensembles such as Random Forests have achieved impressive empirical success across a wide variety of applications. To understand how these models make
predictions, people routinely turn to feature importance measures calculated from
tree ensembles. It has long been known that Mean Decrease Impurity (MDI), one
of the most widely used measures of feature importance, incorrectly assigns high
importance to noisy features, leading to systematic bias in feature selection. In
this paper, we address the feature selection bias of MDI from both theoretical and
methodological perspectives. Based on the original definition of MDI by Breiman
et al. [3] for a single tree, we derive a tight non-asymptotic bound on the expected
bias of MDI importance of noisy features, showing that deep trees have higher
(expected) feature selection bias than shallow ones. However, it is not clear how to
reduce the bias of MDI using its existing analytical expression. We derive a new
analytical expression for MDI, and based on this new expression, we are able to
propose a new MDI feature importance measure using out-of-bag samples, called
MDI-oob. For both the simulated data and a genomic ChIP dataset, MDI-oob
achieves state-of-the-art performance in feature selection from Random Forests for
both deep and shallow trees.

1

Introduction

Understanding how a machine learning (ML) model makes predictions is important in many scientific
and industrial problems [19]. Appropriate interpretations can help increase the predictive performance
of a model and provide new domain insights. While a line of study focuses on interpreting any generic
ML model [30, 22], there is a growing interest in developing specialized methods to understand
specific models. In particular, interpreting Random Forests (RFs) [2] and its variants [14, 28, 27,
29, 1, 12] has become an important area of research due to the wide ranging applications of RFs
in various scientific areas, such as genome-wide association studies (GWAS) [7], gene expression
microarray [13, 23], and gene regulatory networks [9].
A key question in understanding RFs is how to assign feature importance. That is, which features
does a RF rely on for prediction? One of the most widely used feature importance measures for
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

