Band-Limited Gaussian Processes:
The Sinc Kernel
Felipe Tobar
Center for Mathematical Modeling
Universidad de Chile
ftobar@dim.uchile.cl

Abstract
We propose a novel class of Gaussian processes (GPs) whose spectra have compact
support, meaning that their sample trajectories are almost-surely band limited. As
a complement to the growing literature on spectral design of covariance kernels,
the core of our proposal is to model power spectral densities through a rectangular
function, which results in a kernel based on the sinc function with straightforward
extensions to non-centred (around zero frequency) and frequency-varying cases.
In addition to its use in regression, the relationship between the sinc kernel and
the classic theory is illuminated, in particular, the Shannon-Nyquist theorem is
interpreted as posterior reconstruction under the proposed kernel. Additionally,
we show that the sinc kernel is instrumental in two fundamental signal processing
applications: first, in stereo amplitude modulation, where the non-centred sinc
kernel arises naturally. Second, for band-pass filtering, where the proposed kernel
allows for a Bayesian treatment that is robust to observation noise and missing
data. The developed theory is complemented with illustrative graphic examples
and validated experimentally using real-world data.

1

Introduction

1.1

Spectral representation and Gaussian processes

The spectral representation of time series is both meaningful and practical in a plethora of scientific domains. From seismology to medical imagining, and from astronomy to audio processing,
understanding which fraction of the energy in a time series is contained on a specific frequency band
is key for, e.g., detecting critical events, reconstruction, and denoising. The literature on spectral
estimation [13, 24] enjoys of a long-standing reputation with proven success in real-world applications in discrete-time signal processing and related fields. For unevenly-sampled noise-corrupted
observations, Bayesian approaches to spectral representation emerged in the late 1980s and early
1990s [4, 11, 8], thus reformulating spectral analysis as an inference problem which benefits from the
machinery of Bayesian probability theory [12].
In parallel to the advances of spectral analysis, the interface between probability, statistics and
machine learning (ML) witnessed the development of Gaussian processes (GP, [21]), a nonparametric
generative model for time series with unparalleled modelling abilities and unique conjugacy properties
for Bayesian inference. GPs are the de facto model in the ML community to learn (continuoustime) time series in the presence of unevenly-sampled observations corrupted by noise. Recent GP
models rely on Bochner theorem [2], which indicates that the covariance kernel and power spectral
density (PSD) of a stationary stochastic process are Fourier pairs, to construct kernels by direct
parametrisation of PSDs to then express the kernel via the inverse Fourier transform. The precursor
of this concept in ML is the spectral-mixture kernel (SM, [32]), which models PSDs as Gaussian
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

