Ultrametric Fitting by Gradient Descent

Giovanni Chierchia∗
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049)
CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM
F-93162, Noisy-le-Grand, France
giovanni.chierchia@esiee.fr

Benjamin Perret∗
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049)
CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM
F-93162, Noisy-le-Grand, France
benjamin.perret@esiee.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of fitting an ultrametric distance to a dissimilarity graph
in the context of hierarchical cluster analysis. Standard hierarchical clustering
methods are specified procedurally, rather than in terms of the cost function to be
optimized. We aim to overcome this limitation by presenting a general optimization
framework for ultrametric fitting. Our approach consists of modeling the latter as a
constrained optimization problem over the continuous space of ultrametrics. So
doing, we can leverage the simple, yet effective, idea of replacing the ultrametric
constraint with a min-max operation injected directly into the cost function. The
proposed reformulation leads to an unconstrained optimization problem that can
be efficiently solved by gradient descent methods. The flexibility of our framework
allows us to investigate several cost functions, following the classic paradigm
of combining a data fidelity term with a regularization. While we provide no
theoretical guarantee to find the global optimum, the numerical results obtained
over a number of synthetic and real datasets demonstrate the good performance of
our approach with respect to state-of-the-art agglomerative algorithms. This makes
us believe that the proposed framework sheds new light on the way to design a new
generation of hierarchical clustering methods. Our code is made publicly available
at https://github.com/PerretB/ultrametric-fitting.

1

Introduction

Ultrametrics provide a natural way to describe a recursive partitioning of data into increasingly
finer clusters, also known as hierarchical clustering [1]. Ultrametrics are intuitively represented by
dendrograms, i.e., rooted trees whose leaves correspond to data points, and whose internal nodes
represent the clusters of its descendant leaves. In topology, this corresponds to a metric space in
which the usual triangle inequality is strengthened by the ultrametric inequality, so that every triple of
points forms an isosceles triangle, with the two equal sides at least as long as the third side. The main
question investigated in this article is: « How well can we construct an ultrametric to fit the given
dissimilarity data? » This is what we refer to as ultrametric fitting.
Ultrametric fitting can be traced back to the early work on numerical taxonomy [2] in the context of
phylogenetics [3]. Several well-known algorithms originated in this field, such as single linkage [4],
average linkage [5], and Ward method [6]. Nowadays, there exists a large literature on ultrametric
fitting, which can be roughly divided in four categories: agglomerative and divisive greedy heuristics
[7–13], integer linear programming [14–16], continuous relaxations [17–20], and probabilistic
formulations [21–23]. Our work belongs to the family of continuous relaxations.
The most popular methods for ultrametric fitting probably belong to the family of agglomerative
heuristics. They follow a bottom-up approach, in which the given dissimilarity data are sequentially
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

