Unsupervised Discovery of Temporal Structure in
Noisy Data with Dynamical Components Analysis

David G. Clark∗,1,2 Jesse A. Livezey∗,2,3 Kristofer E. Bouchard2,3,4
dgc2138@cumc.columbia.edu jlivezey@lbl.gov kebouchard@lbl.gov
∗
Equal contribution.
1
Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Columbia University
2
Biological Systems and Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
3
Redwood Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, University of California, Berkeley
4
Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Linear dimensionality reduction methods are commonly used to extract lowdimensional structure from high-dimensional data. However, popular methods
disregard temporal structure, rendering them prone to extracting noise rather than
meaningful dynamics when applied to time series data. At the same time, many
successful unsupervised learning methods for temporal, sequential and spatial data
extract features which are predictive of their surrounding context. Combining these
approaches, we introduce Dynamical Components Analysis (DCA), a linear dimensionality reduction method which discovers a subspace of high-dimensional time
series data with maximal predictive information, defined as the mutual information
between the past and future. We test DCA on synthetic examples and demonstrate its superior ability to extract dynamical structure compared to commonly
used linear methods. We also apply DCA to several real-world datasets, showing
that the dimensions extracted by DCA are more useful than those extracted by
other methods for predicting future states and decoding auxiliary variables. Overall, DCA robustly extracts dynamical structure in noisy, high-dimensional data
while retaining the computational efficiency and geometric interpretability of linear
dimensionality reduction methods.

1

Introduction

Extracting meaningful structure from noisy, high-dimensional data in an unsupervised manner
is a fundamental problem in many domains including neuroscience, physics, econometrics and
climatology. In the case of time series data, e.g., the spiking activity of a network of neurons or
the time-varying prices of many stocks, one often wishes to extract features which capture the
dynamics underlying the system which generated the data. Such dynamics are often expected to
be low-dimensional, reflecting the fact that the system has fewer effective degrees of freedom than
observed variables. For instance, in neuroscience, recordings of 100s of neurons during simple stimuli
or behaviors generally contain only ∼10 relevant dimensions [1]. In such cases, dimensionality
reduction methods may be used to uncover the low-dimensional dynamical structure.
Linear dimensionality reduction methods are popular since they are computationally efficient, often
reducing to generalized eigenvalue or simple optimization problems, and geometrically interpretable,
since the high- and low-dimensional variables are related by a simple change of basis [2]. Analyzing
the new basis can provide insight into the relationship between the high- and low-dimensional
DCA code is available at: https://github.com/BouchardLab/DynamicalComponentsAnalysis
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

