On the Inductive Bias of Neural Tangent Kernels

Julien Mairal
Inria∗
julien.mairal@inria.fr

Alberto Bietti
Inria∗
alberto.bietti@inria.fr

Abstract
State-of-the-art neural networks are heavily over-parameterized, making the optimization algorithm a crucial ingredient for learning predictive models with good
generalization properties. A recent line of work has shown that in a certain overparameterized regime, the learning dynamics of gradient descent are governed by
a certain kernel obtained at initialization, called the neural tangent kernel. We
study the inductive bias of learning in such a regime by analyzing this kernel and
the corresponding function space (RKHS). In particular, we study smoothness,
approximation, and stability properties of functions with finite norm, including
stability to image deformations in the case of convolutional networks, and compare
to other known kernels for similar architectures.

1

Introduction

The large number of parameters in state-of-the-art deep neural networks makes them very expressive,
with the ability to approximate large classes of functions [26, 41]. Since many networks can
potentially fit a given dataset, the optimization method, typically a variant of gradient descent, plays
a crucial role in selecting a model that generalizes well [39].
A recent line of work [2, 16, 20, 21, 27, 30, 54] has shown that when training deep networks in a
certain over-parameterized regime, the dynamics of gradient descent behave like those of a linear
model on (non-linear) features determined at initialization. In the over-parameterization limit, these
features correspond to a kernel known as the neural tangent kernel. In particular, in the case of
a regression loss, the obtained model behaves similarly to a minimum norm kernel least squares
solution, suggesting that this kernel may play a key role in determining the inductive bias of the
learning procedure and its generalization properties. While it is still not clear if this regime is at play
in state-of-the-art deep networks, there is some evidence that this phenomenon of “lazy training” [16],
where weights only move very slightly during training, may be relevant for early stages of training and
for the outmost layers of deep networks [29, 53], motivating a better understanding of its properties.
In this paper, we study the inductive bias of this regime by studying properties of functions in the
space associated with the neural tangent kernel for a given architecture (that is, the reproducing kernel
Hilbert space, or RKHS). Such kernels can be defined recursively using certain choices of dot-product
kernels at each layer that depend on the activation function. For the convolutional case with rectified
linear unit (ReLU) activations and arbitrary patches and linear pooling operations, we show that the
NTK can be expressed through kernel feature maps defined in a tree-structured hierarchy.
We study smoothness and stability properties of the kernel mapping for two-layer networks and
CNNs, which control the variations of functions in the RKHS. In particular, a useful inductive bias
when dealing with natural signals such as images is stability of the output to deformations of the
input, such as translations or small rotations. A precise notion of stability to deformations was
proposed by Mallat [35], and was later studied in [11] in the context of CNN architectures, showing
∗

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

