Precision-Recall Balanced Topic Modelling

Seppo Virtanen
University of Cambridge
sjv35@cam.ac.uk

Mark Girolami
University of Cambridge and The Alan Turing Institute
mag92@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Topic models are becoming increasingly relevant probabilistic models for dimensionality reduction of text data, inferring topics that capture meaningful themes of
frequently co-occurring terms. We formulate topic modelling as an information
retrieval task, where the goal is, based on the latent topic representation, to capture relevant term co-occurrence patterns. We evaluate performance for this task
rigorously with regard to two types of errors, false negatives and positives, based
on the well-known precision-recall trade-off and provide a statistical model that
allows the user to balance between the contributions of the different error types.
When the user focuses solely on the contribution of false negatives ignoring false
positives altogether our proposed model reduces to a standard topic model. Extensive experiments demonstrate the proposed approach is effective and infers more
coherent topics than existing related approaches.

1

Introduction

Topic models are ubiquitous probabilistic models for text data suitable for corpus exploration and
summarisation as well as for predictive tasks (Blei et al., 2003). The inferred topics are deemed to
be useful and meaningful for human interpretation. Accordingly, there is a strong need to develop
inexpensive quantitative evaluation methods to assess the quality of the inferred topics efficiently
and accurately, because human-based evaluations are slow and elaborate.
Mimno et al. (2011) present a useful data-based quantitative evaluation criterion for measuring quality of the topics. The measure relies on pair-wise word co-occurrence statistics computed efficiently
over the corpus and agrees well with human-based topical quality evaluations. Wallach et al. (2009)
present evaluation methods based on predictive performance (held-out data likelihood). However,
Chang et al. (2009) demonstrate with large-scale human-based evaluations that predictive likelihood
may not be a useful criterion; models with better predictive ability may infer less semantically meaningful topics. The finding undermines the core modelling assumptions, complicating development
of human-interpretable models. Even though many authors (Arora et al., 2012; AlSumait et al.,
2009; Griffiths et al., 2004; Minka and Lafferty, 2002; Teh and Jordan, 2010) have proposed particular topic model variants, based on different modelling assumptions, empirically reporting improved
topic coherences, all these assumptions may not be interpreted or justified with a robust quantitative
evaluation framework.
In this work, we formulate topic modelling as a novel information retrieval task, where the goal
is to retrieve recurring word co-occurrence patterns based on the latent topic representation. We
quantify the task performance regarding two types of errors, false negatives (referred to as, misses)
and false positives, measured via concepts of recall and precision, respectively. We present a novel
topic model that allows the user to trade-off between contributions of the two error types efficiently,
and show that taking precision also into account significantly improves topic quality. We show
that standard topic models emphasise recall, penalising only misses, at the expense of discarding
precision altogether not taking into account false positives.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

