ETNet: Error Transition Network for Arbitrary
Style Transfer

Chunjin Song∗
Shenzhen University
songchunjin1990@gmail.com
Yang Zhou†
Shenzhen University
zhouyangvcc@gmail.com

Zhijie Wu∗
Shenzhen University
wzj.micker@gmail.com

Minglun Gong
University of Guelph
minglun@uoguelph.ca

Hui Huang†
Shenzhen University
hhzhiyan@gmail.com

Abstract
Numerous valuable efforts have been devoted to achieving arbitrary style transfer
since the seminal work of Gatys et al. However, existing state-of-the-art approaches
often generate insufficiently stylized results under challenging cases. We believe a
fundamental reason is that these approaches try to generate the stylized result in a
single shot and hence fail to fully satisfy the constraints on semantic structures in
the content images and style patterns in the style images. Inspired by the works
on error-correction, instead, we propose a self-correcting model to predict what is
wrong with the current stylization and refine it accordingly in an iterative manner.
For each refinement, we transit the error features across both the spatial and scale
domain and invert the processed features into a residual image, with a network we
call Error Transition Network (ETNet). The proposed model improves over the
state-of-the-art methods with better semantic structures and more adaptive style
pattern details. Various qualitative and quantitative experiments show that the key
concept of both progressive strategy and error-correction leads to better results.
Code and models are available at https://github.com/zhijieW94/ETNet.

1

Introduction

Style transfer is a challenging image manipulation task, whose goal is to apply the extracted style
patterns to content images. Starting from the works on neural network based generative models [17,
10, 2, 3], the seminal work of Gatys et al. [9] made the first effort to achieve stylization using
neural networks with surprising results. The basic assumption they made is that the feature map
output by a deep encoder represents the content information, while the correlations between the
feature channels of multiple deep layers encode the style info. Following Gatys et al. [9], subsequent
works [8, 16, 26, 5, 31] try to address problems in quality, generalization and efficiency through
replacing the time-consuming optimization process with feed-forward neural networks.
In this paper, we focus on how to transfer arbitrary styles with one single model. The existing
methods achieve this goal by simple statistic matching [13, 21], local patch exchange [6] and their
combinations [24, 28]. Even with their current success, these methods still suffer from artifacts, such
as the distortions to both semantic structures and detailed style patterns. This is because, when there
is large variation between content and style images, it is difficult to use the network to synthesize the
stylized outputs in a single step; see e.g., Figure 1(a).
∗
†

Equal contribution, in alphabetic order.
Corresponding authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

