Learning to Control Self-Assembling Morphologies:
A Study of Generalization via Modularity

Deepak Pathak∗
UC Berkeley

Chris Lu∗
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley

Phillip Isola
MIT

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Contemporary sensorimotor learning approaches typically start with an existing
complex agent (e.g., a robotic arm), which they learn to control. In contrast, this
paper investigates a modular co-evolution strategy: a collection of primitive agents
learns to dynamically self-assemble into composite bodies while also learning to
coordinate their behavior to control these bodies. Each primitive agent consists
of a limb with a motor attached at one end. Limbs may choose to link up to form
collectives. When a limb initiates a link-up action, and there is another limb nearby,
the latter is magnetically connected to the ‘parent’ limb’s motor. This forms a
new single agent, which may further link with other agents. In this way, complex
morphologies can emerge, controlled by a policy whose architecture is in explicit
correspondence with the morphology. We evaluate the performance of these dynamic and modular agents in simulated environments. We demonstrate better generalization to test-time changes both in the environment, as well as in the structure
of the agent, compared to static and monolithic baselines. Project video and code
are available at https://pathak22.github.io/modular-assemblies/.

1

Introduction

Possibly the single most pivotal event in the history of evolution was the point when single-celled
organisms switched from always competing with each other for resources to sometimes cooperating,
first by forming colonies, and later by merging into multicellular organisms [1]. These modular selfassemblies were successful because they combined the high adaptability of single-celled organisms
while making it possible for vastly more complex behaviors to emerge. Indeed, one could argue that
it is this modular design that allowed the multicellular organisms to successfully adapt, increase in
complexity, and generalize to the constantly changing environment of prehistoric Earth. Like many
researchers before us [13, 20, 23, 31, 32], we are inspired by the biology of multicellular evolution
as a model for emergent complexity in artificial agents. Unlike most previous work, however, we
are primarily focused on modularity as a way of improving adaptability and generalization to novel
test-time scenarios.
In this paper, we present a study of modular self-assemblies of primitive agents — “limbs” — which
can link up to solve a task. Limbs have the option to bind together by a magnet that connects their
morphologies within the magnetic range (Figure 1), and when they do so, they pass messages and
share rewards. Each limb comes with a simple neural net that controls the torque applied to its joints.
Linking and unlinking are treated as dynamic actions so that the limb assembly can change shape
within an episode. A similar setup has previously been explored in robotics as “self-reconfiguring
modular robots" [21]. However, unlike prior work on such robots, where the control policies are
hand-defined, we show how to learn the policies and study the generalization properties that emerge.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

