MaxGap Bandit: Adaptive Algorithms for
Approximate Ranking
Sumeet Katariya ⇤
UW-Madison and Amazon
sumeetsk@gmail.com

Ardhendu Tripathy ⇤
UW-Madison
astripathy@wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
UW-Madison
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of adaptively sampling from K distributions (arms)
in order to identify the largest gap between any two adjacent means. We call
this the MaxGap-bandit problem. This problem arises naturally in approximate
ranking, noisy sorting, outlier detection, and top-arm identification in bandits. The
key novelty of the MaxGap bandit problem is that it aims to adaptively determine
the natural partitioning of the distributions into a subset with larger means and a
subset with smaller means, where the split is determined by the largest gap rather
than a pre-specified rank or threshold. Estimating an arm’s gap requires sampling
its neighboring arms in addition to itself, and this dependence results in a novel
hardness parameter that characterizes the sample complexity of the problem. We
propose elimination and UCB-style algorithms and show that they are minimax
optimal. Our experiments show that the UCB-style algorithms require 6-8x fewer
samples than non-adaptive sampling to achieve the same error.

1

Introduction

Consider an algorithm that can draw i.i.d. samples from K unknown distributions. The goal is
to partially rank the distributions according to their (unknown) means. This model encompasses
many problems including best-arms identification (BAI) in multi-armed bandits, noisy sorting and
ranking, and outlier detection. Partial ranking is often preferred to complete ranking because correctly
ordering distributions with nearly equal means is an expensive task (in terms of number of required
samples). Moreover, in many applications it is arguably unnecessary to resolve the order of such
close distributions. This observation motivates algorithms that aim to recover a partial ordering of
groups of distributions having similar means. This entails identifying large “gaps” in the ordered
sequence of means. The focus of this paper is the fundamental problem of finding the largest gap by
sampling adaptively. Identification of the largest gap separates the distributions into two groups, and
recursive application can identify any desired number of groupings in a partial order.
As an illustration, consider a subset of images from the Chicago streetview dataset [17] shown in
Fig. 1. In this study, people were asked to judge how safe each scene looks [18], and a larger mean
indicates a safer looking scene. While each person has a different sense of how safe an image looks,
when aggregated there are clear trends in the safety scores (denoted by µ(i) ) of the images. Fig. 1
schematically shows the distribution of scores given by people as a bell curve below each image.
Assuming the sample means are close to their true means, one can nominally classify them as ‘safe’,
‘maybe unsafe’ and ‘unsafe’ as indicated in Fig. 1. Here we have implicitly used the large gaps
µ(2) µ(3) and µ(4) µ(5) to mark the boundaries. Note that finding the safest image (BAI) is hard as
we need a lot of human responses to decide the larger mean between the two rightmost distributions;
it is also arguably unnecessary. A common way to address this problem is to specify a tolerance ✏ [7],
⇤

Authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

