Zero-shot Learning via Simultaneous Generating and
Learning

Hyeonwoo Yu
Beomhee Lee
Automation and Systems Research Institute (ASRI)
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Seoul National University
{bgus2000,bhlee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
To overcome the absence of training data for unseen classes, conventional zero-shot
learning approaches mainly train their model on seen datapoints and leverage
the semantic descriptions for both seen and unseen classes. Beyond exploiting
relations between classes of seen and unseen, we present a deep generative model
to provide the model with experience about both seen and unseen classes. Based
on the variational auto-encoder with class-specific multi-modal prior, the proposed
method learns the conditional distribution of seen and unseen classes. In order to
circumvent the need for samples of unseen classes, we treat the non-existing data
as missing examples. That is, our network aims to find optimal unseen datapoints
and model parameters, by iteratively following the generating and learning strategy.
Since we obtain the conditional generative model for both seen and unseen classes,
classification as well as generation can be performed directly without any offthe-shell classifiers. In experimental results, we demonstrate that the proposed
generating and learning strategy makes the model achieve the outperforming results
compared to that trained only on the seen classes, and also to the several state-ofthe-art methods.

1

Introduction

The combination of the large amount of data and deep learning finds the usage in various fields such
as machine learning and artificial intelligence. However, deep learning as a non-linear regression
tool based on statistics mostly suffers from the insufficient or non-existing training data, which is
the usual case and should be overcome for autonomous learning systems. The advantage of deep
learning, that learns reliable models on plenty of labeled training datapoints, becomes a curse in this
scenario, since the model loses the generalization aspects with lack of training data. This severely
interrupts the scalability to unseen classes of which training samples simply does not exist.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a learning paradigm that proposes an elegant way to fulfill this desideratum
by utilizing semantic descriptions of seen and unseen classes [8, 30]. These descriptions are usually
assumed to be given as the form of the class embedding vectors or textual descriptions of each
class. By assuming that seen and unseen classes share the same class attribute space, transferring the
knowledge from the seen to unseen can be achieved by training models on seen samples and plugging
in embedding vectors of unseen classes. Based on this concept, previous works find a relation between
class embedding vectors and given datapoints of classes, by learning a projection from feature vectors
to the class attribute space [16, 22, 19]. Similar works can be conducted by learning a visual-semantic
mapping using either shallow or deep embeddings, thereby handle the unseen datapoints via an
indirect manner [35, 36, 17, 21, 3, 34]. These approaches have shown promising results. However,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

