Unsupervised Object Segmentation by Redrawing

Mickaël Chen
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6, F-75005, Paris, France
mickael.chen@lip6.fr
Thierry Artières
Aix Marseille Univ, Université de Toulon, CNRS, LIS, Marseille, France
Ecole Centrale Marseille
thierry.artieres@centrale-marseille.fr
Ludovic Denoyer
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
denoyer@fb.com

Abstract
Object segmentation is a crucial problem that is usually solved by using supervised
learning approaches over very large datasets composed of both images and corresponding object masks. Since the masks have to be provided at pixel level, building
such a dataset for any new domain can be very time-consuming. We present ReDO,
a new model able to extract objects from images without any annotation in an unsupervised way. It relies on the idea that it should be possible to change the textures
or colors of the objects without changing the overall distribution of the dataset.
Following this assumption, our approach is based on an adversarial architecture
where the generator is guided by an input sample: given an image, it extracts the
object mask, then redraws a new object at the same location. The generator is
controlled by a discriminator that ensures that the distribution of generated images
is aligned to the original one. We experiment with this method on different datasets
and demonstrate the good quality of extracted masks.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation aims at splitting a given image into a set of non-overlapping regions corresponding to the main components in the image. It has been studied for a long time in an unsupervised
setting using prior knowledge on the nature of the region one wants to detect using e.g. normalized
cuts and graph-based methods. Recently the rise of deep neural networks and their spectacular
performances on many difficult computer vision tasks have led to revisit the image segmentation
problem using deep networks in a fully supervised setting [5, 20, 58], a problem referred as semantic
image segmentation.
Although such modern methods allowed learning successful semantic segmentation systems, their
training requires large-scale labeled datasets with usually a need for pixel-level annotations. This
feature limits the use of such techniques for many image segmentation tasks for which no such large
scale supervision is available. To overcome this drawback, we follow here a very recent trend that
aims at revisiting the unsupervised image segmentation problem with new tools and new ideas from
the recent history and success of deep learning [55] and from the recent results of supervised semantic
segmentation [5, 20, 58].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

