Curriculum-guided Hindsight Experience Replay

Meng Fang1∗, Tianyi Zhou2∗, Yali Du3 , Lei Han1 , Zhengyou Zhang1
1
Tencent Robotics X
2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
3
University College London

Abstract
In off-policy deep reinforcement learning, it is usually hard to collect sufficient
successful experiences with sparse rewards to learn from. Hindsight experience
replay (HER) enables an agent to learn from failures by treating the achieved state
of a failed experience as a pseudo goal. However, not all the failed experiences
are equally useful to different learning stages, so it is not efficient to replay all of
them or uniform samples of them. In this paper, we propose to 1) adaptively select
the failed experiences for replay according to the proximity to true goals and the
curiosity of exploration over diverse pseudo goals, and 2) gradually change the
proportion of the goal-proximity and the diversity-based curiosity in the selection
criteria: we adopt a human-like learning strategy that enforces more curiosity in
earlier stages and changes to larger goal-proximity later. This “Goal-and-Curiositydriven Curriculum Learning” leads to “Curriculum-guided HER (CHER)”, which
adaptively and dynamically controls the exploration-exploitation trade-off during
the learning process via hindsight experience selection. We show that CHER
improves the state of the art in challenging robotics environments.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has been an effective framework addressing a rich repertoire of
complex control problems. In simulated domains, deep RL can train agents to perform a diverse array
of challenging tasks [Mnih et al., 2015, Lillicrap et al., 2015, Duan et al., 2016]. In order to train
reliable agents, it is critical to not only design a reward faithfully reflecting how successful the task is,
but also (re)shape the reward [Ng et al., 1999] to provide dense feedback that can efficiently guide
the policy optimization towards a better solution in the given environment. Unfortunately, many of
the capabilities demonstrated by the current reward engineering are often limited to specific tasks in
specified environments. Moreover, the quality of reward shaping heavily relies on both the choice of
RL algorithm and domain-specific knowledge. For situations where we do not know what admissible
behavior may look like, for example, using LEGO bricks to build a desired architecture, it is difficult
to apply reward engineering. Therefore, it is essential (but also challenging) to develop smarter and
more general algorithms which can directly learn from unshaped and usually sparse reward signals,
where the sparsity is caused by the insufficiency of successful experiences (which are expensive to
collect). Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) [Andrychowicz et al., 2017] proposes to additionally
leverage the rich repository of the failed experiences, by replacing the desired (true) goals of training
trajectories with the achieved goals of the failed experiences. With this modification, any failed
experience can have a nonnegative reward.
The achieved goals of failed experiences can be significantly different to each other: their proximity to
the desired goal varies so learning how to reach a pseudo goal distant from the true one cannot directly
help the targeted task; they also carry different information about the manipulation environment.
∗

Correspondence to: Meng Fang <mfang@tencent.com> and Tianyi Zhou <tianyizh@uw.edu>.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

