Exploiting Local and Global Structure for Point
Cloud Semantic Segmentation with Contextual Point
Representations

Xu Wang
College of Computer Science
and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
wangxu@szu.edu.cn

Jingming He
College of Computer Science
and Software Engineering
Shenzhen University
Shenzhen, China
hejingming519@gmail.com

Lin Ma∗
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, China
forest.linma@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose one novel model for point cloud semantic segmentation,
which exploits both the local and global structures within the point cloud based on
the contextual point representations. Specifically, we enrich each point representation by performing one novel gated fusion on the point itself and its contextual
points. Afterwards, based on the enriched representation, we propose one novel
graph pointnet module, relying on the graph attention block to dynamically compose and update each point representation within the local point cloud structure.
Finally, we resort to the spatial-wise and channel-wise attention strategies to exploit
the point cloud global structure and thereby yield the resulting semantic label for
each point. Extensive results on the public point cloud databases, namely the
S3DIS and ScanNet datasets, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model,
outperforming the state-of-the-art approaches. Our code for this paper is available
at https://github.com/fly519/ELGS.

1

Introduction

The point cloud captured by 3D scanners has attracted more and more research interests, especially for
the point cloud understanding tasks, including the 3D object classification [13, 14, 10, 11], 3D object
detection [21, 27], and 3D semantic segmentation [25, 13, 14, 23, 10]. 3D semantic segmentation,
aiming at providing class labels for each point in the 3D space, is a prevalent challenging problem.
First, the points captured by the 3D scanners are usually sparse, which hinders the design of one
effective and efficient deep model for semantic segmentation. Second, the points always appear
unstructured and unordered. As such, the relationship between the points is hard to be captured and
modeled.
As points are not in a regular format, some existing approaches first transform the point clouds into
regular 3D voxel grids or collections of images, and then feed them into traditional convolutional
neural network (CNN) to yield the resulting semantic segmentation [25, 5, 22]. Such a transformation
process can somehow capture the structure information of the points and thereby exploit their
relationships. However, such approaches, especially in the format of 3D volumetric data, require
high memory and computation cost. Recently, another thread of deep learning architectures on point
clouds, namely PointNet [13] and PointNet++ [14], is proposed to handle the points in an efficient
and effective way. Specifically, PointNet learns a spatial encoding of each point and then aggregates
all individual point features as one global representation. However, PointNet does not consider the
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

