Demystifying Black-box Models with
Symbolic Metamodels

Ahmed M. Alaa
ECE Department
UCLA
ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
UCLA, University of Cambridge, and
Alan Turing Institute
{mv472@cam.ac.uk,mihaela@ee.ucla.edu}

Abstract
Understanding the predictions of a machine learning model can be as crucial as the
model’s accuracy in many application domains. However, the black-box nature of
most highly-accurate (complex) models is a major hindrance to their interpretability.
To address this issue, we introduce the symbolic metamodeling framework — a
general methodology for interpreting predictions by converting “black-box” models
into “white-box” functions that are understandable to human subjects. A symbolic
metamodel is a model of a model, i.e., a surrogate model of a trained (machine
learning) model expressed through a succinct symbolic expression that comprises
familiar mathematical functions and can be subjected to symbolic manipulation. We
parameterize metamodels using Meijer G-functions — a class of complex-valued
contour integrals that depend on real-valued parameters, and whose solutions reduce
to familiar algebraic, analytic and closed-form functions for different parameter
settings. This parameterization enables efficient optimization of metamodels via
gradient descent, and allows discovering the functional forms learned by a model
with minimal a priori assumptions. We show that symbolic metamodeling provides
a generalized framework for model interpretation — many common forms of model
explanation can be analytically derived from a symbolic metamodel.

1

Introduction

The ability to interpret the predictions of a machine learning model brings about user trust and supports
understanding of the underlying processes being modeled. In many application domains, such as the
medical and legislative domains [1–3], model interpretability can be a crucial requirement for the
deployment of machine learning, since a model’s predictions would inform critical decision-making.
Model explanations can also be central in other domains, such as social and natural sciences [4, 5],
where the primary utility of a model is to help understand an underlying phenomenon, rather than
merely making predictions about it. Unfortunately, most state-of-the-art models — such as ensemble
models, kernel methods, and neural networks — are perceived as being complex “black-boxes”, the
predictions of which are too hard to be interpreted by human subjects [1, 6–16].
Symbolic metamodeling. In this paper, we approach the problem of model interpretation by introducing the symbolic metamodeling framework for expressing black-box models in terms of transparent
mathematical equations that can be easily understood and analyzed by human subjects (Section 2).
The proposed metamodeling procedure takes as an input a (trained) model — represented by a blackbox function f (x) that maps a feature x to a prediction y — and retrieves a symbolic metamodel
g(x), which is meant to be an interpretable mathematical abstraction of f (x). The metamodel g(x)
is a tractable symbolic expression comprising a finite number of familiar functions (e.g., polynomial,
analytic, algebraic, or closed-form expressions) that are combined via elementary arithmetic operations (i.e., addition and multiplication), which makes it easily understood by inspection, and can be
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

