Learning to Screen

Alon Cohen∗

Avinatan Hassidim†

Haim Kaplan‡

Yishay Mansour§

Shay Moran¶

Abstract
Imagine a large firm with multiple departments that plans a large recruitment.
Candidates arrive one-by-one, and for each candidate the firm decides, based on her
data (CV, skills, experience, etc), whether to summon her for an interview. The firm
wants to recruit the best candidates while minimizing the number of interviews.
We model such scenarios as an assignment problem between items (candidates)
and categories (departments): the items arrive one-by-one in an online manner,
and upon processing each item the algorithm decides, based on its value and the
categories it can be matched with, whether to retain or discard it (this decision is
irrevocable). The goal is to retain as few items as possible while guaranteeing that
the set of retained items contains an optimal matching.
We consider two variants of this problem: (i) in the first variant it is assumed that
the n items are drawn independently from an unknown distribution D. (ii) In the
second variant it is assumed that before the process starts, the algorithm has an
access to a training set of n items drawn independently from the same unknown
distribution (e.g. data of candidates from previous recruitment seasons). We give
near-optimal bounds on the best-possible number of retained items in each of these
variants. These results demonstrate that one can retain exponentially less items in
the second variant (with the training set).
Our algorithms and analysis utilize ideas and techniques from statistical learning
theory and from discrete algorithms.

1

Introduction

Matching is the bread-and-butter of many real-life problems from the fields of computer science,
operations research, game theory, and economics. Some examples include job scheduling where we
assign jobs to machines, economic markets where we allocate products to buyers, online advertising
where we assign advertisers to ad slots, assigning medical interns to hospitals, and many more.
One particular example that motivates this work is the following example from labor markets. Imagine
a firm that is planning a large recruitment. Candidates arrive one-by-one and the HR department
immediately decides whether to summon them for an interview. Moreover, the firm has multiple
departments, each requiring different skills and having a different target number of hires. Different
employees have different subsets of the required skills, and thus fit only certain departments and
with a certain quality. The firm’s HR department, following the interviews, decides which candidates
to recruit and to which departments to assign them. The HR department has to maximize the total
quality of the hired employees such that each department gets its required number of hires with
the required skills. In addition, the HR uses data from the previous recruitment season in order to
minimize the number of interviews while not compromising the quality of the solution.
∗

Technion—Israel Inst. of Technology and Google Research. aloncohen@technion.ac.il
Bar-Ilan University and Google Research. avinatanh@gmail.com
‡
Tel-Aviv University and Google Research. haimk@tau.ac.il
§
Tel-Aviv University and Google Research. mansour.yishay@gmail.com
¶
Princeton University. shaymoran1@gmail.com. This work was done while the author was working at
Google Research.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

