Conditional Structure Generation through
Graph Variational Generative Adversarial Nets

Carl Yang∗, Peiye Zhuang, Wenhan Shi, Alan Luu, Pan Li
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801
{jiyang3, peiye, wenhans2, alanluu2, panli2}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Graph embedding has been intensively studied recently, due to the advance of
various neural network models. Theoretical analyses and empirical studies have
pushed forward the translation of discrete graph structures into distributed representation vectors, but seldom considered the reverse direction, i.e., generation of
graphs from given related context spaces. Particularly, since graphs often become
more meaningful when associated with semantic contexts (e.g., social networks
of certain communities, gene networks of certain diseases), the ability to infer
graph structures according to given semantic conditions could be of great value.
While existing graph generative models only consider graph structures without
semantic contexts, we formulate the novel problem of conditional structure generation, and propose a novel unified model of graph variational generative adversarial
nets (C OND G EN) to handle the intrinsic challenges of flexible context-structure
conditioning and permutation-invariant generation. Extensive experiments on two
deliberately created benchmark datasets of real-world context-enriched networks
demonstrate the supreme effectiveness and generalizability of C OND G EN.

1

Introduction

Graphs (networks) provide a generic way to model real-world relational data, such as entities in
knowledge graphs, users in social networks, genes in regulatory networks, etc. It is thus critical
to study the generation of graph structures, which is fundamental for the understanding of their
underlying functional components and creation of meaningful structures with desired properties.
Nowadays, contextual data like attributes and labels are becoming ubiquitous in networks [44], the
rich semantics of which may well correspond to particular graph structures. This brings up a natural
but challenging question: Can we generate graph structures w.r.t. given semantic conditions?
In this work, we propose and study the novel problem of conditional structure generation, whose goal
is to learn and generate graph structures under various semantic conditions indicated by contextual
attributes or labels in the networks. Figure 1 shows a toy example of biomedical networks, where the
interactions of certain genes and proteins may follow related but different patterns for individuals
with different diseases (e.g., cancers in different body parts and stages). Due to limited observations,
network data of some diseases may be more scarce (only one network observed for Case 1) or
totally missing (no network observed for Case 2), while those of other closely related diseases are
more available (2-3 networks observed for other cases). Since the diseases are semantically related,
their corresponding gene networks may well share certain graph structures. Thus, by efficiently
exploring the possible correspondence between network contexts and structures, an ideal model
should be able to generate more similar graphs for conditions with scarce observed graphs (Task 1),
and generate meaningful novel graphs for conditions without any observed graphs (Task 2). The
problem is important because the generated networks can be valuable in various subsequent studies
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

