Continuous Hierarchical Representations with
Poincaré Variational Auto-Encoders
Emile Mathieu†
emile.mathieu@stats.ox.ac.uk

Charline Le Lan†
charline.lelan@stats.ox.ac.uk

Chris J. Maddison†⇤
cmaddis@stats.ox.ac.uk

Ryota Tomioka‡
ryoto@microsoft.com

Yee Whye Teh†⇤
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk
† Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, United Kingdom
⇤ DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
‡ Microsoft Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
The variational auto-encoder (VAE) is a popular method for learning a generative
model and embeddings of the data. Many real datasets are hierarchically structured.
However, traditional VAEs map data in a Euclidean latent space which cannot
efficiently embed tree-like structures. Hyperbolic spaces with negative curvature
can. We therefore endow VAEs with a Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic geometry
as a latent space and rigorously derive the necessary methods to work with two
main Gaussian generalisations on that space. We empirically show better generalisation to unseen data than the Euclidean counterpart, and can qualitatively and
quantitatively better recover hierarchical structures.

1 Introduction
Learning useful representations from unlabelled
raw sensory observations, which are often highdimensional, is a problem of significant importance in
machine learning. Variational auto-encoders (VAEs)
(Kingma and Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
are a popular approach to this: they are probabilistic
generative models composed of an encoder stochastically embedding observations in a low dimensional
latent space Z, and a decoder generating observations
x 2 X from encodings z 2 Z. After training, the encodings constitute a low-dimensional representation
of the original raw observations, which can be used
as features for a downstream task (e.g. Huang and
LeCun, 2006; Coates et al., 2011) or be interpretable
for their own sake. VAEs are therefore of interest for
representation learning (Bengio et al., 2013), a field
which aims to learn good representations, e.g. inter- Figure 1: A regular tree isometrically embedpretable representations, ones yielding better gener- ded in the Poincaré disc. Red curves are same
length geodesics, i.e. "straight lines".
alisation, or ones useful for downstream tasks.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

