Importance Weighted Hierarchical
Variational Inference
Artem Sobolev
Samsung AI Center Moscow, Russia
asobolev@bayesgroup.ru

Dmitry Vetrov
Samsung AI Center Moscow, Russia
NRU HSE∗, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
Variational Inference is a powerful tool in the Bayesian modeling toolkit, however, its effectiveness is determined by the expressivity of the utilized variational
distributions in terms of their ability to match the true posterior distribution. In
turn, the expressivity of the variational family is largely limited by the requirement
of having a tractable density function. To overcome this roadblock, we introduce
a new family of variational upper bounds on a log marginal density in the case
of hierarchical models (also known as latent variable models). We then derive a
family of increasingly tighter variational lower bounds on the otherwise intractable
standard evidence lower bound for hierarchical variational distributions, enabling
the use of more expressive approximate posteriors. We show that previously known
methods, such as Hierarchical Variational Models, Semi-Implicit Variational Inference and Doubly Semi-Implicit Variational Inference can be seen as special cases
of the proposed approach, and empirically demonstrate superior performance of
the proposed method in a set of experiments.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Inference is an important statistical tool. However, exact inference is possible only in a
small class of conjugate problems, and for many practically interesting cases, one has to resort to
Approximate Inference techniques. Variational Inference (Hinton and van Camp, 1993; Waterhouse
et al., 1996; Wainwright et al., 2008) being one of them is an efficient and scalable approach that
gained a lot of interest in recent years due to advances in Neural Networks.
However, the efficiency and accuracy of Variational Inference heavily depend on how close an
approximate posterior is to the true posterior. As a result, Neural Networks’ universal approximation
abilities and great empirical success propelled a lot of interest in employing them as powerful sample
generators that are trained to output samples from approximate posterior when fed some standard
noise as input (Nowozin et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2014; MacKay, 1995). Unfortunately, a
significant obstacle in this direction is a need for a tractable density q(z | x), which in general
requires intractable integration. A theoretically sound approach then is to give tight lower bounds on
the intractable term – the differential entropy of q(z|x), which is easy to recover from upper bounds
on the log marginal density. One such bound was introduced by Agakov and Barber (2004); however
it’s tightness depends on the auxiliary variational distribution. Yin and Zhou (2018) suggested a
multisample surrogate whose quality is controlled by the number of samples.
In this paper we consider hierarchical variational models (Ranganath et al., 2016; Salimans et al.,
2015; Agakov and Barber, 2004) where the approximate posterior q(z | x) is represented as a
Rmixture of tractable distributions q(z|ψ, x) over some tractable mixing distribution q(ψ|x): q(z|x) =
q(z|ψ, x)q(ψ|x)dψ. We show that such variational models contain semi-implicit models where
∗

Samsung-HSE Laboratory, National Research University Higher School of Economics

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

