Near Neighbor: Who is the Fairest of Them All?

Sariel Har-Peled
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL 61801
sariel@illinois.edu

Sepideh Mahabadi
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
mahabadi@ttic.edu

Abstract
In this work we study a fair variant of the near neighbor problem. Namely, given a
set of n points P and a parameter r, the goal is to preprocess the points, such that
given a query point q, any point in the r-neighborhood of the query, i.e., Bpq, rq,
have the same probability of being reported as the near neighbor.
We show that LSH based algorithms can be made fair, without a significant loss
in efficiency. Specifically, we show an algorithm that reports a point in the rneighborhood of a query q with almost
uniform probability. The query time is

proportional to O dnspq.rqQpn, cq , and its space is OpS pn, cqq, where Qpn, cq
and S pn, cq are the query time and space of an LSH algorithm for c-approximate
near neighbor, and dnspq, rq is a function of the local density around q.
Our approach works more generally for sampling uniformly from a sub-collection
of sets of a given collection and can be used in a few other applications. Finally,
we run experiments to show performance of our approach on real data.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, many important decisions, such as college admissions, offering home loans, or estimating the likelihood of recidivism, rely on machine learning algorithms. There is a growing concern about the fairness of the algorithms and creating bias toward a specific population or feature [HPS16, Cho17, MSP16, KLL 17]. While algorithms are not inherently biased, nevertheless,
they may amplify the already existing biases in the data. Hence, this concern has led to the design
of fair algorithms for many different applications, e.g., [DOBD 18, ABD 18, PRW 17, CKLV19,
EJJ 19, OA18, CKLV17, BIO 19, BCN19, KSAM19].
Bias in the data used for training machine learning algorithms is a monumental challenge in creating fair algorithms [HGB 07, TE11, ZVGRG17, Cho17]. Here, we are interested in a somewhat
different problem, of handling the bias introduced by the data-structures used by such algorithms.
Specifically, data-structures may introduce bias in the data stored in them, and the way they answer
queries, because of the way the data is stored and how it is being accessed. Such a defect leads to
selection bias by the algorithms using such data-structures. It is natural to want data-structures that
do not introduce a selection bias into the data when handling queries.
The target as such is to derive data-structures that are bias-neutral. To this end, imagine a datastructure that can return, as an answer to a query, an item out of a set of acceptable answers. The
purpose is then to return uniformly a random item out of the set of acceptable outcomes, without
explicitly computing the whole set of acceptable answers (which might be prohibitively expensive).
Several notions of fairness have been studied, including group fairness1 (where demographics of the
population is preserved in the outcome) and individual fairness (where the goal is to treat individuals
1

The concept is denoted as statistical fairness too, e.g., [Cho17].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

