Theoretical evidence for adversarial robustness
through randomization

Rafael Pinot1,2 Laurent Meunier1,3 Alexandre Araujo1,4
Hisashi Kashima5,6 Florian Yger1 Cédric Gouy-Pailler2 Jamal Atif1
1

Université Paris-Dauphine, PSL Research University, CNRS, LAMSADE, Paris, France
2
Institut LIST, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay 3 Facebook AI Research, Paris, France
4
Wavestone, Paris, France 5 Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 6 RIKEN Center for AIP, Japan

Abstract
This paper investigates the theory of robustness against adversarial attacks. It
focuses on the family of randomization techniques that consist in injecting noise
in the network at inference time. These techniques have proven effective in many
contexts, but lack theoretical arguments. We close this gap by presenting a theoretical analysis of these approaches, hence explaining why they perform well in
practice. More precisely, we make two new contributions. The first one relates
the randomization rate to robustness to adversarial attacks. This result applies for
the general family of exponential distributions, and thus extends and unifies the
previous approaches. The second contribution consists in devising a new upper
bound on the adversarial risk gap of randomized neural networks. We support our
theoretical claims with a set of experiments.

1

Introduction

Adversarial attacks are some of the most puzzling and burning issues in modern machine learning.
An adversarial attack refers to a small, imperceptible change of an input maliciously designed to fool
the result of a machine learning algorithm. Since the seminal work of [42] exhibiting this intriguing
phenomenon in the context of deep learning, a wealth of results have been published on designing
attacks [18, 34, 32, 23, 6, 31] and defenses [18, 35, 20, 29, 39, 27]), or on trying to understand the
very nature of this phenomenon [17, 40, 15, 16]. Most methods remain unsuccessful to defend against
powerful adversaries [6, 28, 1]. Among the defense strategies, randomization has proven effective
in some contexts. It consists in injecting random noise (both during training and inference phases)
inside the network architecture, i.e. at a given layer of the network. Noise can be drawn either from
Gaussian [26, 24, 37], Laplace [24], Uniform [44], or Multinomial [12] distributions. Remarkably,
most of the considered distributions belong to the Exponential family. Albeit these significant efforts,
several theoretical questions remain unanswered. Among these, we tackle the following, for which
we provide principled and theoretically-founded answers:
Q1: To what extent does a noise drawn from the Exponential family preserve robustness
(in a sense to be defined) to adversarial attacks?
A1: We introduce a definition of robustness to adversarial attacks that is suitable to the randomization
defense mechanism. As this mechanism can be described as a non-deterministic querying process,
called probabilistic mapping in the sequel, we propose a formal definition of robustness relying on a
metric/divergence between probability measures. A key question arises then about the appropriate
metric/divergence for our context. This requires tools for comparing divergences w.r.t. the introduced
robustness definition. Renyi divergence turned out to be a measure of choice, since it satisfies most of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

