BIVA: A Very Deep Hierarchy of Latent Variables for
Generative Modeling

Lars Maaløe
Corti
Copenhagen
Denmark
lm@corti.ai

Marco Fraccaro
Unumed
Copenhagen
Denmark
mf@unumed.com

Valentin Liévin & Ole Winther
Technical University of Denmark
Copenhagen
Denmark
{valv,olwi}@dtu.dk

Abstract
With the introduction of the variational autoencoder (VAE), probabilistic latent
variable models have received renewed attention as powerful generative models.
However, their performance in terms of test likelihood and quality of generated
samples has been surpassed by autoregressive models without stochastic units.
Furthermore, flow-based models have recently been shown to be an attractive
alternative that scales well to high-dimensional data. In this paper we close the
performance gap by constructing VAE models that can effectively utilize a deep
hierarchy of stochastic variables and model complex covariance structures. We introduce the Bidirectional-Inference Variational Autoencoder (BIVA), characterized
by a skip-connected generative model and an inference network formed by a bidirectional stochastic inference path. We show that BIVA reaches state-of-the-art test
likelihoods, generates sharp and coherent natural images, and uses the hierarchy of
latent variables to capture different aspects of the data distribution. We observe that
BIVA, in contrast to recent results, can be used for anomaly detection. We attribute
this to the hierarchy of latent variables which is able to extract high-level semantic
features. Finally, we extend BIVA to semi-supervised classification tasks and show
that it performs comparably to state-of-the-art results by generative adversarial
networks.

1

Introduction

One of the key aspirations in recent machine learning research is to build models that understand
the world [24, 40, 11, 57]. Generative models are providing the means to learn from a plethora of
unlabeled data in order to model a complex data distribution, e.g. natural images, text, and audio.
These models are evaluated by their ability to generate data that is similar to the input data distribution
from which they were trained on. The range of applications that come with generative models are
vast, where audio synthesis [55] and semi-supervised classification [38, 31, 44] are examples hereof.
Generative models can be broadly divided into explicit and implicit density models. The generative
adversarial network (GAN) [11] is an example of an implicit model, since it is not possible to procure
a likelihood estimation from this model framework. The focus of this research is instead within
explicit density models, for which a tractable or approximate likelihood estimation can be performed.
The three main classes of powerful explicit density models are autoregressive models [26, 57], flowbased models [8, 9, 21, 16], and probabilistic latent variable models [24, 40, 33]. In recent years
autoregressive models, such as the PixelRNN and the PixelCNN [57, 45], have achieved superior
likelihood performance and flow-based models have proven efficacy on large-scale natural image
generation tasks [21]. However, in the autoregressive models, the runtime performance of generation
is scaling poorly with the complexity of the input distribution. The flow-based models do not possess
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

