Convergent Policy Optimization for Safe
Reinforcement Learning
Ming Yu ⇤

Zhuoran Yang †

Mladen Kolar ‡

Zhaoran Wang §

Abstract
We study the safe reinforcement learning problem with nonlinear function approximation, where policy optimization is formulated as a constrained optimization
problem with both the objective and the constraint being nonconvex functions.
For such a problem, we construct a sequence of surrogate convex constrained
optimization problems by replacing the nonconvex functions locally with convex
quadratic functions obtained from policy gradient estimators. We prove that the
solutions to these surrogate problems converge to a stationary point of the original
nonconvex problem. Furthermore, to extend our theoretical results, we apply our
algorithm to examples of optimal control and multi-agent reinforcement learning
with safety constraints.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning [58] has achieved tremendous success in video games [41, 44, 56, 36, 66]
and board games, such as chess and Go [53, 55, 54], in part due to powerful simulators [8, 62]. In
contrast, due to physical limitations, real-world applications of reinforcement learning methods often
need to take into consideration the safety of the agent [5, 26]. For instance, in expensive robotic
and autonomous driving platforms, it is pivotal to avoid damages and collisions [25, 9]. In medical
applications, we need to consider the switching cost [7].
A popular model of safe reinforcement learning is the constrained Markov decision process (CMDP),
which generalizes the Markov decision process by allowing for inclusion of constraints that model
the concept of safety [3]. In a CMDP, the cost is associated with each state and action experienced
by the agent, and safety is ensured only if the expected cumulative cost is below a certain threshold.
Intuitively, if the agent takes an unsafe action at some state, it will receive a huge cost that punishes
risky attempts. Moreover, by considering the cumulative cost, the notion of safety is defined for the
whole trajectory enabling us to examine the long-term safety of the agent, instead of focusing on
individual state-action pairs. For a CMDP, the goal is to take sequential decisions to achieve the
expected cumulative reward under the safety constraint.
Solving a CMDP can be written as a linear program [3], with the number of variables being the
same as the size of the state and action spaces. Therefore, such an approach is only feasible for the
tabular setting, where we can enumerate all the state-action pairs. For large-scale reinforcement
learning problems, where function approximation is applied, both the objective and constraint of the
CMDP are nonconvex functions of the policy parameter. One common method for solving CMDP
is to formulate an unconstrained saddle-point optimization problem via Lagrangian multipliers and
solve it using policy optimization algorithms [18, 60]. Such an approach suffers the following two
drawbacks:
⇤

The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL. Email: ming93@uchicago.edu.
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
‡
The University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Chicago, IL.
§
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

