Combinatorial Bandits with Relative Feedback
Aadirupa Saha
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
aadirupa@iisc.ac.in

Aditya Gopalan
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
aditya@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We consider combinatorial online learning with subset choices when only relative
feedback information from subsets is available, instead of bandit or semi-bandit
feedback which is absolute. Specifically, we study two regret minimisation problems over subsets of a finite ground set [n], with subset-wise relative preference
information feedback according to the Multinomial logit choice model. In the
first setting, the learner can play subsets of size bounded by a maximum size and
receives top-m rank-ordered feedback, while in the second setting the learner can
play subsets of a fixed size k with a full subset ranking observed as feedback. For
both settings, we devise instance-dependent and order-optimal regret algorithms
n
with regret O( m
ln T ) and O( nk ln T ), respectively. We derive fundamental limits
on the regret performance of online learning with subset-wise preferences, proving
the tightness of our regret guarantees. Our results also show the value of eliciting
more general top-m rank-ordered feedback over single winner feedback (m = 1).
Our theoretical results are corroborated with empirical evaluations.

1

Introduction

Online learning over subsets with absolute or cardinal utility feedback is well-understood in terms of
statistically efficient algorithms for bandits or semi-bandits with large, combinatorial subset action
spaces [15, 31]. In such settings the learner aims to find the subset with highest value, and upon
testing a subset observes either noisy rewards from its constituents or an aggregate reward. In many
natural settings, however, information obtained about the utilities of alternatives chosen is inherently
relative or ordinal, e.g., recommender systems [25, 34], crowdsourcing [16], multi-player game
ranking [22], market research and social surveys [9, 6, 24], and in other systems where humans are
often more inclined to express comparative preferences.
The framework of dueling bandits [43, 46] represents a promising attempt to model online optimisation with pairwise preference feedback. However, our understanding of the more general and realistic
online learning setting of combinatorial subset choices and subset-wise feedback is relatively less
developed than the case of observing absolute, subset-independent reward information.
In this work, we consider a generalisation of the dueling bandit problem where the learner, instead
of choosing only two arms, selects a subset of (up to) k ≥ 2 many arms in each round. The learner
subsequently observes as feedback a rank-ordered list of m ≥ 1 items from the subset, generated
probabilistically according to an underlying subset-wise preference model – in this work the PlackettLuce distribution on rankings based on the multinomial logit (MNL) choice model [7] – in which
each arm has an unknown positive value. Simultaneously, the learner earns as reward the average
value of the subset played in the round. The goal of the learner is to play subsets to minimise its
cumulative regret with respect to the subset with highest value.
Achieving low regret with subset-wise preference feedback is relevant in settings where deviating
from choosing an optimal subset of alternatives comes with a cost (driven by considerations like
revenue) even during the learning phase, but where the feedback information provides purely relative
feedback. For instance, consider a beverage company that experimentally develops several variants
of a drink (arms or alternatives), a best-selling subset of which it wants to learn to put up in the open
market by trial and error. Each time a subset of items is put up, in parallel the company elicits relative
preference feedback about the subset from, say, a team of expert tasters or through crowdsourcing.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

