Learning to Perform Local Rewriting for
Combinatorial Optimization
Xinyun Chen ∗
UC Berkeley
xinyun.chen@berkeley.edu

Yuandong Tian
Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Abstract
Search-based methods for hard combinatorial optimization are often guided by
heuristics. Tuning heuristics in various conditions and situations is often timeconsuming. In this paper, we propose NeuRewriter that learns a policy to
pick heuristics and rewrite the local components of the current solution to iteratively improve it until convergence. The policy factorizes into a region-picking
and a rule-picking component, each parameterized by a neural network trained
with actor-critic methods in reinforcement learning. NeuRewriter captures the
general structure of combinatorial problems and shows strong performance in
three versatile tasks: expression simplification, online job scheduling and vehicle routing problems. NeuRewriter outperforms the expression simplification
component in Z3 [15]; outperforms DeepRM [33] and Google OR-tools [19] in
online job scheduling; and outperforms recent neural baselines [35, 29] and Google
OR-tools [19] in vehicle routing problems. 2

1

Introduction

Solving combinatorial problems is a long-standing challenge and has a lot of practical applications
(e.g., job scheduling, theorem proving, planning, decision making). While problems with specific
structures (e.g., shortest path) can be solved efficiently with proven algorithms (e.g, dynamic programming, greedy approach, search), many combinatorial problems are NP-hard and rely on manually
designed heuristics to improve the quality of solutions [1, 40, 27].
Although it is usually easy to come up with many heuristics, determining when and where such
heuristics should be applied, and how they should be prioritized, is time-consuming. It takes
commercial solvers decades to tune to strong performance in practical problems [15, 44, 19].
To address this issue, previous works use neural networks to predict a complete solution from scratch,
given a complete description of the problem [50, 33, 29, 21]. While this avoids search and tuning, a
direct prediction could be difficult when the number of variables grows.
Improving iteratively from an existing solution is a common approach for continuous solution spaces,
e.g, trajectory optimization in robotics [34, 47, 31]. However, such methods relying on gradient
information to guide the search, is not applicable for discrete solution spaces due to indifferentiablity.
To address this problem, we directly learn a neural-based policy that improves the current solution by
iteratively rewriting a local part of it until convergence. Inspired by the problem structures, the policy
is factorized into two parts: the region-picking and the rule-picking policy, and is trained end-to-end
with reinforcement learning, rewarding cumulative improvement of the solution.
We apply our approach, NeuRewriter, to three different domains: expression simplification, online
job scheduling, and vehicle routing problems. We show that NeuRewriter is better than strong
∗

2

Work partially done when interning at Facebook AI Research.
The code is available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/neural-rewriter.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

