Smoothing Structured Decomposable Circuits
Andy Shih
University of California, Los Angeles
andyshih@cs.ucla.edu
Paul Beame
University of Washington
beame@cs.washington.edu

Guy Van den Broeck
University of California, Los Angeles
guyvdb@cs.ucla.edu
Antoine Amarilli
LTCI, Télécom Paris, IP Paris
antoine.amarilli@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
We study the task of smoothing a circuit, i.e., ensuring that all children of a -gate
mention the same variables. Circuits serve as the building blocks of state-of-the-art
inference algorithms on discrete probabilistic graphical models and probabilistic
programs. They are also important for discrete density estimation algorithms.
Many of these tasks require the input circuit to be smooth. However, smoothing
has not been studied in its own right yet, and only a trivial quadratic algorithm
is known. This paper studies efficient smoothing for structured decomposable
circuits. We propose a near-linear time algorithm for this task and explore lower
bounds for smoothing decomposable circuits, using existing results on range-sum
queries. Further, for the important case of All-Marginals, we show a more efficient
linear-time algorithm. We validate experimentally the performance of our methods.

1

Introduction

Circuits are directed acyclic graphs that are used for many logical and probabilistic inference tasks.
Their structure captures the computation of reasoning algorithms. In the context of machine learning,
state-of-the-art algorithms for exact and approximate inference in discrete probabilistic graphical
models [Chavira and Darwiche, 2008; Kisa et al., 2014; Friedman and Van den Broeck, 2018]
and probabilistic programs [Fierens et al., 2015; Bellodi and Riguzzi, 2013] are built on circuit
compilation. In addition, learning tractable circuits is the current method of choice for discrete
density estimation [Gens and Domingos, 2013; Rooshenas and Lowd, 2014; Vergari et al., 2015;
Liang et al., 2017]. Circuits are also used to enforce logical constraints on deep neural networks [Xu
et al., 2018].
Most of the probabilistic inference algorithms on circuits actually require the input circuit to be
smooth (also referred to as complete) [Sang et al., 2005; Poon and Domingos, 2011]. The notion of
smoothness was first introduced by Darwiche [2001] to ensure efficient model counting and cardinality
minimization and has since been identified as essential to probabilistic inference algorithms. Yet, to
the best of our knowledge, no efficient algorithm to smooth a circuit has been proposed beyond the
original quadratic algorithm by Darwiche [2001].
The quadratic complexity can be a major bottleneck, since circuits in practice often have hundreds
of thousands of edges when learned, and millions of edges when compiled from graphical models.
As such, in the latest Dagstuhl Seminar on “Recent Trends in Knowledge Compilation”, this task of
smoothing a circuit was identified as a major research challenge [Darwiche et al., 2017]. Therefore, a
more efficient smoothing algorithm will increase the scalability of circuit-based inference algorithms.
Intuitively, smoothing a circuit amounts to filling in the missing variables under its -gates. In
Figure 1a we see that the -gate does not mention the same variables on its left side and right side,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

