Certainty Equivalence is Efficient for Linear
Quadratic Control
Horia Mania
University of California, Berkeley
hmania@berkeley.edu

Stephen Tu
University of California, Berkeley
stephentu@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Recht
University of California, Berkeley
brecht@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the performance of the certainty equivalent controller on Linear Quadratic
(LQ) control problems with unknown transition dynamics. We show that for both
the fully and partially observed settings, the sub-optimality gap between the cost
incurred by playing the certainty equivalent controller on the true system and the
cost incurred by using the optimal LQ controller enjoys a fast statistical rate, scaling
as the square of the parameter error. To the best of our knowledge, our result is the
first sub-optimality guarantee in the partially observed Linear Quadratic Gaussian
(LQG) setting. Furthermore, in the fully observed Linear Quadratic Regulator
(LQR), our result improves upon recent work by Dean et al. [11], who present an
algorithm achieving a sub-optimality gap linear in the parameter error. A key part
of our analysis relies on perturbation bounds for discrete Riccati equations. We
provide two new perturbation bounds, one that expands on an existing result from
Konstantinov et al. [25], and another based on a new elementary proof strategy.

1

Introduction

One of the most straightforward methods for controlling a dynamical system with unknown transitions
is based on the certainty equivalence principle: a model of the system is fit by observing its time
evolution, and a control policy is then designed by treating the fitted model as the truth [6]. Despite
the simplicity of this method, it is challenging to guarantee its efficiency because small modeling
errors may propagate to large, undesirable behaviors on long time horizons. As a result, most work
on controlling systems with unknown dynamics has explicitly incorporated robustness against model
uncertainty [11, 12, 23, 30, 41, 42].
In this work, we show that for the standard baseline of controlling an unknown linear dynamical
system with a quadratic objective function known as Linear Quadratic (LQ) control, certainty
equivalent control synthesis achieves better cost than prior methods that account for model uncertainty.
Our results hold for both the fully observed Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and the partially
observed Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) setting. For offline control, where one collects some
data and then designs a fixed control policy to be run on an infinite time horizon, we show that the
gap between the performance of the certainty equivalent controller and the optimal control policy
scales quadratically with the error in the model parameters for both LQR and LQG. To the best of
our knowledge, we provide the first sub-optimality guarantee for LQG. Moreover, in the LQR setting
our work improves upon the recent result of Dean et al. [11], who present an algorithm that achieves
a sub-optimality gap linear in the parameter error. In the case of online LQR control, where one
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

