Brain-Like Object Recognition with
High-Performing Shallow Recurrent ANNs
Jonas Kubilius*,1,2 , Martin Schrimpf *,1,3,4 ,
Kohitij Kar , Rishi Rajalingham1 , Ha Hong5 , Najib J. Majaj6 , Elias B. Issa7 , Pouya
Bashivan1,3 , Jonathan Prescott-Roy1 , Kailyn Schmidt1 , Aran Nayebi8 , Daniel Bear9 ,
Daniel L. K. Yamins9,10 , and James J. DiCarlo1,3,4
1,3,4

1

McGovern Institute for Brain Research, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
2
Brain and Cognition, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
3
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
4
Center for Brains, Minds and Machines, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139
5
Bay Labs Inc., San Francisco, CA 94102
6
Center for Neural Science, New York University, New York, NY 10003
7
Department of Neuroscience, Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10027
8
Neurosciences PhD Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
9
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
10
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
*
Equal contribution

Abstract
Deep convolutional artificial neural networks (ANNs) are the leading class of
candidate models of the mechanisms of visual processing in the primate ventral
stream. While initially inspired by brain anatomy, over the past years, these ANNs
have evolved from a simple eight-layer architecture in AlexNet to extremely deep
and branching architectures, demonstrating increasingly better object categorization
performance, yet bringing into question how brain-like they still are. In particular,
typical deep models from the machine learning community are often hard to
map onto the brain’s anatomy due to their vast number of layers and missing
biologically-important connections, such as recurrence. Here we demonstrate that
better anatomical alignment to the brain and high performance on machine learning
as well as neuroscience measures do not have to be in contradiction. We developed
CORnet-S, a shallow ANN with four anatomically mapped areas and recurrent
connectivity, guided by Brain-Score, a new large-scale composite of neural and
behavioral benchmarks for quantifying the functional fidelity of models of the
primate ventral visual stream. Despite being significantly shallower than most
models, CORnet-S is the top model on Brain-Score and outperforms similarly
compact models on ImageNet. Moreover, our extensive analyses of CORnet-S
circuitry variants reveal that recurrence is the main predictive factor of both BrainScore and ImageNet top-1 performance. Finally, we report that the temporal
evolution of the CORnet-S "IT" neural population resembles the actual monkey IT
population dynamics. Taken together, these results establish CORnet-S, a compact,
recurrent ANN, as the current best model of the primate ventral visual stream.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

