Chasing Ghosts

Chasing Ghosts

Chasing Ghosts: Instruction Following

Chasing as
Ghosts
Bayesian State Tracking

Peter Anderson∗ 1 Ayush Shrivastava∗1 Devi Parikh1,2 Dhruv Batra1,2 Stefan Lee1,3
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Facebook AI Research, 3 Oregon State University
{peter.anderson, ayshrv, parikh, dbatra}@gatech.edu
leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
A visually-grounded navigation instruction can be interpreted as a sequence of
expected observations and actions an agent following the correct trajectory would
encounter and perform. Based on this intuition, we formulate the problem of
finding the goal location in Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) [1] within the
framework of Bayesian state tracking – learning observation and motion models
conditioned on these expectable events. Together with a mapper that constructs a
semantic spatial map on-the-fly during navigation, we formulate an end-to-end differentiable Bayes filter and train it to identify the goal by predicting the most likely
trajectory through the map according to the instructions. The resulting navigation
policy constitutes a new approach to instruction following that explicitly models a
probability distribution over states, encoding strong geometric and algorithmic priors while enabling greater explainability. Our experiments show that our approach
outperforms a strong LingUNet [2] baseline when predicting the goal location on
the map. On the full VLN task, i.e., navigating to the goal location, our approach
achieves promising results with less reliance on navigation constraints.

1

Introduction

One long-term challenge in AI is to build agents that can navigate complex 3D environments from
natural language instructions. In the Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) instantiation of this
task [1], an agent is placed in a photo-realistic reconstruction of an indoor environment and given a
natural language navigation instruction, similar to the example in Figure 1. The agent must interpret
this instruction and execute a sequence of actions to navigate efficiently from its starting point to
the corresponding goal. This task is challenging for existing models [3–9], particularly as the test
environments are unseen during training and no prior exploration is permitted in the hardest setting.
To be successful, agents must learn to ground language instructions to both visual observations and
actions. Since the environment is only partially-observable, this in turn requires the agent to relate
instructions, visual observations and actions through memory. Current approaches to the VLN task
use unstructured general purpose memory representations implemented with recurrent neural network
(RNN) hidden state vectors [1, 3–9]. However, these approaches lack geometric priors and contain
no mechanism for reasoning about the likelihood of alternative trajectories – a crucial skill for the
task, e.g., ‘Would this look more like the goal if I was on the other side of the room?’. Due to this
limitation, many previous works have resorted to performing inefficient first-person search through
the environment using search algorithms such as beam search [5, 7]. While this greatly improves
performance, it is clearly inconsistent with practical applications like robotics since the resulting
agent trajectories are enormously long – in the range of hundreds or thousands of meters.
To address these limitations, it is essential to move towards reasoning about alternative trajectories in a
representation of the environment – where there are no search costs associated with moving a physical
robot – rather than in the environment itself. Towards this, we extend the Matterport3D simulator [1]
to provide depth outputs, enabling us to investigate the use of a semantic spatial map [10–13] in the
context of the VLN task for the first time. We propose an instruction-following agent incorporating
three components: (1) a mapper that builds a semantic spatial map of its environment from first∗

First two authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

