Generalization of Reinforcement Learners with
Working and Episodic Memory

Ryan Faulkner?
Gavin Buttimore

Meire Fortunato?
Melissa Tan?
Steven Hansen?
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia
Charlie Deck
Joel Z Leibo
Charles Blundell
DeepMind

{meirefortunato, melissatan, rfaulk, stevenhansen,
adriap, buttimore, cdeck, jzl, cblundell}@google.com
(? Equal Contribution)

Abstract
Memory is an important aspect of intelligence and plays a role in many deep
reinforcement learning models. However, little progress has been made in understanding when specific memory systems help more than others and how well
they generalize. The field also has yet to see a prevalent consistent and rigorous
approach for evaluating agent performance on holdout data. In this paper, we aim
to develop a comprehensive methodology to test different kinds of memory in an
agent and assess how well the agent can apply what it learns in training to a holdout
set that differs from the training set along dimensions that we suggest are relevant
for evaluating memory-specific generalization. To that end, we first construct a
diverse set of memory tasks1 that allow us to evaluate test-time generalization
across multiple dimensions. Second, we develop and perform multiple ablations on
an agent architecture that combines multiple memory systems, observe its baseline
models, and investigate its performance against the task suite.

1

Introduction

Humans use memory to reason, imagine, plan, and learn. Memory is a foundational component of
intelligence, and enables information from past events and contexts to inform decision-making in the
present and future. Recently, agents that utilize memory systems have advanced the state of the art
in various research areas including reasoning, planning, program execution and navigation, among
others (Graves et al., 2016; Zambaldi et al., 2018; Santoro et al., 2018; Banino et al., 2018; Vaswani
et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2015).
Memory has many aspects, and having access to different kinds allows intelligent organisms to
bring the most relevant past information to bear on different sets of circumstances. In cognitive
psychology and neuroscience, two commonly studied types of memory are working and episodic
memory. Working memory (Miyake and Shah, 1999) is a short-term temporary store with limited
capacity.
In contrast, episodic memory (Tulving and Murray, 1985) is typically a larger autobiographical
database of experience (e.g. recalling a meal eaten last month) that lets one store information over a
longer time scale and compile sequences of events into episodes (Tulving, 2002). Episodic memory
has been shown to help reinforcement learning agents adapt more quickly and thereby boost data
1
https://github.com/deepmind/dm_memorytasks. Videos available at https://sites.google.com/view/memorytasks-suite

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

