Discriminative Topic Modeling with Logistic LDA

Iryna Korshunova
Ghent University
iryna.korshunova@ugent.be

Hanchen Xiong
Twitter
hxiong@twitter.com

Mateusz Fedoryszak
Twitter
mfedoryszak@twitter.com

Lucas Theis
Twitter
ltheis@twitter.com

Abstract
Despite many years of research into latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), applying
LDA to collections of non-categorical items is still challenging. Yet many problems
with much richer data share a similar structure and could benefit from the vast
literature on LDA. We propose logistic LDA, a novel discriminative variant of latent
Dirichlet allocation which is easy to apply to arbitrary inputs. In particular, our
model can easily be applied to groups of images, arbitrary text embeddings, and
integrates well with deep neural networks. Although it is a discriminative model,
we show that logistic LDA can learn from unlabeled data in an unsupervised manner
by exploiting the group structure present in the data. In contrast to other recent
topic models designed to handle arbitrary inputs, our model does not sacrifice the
interpretability and principled motivation of LDA.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic topic models are powerful tools for discovering themes in large collections of items.
Typically, these collections are assumed to be documents and the models assign topics to individual
words. However, a growing number of real-world problems require assignment of topics to much
richer sets of items. For example, we may want to assign topics to the tweets of an author on Twitter
which contain multiple sentences as well as images, or to the images and websites stored in a board
on Pinterest, or to the videos uploaded by a user on YouTube. These problems have in common that
grouped items are likely to be thematically similar. We would like to exploit this dependency instead
of categorizing items based on their content alone. Topic models provide a natural way to achieve
this.
The most widely used topic model is latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) [6]. With a few exceptions [7,
31], LDA and its variants, including supervised models [5, 19], are generative. They generally assume
a multinomial distribution over words given topics, which limits their applicability to discrete tokens.
While it is conceptually easy to extend LDA to continuous inputs [4], modeling the distribution of
complex data such as images can be a difficult task on its own. Achieving low perplexity on images,
for example, would require us to model many dependencies between pixels which are of little use for
topic inference and would lead to inefficient models. On the other hand, a lot of progress has been
made in accurately and efficiently assigning categories to images using discriminative models such
as convolutional neural networks [18, 35].
In this work, our goal is to build a class of discriminative topic models capable of handling much
richer items than words. At the same time, we would like to preserve LDA’s extensibility and
interpretability. In particular, group-level topic distributions and items should be independent given
the item’s topics, and topics and topic distributions should interact in an intuitive way. Our model
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

