Deep Set Prediction Networks

Yan Zhang
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
yz5n12@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Jonathon Hare
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
jsh2@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Adam Prügel-Bennett
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
apb@ecs.soton.ac.uk

Abstract
Current approaches for predicting sets from feature vectors ignore the unordered
nature of sets and suffer from discontinuity issues as a result. We propose a general
model for predicting sets that properly respects the structure of sets and avoids this
problem. With a single feature vector as input, we show that our model is able to
auto-encode point sets, predict the set of bounding boxes of objects in an image,
and predict the set of attributes of these objects.

1

Introduction

You are given a rotation angle and your task is to draw the four corner points of a square that is
rotated by that amount. This is a structured prediction task where the output is a set, since there is no
inherent ordering to the four points. Such sets are a natural representation for many kinds of data,
ranging from the set of points in a point cloud, to the set of objects in an image (object detection), to
the set of nodes in a molecular graph (molecular generation). Yet, existing machine learning models
often struggle to solve even the simple square prediction task [30].
The main difficulty in predicting sets comes from the ability to permute the elements in a set freely,
which means that there are n! equally good solutions for a set of size n. Models that do not take this
set structure into account properly (such as MLPs or RNNs) result in discontinuities, which is the
reason why they struggle to solve simple toy set prediction tasks [30]. We give background on what
the problem is in section 2.
How can we build a model that properly respects the set structure of the problem so that we can
predict sets without running into discontinuity issues? In this paper, we aim to address this question.
Concretely, we contribute the following:
1. We propose a model (section 3, Algorithm 1) that can predict a set from a feature vector
(vector-to-set) while properly taking the structure of sets into account. We explain what
properties we make use of that enables this. Our model uses backpropagation through a set
encoder to decode a set and works for variable-size sets. The model is applicable to a wide
variety of set prediction tasks since it only requires a feature vector as input.
2. We evaluate our model on several set prediction datasets (section 5). First, we demonstrate
that the auto-encoder version of our model is sound on a set version of MNIST. Next,
we use the CLEVR dataset to show that this works for general set prediction tasks. We
predict the set of bounding boxes of objects in an image and we predict the set of object
attributes in an image, both from a single feature vector. Our model is a completely
different approach to usual anchor-based object detectors because we pose the task as a set
prediction problem, which does not need complicated post-processing techniques such as
non-maximum suppression.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

