Dynamic Incentive-aware Learning: Robust Pricing
in Contextual Auctions
Negin Golrezaei
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
golrezae@mit.edu

Adel Javanmard
Data Sciences and Operations Department
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
ajavanma@usc.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
New York, NY
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Motivated by pricing in ad exchange markets, we consider the problem of robust
learning of reserve prices against strategic buyers in repeated contextual secondprice auctions. Buyers’ valuations for an item depend on the context that describes
the item. However, the seller is not aware of the relationship between the context
and buyers’ valuations, i.e., buyers’ preferences. The seller’s goal is to design
a learning policy to set reserve prices via observing the past sales data, and her
objective is to minimize her regret for revenue, where the regret is computed
against a clairvoyant policy that knows buyers’ heterogeneous preferences. Given
the seller’s goal, utility-maximizing buyers have the incentive to bid untruthfully
in order to manipulate the seller’s learning policy. We propose two learning
policies that are robust to such strategic behavior. These policies use the outcomes
of the auctions, rather than the submitted bids, to estimate the preferences while
controlling the long-term effect of the outcome of each auction on the future reserve
prices. The first policy called Contextual Robust Pricing (CORP) is designed for
the setting where the market noise distribution is known to the seller and achieves a
T-period regret of O(d log(T d) log(T )), where d is the dimension of the contextual
information. The second policy, which is a variant of the first policy, is called
Stable CORP (SCORP). This policy is tailored to the setting where the market
noise distribution is unknown to the seller and belongs p
to an ambiguity set. We
show that the SCORP policy has a T-period regret of O( d log(T d) T 2/3 ).

1

Introduction

In many online marketplaces, both sides of the market have access to rich dynamic contextual
information about the products being sold over time. On the buy side, such information can influence
the willingness-to-pay of the buyers for the products, potentially in a heterogeneous way. On the sell
side, the information can help the seller differentiate the products and set contextual and possibly
personalized prices. To do so, the seller needs to learn the impact of this information on buyers’
willingness-to-pay. Such contextual learning can be challenging for the seller when there are repeated
interactions between the buy and the sell sides. With repeated interactions, the utility-maximizing
buyers may have the incentive to act strategically and trick the learning policy of the seller into
lowering the prices. Motivated by this, our key research question is as follows: How can the seller
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

