Face Reconstruction from Voice using Generative
Adversarial Networks
Yandong Wen
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
yandongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Rita Singh
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
rsingh@cs.cmu.edu

Bhiksha Raj
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
bhiksha@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Voice profiling aims at inferring various human parameters from their speech, e.g.
gender, age, etc. In this paper, we address the challenge posed by a subtask of voice
profiling - reconstructing someone’s face from their voice. The task is designed
to answer the question: given an audio clip spoken by an unseen person, can we
picture a face that has as many common elements, or associations as possible with
the speaker, in terms of identity?
To address this problem, we propose a simple but effective computational
framework based on generative adversarial networks (GANs). The network
learns to generate faces from voices by matching the identities of generated
faces to those of the speakers, on a training set. We evaluate the performance of the network by leveraging a closely related task - cross-modal matching. The results show that our model is able to generate faces that match
several biometric characteristics of the speaker, and results in matching accuracies that are much better than chance. The code is publicly available in
https://github.com/cmu-mlsp/reconstructing_faces_from_voices

1

Introduction

The challenge of voice profiling is to infer a person’s biophysical parameters, such as gender, age,
health conditions, etc. from their speech, and a large body of literature exists on the topic [28, 1, 21].
In this paper, we extend this challenge and address the problem: is it possible to go beyond merely
predicting a person’s physical attributes, and actually reconstruct their entire face from their voice?
Effectively a new subtask of voice profiling, the task is designed to answer the question: given an
unheard audio clip spoken by an unseen person, can we picture a face image that has as many as
possible associations with the speaker in terms of identity?
A person’s voice is incontrovertibly statistically related to their facial structure. The relationship
is, in fact, multi-faceted. Direct relationships include the effect of the underlying skeletal and
articulator structure of the face and the tissue covering them, all of which govern the shapes, sizes,
and acoustic properties of the vocal tract that produces the voice [22, 38]. Less directly, the same
genetic, physical and environmental influences that affect the development of the face also affect the
voice. Demographic factors, such as gender, age and ethnicity too influence both voice and face (and
can in fact be independently inferred from the voice [1, 15] or the face [17]), providing additional
links between the two.
Neurocognitive studies have shown that human perception implicitly recognizes the association
of faces to voices [4]. Studies indicate that neuro-cognitive pathways for voices share a common
structure with that for faces [7] – the two may follow parallel pathways within a common recognition
framework [4, 3]. In empirical studies humans have shown the ability to associate voices of unknown
individuals to pictures of their faces [11, 19]. They are seen to show improved ability to memorize
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

