Learning Temporal Pose Estimation
from Sparsely-Labeled Videos

Gedas Bertasius1,2 , Christoph Feichtenhofer1 , Du Tran1 , Jianbo Shi2 , Lorenzo Torresani1
1
Facebook AI, 2 University of Pennsylvania

Abstract
Modern approaches for multi-person pose estimation in video require large amounts
of dense annotations. However, labeling every frame in a video is costly and labor
intensive. To reduce the need for dense annotations, we propose a PoseWarper
network that leverages training videos with sparse annotations (every k frames) to
learn to perform dense temporal pose propagation and estimation. Given a pair
of video frames—a labeled Frame A and an unlabeled Frame B—we train our
model to predict human pose in Frame A using the features from Frame B by
means of deformable convolutions to implicitly learn the pose warping between A
and B. We demonstrate that we can leverage our trained PoseWarper for several
applications. First, at inference time we can reverse the application direction
of our network in order to propagate pose information from manually annotated
frames to unlabeled frames. This makes it possible to generate pose annotations
for the entire video given only a few manually-labeled frames. Compared to
modern label propagation methods based on optical flow, our warping mechanism
is much more compact (6M vs 39M parameters), and also more accurate (88.7%
mAP vs 83.8% mAP). We also show that we can improve the accuracy of a
pose estimator by training it on an augmented dataset obtained by adding our
propagated poses to the original manual labels. Lastly, we can use our PoseWarper
to aggregate temporal pose information from neighboring frames during inference.
This allows us to obtain state-of-the-art pose detection results on PoseTrack2017
and PoseTrack2018 datasets. Code has been made available at: https://github.
com/facebookresearch/PoseWarper.

1

Introduction

In recent years, visual understanding methods [1–15] have made tremendous progress, partly because
of advances in deep learning [16–19], and partly due to the introduction of large-scale annotated
datasets [20, 21]. In this paper we consider the problem of pose estimation, which has greatly
benefitted from the recent creation of large-scale datasets [22, 23]. Most of the recent advances
in this area, though, have concentrated on the task of pose estimation in still-images [3, 23–27].
However, directly applying these image-level models to video is challenging due to nuisance factors
such as motion blur, video defocus, and frequent pose occlusions. Additionally, the process of
collecting annotated pose data in multi-person videos is costly and time consuming. A video typically
contains hundreds of frames that need to be densely-labeled by human annotators. As a result,
datasets for video pose estimation [22] are typically smaller and less diverse compared to their image
counterparts [21]. This is problematic because modern deep models require large amounts of labeled
data to achieve good performance. At the same time, videos have high informational redundancy as
the content changes little from frame to frame. This raises the question of whether every single frame
in a training video needs to be labeled in order to achieve good pose estimation accuracy.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

