FastSpeech: Fast, Robust and Controllable
Text to Speech

Yi Ren∗
Zhejiang University
rayeren@zju.edu.cn

Yangjun Ruan∗
Zhejiang University
ruanyj3107@zju.edu.cn

Xu Tan
Microsoft Research
xuta@microsoft.com

Tao Qin
Microsoft Research
taoqin@microsoft.com

Sheng Zhao
Microsoft STC Asia
Sheng.Zhao@microsoft.com

Zhou Zhao†
Zhejiang University
zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural network based end-to-end text to speech (TTS) has significantly improved
the quality of synthesized speech. Prominent methods (e.g., Tacotron 2) usually
first generate mel-spectrogram from text, and then synthesize speech from the
mel-spectrogram using vocoder such as WaveNet. Compared with traditional
concatenative and statistical parametric approaches, neural network based endto-end models suffer from slow inference speed, and the synthesized speech is
usually not robust (i.e., some words are skipped or repeated) and lack of controllability (voice speed or prosody control). In this work, we propose a novel
feed-forward network based on Transformer to generate mel-spectrogram in parallel for TTS. Specifically, we extract attention alignments from an encoder-decoder
based teacher model for phoneme duration prediction, which is used by a length
regulator to expand the source phoneme sequence to match the length of the target
mel-spectrogram sequence for parallel mel-spectrogram generation. Experiments
on the LJSpeech dataset show that our parallel model matches autoregressive models in terms of speech quality, nearly eliminates the problem of word skipping and
repeating in particularly hard cases, and can adjust voice speed smoothly. Most
importantly, compared with autoregressive Transformer TTS, our model speeds up
mel-spectrogram generation by 270x and the end-to-end speech synthesis by 38x.
Therefore, we call our model FastSpeech. 3

1

Introduction

Text to speech (TTS) has attracted a lot of attention in recent years due to the advance in deep
learning. Deep neural network based systems have become more and more popular for TTS, such
as Tacotron [27], Tacotron 2 [22], Deep Voice 3 [19], and the fully end-to-end ClariNet [18]. Those
models usually first generate mel-spectrogram autoregressively from text input and then synthesize
speech from the mel-spectrogram using vocoder such as Griffin-Lim [6], WaveNet [24], Parallel
∗

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author
3
Synthesized speech samples can be found in https://speechresearch.github.io/fastspeech/.

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

