Individual Regret in Cooperative Nonstochastic
Multi-Armed Bandits
Yogev Bar-On
Tel Aviv University, Israel
baronyogev@gmail.com

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University, Israel
and Google Research, Israel
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
We study agents communicating over an underlying network by exchanging messages, in order to optimize their individual regret in a common nonstochastic
multi-armed bandit problem. We derive regret minimizationr
algorithms that guar 

K
e
antee for each agent v an individual expected regret of O
1 + |N (v)| T ,
where T is the number of time steps, K is the number of actions and N (v) is the
set of neighbors of agent v in the communication graph. We present algorithms
both for the case that the communication graph is known to all the agents, and for
the case that the graph is unknown. When the graph is unknown, each agent knows
only the set of its neighbors and an upper bound on the total number of agents.
The individual regret between the models differs only by a logarithmic factor. Our
work resolves an open problem from [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2019b].

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most basic models for decision making under
uncertainty. It highlights the agent’s uncertainty regarding the losses it suffers from selecting various
actions. The agent selects actions in an online fashion - each time step the agent selects a single action
and suffers a loss corresponding to that action. The agent’s goal is to minimize its cumulative loss
over a fixed horizon of time steps. The agent observes only the loss of the action it selected each step.
Therefore, the MAB problem captures well the crucial trade-off between exploration and exploitation,
where the agent needs to explore various actions in order to gather information about them.
MAB research discusses two main settings: the stochastic setting, where the losses of each action are
sampled i.i.d. from an unknown distribution, and the nonstochastic (adversarial) setting, where we
make no assumptions about the loss sequences. In this work we consider the nonstochastic setting
and the objective of minimizing the regret - the difference between the agent’s cumulativeloss and

√
the cumulative loss of the best action in hindsight. It is known that a regret of the order of Θ
KT
is the best that can be guaranteed, where K is the number of actions and T is the time horizon. In
contrast, when the losses 
of all actions are observed (full-information feedback) the regret can be of
√
the order of Θ
T ln K (see, e.g., [Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006, Bubeck et al., 2012]).
The main focus of our work is to consider agents that are connected in a communication graph, and
can exchange messages in each step, in order to reduce their individual regret. This is possible since
the losses depend only on the action and the time step, but not on the agent.
One extreme case is when the communication graph is a clique, i.e., any pair of agents can communicate directly. In this case, the agents
√ can run the well known Exp3 algorithm [Auer et al., 2002],
and guarantee each a regret of O
T ln K , assuming there are at least K agents (see [Seldin et al.,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

