Controlling Neural Level Sets

Matan Atzmon, Niv Haim, Lior Yariv, Ofer Israelov, Haggai Maron, Yaron Lipman
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
The level sets of neural networks represent fundamental properties such as decision
boundaries of classifiers and are used to model non-linear manifold data such as
curves and surfaces. Thus, methods for controlling the neural level sets could find
many applications in machine learning.
In this paper we present a simple and scalable approach to directly control level
sets of a deep neural network. Our method consists of two parts: (i) sampling of the
neural level sets, and (ii) relating the samples’ positions to the network parameters.
The latter is achieved by a sample network that is constructed by adding a single
fixed linear layer to the original network. In turn, the sample network can be used
to incorporate the level set samples into a loss function of interest.
We have tested our method on three different learning tasks: improving generalization to unseen data, training networks robust to adversarial attacks, and curve and
surface reconstruction from point clouds. For surface reconstruction, we produce
high fidelity surfaces directly from raw 3D point clouds. When training small to
medium networks to be robust to adversarial attacks we obtain robust accuracy
comparable to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

The level sets of a Deep Neural Network (DNN) are known to capture important characteristics
and properties of the network. A popular example is when the network F (x; θ) : Rd × Rm → Rl
represents a classifier, θ are its learnable parameters, fi (x; θ) are its logits (the outputs of the final
linear layer), and the level set


S(θ) = x ∈ Rd fj − max {fi } = 0
(1)
i6=j

represents the decision boundary of the j-th class. Another recent example is modeling a manifold
(e.g., a curve or a surface in R3 ) using a level set of a neural network (e.g., [24]). That is,
n
o
S(θ) = x ∈ Rd F = 0
(2)
represents (generically) a manifold of dimension d − l in Rd .
The goal of this work is to provide practical means to directly control and manipulate neural level
sets S(θ), as exemplified in Equations 1, 2. The main challenge is how to incorporate S(θ) in a
differentiable loss function. Our key observation is that given a sample p ∈ S(θ), its position can be
associated to the network parameters: p = p(θ), in a differentiable and scalable way. In fact, p(θ) is
itself a neural network that is obtained by an addition of a single linear layer to F (x; θ); we call these
networks sample networks. Sample networks, together with an efficient mechanism for sampling the
level set, {pj (θ)} ⊂ S(θ), can be incorporated in general loss functions as a proxy for the level set
S(θ).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

