Learning step sizes for unfolded sparse coding

Pierre Ablin∗ , Thomas Moreau∗ , Mathurin Massias, Alexandre Gramfort
Inria - CEA
Université Paris-Saclay
{pierre.ablin,thomas.moreau,mathurin.massias,alexandre.gramfort}@inria.fr

Abstract
Sparse coding is typically solved by iterative optimization techniques, such as
the Iterative Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA). Unfolding and learning
weights of ISTA using neural networks is a practical way to accelerate estimation.
In this paper, we study the selection of adapted step sizes for ISTA. We show
that a simple step size strategy can improve the convergence rate of ISTA by
leveraging the sparsity of the iterates. However, it is impractical in most largescale applications. Therefore, we propose a network architecture where only the
step sizes of ISTA are learned. We demonstrate that for a large class of unfolded
algorithms, if the algorithm converges to the solution of the Lasso, its last layers
correspond to ISTA with learned step sizes. Experiments show that our method is
competitive with state-of-the-art networks when the solutions are sparse enough.

1

Introduction

The resolution of convex optimization problems by iterative algorithms has become a key part of
machine learning and signal processing pipelines, in particular with the Generalized Linear Models
for classification [Nelder and Wedderburn, 1972]. Amongst these problems, special attention has
been devoted to the Lasso [Tibshirani, 1996], due to the attractive sparsity properties of its solution
(see Hastie et al. 2015 for an extensive review). For a given input x ∈ Rn , a dictionary D ∈ Rn×m
and a regularization parameter λ > 0 , the Lasso problem is
z ∗ (x) ∈ arg min Fx (z)
z∈Rm

with

Fx (z) ,

1
kx − Dzk2 + λkzk1 .
2

(1)

A variety of algorithms exist to solve Problem (1), e.g. proximal coordinate descent
[Tseng, 2001, Friedman et al., 2007], Least Angle Regression [Efron et al., 2004] or proximal
splitting methods [Combettes and Bauschke, 2011]. The focus of this paper is on the Iterative
Shrinkage-Thresholding Algorithm (ISTA, Daubechies et al. 2004), which is a proximal-gradient
method applied to Problem (1). ISTA starts from z (0) = 0 and iterates


1 ⊤
λ
(t+1)
(t)
(t)
z
= ST z − D (Dz − x),
,
(2)
L
L
where ST is the soft-thresholding operator defined as ST(x, u) , sign(x) max(|x| − u, 0) , and L
is the greatest eigenvalue of D⊤ D . In the general case, ISTA converges at rate 1/t , which can be
improved to the optimal rate 1/t2 [Nesterov, 1983]. However, this optimality stands in the worst
possible case, and linear rates are achievable in practice [Liang et al., 2014].
A popular line of research to improve the speed of Lasso solvers is to try to identify the support of z ∗ , in order to diminish the size of the optimization problem [El Ghaoui et al., 2012, Ndiaye et al., 2017, Johnson and Guestrin, 2015, Massias et al., 2018].
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

