A Family of Robust Stochastic Operators for
Reinforcement Learning

Yingdong Lu, Mark S. Squillante, Chai Wah Wu
Mathematical Sciences
IBM Research
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{yingdong, mss, cwwu}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We consider a new family of stochastic operators for reinforcement learning that
seeks to alleviate negative effects and become more robust to approximation or
estimation errors. Theoretical results are established, showing that our family of
operators preserve optimality and increase the action gap in a stochastic sense.
Empirical results illustrate the strong benefits of our robust stochastic operators,
significantly outperforming the classical Bellman and recently proposed operators.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has a rich history within the machine learning community to solve a wide
variety of decision making problems in environments with unknown and possibly unstructured
dynamics. Through iterative application of a convergent operator, value-based reinforcement learning
(RL) generates successive refinements of an initial value function [14, 22, 21]. Q-learning [24] is
a particular RL technique in which the computations of value iteration consist of evaluating the
corresponding Bellman equation without a model of the environment.
While Q-learning continues to be broadly and successfully used in RL to determine the optimal actions
of an agent, the development of new Q-learning approaches that improve convergence speed, accuracy
and robustness remains of great interest. One area of particular interest concerns environments in
which there exist approximation or estimation errors. Of course, when no approximation/estimation
errors are present, then the corresponding Markov decision process (MDP) can be solved exactly
with the Bellman operator. However, in the presence of nonstationary errors – a typically encountered
example being when a discrete-state, discrete-time MDP is used to approximate a continuous-state,
continuous-time system – then the optimal state-action value function obtained through the Bellman
operator does not always describe the value of stationary policies. Hence, when the optimal stateaction value function and the suboptimal state-action value functions are reasonably close to each
other, approximation/estimation errors can cause suboptimal actions to be chosen instead of an
optimal action and thus in turn potentially causing errors in identifying truly optimal actions.
To help explain and formalize this phenomena, Farahmand [13] introduced the notion of action-gap
regularity and showed that a larger action-gap regularity implies a smaller loss in performance.
Building on action-gap regularity and its benefits with respect to (w.r.t.) performance loss, Bellemare
et al. [6] considered a particular approach to having the value iteration converge to an alternative
action-value function Q associated with the same optimal action policy – i.e., maintain properties of
optimality-preserving – while at the same time achieving a larger separation between the Q-values of
optimal actions and those of suboptimal actions – i.e., maintain properties of action-gap increasing.
The former properties ensure optimality whereas the latter properties may assist the value-iteration
algorithm to determine the optimal actions of an agent faster, more easily, and with less errors of
mislabeling suboptimal actions. Therefore, by exploiting weaker optimality conditions than the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

