Drill-down: Interactive Retrieval of Complex Scenes
using Natural Language Queries

Fuwen Tan
University of Virginia
fuwen.tan@virginia.edu
Xiaoxiao Guo
IBM Research AI
xiaoxiao.guo@ibm.com

Paola Cascante-Bonilla
University of Virginia
pc9za@virginia.com

Hui Wu
IBM Research AI
wuhu@us.ibm.com

Song Feng
IBM Research AI
sfeng@us.ibm.com

Vicente Ordonez
University of Virginia
vicente@virginia.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the task of interactive image retrieval using natural language
queries, where a user progressively provides input queries to refine a set of retrieval
results. Moreover, our work explores this problem in the context of complex image
scenes containing multiple objects. We propose Drill-down, an effective framework
for encoding multiple queries with an efficient compact state representation that
significantly extends current methods for single-round image retrieval. We show
that using multiple rounds of natural language queries as input can be surprisingly
effective to find arbitrarily specific images of complex scenes. Furthermore, we
find that existing image datasets with textual captions can provide a surprisingly
effective form of weak supervision for this task. We compare our method with
existing sequential encoding and embedding networks, demonstrating superior performance on two proposed benchmarks: automatic image retrieval on a simulated
scenario that uses region captions as queries, and interactive image retrieval using
real queries from human evaluators.

1

Introduction

Retrieving images from text-based queries has been an active area of research that requires some level
of visual and textual understanding. Significant improvement has been achieved over the past years
with advances in representation learning but finding very specific images with detailed specifications
remains challenging. A common way of specification is through natural language queries, where a
user inputs a description of the image and obtains a set of results. We focus on a common scenario
where a user is trying to find an exact image, or similarly where the user has a very specific idea of a
target image, or is deciding on-the-fly while querying. We present empirical evidence that users are
much more successful if they are allowed to refine their search results with subsequent textual queries.
Users might start with a general query about the “concept” of the image they have in mind and then
“drill down” onto more specific descriptions of objects or attributes in the image to refine the results.
Among previous efforts in image retrieval, a promising paradigm is to learn a visual-semantic
embedding by minimizing the distance between a target image and an input textual query using a joint
feature space. Pioneering approaches such as [17, 34, 9, 21, 36, 33] have demonstrated remarkable
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

