Transfer Anomaly Detection by
Inferring Latent Domain Representations

Atsutoshi Kumagai
NTT Software Innovation Center
NTT Secure Platform Laboratories
atsutoshi.kumagai.ht@hco.ntt.co.jp

Tomoharu Iwata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
tomoharu.iwata.gy@hco.ntt.co.jp

Yasuhiro Fujiwara
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh@hco.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
We propose a method to improve the anomaly detection performance on target
domains by transferring knowledge on related domains. Although anomaly labels
are valuable to learn anomaly detectors, they are difficult to obtain due to their rarity.
To alleviate this problem, existing methods use anomalous and normal instances
in the related domains as well as target normal instances. These methods require
training on each target domain. However, this requirement can be problematic
in some situations due to the high computational cost of training. The proposed
method can infer the anomaly detectors for target domains without re-training by
introducing the concept of latent domain vectors, which are latent representations
of the domains and are used for inferring the anomaly detectors. The latent
domain vector for each domain is inferred from the set of normal instances in the
domain. The anomaly score function for each domain is modeled on the basis of
autoencoders, and its domain-specific property is controlled by the latent domain
vector. The anomaly score function for each domain is trained so that the scores of
normal instances become low and the scores of anomalies become higher than those
of the normal instances, while considering the uncertainty of the latent domain
vectors. When target normal instances can be used during training, the proposed
method can also use them for training in a unified framework. The effectiveness
of the proposed method is demonstrated through experiments using one synthetic
and four real-world datasets. Especially, the proposed method without re-training
outperforms existing methods with target specific training.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is an important task in artificial intelligence [8, 6]. The goal of anomaly detection
is to detect anomalous instances, called anomalies or outliers, that do not conform to the expected
normal pattern. Anomaly detection methods have been used in a wide variety of applications such as
intrusion detection [16], fraud detection [33], medical care [30], and industrial asset monitoring [28].
Many semi-supervised anomaly detection methods have been proposed such as autoencoders (AEs)
[43], one-class support vector machines (OSVMs) [44], and isolation forests [35]. Since they require
only normal instances, which are relatively easy to prepare, to obtain anomaly detectors, they are
particularly used in practice. In some situations, anomaly labels that indicate anomalous instances
can be used. By using anomaly labels, supervised anomaly detection methods can detect anomalies
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

