Partially Encrypted Machine Learning
using Functional Encryption
Théo Ryffel1, 2 , Edouard Dufour-Sans1 , Romain Gay1,3 ,
Francis Bach2, 1 and David Pointcheval1, 2
1

Département d’informatique de l’ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University, Paris, France
2
INRIA, Paris, France
3
University of California, Berkeley

{theo.ryffel,edufoursans,romain.gay,francis.bach,david.pointcheval}@ens.fr

Abstract
Machine learning on encrypted data has received a lot of attention thanks to recent
breakthroughs in homomorphic encryption and secure multi-party computation. It
allows outsourcing computation to untrusted servers without sacrificing privacy of
sensitive data. We propose a practical framework to perform partially encrypted and
privacy-preserving predictions which combines adversarial training and functional
encryption. We first present a new functional encryption scheme to efficiently
compute quadratic functions so that the data owner controls what can be computed
but is not involved in the calculation: it provides a decryption key which allows one
to learn a specific function evaluation of some encrypted data. We then show how
to use it in machine learning to partially encrypt neural networks with quadratic
activation functions at evaluation time, and we provide a thorough analysis of
the information leaks based on indistinguishability of data items of the same
label. Last, since most encryption schemes cannot deal with the last thresholding
operation used for classification, we propose a training method to prevent selected
sensitive features from leaking, which adversarially optimizes the network against
an adversary trying to identify these features. This is interesting for several existing
works using partially encrypted machine learning as it comes with little reduction
on the model’s accuracy and significantly improves data privacy.

1

Introduction

As both public opinion and regulators are becoming increasingly aware of issues of data privacy, the
area of privacy-preserving machine learning has emerged with the aim of reshaping the way machine
learning deals with private data. Breakthroughs in fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) [15, 18] and
secure multi-party computation (SMPC) [19, 39] have made computation on encrypted data practical
and implementations of neural networks to do encrypted predictions have flourished [34–36, 8, 13].
However, these protocols require the data owner encrypting the inputs and the parties performing the
computations to interact and communicate in order to get decrypted results, which we would like
to avoid in some cases, like spam filtering, for example, where the email receiver should not need
to be online for the email server to classify incoming email as spam or not. Functional encryption
(FE) [12, 32] in return does not need interaction to compute over encrypted data: it allows users to
receive in plaintext specific functional evaluations of encrypted data: for a function f , a functional
decryption key can be generated such that, given any ciphertext with underlying plaintext x, a user
can use this key to obtain f (x) without learning x or any other information than f (x). It stands in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

