Mo0 States Mo0 Problems:
Emergency Stop Mechanisms from Observation
Samuel Ainsworth

Matt Barnes

Siddhartha Srinivasa

School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington
{skainswo,mbarnes,siddh}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In many environments, only a relatively small subset of the complete state space is
necessary in order to accomplish a given task. We develop a simple technique using
emergency stops (e-stops) to exploit this phenomenon. Using e-stops significantly
improves sample complexity by reducing the amount of required exploration, while
retaining a performance bound that efficiently trades off the rate of convergence
with a small asymptotic sub-optimality gap. We analyze the regret behavior of
e-stops and present empirical results in discrete and continuous settings demonstrating that our reset mechanism can provide order-of-magnitude speedups on top
of existing reinforcement learning methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the problem of determining when along a training roll-out feedback
from the environment is no longer beneficial, and an intervention such as resetting the agent to
the initial state distribution is warranted. We show that such interventions can naturally trade off
a small sub-optimality gap for a dramatic decrease in sample complexity. In particular, we focus
on the reinforcement learning setting in which the agent has access to a reward signal in addition
to either (a) an expert supervisor triggering the e-stop mechanism in real-time or (b) expert stateonly demonstrations used to “learn” an automatic e-stop trigger. Both settings fall into the same
framework.
Evidence already suggests that using simple, manually-designed heuristic resets can dramatically
improve training time. For example, the classic pole-balancing problem originally introduced in
Widrow and Smith [25] prematurely terminates an episode and resets to an initial distribution
whenever the pole exceeds some fixed angle off-vertical. More subtly, these manually designed reset
rules are hard-coded into many popular OpenAI gym environments [7].
Some recent approaches have demonstrated empirical success learning when to intervene, either in
the form of resetting, collecting expert feedback, or falling back to a safe policy [8, 16, 19, 14]. We
specifically study reset mechanisms which are more natural for human operators to provide – in the
form of large red buttons, for example – and thus perhaps less noisy than action or value feedback [5].
Further, we show how to build automatic reset mechanisms from state-only observations which are
often widely available, e.g. in the form of videos [24].
The key idea of our method is to build a support set related to the expert’s state-visitation probabilities,
and to terminate the episode with a large penalty when the agent leaves this set, visualized in Fig. 1.
This support set defines a modified MDP and can either be constructed implicitly via an expert
supervisor triggering e-stops in real-time or constructed a priori based on observation-only roll-outs
from an expert policy. As we will show, using a support set explicitly restricts exploration to a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

