Poisson-Minibatching for Gibbs Sampling with
Convergence Rate Guarantees
Ruqi Zhang
Cornell University
rz297@cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Gibbs sampling is a Markov chain Monte Carlo method that is often used for learning and inference on graphical models. Minibatching, in which a small random
subset of the graph is used at each iteration, can help make Gibbs sampling scale
to large graphical models by reducing its computational cost. In this paper, we
propose a new auxiliary-variable minibatched Gibbs sampling method, Poissonminibatching Gibbs, which both produces unbiased samples and has a theoretical
guarantee on its convergence rate. In comparison to previous minibatched Gibbs
algorithms, Poisson-minibatching Gibbs supports fast sampling from continuous
state spaces and avoids the need for a Metropolis-Hastings correction on discrete
state spaces. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on multiple applications and in comparison with both plain Gibbs and previous minibatched
methods.

1

Introduction

Gibbs sampling is a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method which is widely used for inference on graphical models [7]. Gibbs sampling works by iteratively resampling a variable from its
conditional distribution with the remaining variables fixed. Although Gibbs sampling is a powerful
method, its utility can be limited by its computational cost when the model is large. One way to
address this is to use stochastic methods, which use a subsample of the dataset or model—called a
minibatch—to approximate the dataset or model used in an MCMC algorithm. Minibatched variants
of many classical MCMC algorithms have been explored [18, 10, 3, 9], including the MIN-Gibbs
algorithm for Gibbs sampling [3].
In this paper, we propose a new minibatched variant of Gibbs sampling on factor graphs called
Poisson-minibatching Gibbs (Poisson-Gibbs). Like other minibatched MCMC methods, Poissonminibatching Gibbs improves Gibbs sampling by reducing its computational cost. In comparison
to prior work, our method improves upon MIN-Gibbs in two ways. First, it eliminates the need for
a potentially expensive Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) acceptance step, giving it a better asymptotic
per-iteration time complexity than MIN-Gibbs. Poisson-minibatching Gibbs is able to do this by
choosing a minibatch in a way that depends on the current state of the variables, rather than choosing
one that is independent of the current state as is usually done in stochastic algorithms. We show that
such state-dependent minibatches can still be sampled quickly, and that an appropriately chosen statedependent minibatch can result in a reversible Markov chain with the correct stationary distribution
even without a Metropolis-Hastings correction step.
The second way that our method improves upon previous work is that it supports sampling over
continuous state spaces, which are common in machine learning applications (in comparison, the
previous work only supported sampling over discrete state spaces). The main difficulty here for Gibbs
sampling is that resampling a continuous-valued variable from its conditional distribution requires
sampling from a continuous distribution, and this is a nontrivial task (as compared with a discrete
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

