Globally Convergent Newton Methods for
Ill-conditioned Generalized Self-concordant Losses
Ulysse Marteau-Ferey
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure
PSL Reasearch University
ulysse.marteau-ferey@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure
PSL Reasearch University
francis.bach@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA - École Normale Supérieure
PSL Reasearch University
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we study large-scale convex optimization algorithms based on the
Newton method applied to regularized generalized self-concordant losses, which
include logistic regression and softmax regression. We first prove that our new
simple scheme based on a sequence of problems with decreasing regularization
parameters is provably globally convergent, that this convergence is linear with a
constant factor which scales only logarithmically with the condition number. In
the parametric setting, we obtain an algorithm with the same scaling than regular
first-order methods but with an improved behavior, in particular in ill-conditioned
problems. Second, in the non-parametric machine learning setting, we provide
an explicit algorithm combining the previous scheme with Nyström projection
techniques, and prove that it achieves optimal generalization bounds with a time
complexity of order O(ndf λ ), a memory complexity of order O(df 2λ ) and no
dependence on the condition number, generalizing the results known for leastsquares regression. Here n is the number of observations and df λ is the associated
degrees of freedom. In particular, this is the first large-scale algorithm to solve
logistic and softmax regressions in the non-parametric setting with large condition
numbers and theoretical guarantees.

1

Introduction

Minimization algorithms constitute a crucial algorithmic part of many machine learning methods,
with algorithms available for a variety of situations [10]. In this paper, we focus on finite sum
problems of the form
n
λ
1X
min fλ (x) = f (x) + kxk2 , with f (x) =
fi (x),
x∈H
2
n i=1
where H is a Euclidean or a Hilbert space, and each function is convex and smooth. The runningtime of minimization algorithms classically depends on the number of functions n, the explicit (for
Euclidean spaces) or implicit (for Hilbert spaces) dimension d of the search space, and the condition
number of the problem, which is upper bounded by κ = L/λ, where L characterizes the smoothness
of the functions fi , and λ the regularization parameter.
In the last few years, there has been a strong focus on problems with large n and d, leading to firstorder (i.e., gradient-based) stochastic algorithms, culminating in a sequence of linearly convergent
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

