Sample Efficient Active Learning of Causal Trees
Kristjan Greenewald
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Dmitriy Katz
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
dkatzrog@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Sara Magliacane
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
sara.magliacane@ibm.com

Murat Kocaoglu
IBM Research
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
murat@ibm.com

Enric Boix-Adserà
MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
eboix@mit.edu

Guy Bresler
MIT
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
guy@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of experimental design for learning causal graphs that
have a tree structure. We propose an adaptive framework that determines the next
intervention based on a Bayesian prior updated with the outcomes of previous
experiments, focusing on the setting where observational data is cheap (assumed
infinite) and interventional data is expensive. While information greedy approaches
are popular in active learning, we show that in this setting they can be exponentially
suboptimal (in the number of interventions required), and instead propose an
algorithm that exploits graph structure in the form of a centrality measure. If each
intervention yields a very large data sample, we show that the algorithm requires
a number of interventions less than or equal to a factor of 2 times the minimum
achievable number. We show that the algorithm and the associated theory can
be adapted to the setting where each performed intervention yields finitely many
samples. Several extensions are also presented, to the case where a specified set of
nodes cannot be intervened on, to the case where K interventions are scheduled at
once, and to the fully adaptive case where each experiment yields only one sample.
In the case of finite interventional data, through simulated experiments we show
that our algorithms outperform different adaptive baseline algorithms.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery from observational and interventional data is a fundamental problem and prevalent in multiple areas of science and engineering (Pearl, 2009; Spirtes et al., 2000; Peters et al.,
2017). Learning the underlying causal mechanisms is essential for policy design. Technological
advancements in the recent decades have paved the way for the collection of abundant amounts of
observational data, i.e., data collected without perturbing the underlying causal mechanisms. However, observational data is generally not sufficient for drawing causal conclusions and interventional
data, i.e., data collected after a perturbation in the system, may be needed. Therefore, many recent
methods propose to exploit both observational and interventional data (Triantafillou & Tsamardinos,
2015; Hyttinen et al., 2014; Peters et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; Magliacane et al., 2016).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

