Flow-based Image-to-Image Translation
with Feature Disentanglement

Ruho Kondo
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
r-kondo@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Keisuke Kawano
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
kawano@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Satoshi Koide
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
koide@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Takuro Kutsuna
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
kutsuna@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Abstract
Learning non-deterministic dynamics and intrinsic factors from images obtained
through physical experiments is at the intersection of machine learning and material
science. Disentangling the origins of uncertainties involved in microstructure
growth, for example, is of great interest because future states vary due to thermal
fluctuation and other environmental factors. To this end we propose a flow-based
image-to-image model, called Flow U-Net with Squeeze modules (FUNS), that
allows us to disentangle the features while retaining the ability to generate highquality diverse images from condition images. Our model successfully captures
probabilistic phenomena by incorporating a U-Net-like architecture into the flowbased model. In addition, our model automatically separates the diversity of
target images into condition-dependent/independent parts. We demonstrate that
the quality and diversity of the images generated for microstructure growth and
CelebA datasets outperform existing variational generative models.

1

Introduction

Condition-independent diversity
Cross-conditional diversity

Condition-speci ic diversity

Recently, machine learning models for generating various images conditioned on another
x
image (diverse image-to-image models) have
been developed [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] based on vari- c=c
1
ational autoencoders (VAEs) [6] or generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7]. In
the fields of material science, these models
can be used for learning the relationship bex
tween the initial microstructure images and
those after material processing. Figure 1 c=c
2
shows an example of microstructure growth,
in which various microstructures (x) are ob- Nondeterministic Feature
tained from an initial condition (c) via phase dynamics
disentanglement
separation [8]. Such diversity is due not only
to the elapsed processing time but to other Figure 1: Illustration of our tasks: learning microstrucenvironmental factors such as thermal fluc- ture growth and disentangling its features. Condition
tuation [8, 9, 10]. Our first goal is to model and target are indicated as c and x, respectively.
such a non-deterministic image translation,
i.e., to generate diverse images (x) from the corresponding initial conditions (c).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

