Multimodal Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning via
Task-Aware Modulation
Risto Vuorio∗1
Shao-Hua Sun∗2
Hexiang Hu2
Joseph J. Lim2
1
2
University of Michigan
University of Southern California
vuoristo@gmail.com

{shaohuas, hexiangh, limjj}@usc.edu

Abstract
Model-agnostic meta-learners aim to acquire meta-learned parameters from similar
tasks to adapt to novel tasks from the same distribution with few gradient updates.
With the flexibility in the choice of models, those frameworks demonstrate appealing performance on a variety of domains such as few-shot image classification and
reinforcement learning. However, one important limitation of such frameworks is
that they seek a common initialization shared across the entire task distribution,
substantially limiting the diversity of the task distributions that they are able to learn
from. In this paper, we augment MAML [5] with the capability to identify the mode
of tasks sampled from a multimodal task distribution and adapt quickly through
gradient updates. Specifically, we propose a multimodal MAML (MMAML) framework, which is able to modulate its meta-learned prior parameters according to the
identified mode, allowing more efficient fast adaptation. We evaluate the proposed
model on a diverse set of few-shot learning tasks, including regression, image
classification, and reinforcement learning. The results not only demonstrate the
effectiveness of our model in modulating the meta-learned prior in response to the
characteristics of tasks but also show that training on a multimodal distribution
can produce an improvement over unimodal training. The code for this project is
publicly available at https://vuoristo.github.io/MMAML.

1

Introduction

Humans make effective use of prior knowledge to acquire new skills rapidly. When the skill of interest
is related to a wide range of skills that one have mastered before, we can recall relevant knowledge of
prior skills and exploit them to accelerate the new skill acquisition procedure. For example, imagine
that we are learning a novel snowboarding trick with knowledge of basic skills about snowboarding,
skiing, and skateboarding. We accomplish this feat quickly by exploiting our basic snowboarding
knowledge together with inspiration from our skiing and skateboarding experience.
Can machines likewise quickly master a novel skill based on a variety of related skills they have
already acquired? Recent advances in meta-learning [48, 6, 4] have attempted to tackle this problem.
They offer machines a way to rapidly adapt to a new task using few samples by first learning an
internal representation that matches similar tasks. Such representations can be learned by considering
a distribution over similar tasks as the training data distribution. Model-based (i.e. RNN-based)
meta-learning approaches [4, 52, 27, 25] propose to recognize the task identity from a few sample
data, use the task identity to adjust a model’s state (e.g. RNN’s internal state or an external memory)
and make the appropriate predictions with the adjusted model. Those methods demonstrate good
performance at the expense of having to hand-design architectures, yet the optimal strategy of
designing a meta-learner for arbitrary tasks may not always be obvious to humans. On the other hand,
model-agnostic meta-learning frameworks [5, 7, 15, 18, 8, 28, 36, 35] seek an initialization of model
∗

Contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

