Worst-Case Regret Bounds for Exploration via
Randomized Value Functions
Daniel Russo
Columbia University
djr2174@gsb.columbia.edu

Abstract
This paper studies a recent proposal to use randomized value functions to drive
exploration in reinforcement learning. These randomized value functions are
generated by injecting random noise into the training data, making the approach
compatible with many popular methods for estimating parameterized value functions. By providing a worst-case regret bound for tabular finite-horizon Markov
decision processes, we show that planning with respect to these randomized value
functions can induce provably efficient exploration.

1

Introduction

Exploration is one of the central challenges in reinforcement learning (RL). A large theoretical
literature treats exploration in simple finite state and action MDPs, showing that it is possible
to efficiently learn a near optimal policy through interaction alone [5, 8, 10, 11, 13–16, 25, 26].
Overwhelmingly, this literature focuses on optimistic algorithms, with most algorithms explicitly
maintaining uncertainty sets that are likely to contain the true MDP.
It has been difficult to adapt these exploration algorithms to the more complex problems investigated
in the applied RL literature. Most applied papers seem to generate exploration through –greedy
or Boltzmann exploration. Those simple methods are compatible with practical value function
learning algorithms, which use parametric approximations to value functions to generalize across
high dimensional state spaces. Unfortunately, such exploration algorithms can fail catastrophically in
simple finite state MDPs [See e.g. 24]. This paper is inspired by the search for principled exploration
algorithms that both (1) are compatible with practical function learning algorithms and (2) provide
robust performance, at least when specialized to simple benchmarks like tabular MDPs.
Our focus will be on methods that generate exploration by planning with respect to randomized value
function estimates. This idea was first proposed in a conference paper by [22] and is investigated more
thoroughly in the journal paper [24]. It is inspired by work on posterior sampling for reinforcement
learning (a.k.a Thompson sampling) [20, 27], which could be interpreted as sampling a value function
from a posterior distribution and following the optimal policy under that value function for some
extended period of time before resampling. A number of papers have subsequently investigated
approaches that generate randomized value functions in complex reinforcement learning problems
[6, 9, 12, 21, 23, 28, 29]. Our theory will focus on a specific approach of [22, 24], dubbed randomized
least squares value iteration (RLSVI), as specialized to tabular MDPs. The name is a play on the
classic least-squares policy iteration algorithm (LSPI) of [17]. RLSVI generates a randomized value
function (essentially) by judiciously injecting Gaussian noise into the training data and then applying
applying LSPI to this noisy dataset. One could naturally follow the same template while using other
value learning algorithms in place of LSPI.
This is a strikingly simple algorithm, but providing rigorous theoretical guarantees has proved
challenging. One challenge is that, despite the appealing conceptual connections, there are significant
subtleties to any precise link between RLSVI and posterior sampling. The issue is that posterior
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

