Riemannian batch normalization for SPD neural
networks
Daniel Brooks
Thales Land and Air Systems, BU ARC
Limours, FRANCE
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6
Paris, FRANCE
Olivier Schwander
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6
Paris, FRANCE

Frédéric Barbaresco
Thales Land and Air Systems, BU ARC
Limours, FRANCE

Jean-Yves Schneider
Thales Land and Air Systems, BU ARC
Limours, FRANCE

Matthieu Cord
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, LIP6
Paris, FRANCE

Abstract
Covariance matrices have attracted attention for machine learning applications due
to their capacity to capture interesting structure in the data. The main challenge
is that one needs to take into account the particular geometry of the Riemannian
manifold of symmetric positive definite (SPD) matrices they belong to. In the context of deep networks, several architectures for these matrices have recently been
proposed. In our article, we introduce a Riemannian batch normalization (batchnorm) algorithm, which generalizes the one used in Euclidean nets. This novel
layer makes use of geometric operations on the manifold, notably the Riemannian
barycenter, parallel transport and non-linear structured matrix transformations. We
derive a new manifold-constrained gradient descent algorithm working in the space
of SPD matrices, allowing to learn the batchnorm layer. We validate our proposed
approach with experiments in three different contexts on diverse data types: a
drone recognition dataset from radar observations, and on emotion and action
recognition datasets from video and motion capture data. Experiments show that
the Riemannian batchnorm systematically gives better classification performance
compared with leading methods and a remarkable robustness to lack of data.

1

Introduction and related works

Covariance matrices are ubiquitous in any statistical related field but their direct usage as a representation of the data for machine learning is less common. However, it has proved its usefulness in a variety
of applications: object detection in images [46], analysis of Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
data [41], classification of time-series for Brain-Computer Interfaces [8] (BCI). It is particularly
interesting in the case of temporal data since a global covariance matrix is a straightforward way
to capture and represent the temporal fluctuations of data points of different lengths. The main
difficulty is that these matrices, which are symmetric positive definite (SPD), cannot be seen as
points in a Euclidean space: the set of SPD matrices is a curved Riemannian manifold, thus tools
from non-Euclidean geometry must be used; see [10] for a plethora of theoretical justifications and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

