Gradient based sample selection for online continual
learning

Rahaf Aljundi∗
KU Leuven
rahaf.aljundi@gmail.com

Min Lin
Mila
mavenlin@gmail.com

Baptiste Goujaud
Mila
baptiste.goujaud@gmail.com

Yoshua Bengio
Mila
yoshua.bengio@mila.quebec

Abstract
A continual learning agent learns online with a non-stationary and never-ending
stream of data. The key to such learning process is to overcome the catastrophic
forgetting of previously seen data, which is a well known problem of neural
networks. To prevent forgetting, a replay buffer is usually employed to store the
previous data for the purpose of rehearsal. Previous works often depend on task
boundary and i.i.d. assumptions to properly select samples for the replay buffer.
In this work, we formulate sample selection as a constraint reduction problem
based on the constrained optimization view of continual learning. The goal is
to select a fixed subset of constraints that best approximate the feasible region
defined by the original constraints. We show that it is equivalent to maximizing the
diversity of samples in the replay buffer with parameters gradient as the feature.
We further develop a greedy alternative that is cheap and efficient. The advantage
of the proposed method is demonstrated by comparing to other alternatives under
the continual learning setting. Further comparisons are made against state of the
art methods that rely on task boundaries which show comparable or even better
results for our method.

1

Introduction

The central problem of continual learning is to overcome the catastrophic forgetting problem of
neural networks. Current continual learning methods can be categorized into three major families
based on how the information of previous data are stored and used. We describe each of them below.
The prior-focused Prior-focused methods use a penalty term to regularize the parameters rather than
a hard constraint. The parameter gradually drifts away from the feasible regions of previous tasks,
especially when there is a long chain of tasks and when the tasks resemble each other [6]. It is often
necessary to hybridize the prior-focused approach with the replay-based methods for better results
[13, 6].
Another major family is the parameter isolation methods which dedicates different parameters for
different tasks to prevent interference. Dynamic architectures that freeze/grow the network belong
to this family. However, it is also possible to isolate parameters without changing the architecture
[7, 11].
∗

Work mostly done while first author was a visiting researcher at Mila.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

