Using a Logarithmic Mapping to Enable Lower
Discount Factors in Reinforcement Learning

Harm van Seijen
Microsoft Research Montréal
harm.vanseijen@microsoft.com

Mehdi Fatemi
Microsoft Research Montréal
mehdi.fatemi@microsoft.com

Arash Tavakoli
Imperial College London
a.tavakoli@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In an effort to better understand the different ways in which the discount factor
affects the optimization process in reinforcement learning, we designed a set of
experiments to study each effect in isolation. Our analysis reveals that the common
perception that poor performance of low discount factors is caused by (too) small
action-gaps requires revision. We propose an alternative hypothesis that identifies
the size-difference of the action-gap across the state-space as the primary cause.
We then introduce a new method that enables more homogeneous action-gaps by
mapping value estimates to a logarithmic space. We prove convergence for this
method under standard assumptions and demonstrate empirically that it indeed
enables lower discount factors for approximate reinforcement-learning methods.
This in turn allows tackling a class of reinforcement-learning problems that are
challenging to solve with traditional methods.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), the objective that one wants to optimize for is often best described
as an undiscounted sum of rewards (e.g., maximizing the total score in a game) and a discount
factor is merely introduced so as to avoid some of the optimization challenges that can occur when
directly optimizing on an undiscounted objective [Bertsekas and Tsitsiklis, 1996]. In this scenario, the
discount factor plays the role of a hyper-parameter that can be tuned to obtain a better performance
on the true objective. Furthermore, for practical reasons, a policy can only be evaluated for a finite
amount of time, making the effective performance metric a finite-horizon, undiscounted objective.1
To gain a better understanding of the interaction between the discount factor and a finite-horizon,
undiscounted objective, we designed a number of experiments to study this relation. One surprising
finding is that for some problems a low discount factor can result in better asymptotic performance,
when a finite-horizon, undiscounted objective is indirectly optimized through the proxy of an infinitehorizon, discounted sum. This motivates us to look deeper into the effect of the discount factor on the
optimization process.
We analyze why in practice the performance of low discount factors tends to fall flat when combined
with function approximation, especially in tasks with long horizons. Specifically, we refute a number
of common hypotheses and present a new one instead, identifying the primary culprit to be the size1
As an example, in the seminal work of Mnih et al. [2015], the (undiscounted) score of Atari games is
reported with a time-limit of 5 minutes per game.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

