Addressing Sample Complexity in Visual Tasks Using
HER and Hallucinatory GANs

Himanshu Sahni†∗

Toby Buckley‡

Pieter Abbeel‡, §

Ilya Kuzovkin‡

†

Georgia Institute of Technology
‡
OffWorld Inc.
§
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms typically require millions of environment
interactions to learn successful policies in sparse reward settings. Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) was introduced as a technique to increase sample efficiency by
reimagining unsuccessful trajectories as successful ones by altering the originally
intended goals. However, it cannot be directly applied to visual environments where
goal states are often characterized by the presence of distinct visual features. In
this work, we show how visual trajectories can be hallucinated to appear successful
by altering agent observations using a generative model trained on relatively few
snapshots of the goal. We then use this model in combination with HER to train
RL agents in visual settings. We validate our approach on 3D navigation tasks and
a simulated robotics application and show marked improvement over baselines
derived from previous work.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has recently demonstrated success in a range of previously
unsolved tasks, from playing Atari and Go on a superhuman level [23, 14, 34] to learning control
policies for real robotics tasks [20, 28, 29]. But deep RL algorithms are highly sample inefficient for
complex tasks and learning from sparse rewards can be challenging. In these settings, millions of
steps are wasted exploring trajectories that yield no learning signal. On the other hand, shaping the
rewards in an attempt to make learning easier is non-trivial and can often lead to unexpected ‘hacking’
behaviour [26, 30]. Therefore, an important vector for RL research is towards more sample efficient
methods that minimize the number of environment interactions, yet can be trained using only sparse
rewards.
To this end, Andrychowicz et al. [1] introduced Hindsight Experience Replay (HER), which can
rapidly train goal-conditioned policies by retroactively imagining failed trajectories as successful
ones. HER was able to learn a range of robotics tasks that traditional RL approaches are unable to
solve. But it was only shown to work in non-visual environments, where the state input is composed
of object locations and proprioceptive features and it is straightforward to convert any state into a
goal. The precise goal configuration is provided to the agent’s policy throughout training through
a universal value function approximator (UVFA) [31]. UVFAs provide a simple mechanism for
reimagining goals by allowing direct substitution of a new goal in off-policy settings. In many visual
environments, though, goal states appear different from other states. Moreover, if the agent’s policy
is conditioned solely on its state, goals states have to be sought out in the state image using their
distinct visual cues and, in order to reimagine goals, the agent’s observations themselves must be
∗

Work done as an intern at OffWorld Inc. Correspondence to: hsahni3@gatech.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

