Deep Multimodal Multilinear Fusion with
High-order Polynomial Pooling

Ming Hou1,∗, Jiajia Tang2,1,∗ , Jianhai Zhang2 , Wanzeng Kong2 , Qibin Zhao1,†
1
Tensor Learning Unit, Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Japan
2
College of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, China
ming.hou@riken.jp, hdutangjiajia@163.com
jhzhang@hdu.edu.cn, kongwanzeng@hdu.edu.cn, qibin.zhao@riken.jp

Abstract
Tensor-based multimodal fusion techniques have exhibited great predictive performance. However, one limitation is that existing approaches only consider bilinear
or trilinear pooling, which fails to unleash the complete expressive power of multilinear fusion with restricted orders of interactions. More importantly, simply
fusing features all at once ignores the complex local intercorrelations, leading
to the deterioration of prediction. In this work, we first propose a polynomial
tensor pooling (PTP) block for integrating multimodal features by considering
high-order moments, followed by a tensorized fully connected layer. Treating
PTP as a building block, we further establish a hierarchical polynomial fusion
network (HPFN) to recursively transmit local correlations into global ones. By
stacking multiple PTPs, the expressivity capacity of HPFN enjoys an exponential
growth w.r.t. the number of layers, which is shown by the equivalence to a very
deep convolutional arithmetic circuits. Various experiments demonstrate that it can
achieve the state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Multimodal representation learning has been a very actively growing research field in artificial
intelligence and human communication analysis. Its applications have proliferated across human
multimodal tasks such as emotion recognition [2], personality traits recognition [22] and sentiment
analysis [18]. The multimodal signals collected from diverse modalities (spoken language, visual and
acoustic signals) exhibit properties of consistency and complementarity [28]. Extensive studies are
dedicated to modelling the multiple modalities and their complex interactions [28, 14, 15, 13]. These
interactions are hard to model due to the factors like non-trivial multimodal alignment and unreliable
or contradictory information among modalities. It yet remains a major challenge on improving the
generalization ability of the model by exploring heterogeneous properties of the multimodal data.
The very key step of multimodal modelling is referred as multimodal fusion, with the aim at integrating
features of multiple modalities for yielding more robust predictions. Typically, the multimodal feature
fusion can be categorized as early, late and hybrid fusion [1]. Among those, early fusion utilizes
the concatenated signals from different sources as the model input [7]. Late fusion, on the other
hand, attempts to model each modality separately and thus merge them at the decision level, either by
voting or averaging [19, 25]. In hybrid fusion, the output depends on both the predictions of unimodal
and the early fusion. Despite being simple, aforementioned conventional fusion techniques are all
restricted to the concatenation or averaging of, or more generally, linear combination of multimodal
features. And the linear modelling may not be sufficient to capture the complicated intercorrelations.
∗
†

The authors contribute equally
The corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

