HYPE: A Benchmark for Human eYe Perceptual
Evaluation of Generative Models
Sharon Zhou∗, Mitchell L. Gordon∗, Ranjay Krishna,
Austin Narcomey, Li Fei-Fei, Michael S. Bernstein
Stanford University
{sharonz, mgord, ranjaykrishna, aon2, feifeili, msb}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Generative models often use human evaluations to measure the perceived quality
of their outputs. Automated metrics are noisy indirect proxies, because they rely
on heuristics or pretrained embeddings. However, up until now, direct human evaluation strategies have been ad-hoc, neither standardized nor validated. Our work
establishes a gold standard human benchmark for generative realism. We construct
H UMAN E Y E P ERCEPTUAL E VALUATION (HYPE), a human benchmark that is
(1) grounded in psychophysics research in perception, (2) reliable across different
sets of randomly sampled outputs from a model, (3) able to produce separable
model performances, and (4) efficient in cost and time. We introduce two variants:
one that measures visual perception under adaptive time constraints to determine
the threshold at which a model’s outputs appear real (e.g. 250ms), and the other a
less expensive variant that measures human error rate on fake and real images sans
time constraints. We test HYPE across six state-of-the-art generative adversarial
networks and two sampling techniques on conditional and unconditional image
generation using four datasets: CelebA, FFHQ, CIFAR-10, and ImageNet. We find
that HYPE can track the relative improvements between models, and we confirm
via bootstrap sampling that these measurements are consistent and replicable.

Figure 1: Our human evaluation metric, HYPE, consistently distinguishes models from each other:
here, we compare different generative models performance on FFHQ. A score of 50% represents
indistinguishable results from real, while a score above 50% represents hyper-realism.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic images is regarded as a focal task for measuring the progress of generative models.
Automated metrics are either heuristic approximations [49, 52, 14, 26, 9, 45] or intractable density
estimations, examined to be inaccurate on high dimensional problems [24, 7, 55]. Human evaluations,
such as those given on Amazon Mechanical Turk [49, 14], remain ad-hoc because “results change
drastically” [52] based on details of the task design [36, 34, 27]. With both noisy automated and noisy
human benchmarks, measuring progress over time has become akin to hill-climbing on noise. Even
widely used metrics, such as Inception Score [52] and Fréchet Inception Distance [23], have been
discredited for their application to non-ImageNet datasets [3, 48, 8, 46]. Thus, to monitor progress,
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

