Memory-oriented Decoder for Light Field
Salient Object Detection

Miao Zhang∗

Jingjing Li∗
Wei Ji∗
Yongri Piao†
Dalian University of Technology, China

Huchuan Lu

miaozhang@dlut.edu.cn, {lijingjing, jiwei521}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
{yrpiao, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Light field data have been demonstrated in favor of many tasks in computer vision,
but existing works about light field saliency detection still rely on hand-crafted
features. In this paper, we present a deep-learning-based method where a novel
memory-oriented decoder is tailored for light field saliency detection. Our goal is
to deeply explore and comprehensively exploit internal correlation of focal slices
for accurate prediction by designing feature fusion and integration mechanisms.
The success of our method is demonstrated by achieving the state of the art on
three datasets. We present this problem in a way that is accessible to members
of the community and provide a large-scale light field dataset that facilitates
comparisons across algorithms. The code and dataset are made publicly available
at https://github.com/OIPLab-DUT/MoLF.

1

Introduction

Salient object detection (SOD) is the ability to identify the most visually distinctive objects despite
substantial appearance similarity in a scene. This fundamental task has attracted lots of interest due
to its importance in various applications, such as visual tracking [20, 47], object recognition [43, 10],
image segmentation [33], image retrieval [44], and robot navigation [9].
Existing methods can be categorized into 2D (RGB), 3D (RGB-D) and 4D (light field) saliency
detection based on the input data types. 2D methods [15, 23, 8, 18, 21, 36, 27, 63] have achieved great
success and long been dominant in the field of saliency detection. However, 2D saliency detection
methods may suffer from false positives when it comes to challenging scenes shown in Fig. 1. The
reasons are twofold: First, traditional 2D methods underlie many prior knowledges in which violations
highly pose a risk under complex scenes; Second, 2D deep-learning-based methods are subject to the
features extracted from limited RGB data not containing as much special information from RGB-D
data or light field data. 3D saliency detection has also attracted a lot of attention because depth maps
providing scene layout can improve the saliency accuracy to some extent. However, mediocre-quality
depth maps heavily jeopardize the accuracy of saliency detection.
The light field provides images of the scene from an array of viewpoints which spread over the extent
of the lens aperture. These different views can be used to produce a stack of focal slices, containing
abundant spatial parallax information as well as accurate depth information about the objects in the
scene. Furthermore, focusness is one of the strongest information, allowing a human observer to
instantly understand the order in which objects are arranged along the depth in a scene [24, 59, 29].
Light field data have been demonstrated in favor of many applications in computer vision, such as
depth estimation [16, 48, 64], super resolution [67, 55], and material recognition [51]. Due to the
∗
†

denotes equal contributions.
Prof.Piao is the corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

