Cost effective active search
Shali Jiang
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
jiang.s@wustl.edu

Benjamin Moseley
Tepper School of Business, CMU and
Relational AI
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
moseleyb@andrew.cmu.edu

Roman Garnett
CSE, WUSTL
St. Louis, MO 63130
garnett@wustl.edu

Abstract
We study a paradigm of active learning we call cost effective active search, where
the goal is to find a given number of positive points from a large unlabeled pool with
minimum labeling cost. Most existing methods solve this problem heuristically, and
few theoretical results have been established. Here we adopt a principled Bayesian
approach for the first time. We first derive the Bayesian optimal policy and establish
a strong hardness result: the optimal policy is hard to approximate, with the bestpossible approximation ratio bounded below by Ω(n0.16 ). We then propose an
efficient and nonmyopic policy, simulating future search progress using the negative
Poisson binomial distribution. We propose simple and fast approximations for
its expectation, which serves as an essential role in our proposed policy. We
conduct comprehensive experiments on drug and materials discovery datasets and
demonstrate that our proposed method is superior to a popular (greedy) baseline.

1

Introduction

Active search is a particular realization of active learning where the goal is to identify positive points
from a large pool of unlabeled candidates. To make this problem copelling, we typically assume
that the positive points are extremely rare (e.g., <1%) and that labeling process costly, making
the search challenging. A prototypical application is drug discovery, where we seek to identify
compounds exhibiting binding activity with a certain biological target from among millions of
candidates [Warmuth et al., 2001, Garnett et al., 2015]. Other applications include materials discovery
[Jiang et al., 2018b], product recommendation [Vanchinathan et al., 2015], etc.
There have been major theoretical and algorithmic advances on active search in recent years [Garnett
et al., 2012, 2015, Jiang et al., 2017, 2018a]. This work has primarily focussed on the budgeted
setting, where the goal is to find as many positive points as possible in a given budget B, the total
number of points one can query, known a priori. In this paper, we consider the “dual” problem: how
to find a given number of positives with minimum cost. Formally, given a large pool of n points
X = {xi }ni=1 with corresponding unknown labels yi ∈ {0, 1} indicating whether xi is positive or
not, we want to sequentially choose a set D ⊂ X of points to evaluate to identify a given target
number T of positives in as few iterations as possible. We call this problem cost effective active
search (CEAS). To contrast with the budgeted setting, we present both formulations:
P
P
Budgeted: arg maxD⊂X , xi ∈D yi , s.t. |D| = B; CEAS: arg minD⊆X |D|, s.t. xi ∈D yi ≥ T.
One might wonder if we could reduce CEAS to the budgeted case, for which many effective policies
are readily available [Jiang et al., 2017]. For example, given a CEAS problem with target T , we could
instead solve a budgeted problem with an estimated budget B. However, this “dual” transformation
is not one-to-one: given a budget B, the expected utility is no longer T . In fact, both Pr(utility | B)
and Pr(cost | T ) are highly complicated distributions and estimating their expectations is extremely
intractable, as we will show later. Therefore it is necessary to develop specific policies for CEAS.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

