Neural Machine Translation with Soft Prototype

Yiren Wang1,∗, Yingce Xia2,†, Fei Tian3 , Fei Gao4 , Tao Qin2 , ChengXiang Zhai1 , Tie-Yan Liu2
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 Microsoft Research,
3
Facebook, 4 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1
{yiren, czhai}@illinois.edu 2 {yingce.xia, taoqin, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com
3
feitia@fb.com 4 gaofei17n@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Neural machine translation models usually use the encoder-decoder framework and
generate translation from left to right (or right to left) without fully utilizing the
target-side global information. A few recent approaches seek to exploit the global
information through two-pass decoding, yet have limitations in translation quality
and model efficiency. In this work, we propose a new framework that introduces a
soft prototype into the encoder-decoder architecture, which allows the decoder to
have indirect access to both past and future information, such that each target word
can be generated based on the better global understanding. We further provide
an efficient and effective method to generate the prototype. Empirical studies on
various neural machine translation tasks show that our approach brings substantial
improvement in generation quality over the baseline model, with little extra cost
in storage and inference time, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed
framework. Specially, we achieve state-of-the-art results on WMT2014, 2015 and
2017 English→German translation.

1

Introduction

Neural machine translation (briefly, NMT) [1, 17, 16] has attracted much research attention recently.
The major approach for neural machine translation (also, sequence generation) is to generate a
target sequence through a one-pass decoding process, either from left to right [17, 1] or from right
to left [15]. To translate a sentence x, the model usually conditions on the source sentence x and
previously generated words y<t to generate the t-th target word yt .
One limitation of such a one-pass process is that the generation of word yt only uses partial information of the previously generated incomplete sentence y<t , rather than considering the global
information carried by a complete possible target candidate y 0 = (y10 , y20 , ..., yl0 ). Global information
of the target domain is intuitively beneficial for sequence generation, since each word in the target
sentence has to be consistent with its surrounding words, i.e. both words before and after it. Different
approaches have been proposed to leverage the global information to overcome such limitation,
including introducing additional networks that generate an intermediate sequence y 0 from left to
right [18, 12, 20] or from right to left [21], and retrieving an intermediate sequence y 0 from an existing
corpus [5, 4, 11]. These approaches, though proposed for different tasks under different settings, share
the same intrinsic idea to introduce a prototype sequence to the standard encoder-decoder framework.
For example, the intermediate sequence y 0 in [4, 5] serves as a prototype. When generating each
0
token yt , the prototype allows the decoder to have indirect access to both previous (y<t
) and future
0
(y>t
) information, and thus can generate all tokens based on a good global understanding.
∗
†

This work is conducted at Microsoft Research Asia.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

