Diffeomorphic Temporal Alignment Nets

Ron Shapira Weber
Ben-Gurion University
ronsha@post.bgu.ac.il
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen
Technical University of Denmark
nsde@dtu.dk

Matan Eyal
Ben-Gurion University
mataney@post.bgu.ac.il

Oren Shriki
Ben-Gurion University
shrikio@bgu.ac.il

Oren Freifeld
Ben-Gurion University
orenfr@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Time-series analysis is confounded by nonlinear time warping of the data. Traditional methods for joint alignment do not generalize: after aligning a given signal
ensemble, they lack a mechanism, that does not require solving a new optimization
problem, to align previously-unseen signals. In the multi-class case, they must also
first classify the test data before aligning it. Here we propose the Diffeomorphic
Temporal Alignment Net (DTAN), a learning-based method for time-series joint
alignment. Via flexible temporal transformer layers, DTAN learns and applies an
input-dependent nonlinear time warping to its input signal. Once learned, DTAN
easily aligns previously-unseen signals by its inexpensive forward pass. In a singleclass case, the method is unsupervised: the ground-truth alignments are unknown.
In the multi-class case, it is semi-supervised in the sense that class labels (but not
the ground-truth alignments) are used during learning; in test time, however, the
class labels are unknown. As we show, DTAN not only outperforms existing jointalignment methods in aligning training data but also generalizes well to test data.
Our code is available at https://github.com/BGU-CS-VIL/dtan.

1

Introduction

Time-series data often presents a significant amount of misalignment, also known as nonlinear time
warping. To fix ideas, consider ECG recordings from healthy patients during rest. Suppose that
the signals were partitioned correctly such that each segment corresponds to a heartbeat and that
these segments were resampled to have equal length (e.g., see Figure 1). Each resampled segment is
then viewed as a distinct signal. The sample mean of these usually-misaligned signals (even when
restricting to single-patient recordings) would not look like the iconic ECG sinus rhythm; rather, it
would smear the correct peaks and valleys and/or contain superfluous ones. This is unfortunate as
the sample mean, a cornerstone of Descriptive Statistics, has numerous applications in data analysis
(e.g., providing a succinct data summary). Moreover, even if one succeeds somehow in aligning a
currently-available recording batch, upon the arrival of new data batches, the latter will also need to
be aligned; i.e., one would like to generalize the inferred alignment from the original batch to the
new data without having to solve a new optimization problem. This is especially the case if the new
dataset is much larger than the original one; e.g., imagine a hospital solving the problem once, and
then generalizing its solution, essentially at no cost, to align all the data collected in the following
year. Finally, these issues become even more critical for multi-class data (e.g., healthy/sick patients),
where only in the original batch we know which signal belongs to which class; i.e., seemingly, the
new data will have to be explicitly classified before its within-class alignment.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

