Communication-Efficient Distributed Blockwise
Momentum SGD with Error-Feedback
Shuai Zheng⇤1,2 , Ziyue Huang1 , James T. Kwok1
shzheng@amazon.com, {zhuangbq, jamesk}@cse.ust.hk
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
Communication overhead is a major bottleneck hampering the scalability of distributed machine learning systems. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in
using gradient compression to improve the communication efficiency of distributed
neural network training. Using 1-bit quantization, signSGD with majority vote
achieves a 32x reduction on communication cost. However, its convergence is based
on unrealistic assumptions and can diverge in practice. In this paper, we propose
a general distributed compressed SGD with Nesterov’s momentum. We consider
two-way compression, which compresses the gradients both to and from workers.
Convergence analysis on nonconvex problems for general gradient compressors
is provided. By partitioning the gradient into blocks, a blockwise compressor is
introduced such that each gradient block is compressed and transmitted in 1-bit
format with a scaling factor, leading to a nearly 32x reduction on communication. Experimental results show that the proposed method converges as fast as
full-precision distributed momentum SGD and achieves the same testing accuracy.
In particular, on distributed ResNet training with 7 workers on the ImageNet, the
proposed algorithm achieves the same testing accuracy as momentum SGD using
full-precision gradients, but with 46% less wall clock time.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have been highly successful in recent years [9, 10, 17, 22, 27]. To achieve
state-of-the-art performance, they often have to leverage the computing power of multiple machines
during training [8, 26, 28, 6]. Popular approaches include distributed synchronous SGD and its
momentum variant SGDM, in which the computational load for evaluating a mini-batch gradient is
distributed among the workers. Each worker performs local computation, and these local informations
are then merged by the server for final update on the model parameters. However, its scalability is
limited by the possibly overwhelming cost due to communication of the gradient and model parameter
[12]. Let d be the gradient/parameter dimensionality, and M be the number of workers. 64M d bits
need to be transferred between the workers and server in each iteration.
To mitigate this communication bottleneck, the two common approaches are gradient sparsification
and gradient quantization. Gradient sparsification only sends the most significant, informationpreserving gradient entries. A heuristic algorithm is first introduced in [16], in which only the large
entries are transmitted. On training a neural machine translation model with 4 GPUs, this greatly
reduces the communication overhead and achieves 22% speedup [1]. Deep gradient compression
[13] is another heuristic method that combines gradient sparsification with other techniques such as
momentum correction, local gradient clipping, and momentum factor masking, achieving significant
⇤

The work was done before Shuai Zheng joined Amazon Web Services.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

