Max-value Entropy Search for Multi-Objective
Bayesian Optimization

Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, Janardhan Rao Doppa
School of EECS, Washington State University
{syrine.belakaria, aryan.deshwal, jana.doppa}@wsu.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of multi-objective (MO) blackbox optimization using
expensive function evaluations, where the goal is to approximate the true pareto-set
of solutions by minimizing the number of function evaluations. For example, in
hardware design optimization, we need to find the designs that trade-off performance, energy, and area overhead using expensive computational simulations. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach referred as Max-value Entropy Search for
Multi-objective Optimization (MESMO) to solve this problem. MESMO employs
an output-space entropy based acquisition function to efficiently select the sequence
of inputs for evaluation to quickly uncover high-quality pareto-set solutions. We
also provide theoretical analysis to characterize the efficacy of MESMO. Our
experiments on several synthetic and real-world benchmark problems show that
MESMO consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many engineering and scientific applications involve making design choices to optimize multiple
objectives. Some examples include tuning the knobs of a compiler to optimize performance and
efficiency of a set of software programs; and designing new materials to optimize strength, elasticity,
and durability. There are two common challenges in solving this kind of optimization problems: 1)
The objective functions are unknown and we need to perform expensive experiments to evaluate
each candidate design choice. For example, performing computational simulations and physical
lab experiments for compiler optimization and material design applications respectively. 2) The
objectives are conflicting in nature and all of them cannot be optimized simultaneously. Therefore,
we need to find the Pareto optimal set of solutions. A solution is called Pareto optimal if it cannot be
improved in any of the objectives without compromising some other objective. The overall goal is to
approximate the optimal Pareto set by minimizing the number of function evaluations.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) [22] is an effective framework to solve blackbox optimization problems
with expensive function evaluations. The key idea behind BO is to build a cheap surrogate model
(e.g., Gaussian Process [28]) using the real experimental evaluations; and employ it to intelligently
select the sequence of function evaluations using an acquisition function, e.g., expected improvement
(EI). There is a large body of literature on single-objective BO algorithms [22] and their applications
including hyper-parameter tuning of machine learning methods [24, 12]. However, there is relatively
less work on the more challenging problem of BO for multiple objective functions [7] as discussed in
the related work section.
Prior work on multi-objective BO is lacking in the following ways. Many algorithms reduce
the problem to single-objective optimization by designing appropriate acquisition functions, e.g.,
expected improvement in Pareto hypervolume [11, 5]. Unfortunately, this choice is sub-optimal
as it can potentially lead to aggressive exploitation behavior. Additionally, algorithms to optimize
Pareto Hypervolume (PHV) based acquisition functions scale poorly as the number of objectives and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

