DRUM: End-To-End Differentiable Rule Mining On
Knowledge Graphs

Ali Sadeghian *1 , Mohammadreza Armandpour*2 , Patrick Ding,2 Daisy Zhe Wang,1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Florida
2
Department of Statistics, Texas A&M University
{asadeghian, daisyw}@ufl.edu, {armand, patrickding}@stat.tamu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of learning probabilistic logical rules for
inductive and interpretable link prediction. Despite the importance of inductive link
prediction, most previous works focused on transductive link prediction and cannot
manage previously unseen entities. Moreover, they are black-box models that are
not easily explainable for humans. We propose DRUM, a scalable and differentiable
approach for mining first-order logical rules from knowledge graphs which resolves
these problems. We motivate our method by making a connection between learning
confidence scores for each rule and low-rank tensor approximation. DRUM uses
bidirectional RNNs to share useful information across the tasks of learning rules
for different relations. We also empirically demonstrate the efficiency of DRUM
over existing rule mining methods for inductive link prediction on a variety of
benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Knowledge bases store structured information about real-world people, locations, companies and
governments, etc. Knowledge base construction has attracted the attention of researchers, foundations,
industry, and governments [11, 13, 34, 38]. Nevertheless, even the largest knowledge bases remain
incomplete due to the limitations of human knowledge, web corpora, and extraction algorithms.
Numerous projects have been developed to shorten the gap between KBs and human knowledge. A
popular approach is to use the existing elements in the knowledge graph to infer the existence of new
ones. There are two prominent directions in this line of research: representation learning that obtains
distributed vectors for all entities and relations in the knowledge graph [12, 31, 33], and rule mining
that uses observed co-occurrences of frequent patterns in the knowledge graph to determine logical
rules [5, 15]. An example of knowledge graph completion with logical rules is shown in Figure 1.
One of the main advantages of logic-learning based methods for link prediction is that they can
be applied to both transductive and inductive problems while representation learning methods like
that of Bordes et al. [4] and Yang et al. [40] cannot be employed in inductive scenarios. Consider
the scenario in Figure 1, and suppose that at training time our knowledge base does not contain
information about Obama’s family. Representation learning techniques need to be retrained on the
whole knowledge base in order to find the answer. In contrast rule mining methods can transfer
reasoning to unseen facts.
Additionally, learning logical rules provides us with interpretable reasoning for predictions
which is not the case for the embedding based method. This interpretability can keep humans in the loop, facilitate debugging, and increase user trustworthiness. More importantly,
*Authors contributed equally
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

