Wasserstein Weisfeiler-Lehman Graph Kernels
Matteo Togninalli1,2,⇤

matteo.togninalli@bsse.ethz.ch

Felipe Llinares-López1,2

felipe.llinares@bsse.ethz.ch

Elisabetta Ghisu1,2,⇤

elisabetta.ghisu@bsse.ethz.ch

Bastian Rieck1,2

bastian.rieck@bsse.ethz.ch

Karsten Borgwardt1,2

karsten.borgwardt@bsse.ethz.ch
1

D EPARTMENT OF B IOSYSTEMS S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING , ETH Z URICH , S WITZERLAND
2
SIB S WISS I NSTITUTE OF B IOINFORMATICS , S WITZERLAND
⇤
These authors contributed equally

Abstract
Most graph kernels are an instance of the class of R-Convolution kernels, which
measure the similarity of objects by comparing their substructures. Despite their
empirical success, most graph kernels use a naive aggregation of the final set of
substructures, usually a sum or average, thereby potentially discarding valuable
information about the distribution of individual components. Furthermore, only
a limited instance of these approaches can be extended to continuously attributed
graphs. We propose a novel method that relies on the Wasserstein distance between
the node feature vector distributions of two graphs, which allows finding subtler
differences in data sets by considering graphs as high-dimensional objects rather
than simple means. We further propose a Weisfeiler–Lehman-inspired embedding
scheme for graphs with continuous node attributes and weighted edges, enhance it
with the computed Wasserstein distance, and thereby improve the state-of-the-art
prediction performance on several graph classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data have become ubiquitous across domains over the last decades, with examples
ranging from social and sensor networks to chemo- and bioinformatics. Graph kernels [45] have
been highly successful in dealing with the complexity of graphs and have shown good predictive
performance on a variety of classification problems [27, 38, 47]. Most graph kernels rely on the
R-Convolution framework [18], which decomposes structured objects into substructures to compute local similarities that are then aggregated. Although being successful in several applications,
R-Convolution kernels on graphs have limitations: (1) the simplicity of the way in which the similarities between substructures are aggregated might limit their ability to capture complex characteristics
of the graph; (2) most proposed variants do not generalise to graphs with high-dimensional continuous
node attributes, and extensions are far from being straightforward. Various solutions have been proposed to address point (1). For example, Fröhlich et al. [15] introduced kernels based on the optimal
assignment of node labels for molecular graphs, although these kernels are not positive definite [43].
Recently, another approach was proposed by Kriege et al. [25], which employs a Weisfeiler–Lehman
based colour refinement scheme and uses an optimal assignment of the nodes to compute the kernel.
However, this method cannot handle continuous node attributes, leaving point (2) as an open problem.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

