Nonstochastic Multiarmed Bandits
with Unrestricted Delays

Tobias Sommer Thune∗
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
tobias.thune@di.ku.dk

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
DSRC & Univ. degli Studi di Milano
Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen, Denmark
seldin@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We investigate multiarmed bandits with delayed feedback, where the delays need
neither
p be identical nor bounded. We first prove that "delayed" Exp3 achieves the
O (KT + D) ln K regret bound conjectured by Cesa-Bianchi et al. [2019]
in the case of variable, but bounded delays. Here, K is the number of actions
and D is the total delay over T rounds. We then introduce a new algorithm that
lifts the requirement of bounded delays by using a wrapper that skips rounds with
excessively large delays. The new algorithm maintains the same regret bound, but
similar to its predecessor requires prior knowledge of D and T . For this algorithm
we then construct a novel doubling scheme that forgoes the prior knowledge
requirement under the assumption that the delays are available at action time (rather
than at loss observation time). This assumption is satisfied in a broad range of
applications, including interaction with servers and service providers. The resulting
oracle regret bound is of order minβ |Sβ | + β ln K + (KT + Dβ )/β , where |Sβ |
is the number of observations with delay exceeding β, andpDβ is the total delay of

observations with delay below β. The bound relaxes to O (KT + D) ln K , but
we also provide examples where Dβ  D and the oracle bound has a polynomially
better dependence on the problem parameters.

1

Introduction

Multiarmed bandits is an algorithmic paradigm for sequential decision making with a growing
range of industrial applications, including content recommendation, computational advertising,
and many more. In the multiarmed bandit framework an algorithm repeatedly takes actions (e.g.,
recommendation of content to a user) and observes outcomes of these actions (e.g., whether the
user engaged with the content), whereas the outcome of alternative actions (e.g., alternative content
that could have been recommended) remains unobserved. In many real-life situations the algorithm
experience delay between execution of an action and observation of its outcome. Within the delay
period the algorithm may be forced to make a series of other actions (e.g., interact with new users)
before observing the outcomes of all the previous actions. This setup falls outside of the classical
multiarmed bandit paradigm, where observations happen instantaneously after the actions, and
motivates the study of bandit algorithms that are provably robust in the presence of delays.
∗

Part of this work was done while visiting Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

