Understanding Attention and Generalization
in Graph Neural Networks

Boris Knyazev
University of Guelph
Vector Institute
bknyazev@uoguelph.ca

Graham W. Taylor
University of Guelph
Vector Institute, Canada CIFAR AI Chair
gwtaylor@uoguelph.ca

Mohamed R. Amer∗
Robust.AI
mohamed@robust.ai

Abstract
We aim to better understand attention over nodes in graph neural networks (GNNs)
and identify factors influencing its effectiveness. We particularly focus on the ability
of attention GNNs to generalize to larger, more complex or noisy graphs. Motivated
by insights from the work on Graph Isomorphism Networks, we design simple
graph reasoning tasks that allow us to study attention in a controlled environment.
We find that under typical conditions the effect of attention is negligible or even
harmful, but under certain conditions it provides an exceptional gain in performance
of more than 60% in some of our classification tasks. Satisfying these conditions
in practice is challenging and often requires optimal initialization or supervised
training of attention. We propose an alternative recipe and train attention in a
weakly-supervised fashion that approaches the performance of supervised models,
and, compared to unsupervised models, improves results on several synthetic as
well as real datasets. Source code and datasets are available at https://github.
com/bknyaz/graph_attention_pool.

1

Attention meets pooling in graph neural networks

The practical importance of attention in deep learning is well-established and there are many arguments in its favor [1], including interpretability [2, 3]. In graph neural networks (GNNs), attention
can be defined over edges [4, 5] or over nodes [6]. In this work, we focus on the latter, because,
despite being equally important in certain tasks, it is not as thoroughly studied [7]. To begin our
description, we first establish a connection between attention and pooling methods. In convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), pooling methods are generally based on uniformly dividing the regular grid
(such as one-dimensional temporal grid in audio) into local regions and taking a single value from
that region (average, weighted average, max, stochastic, etc.), while attention in CNNs is typically a
separate mechanism that weights C-dimensional input X ∈ RN ×C :
Z=α

X,
(1)
PN
where Zi = αi Xi - output for unit (node in a graph) i, i αi = 1, - element-wise multiplication,
N - the number of units in the input (i.e. number of nodes in a graph).
In GNNs, pooling methods generally follow the same pattern as in CNNs, but the pooling regions
(sets of nodes) are often found based on clustering [8, 9, 10], since there is no grid that can be
uniformly divided into regions in the same way across all examples (graphs) in the dataset. Recently,
top-k pooling [11] was proposed, diverging from other methods: instead of clustering “similar” nodes,
it propagates only part of the input and this part is not uniformly sampled from the input. Top-k
pooling can thus select some local part of the input graph, completely ignoring the rest. For this
reason at first glance it does not appear to be logical.
∗

Most of this work was done while the author was at SRI International.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

