Manifold Denoising by Nonlinear Robust Principal
Component Analysis

He Lyu, Ningyu Sha, Shuyang Qin, Ming Yan, Yuying Xie, Rongrong Wang
Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and Engineering
Michigan State University
{lyuhe,shaningy,qinshuya,myan,xyy,wangron6}@msu.edu

Abstract
This paper extends robust principal component analysis (RPCA) to nonlinear manifolds. Suppose that the observed data matrix is the sum of a sparse component and
a component drawn from some low dimensional manifold. Is it possible to separate
them by using similar ideas as RPCA? Is there any benefit in treating the manifold
as a whole as opposed to treating each local region independently? We answer
these two questions affirmatively by proposing and analyzing an optimization
framework that separates the sparse component from the manifold under noisy data.
Theoretical error bounds are provided when the tangent spaces of the manifold
satisfy certain incoherence conditions. We also provide a near optimal choice of
the tuning parameters for the proposed optimization formulation with the help of a
new curvature estimation method. The efficacy of our method is demonstrated on
both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Manifold learning and graph learning are nowadays widely used in computer vision, image processing,
and biological data analysis on tasks such as classification, anomaly detection, data interpolation,
and denoising. In most applications, graphs are learned from the high dimensional data and used
to facilitate traditional data analysis methods such as PCA, Fourier analysis, and data clustering
[7, 8, 9, 15, 12]. However, the quality of the learned graph may be greatly jeopardized by outliers
which cause instabilities in all the aforementioned graph assisted applications.
In recent years, several methods have been proposed to handle outliers in nonlinear data [11, 21, 3].
Despite the success of those methods, they only aim at detecting the outliers instead of correcting them.
In addition, very few of them are equipped with theoretical analysis of the statistical performances.
In this paper, we propose a novel non-task-driven algorithm for the mixed noise model in (1) and
provide theoretical guarantees to control its estimation error. Specifically, we consider the mixed
noise model as
X̃i = Xi + Si + Ei , i = 1, . . . , n,
(1)
where Xi ∈ Rp is the noiseless data independently drawn from some manifold M with an intrinsic
dimension d  p, Ei is the i.i.d. Gaussian noise with small magnitudes, and Si is the sparse
noise with possibly large magnitudes. If Si has a large entry, then the corresponding X̃i is usually
considered as an outlier. The goal of this paper is to simultaneously recover Xi and Si from X̃i ,
i = 1, .., n.
There are several benefits in recovering the noise term Si along with the signal Xi . First, the support
of Si indicates the locations of the anomaly, which is informative in many applications. For example,
if Xi is the gene expression data from the ith patient, the nonzero elements in Si indicate the
differentially expressed genes that are the candidates for personalized medicine. Similarly, if Si is a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

