Maximum Mean Discrepancy Gradient Flow

Michael Arbel
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
michael.n.arbel@gmail.com

Anna Korba
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
a.korba@ucl.ac.uk

Adil Salim
Visual Computing Center
KAUST
adil.salim@kaust.edu.sa

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
We construct a Wasserstein gradient flow of the maximum mean discrepancy
(MMD) and study its convergence properties. The MMD is an integral probability
metric defined for a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), and serves as a
metric on probability measures for a sufficiently rich RKHS. We obtain conditions
for convergence of the gradient flow towards a global optimum, that can be related
to particle transport when optimizing neural networks. We also propose a way to
regularize this MMD flow, based on an injection of noise in the gradient. This
algorithmic fix comes with theoretical and empirical evidence. The practical
implementation of the flow is straightforward, since both the MMD and its gradient
have simple closed-form expressions, which can be easily estimated with samples.

1

Introduction

We address the problem of defining a gradient flow on the space of probability distributions endowed
with the Wasserstein metric, which transports probability mass from a starting distribtion ν to a target
distribution µ. Our flow is defined on the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) [19], an integral
probability metric [33] which uses the unit ball in a characteristic RKHS [43] as its witness function
class. Specifically, we choose the function in the witness class that has the largest difference in
expectation under ν and µ: this difference constitutes the MMD. The idea of descending a gradient
flow over the space of distributions can be traced back to the seminal work of [24], who revealed
that the Fokker-Planck equation is a gradient flow of the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Its timediscretization leads to the celebrated Langevin Monte Carlo algorithm, which comes with strong
convergence guarantees (see [14, 15]), but requires the knowledge of an analytical form of the target
µ. A more recent gradient flow approach, Stein Variational Gradient Descent (SVGD) [29], also
leverages this analytical µ.
The study of particle flows defined on the MMD relates to two important topics in modern machine
learning. The first is in training Implicit Generative Models, notably generative adversarial networks
[18]. Integral probability metrics have been used extensively as critic functions in this setting: these
include the Wasserstein distance [3, 17, 22] and maximum mean discrepancy [2, 4, 5, 16, 27, 28]. In
[32, Section 3.3], a connection between IGMs and particle transport is proposed, where it is shown
that gradient flow on the witness function of an integral probability metric takes a similar form to the
generator update in a GAN. The critic IPM in this case is the Kernel Sobolev Discrepancy (KSD),
which has an additional gradient norm constraint on the witness function compared with the MMD. It
is intended as an approximation to the negative Sobolev distance from the optimal transport literature
[35, 36, 45]. There remain certain differences between gradient flow and GAN training, however.
First, and most obviously, gradient flow can be approximated by representing ν as a set of particles,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

