Legendre Memory Units: Continuous-Time
Representation in Recurrent Neural Networks

Aaron R. Voelker1,2
1

Ivana Kajić1

Chris Eliasmith1,2

Centre for Theoretical Neuroscience, Waterloo, ON 2 Applied Brain Research, Inc.
{arvoelke, i2kajic, celiasmith}@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
We propose a novel memory cell for recurrent neural networks that dynamically
maintains information across long windows of time using relatively few resources.
The Legendre Memory Unit (LMU) is mathematically derived to orthogonalize
its continuous-time history – doing so by solving d coupled ordinary differential
equations (ODEs), whose phase space linearly maps onto sliding windows of
time via the Legendre polynomials up to degree d − 1. Backpropagation across
LMUs outperforms equivalently-sized LSTMs on a chaotic time-series prediction
task, improves memory capacity by two orders of magnitude, and significantly
reduces training and inference times. LMUs can efficiently handle temporal dependencies spanning 100,000 time-steps, converge rapidly, and use few internal
state-variables to learn complex functions spanning long windows of time – exceeding state-of-the-art performance among RNNs on permuted sequential MNIST.
These results are due to the network’s disposition to learn scale-invariant features
independently of step size. Backpropagation through the ODE solver allows each
layer to adapt its internal time-step, enabling the network to learn task-relevant
time-scales. We demonstrate that LMU memory cells can be implemented using
m recurrently-connected
√ Poisson spiking neurons, O(m) time and memory, with
error scaling as O(d/ m). We discuss implementations of LMUs on analog and
digital neuromorphic hardware.

1

Introduction

A variety of recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures have been used for tasks that require
learning long-range temporal dependencies, including machine translation [3, 26, 34], image caption
generation [36, 39], and speech recognition [10, 16]. An architecture that has been especially
successful in modelling complex temporal relationships is the LSTM [18], which owes its superior
performance to a combination of memory cells and gating mechanisms that maintain and nonlinearly
mix information over time.
LSTMs are designed to help alleviate the issue of vanishing and exploding gradients commonly
associated with training RNNs [5]. However, they are still prone to unstable gradients and saturation
effects for sequences of length T > 100 [2, 22]. To combat this problem, extensive hyperparameter
searches, gradient clipping strategies, layer normalization, and many other RNN training “tricks” are
commonly employed [21].
Although standard LSTMs with saturating units have recently been found to have a memory of about
T = 500–1,000 time-steps [25], non-saturating units in RNNs can improve gradient flow and scale to
2,000–5,000 time-steps before encountering instabilities [7, 25]. However, signals in realistic natural
environments are continuous in time, and it is unclear how existing RNNs can cope with conditions
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

