Universality and individuality in neural dynamics
across large populations of recurrent networks

Niru Maheswaranathan∗
Google Brain, Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA
nirum@google.com

Alex H. Williams∗
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
ahwillia@stanford.edu

Surya Ganguli
Stanford University and Google Brain
Stanford, CA and Mountain View, CA
sganguli@stanford.edu

Matthew D. Golub
Stanford University
Stanford, CA
mgolub@stanford.edu

David Sussillo†
Google Brain, Google Inc.
Mountain View, CA
sussillo@google.com

Abstract
Task-based modeling with recurrent neural networks (RNNs) has emerged as a
popular way to infer the computational function of different brain regions. These
models are quantitatively assessed by comparing the low-dimensional neural representations of the model with the brain, for example using canonical correlation
analysis (CCA). However, the nature of the detailed neurobiological inferences
one can draw from such efforts remains elusive. For example, to what extent does
training neural networks to solve common tasks uniquely determine the network
dynamics, independent of modeling architectural choices? Or alternatively, are
the learned dynamics highly sensitive to different model choices? Knowing the
answer to these questions has strong implications for whether and how we should
use task-based RNN modeling to understand brain dynamics. To address these
foundational questions, we study populations of thousands of networks, with commonly used RNN architectures, trained to solve neuroscientifically motivated tasks
and characterize their nonlinear dynamics. We find the geometry of the RNN
representations can be highly sensitive to different network architectures, yielding
a cautionary tale for measures of similarity that rely on representational geometry,
such as CCA. Moreover, we find that while the geometry of neural dynamics
can vary greatly across architectures, the underlying computational scaffold—the
topological structure of fixed points, transitions between them, limit cycles, and
linearized dynamics—often appears universal across all architectures.

1

Introduction

The computational neuroscience community is increasingly relying on deep learning both to directly
model large-scale neural recordings [1, 2, 3] as well to train neural networks on computational tasks
and compare the internal dynamics of such trained networks to measured neural recordings [4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9]. For example, several recent studies have reported similarities between the internal representations of biological and artificial networks [5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. These representational
similarities are quite striking since artificial neural networks clearly differ in many ways from their
much more biophysically complex natural counterparts. How then, should we scientifically interpret
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

