SpArSe: Sparse Architecture Search for CNNs on
Resource-Constrained Microcontrollers
Igor Fedorov
Arm ML Research
igor.fedorov@arm.com

Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
rpa@princeton.edu

Matthew Mattina
Arm ML Research
matthew.mattina@arm.com

Paul N. Whatmough
Arm ML Research
paul.whatmough@arm.com

Abstract
The vast majority of processors in the world are actually microcontroller units
(MCUs), which find widespread use performing simple control tasks in applications
ranging from automobiles to medical devices and office equipment. The Internet
of Things (IoT) promises to inject machine learning into many of these every-day
objects via tiny, cheap MCUs. However, these resource-impoverished hardware
platforms severely limit the complexity of machine learning models that can be
deployed. For example, although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve
state-of-the-art results on many visual recognition tasks, CNN inference on MCUs
is challenging due to severe memory limitations. To circumvent the memory
challenge associated with CNNs, various alternatives have been proposed that do
fit within the memory budget of an MCU, albeit at the cost of prediction accuracy.
This paper challenges the idea that CNNs are not suitable for deployment on
MCUs. We demonstrate that it is possible to automatically design CNNs which
generalize well, while also being small enough to fit onto memory-limited MCUs.
Our Sparse Architecture Search method combines neural architecture search with
pruning in a single, unified approach, which learns superior models on four popular
IoT datasets. The CNNs we find are more accurate and up to 7.4× smaller than
previous approaches, while meeting the strict MCU working memory constraint.

1

Introduction

The microcontroller unit (MCU) is a truly ubiquitous computer. MCUs are self-contained single-chip
processors which are small (∼ 1cm2 ), cheap (∼ $1), and power efficient (∼ 1mW). Applications
are extremely broad, but often include seemingly banal tasks such as simple control and sequencing
operations for everyday devices like washing machines, microwave ovens, and telephones. The key
advantage of MCUs over application specific integrated circuits is that they are programmed with
software and can be readily updated to fix bugs, change functionality, or add new features. The
short time to market and flexibility of software has led to the staggering popularity of MCUs. In
the developed world, a typical home is likely to have around four general-purpose microprocessors.
In contrast, the number of MCUs is around three dozen [46]. A typical mid-range car may have
about 30 MCUs. Public market estimates suggest that around 50 billion MCU chips will ship in
2019 [1], which far eclipses other chips like graphics processing units (GPUs), whose shipments
totalled roughly 100 million units in 2018 [2].
MCUs can be highly resource constrained; Table 1 compares MCUs with bigger processors. The
broad proliferation of MCUs relative to desktop GPUs and CPUs stems from the fact that they are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

