Average-Case Averages: Private Algorithms for
Smooth Sensitivity and Mean Estimation

Mark Bun
Boston University
mbun@bu.edu

Thomas Steinke
IBM Research – Almaden
smooth@thomas-steinke.net

Abstract
The simplest and most widely applied method for guaranteeing differential privacy
is to add instance-independent noise to a statistic of interest that is scaled to its
global sensitivity. However, global sensitivity is a worst-case notion that is often too
conservative for realized dataset instances. We provide methods for scaling noise
in an instance-dependent way and demonstrate that they provide greater accuracy
under average-case distributional assumptions. Specifically, we consider the basic
problem of privately estimating the mean of a real distribution from i.i.d. samples.
The standard empirical mean estimator can have arbitrarily-high global sensitivity.
We propose the trimmed mean estimator, which interpolates between the mean and
the median, as a way of attaining much lower sensitivity on average while losing
very little in terms of statistical accuracy. To privately estimate the trimmed mean,
we revisit the smooth sensitivity framework of Nissim, Raskhodnikova, and Smith
(STOC 2007), which provides a framework for using instance-dependent sensitivity.
We propose three new additive noise distributions which provide concentrated
differential privacy when scaled to smooth sensitivity. We provide theoretical and
experimental evidence showing that our noise distributions compare favorably to
others in the literature, in particular, when applied to the mean estimation problem.

1

Introduction

Consider a sensitive dataset x ∈ X n consisting of the records of n individuals and a real-valued
function f : X n → R. Our goal is to estimate f (x) while protecting the privacy of the individuals
whose data is being used. Differential privacy [14] gives a formal standard of individual privacy for
this problem (and many others), requiring that, for all pairs of datasets x, y ∈ X n differing in one
record (called neighbouring datasets and denoted d(x, y) ≤ 1), the distribution of outputs should be
similar for both inputs x and y.
The most basic technique in differential privacy is to release an answer f (x) + ν, where ν is instanceindependent additive noise (e.g., Laplace or Gaussian) with standard deviation proportional to the
global sensitivity GSf of the function f . Here,
GSf =

max

y,z∈X n : d(y,z)≤1

|f (y) − f (z)|

measures the maximum amount that f can change across all pairs of datasets differing on one entry,
including those which have nothing to do with x.
Calibrating noise to global sensitivity is optimal in the worst case, but may be overly pessimistic in
the average case. This occurs in many statistical settings where x consists of i.i.d. samples from a
reasonably structured distribution and the goal is to estimate a summary statistic of that distribution.
The main example we consider in this work is that of estimating the mean of a distribution given
i.i.d. samples from it. The standard estimator for the distribution mean is the sample mean. However,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

