Outlier-Robust High-Dimensional Sparse Estimation
via Iterative Filtering

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin - Madison
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com
Daniel Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@ucsd.edu

Sushrut Karmalkar
UT Austin
s.sushrut@gmail.com

Eric Price
UT Austin
ecprice@cs.utexas.edu

Alistair Stewart
Web3 Foundation
stewart.al@gmail.com

Abstract
We study high-dimensional sparse estimation tasks in a robust setting where a
constant fraction of the dataset is adversarially corrupted. Specifically, we focus
on the fundamental problems of robust sparse mean estimation and robust sparse
PCA. We give the first practically viable robust estimators for these problems. In
more detail, our algorithms are sample and computationally efficient and achieve
near-optimal robustness guarantees. In contrast to prior provable algorithms which
relied on the ellipsoid method, our algorithms use spectral techniques to iteratively
remove outliers from the dataset. Our experimental evaluation on synthetic data
shows that our algorithms are scalable and significantly outperform a range of
previous approaches, nearly matching the best error rate without corruptions.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

The task of leveraging sparsity to extract meaningful information from high-dimensional datasets
is a fundamental problem of significant practical importance, motivated by a range of data analysis
applications. Various formalizations of this general problem have been investigated in statistics and
machine learning for at least the past two decades, see, e.g., [HTW15] for a recent textbook on the
topic. This paper focuses on the unsupervised setting and in particular on estimating the parameters
of a high-dimensional distribution under sparsity assumptions. Concretely, we study the problems
of sparse mean estimation and sparse PCA under natural data generating models.
The classical setup in statistics is that the data was generated by a probabilistic model of a given
type. This is a simplifying assumption that is only approximately valid, as real datasets are typically
exposed to some source of contamination. The field of robust statistics [Hub64, HR09, HRRS86]
aims to design estimators that are robust in the presence of model misspecification. In recent years,
designing computationally efficient robust estimators for high-dimensional settings has become a
pressing challenge in a number of applications. These include the analysis of biological datasets,
where natural outliers are common [RPW+ 02, PLJD10, LAT+ 08] and can contaminate the downstream statistical analysis, and data poisoning attacks [BNJT10], where even a small fraction of fake
data (outliers) can substantially degrade the learned model [BNL12, SKL17].
This discussion motivates the design of robust estimators that can tolerate a constant fraction of
adversarially corrupted data. We will use the following model of corruptions (see, e.g., [DKK+ 16]):
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

