Algorithmic Guarantees for Inverse Imaging
with Untrained Network Priors
Gauri Jagatap
New York University
gauri.jagatap@nyu.edu

Chinmay Hegde
New York University
chinmay.h@nyu.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks as image priors have been recently introduced for problems
such as denoising, super-resolution and inpainting with promising performance
gains over hand-crafted image priors such as sparsity. Unlike learned generative
priors they do not require any training over large datasets. However, few theoretical
guarantees exist in the scope of using untrained network priors for inverse imaging
problems. We explore new applications and theory for untrained neural network
priors. Specifically, we consider the problem of solving linear inverse problems,
such as compressive sensing, as well as non-linear problems, such as compressive
phase retrieval. We model images to lie in the range of an untrained deep generative
network with a fixed seed. We further present a projected gradient descent scheme
that can be used for both compressive sensing and phase retrieval and provide
rigorous theoretical guarantees for its convergence. We also show both theoretically
as well as empirically that with deep neural network priors, one can achieve better
compression rates for the same image quality as compared to when hand crafted
priors are used.

1

Introduction

1.1

Motivation

Deep neural networks have led to unprecedented success in solving several problems, specifically in
the domain of inverse imaging. Image denoising [1], super-resolution [2], inpainting and compressed
sensing [3], and phase retrieval [4] are among the many imaging applications that have benefited
from the usage of deep convolutional networks (CNNs) trained with thousands of images.
Apart from supervised learning, deep CNN models have also been used in unsupervised setups, such
as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). Here, image priors based on a generative model [5] are
learned from training data. In this context, neural networks emulate the probability distribution of the
data inputs. GANs have been used to model signal prior by learning the distribution of training data.
Such learned priors have replaced hand-crafted priors with high success rates [3, 6, 7, 8]. However,
the main challenge with these approaches is the requirement of massive amounts of training data. For
instance, super-resolution CNN [2] uses ImageNet which contains millions of images. Moreover,
convergence guarantees for training such networks are limited [7].
In contrast, there has been recent interest in using untrained neural networks as an image prior. Deep
Image Prior [9] and variants such as Deep Decoder [10] are capable of solving linear inverse imaging
problems with no training data whatsover, while merely imposing an auto-encoder [9] and decoder
[10] architecture as a structural prior. For denoising, inpainting and super-resolution, deep image
priors have shown superior reconstruction performance as compared to conventional methodologies
such as basis pursuit denoising (BPDN) [11], BM3D [12] as well as convolutional sparse coding
[13]. Similar emperical results have been claimed very recently in the context of time-series data
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

