PIDForest: Anomaly Detection via Partial
Identification
Parikshit Gopalan
VMware Research
pgopalan@vmware.com

Vatsal Sharan
Stanford University
vsharan@stanford.edu

Udi Wieder
VMware Research
uwieder@vmware.com

Abstract
We consider the problem of detecting anomalies in a large dataset. We propose a
framework called Partial Identification which captures the intuition that anomalies
are easy to distinguish from the overwhelming majority of points by relatively
few attribute values. Formalizing this intuition, we propose a geometric anomaly
measure for a point that we call PIDScore, which measures the minimum density
of data points over all subcubes containing the point. We present PIDForest: a
random forest based algorithm that finds anomalies based on this definition. We
show that it performs favorably in comparison to several popular anomaly detection
methods, across a broad range of benchmarks. PIDForest also provides a succinct
explanation for why a point is labelled anomalous, by providing a set of features
and ranges for them which are relatively uncommon in the dataset.1

1

Introduction

An anomaly in a dataset is a point that does not conform to what is normal or expected. Anomaly
detection is a ubiquitous machine learning task with diverse applications including network monitoring, medicine and finance [1, Section 3]. There is an extensive body of research devoted to it,
see [1, 2] and the references therein. Our work is primarily motivated by the emergence of large
distributed systems, like the modern data center which produce massive amounts of heterogeneous
data. Operators need to constantly monitor this data, and use it to identify and troubleshoot problems.
The volumes of data involved are so large that a lot of the analysis has to be automated. Here we
highlight some of the challenges that an anomaly detection algorithm must face.
1. High dimensional, heterogeneous data: The data collected could contains measurements
of metrics like cpu usage, memory, bandwidth, temperature, in addition to categorical data
such as day of the week, geographic location, OS type. This makes finding an accurate
generative model for the data challenging. The metrics might be captured in different units,
hence algorithms that are unit-agnostic are preferable. The algorithm needs to scale to high
dimensional data.
2. Scarce labels: Most of the data are unlabeled. Generating labels is time and effort intensive
and requires domain knowledge. Hence supervised methods are a non-starter, and even
tuning too many hyper-parameters of unsupervised algorithms could be challenging.
3. Irrelevant attributes: Often an anomaly manifests itself in a relatively small number of
attributes among the large number being monitored. For instance, a single machine in a
large datacenter might be compromised and behave abnormally.
4. Interpretability of results: When we alert a datacenter administrator to a potential
anomaly, it helps to point to a few metrics that might have triggered it, to help in troubleshooting.
1

The full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.03582.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

