Emergence of Object Segmentation
in Perturbed Generative Models
Adam Bielski
University of Bern
adam.bielski@inf.unibe.ch

Paolo Favaro
University of Bern
paolo.favaro@inf.unibe.ch

Abstract
We introduce a framework to learn object segmentation from a collection of images
without any manual annotation. We build on the observation that the location of
object segments can be perturbed locally relative to a given background without
affecting the realism of a scene. First, we train a generative model of a layered scene.
The layered representation consists of a background image, a foreground image and
the mask of the foreground. A composite image is then obtained by overlaying the
masked foreground image onto the background. The generative model is trained in
an adversarial fashion against a discriminator, which forces the generative model to
produce realistic composite images. To force the generator to learn a representation
where the foreground layer corresponds to an object, we perturb the output of
the generative model by introducing a random shift of both the foreground image
and mask relative to the background. Because the generator is unaware of the
shift before computing its output, it must produce layered representations that are
realistic for any such random perturbation. Second, we learn to segment an image
by defining an autoencoder consisting of an encoder, which we train, and the pretrained generator as the decoder, which we fix. The encoder maps an image to the
input of the generator, which then outputs a composite image matching the original
input image. Because the generator outputs an explicit layered representation of
the scene, the encoder learns to detect and segment objects. We demonstrate this
framework on real images of several object categories.

1

Introduction

The problem of extracting a useful interpretation from an image may be simplified by image segmentation, i.e., by partitioning such image into regions associated to separate objects. One of the
challenges in image segmentation is the difficulty of formulating a precise definition of the “correct
image partition”. This has been addressed by using manual annotation indicating the pixels associated
to a set of object categories (by using bounding boxes or landmarks or detailed object segmentations).
However, manual annotation is costly and time-consuming and not easily scalable in some image
domains due to lack of expertise and data privacy (e.g., in medicine). This raises the question of
whether it is possible to obtain object segmentation directly from collections of real images without
any manual annotation. In this paper we show that this is indeed possible and demonstrate it on
several datasets of real images. Our approach is to first identify a powerful and general principle to
define what an object segment is, and then to devise a model and training scheme to learn through
that principle.
With reference to Fig. 1, we propose to build a generative model that outputs a background image, a
foreground object and a foreground mask. This model is trained in an adversarial manner against a
discriminator. The discriminator aims to distinguish the composite image, obtained by overlaying the
output triplet of the generator, from real images. This training alone provides no incentive for the
generator to produce triplets with correct object segmentations. In fact, a trivial solution is to have
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

