Reinforcement Learning with Convex Constraints
Sobhan Miryoosefi
Princeton University
miryoosefi@cs.princeton.edu

Kianté Brantley
University of Maryland
kdbrant@cs.umd.edu

Miroslav Dudík
Microsoft Research
mdudik@microsoft.com

Hal Daumé III
Microsoft Research
University of Maryland
me@hal3.name

Robert E. Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
In standard reinforcement learning (RL), a learning agent seeks to optimize the
overall reward. However, many key aspects of a desired behavior are more naturally expressed as constraints. For instance, the designer may want to limit the use
of unsafe actions, increase the diversity of trajectories to enable exploration, or
approximate expert trajectories when rewards are sparse. In this paper, we propose
an algorithmic scheme that can handle a wide class of constraints in RL tasks,
specifically, any constraints that require expected values of some vector measurements (such as the use of an action) to lie in a convex set. This captures previously
studied constraints (such as safety and proximity to an expert), but also enables
new classes of constraints (such as diversity). Our approach comes with rigorous
theoretical guarantees and only relies on the ability to approximately solve standard
RL tasks. As a result, it can be easily adapted to work with any model-free or
model-based RL algorithm. In our experiments, we show that it matches previous
algorithms that enforce safety via constraints, but can also enforce new properties
that these algorithms cannot incorporate, such as diversity.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) typically considers the problem of learning to optimize the behavior of
an agent in an unknown environment against a single scalar reward function. For simple tasks, this
can be sufficient, but for complex tasks, boiling down the learning goal into a single scalar reward
can be challenging. Moreover, a scalar reward might not be a natural formalism for stating certain
learning objectives, such as safety desires (“avoid dangerous situations”) or exploration suggestions
(“maintain a distribution over visited states that is as close to uniform as possible”). In these settings,
it is much more natural to define the learning goal in terms of a vector of measurements over the
behavior of the agent, and to learn a policy whose measurement vector is inside a target set (§2).
We derive an algorithm, approachability-based policy optimization (A PPRO PO, pronounced like
“apropos”), for solving such problems (§3). Given a Markov decision process with vector-valued
measurements (§2), and a target constraint set, A PPRO PO learns a stochastic policy whose expected
measurements fall in that target set (akin to Blackwell approachability in single-turn games, Blackwell,
1956). We derive our algorithm from a game-theoretic perspective, leveraging recent results in online
convex optimization. A PPRO PO is implemented as a reduction to any off-the-shelf reinforcement
learning algorithm that can return an approximately optimal policy, and so can be used in conjunction
with the algorithms that are the most appropriate for any given domain.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

