Invert to Learn to Invert
Patrick Putzky
Amlab, University of Amsterdam (UvA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems (MPI-IS), Tübingen, Germany
patrick.putzky@googlemail.com
Max Welling
Amlab, University of Amsterdam (UvA), Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR), Canada
welling.max@googlemail.com

Abstract
Iterative learning to infer approaches have become popular solvers for inverse
problems. However, their memory requirements during training grow linearly with
model depth, limiting in practice model expressiveness. In this work, we propose
an iterative inverse model with constant memory that relies on invertible networks
to avoid storing intermediate activations. As a result, the proposed approach allows
us to train models with 400 layers on 3D volumes in an MRI image reconstruction
task. In experiments on a public data set, we demonstrate that these deeper, and
thus more expressive, networks perform state-of-the-art image reconstruction.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of solving inverse problems. An inverse problem is described through a so called
forward problem that models either a real world measurement process or an auxiliary prediction task.
The forward problem can be written as
d = A(p, n)

(1)

where d is the measurable data, A is a (non-)linear forward operator that models the measurement
process, p is an unobserved signal of interest, and n is observational noise. Solving the inverse
problem is then a matter of finding an inverse model p = A−1 (d). However, if the problem is
ill-posed or the forward problem is non-linear, finding A−1 is a non-trivial task. Oftentimes, it is
necessary to impose assumptions about signal p and to solve the task in an iterative fashion [1].
1.1

Learn to Invert

Many recent approached to solving inverse problems focus on models that learn to invert the forward
problem by mimicking the behaviour of an iterative optimization algorithm. Here, we will refer to
models of this type as “iterative inverse models”. Most iterative inverse models can be described
through a recursive update equation of the form
pt+1 , st+1 = hφ (A, d, pt , st )

(2)

where hφ is a parametric function, pt is an estimate of signal p and st is an auxiliary (memory)
variable at iteration t, respectively. Because hφ is an iterative model it is often interpreted as
a recurrent neural network (RNN). The functional form of hφ ultimately characterizes different
approaches to iterative inverse models. Figure 1 (A) illustrates the iterative steps of such models.
Training of iterative inverse models is typically done via supervised learning. To generate training
data, measurements d are simulated from ground truth observations p through a known forward
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

