Imitation-Projected Programmatic Reinforcement
Learning

Abhinav Verma∗
Rice University
averma@rice.edu

Hoang M. Le∗
Caltech
hmle@caltech.edu

Yisong Yue
Caltech
yyue@caltech.edu

Swarat Chaudhuri
Rice University
swarat@rice.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of programmatic reinforcement learning, in which policies
are represented as short programs in a symbolic language. Programmatic policies can be more interpretable, generalizable, and amenable to formal verification
than neural policies; however, designing rigorous learning approaches for such
policies remains a challenge. Our approach to this challenge — a meta-algorithm
called P ROPEL— is based on three insights. First, we view our learning task as
optimization in policy space, modulo the constraint that the desired policy has a
programmatic representation, and solve this optimization problem using a form of
mirror descent that takes a gradient step into the unconstrained policy space and
then projects back onto the constrained space. Second, we view the unconstrained
policy space as mixing neural and programmatic representations, which enables
employing state-of-the-art deep policy gradient approaches. Third, we cast the projection step as program synthesis via imitation learning, and exploit contemporary
combinatorial methods for this task. We present theoretical convergence results for
P ROPEL and empirically evaluate the approach in three continuous control domains.
The experiments show that P ROPEL can significantly outperform state-of-the-art
approaches for learning programmatic policies.

1

Introduction

A growing body of work [58, 8, 60] investigates reinforcement learning (RL) approaches that represent
policies as programs in a symbolic language, e.g., a domain-specific language for composing control
modules such as PID controllers [5]. Short programmatic policies offer many advantages over neural
policies discovered through deep RL, including greater interpretability, better generalization to unseen
environments, and greater amenability to formal verification. These benefits motivate developing
effective approaches for learning such programmatic policies.
However, programmatic reinforcement learning (PR L) remains a challenging problem, owing to the
highly structured nature of the policy space. Recent state-of-the-art approaches employ program
synthesis methods to imitate or distill a pre-trained neural policy into short programs [58, 8]. However, such a distillation process can yield a highly suboptimal programmatic policy — i.e., a large
distillation gap — and the issue of direct policy search for programmatic policies also remains open.
In this paper, we develop P ROPEL (Imitation-Projected Programmatic Reinforcement Learning),
a new learning meta-algorithm for PR L, as a response to this challenge. The design of P ROPEL
is based on three insights that enables integrating and building upon state-of-the-art approaches
for policy gradients and program synthesis. First, we view programmatic policy learning as a
constrained policy optimization problem, in which the desired policies are constrained to be those
that have a programmatic representation. This insight motivates utilizing constrained mirror descent
approaches, which take a gradient step into the unconstrained policy space and then project back onto
the constrained space. Second, by allowing the unconstrained policy space to have a mix of neural
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

