Language as an Abstraction
for Hierarchical Deep Reinforcement Learning

Yiding Jiang∗, Shixiang Gu, Kevin Murphy, Chelsea Finn
Google Research
{ydjiang,shanegu,kpmurphy,chelseaf}@google.com

Abstract
Solving complex, temporally-extended tasks is a long-standing problem in reinforcement learning (RL). We hypothesize that one critical element of solving such
problems is the notion of compositionality. With the ability to learn concepts
and sub-skills that can be composed to solve longer tasks, i.e. hierarchical RL,
we can acquire temporally-extended behaviors. However, acquiring effective yet
general abstractions for hierarchical RL is remarkably challenging. In this paper,
we propose to use language as the abstraction, as it provides unique compositional structure, enabling fast learning and combinatorial generalization, while
retaining tremendous flexibility, making it suitable for a variety of problems. Our
approach learns an instruction-following low-level policy and a high-level policy
that can reuse abstractions across tasks, in essence, permitting agents to reason
using structured language. To study compositional task learning, we introduce an
open-source object interaction environment built using the MuJoCo physics engine
and the CLEVR engine. We find that, using our approach, agents can learn to
solve to diverse, temporally-extended tasks such as object sorting and multi-object
rearrangement, including from raw pixel observations. Our analysis reveals that
the compositional nature of language is critical for learning diverse sub-skills and
systematically generalizing to new sub-skills in comparison to non-compositional
abstractions that use the same supervision.2

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning offers a promising framework for enabling agents to autonomously
acquire complex skills, and has demonstrated impressive performance on continuous control problems [35, 56] and games such as Atari [41] and Go [59]. However, the ability to learn a variety of
compositional, long-horizon skills while generalizing to novel concepts remain an open challenge.
Long-horizon tasks demand sophisticated exploration strategies and structured reasoning, while
generalization requires suitable representations. In this work, we consider the question: how can we
leverage the compositional structure of language for enabling agents to perform long-horizon tasks
and systematically generalize to new goals?
To do so, we build upon the framework of hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL), which offers
a potential solution for learning long-horizon tasks by training a hierarchy of policies. However,
the abstraction between these policies is critical for good performance. Hard-coded abstractions
often lack modeling flexibility and are task-specific [63, 33, 26, 47], while learned abstractions
often find degenerate solutions without careful tuning [5, 24]. One possible solution is to have the
higher-level policy generate a sub-goal state and have the low-level policy try to reach that goal
state [42, 36]. However, using goal states still lacks some degree of flexibility (e.g. in comparison
∗
2

Work done as a part of the Goolge AI Residency program
Code and videos of the environment, and experiments are at https://sites.google.com/view/hal-demo

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

