Toward a Characterization of Loss Functions for
Distribution Learning

Nika Haghtalab∗
Cornell University
nika@cs.cornell.edu

Cameron Musco∗
UMass Amherst
cmusco@cs.umass.edu

Bo Waggoner†
U. Colorado
bwag@colorado.edu

Abstract
In this work we study loss functions for learning and evaluating probability distributions over large discrete domains. Unlike classification or regression where
a wide variety of loss functions are used, in the distribution learning and density
estimation literature, very few losses outside the dominant log loss are applied.
We aim to understand this fact, taking an axiomatic approach to the design of loss
functions for distributions. We start by proposing a set of desirable criteria that
any good loss function should satisfy. Intuitively, these criteria require that the loss
function faithfully evaluates a candidate distribution, both in expectation and when
estimated on a few samples. Interestingly, we observe that no loss function possesses all of these criteria. However, one can circumvent this issue by introducing
a natural restriction on the set of candidate distributions. Specifically, we require
that candidates are calibrated with respect to the target distribution, i.e., they may
contain less information than the target but otherwise do not significantly distort
the truth. We show that, after restricting to this set of distributions, the log loss and
a large variety of other losses satisfy the desired criteria. These results pave the
way for future investigations of distribution learning that look beyond the log loss,
choosing a loss function based on application or domain need.

1

Introduction

Estimating a probability distribution given independent samples from that distribution is a fundamental
problem in machine learning and statistics [e.g. 23, 2, 24, 5]. In machine learning applications, the
distribution of interest is often over a very large but finite sample space, e.g., the set of all English
sentences up to a certain length or images of a fixed size in their RGB format.
A central problem is evaluating the learned distribution, most commonly using a loss function. Such
evaluation is an important task in its own right as well as central to some learning techniques. Given
a ground truth distribution p over a set of outcomes X and a sample x ∼ p, a loss function `(q, x)
evaluates the performance of a candidate distribution q in predicting x. Generally, `(q, x) will be
higher if q places smaller probability on x. Thus, in expectation over x ∼ p, the loss will be lower
for candidate distributions that closely match p.
The dominant loss applied in practice is the log loss `(q, x) = ln(1/qx ), which corresponds to the
learning technique of log likelihood maximization. Surprisingly, few other losses are ever considered.
This is in sharp contrast to other areas of machine learning, including in supervised learning where
different applications have necessitated the use of different losses, such as the squared loss, hinge
loss, `1 loss, etc. However, alternative loss functions can be beneficial for distribution learning on
large domains, as we show with a brief motivating example.
∗
†

Research conducted while at Microsoft Research, New England.
Research conducted while at Microsoft Research, New York City.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

