Tensor Monte Carlo: Particle Methods for the GPU
era
Laurence Aitchison∗
University of Bristol
Bristol, UK
laurence.aitchison@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-sample, importance-weighted variational autoencoders (IWAE) give tighter
bounds and more accurate uncertainty estimates than variational autoencoders
(VAEs) trained with a standard single-sample objective. However, IWAEs scale
poorly: as the latent dimensionality grows, they require exponentially many samples to retain the benefits of importance weighting. While sequential Monte-Carlo
(SMC) can address this problem, it is prohibitively slow because the resampling
step imposes sequential structure which cannot be parallelised, and moreover, resampling is non-differentiable which is problematic when learning approximate
posteriors. To address these issues, we developed tensor Monte-Carlo (TMC) which
gives exponentially many importance samples by separately drawing K samples
for each of the n latent variables, then averaging over all K n possible combinations.
While the sum over exponentially many terms might seem to be intractable, in
many cases it can be computed efficiently as a series of tensor inner-products. We
show that TMC is superior to IWAE on a generative model with multiple stochastic
layers trained on the MNIST handwritten digit database, and we show that TMC
can be combined with standard variance reduction techniques.
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Rezende et al., 2014; Eslami et al., 2018)
have had dramatic success in exploiting modern deep learning methods to do probabilistic inference
in previously intractable high-dimensional spaces. However, standard VAEs using a single-sample
objective give loose variational bounds and poor approximations to the posterior (Turner & Sahani,
2011; Burda et al., 2015). Modern variational autoencoders instead use a multi-sample objective to
improve the tightness of the variational bound and the quality of the approximate posterior (Burda
et al., 2015). These methods implicitly improve the approximate posterior by drawing multiple
samples from a proposal, and resampling to discard samples that do not fit the data (Cremer et al.,
2017).
While multi-sample importance-weighted methods are often extremely effective, they scale poorly
with problem size. In particular, recent results (Chatterjee & Diaconis, 2015) have shown that the
number of importance samples required to closely approximate any target expectation scales as
exp(DKL (P||Q)), where Q is the proposal distribution (and this was prefigured by earlier work in the
particle filter context (Snyder et al., 2008; Bengtsson et al., 2008)). Critically, the KL-divergence
scales roughly linearly in problem size (and exactly linearly if we consider n independent subproblems being combined), and thus we expect the required number of importance samples to be
exponential in the problem size. As such, multi-sample methods are typically only used to infer the
latent variables in smaller models with only a single (albeit vector-valued) latent variable (e.g. Burda
et al., 2015).
∗

Work done while at Janelia Research Campus.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

