Sparse Logistic Regression Learns
All Discrete Pairwise Graphical Models

Shanshan Wu, Sujay Sanghavi, Alexandros G. Dimakis
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
shanshan@utexas.edu, sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu, dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We characterize the effectiveness of a classical algorithm for recovering the Markov
graph of a general discrete pairwise graphical model from i.i.d. samples. The algorithm is (appropriately regularized) maximum conditional log-likelihood, which
involves solving a convex program for each node; for Ising models this is `1 constrained logistic regression, while for more general alphabets an `2,1 groupnorm constraint needs to be used. We show that this algorithm can recover any
arbitrary discrete pairwise graphical model, and also characterize its sample complexity as a function of model width, alphabet size, edge parameter accuracy, and
the number of variables. We show that along every one of these axes, it matches
or improves on all existing results and algorithms for this problem. Our analysis
applies a sharp generalization error bound for logistic regression when the weight
vector has an `1 (or `2,1 ) constraint and the sample vector has an `∞ (or `2,∞ )
constraint. We also show that the proposed convex programs can be efficiently
solved in Õ(n2 ) running time (where n is the number of variables) under the same
statistical guarantees. We provide experimental results to support our analysis.

1

Introduction

Undirected graphical models provide a framework for modeling high dimensional distributions with
dependent variables and have many applications including in computer vision (Choi et al., 2010), bioinformatics (Marbach et al., 2012), and sociology (Eagle et al., 2009). In this paper we characterize
the effectiveness of a natural, and already popular, algorithm for the structure learning problem.
Structure learning is the task of finding the dependency graph of a Markov random field (MRF)
given i.i.d. samples; typically one is also interested in finding estimates for the edge weights as
well. We consider the structure learning problem in general (non-binary) discrete pairwise graphical
models. These are MRFs where the variables take values in a discrete alphabet, but all interactions are
pairwise. This includes the Ising model as a special case (which corresponds to a binary alphabet).
The natural and popular algorithm we consider is (appropriately regularized) maximum conditional
log-likelihood for finding the neighborhood set of any given node. For the Ising model, this becomes
`1 -constrained logistic regression; more generally for non-binary graphical models the regularizer
becomes an `2,1 norm. We show that this algorithm can recover all discrete pairwise graphical
models, and characterize its sample complexity as a function of the parameters of interest: model
width, alphabet size, edge parameter accuracy, and the number of variables. We match or improve
dependence on each of these parameters, over all existing results for the general alphabet case when
no additional assumptions are made on the model (see Table 1). For the specific case of Ising models,
some recent work has better dependence on some parameters (see Table 2 in Appendix A).
We now describe the related work, and then outline our contributions.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

