Practical and Consistent Estimation of f -Divergences
Paul K. Rubenstein⇤
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
& Machine Learning Group, University of Cambridge
paul.rubenstein@tuebingen.mpg.de
Olivier Bousquet, Josip Djolonga, Carlos Riquelme, Ilya Tolstikhin
Google Research, Brain Team, Zürich
{obousquet, josipd, rikel, tolstikhin}@google.com

Abstract
The estimation of an f -divergence between two probability distributions based on
samples is a fundamental problem in statistics and machine learning. Most works
study this problem under very weak assumptions, in which case it is provably hard.
We consider the case of stronger structural assumptions that are commonly satisfied
in modern machine learning, including representation learning and generative
modelling with autoencoder architectures. Under these assumptions we propose and
study an estimator that can be easily implemented, works well in high dimensions,
and enjoys faster rates of convergence. We verify the behavior of our estimator
empirically in both synthetic and real-data experiments, and discuss its direct
implications for total correlation, entropy, and mutual information estimation.

1

Introduction and related literature

The estimation and minimization of divergences between probability distributions based on samples are fundamental problems of machine learning. For example, maximum likelihood learning
can be viewed as minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence KL(Pdata kPmodel ) with respect to
the model parameters. More generally, generative modelling—most famously Variational Autoencoders and Generative Adversarial Networks [21, 12]—can be viewed as minimizing a divergence
D(Pdata kPmodel ) where Pmodel may be intractable. In variational inference, an intractable posterior
p(z|x) is approximated with a tractable distribution q(z) chosen to minimize KL q(z)kp(z|x) . The
mutual information between two variables I(X, Y ), core to information theory and Bayesian machine
learning, is equivalent to KL(PX,Y kPX PY ). Independence testing often involves estimating a divergence D(PX,Y kPX PY ), while two-sample testing (does P = Q?) involves estimating a divergence
D(P kQ). Additionally, one approach to domain adaptation, in which a classifier is learned on a
distribution P but tested on a distinct distribution Q, involves learning a feature map such that a
divergence D ( # P k # Q) is minimized, where # represents the push-forward operation [3, 11].

In this work we consider the well-known family of f -divergences [7, 24] that includes amongst others
the KL, Jensen-Shannon (JS), 2 , and ↵-divergences as well as the Total Variation (TV) and squared
Hellinger (H2 ) distances, the latter two of which play an important role in the statistics literature [2].
A significant body of work exists studying the estimation of the f -divergence Df (QkP ) between
general probability distributions Q and P . While the majority of this focuses on ↵-divergences and
closely related Rényi-↵ divergences [35, 37, 22], many works address specifically the KL-divergence
[34, 39] with fewer considering f -divergences in full generality [28, 20, 26, 27]. Although the
KL-divergence is the most frequently encountered f -divergence in the machine learning literature,
⇤

Part of this work was done during an internship at Google.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

