Gaussian-Based Pooling
for Convolutional Neural Networks
Takumi Kobayashi
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) contain local pooling to effectively downsize feature maps for increasing computation efficiency as well as robustness to
input variations. The local pooling methods are generally formulated in a form of
convex combination of local neuron activations for retaining the characteristics of
an input feature map in a manner similar to image downscaling. In this paper, to
improve performance of CNNs, we propose a novel local pooling method based on
the Gaussian-based probabilistic model over local neuron activations for flexibly
pooling (extracting) features, in contrast to the previous model restricting the output
within the convex hull of local neurons. In the proposed method, the local neuron
activations are aggregated into the statistics of mean and standard deviation in a
Gaussian distribution, and then on the basis of those statistics, we construct the
probabilistic model suitable for the pooling in accordance with the knowledge about
local pooling in CNNs. Through the probabilistic model equipped with trainable
parameters, the proposed method naturally integrates two schemes of adaptively
training the pooling form based on input feature maps and stochastically performing the pooling throughout the end-to-end learning. The experimental results on
image classification demonstrate that the proposed method favorably improves
performance of various CNNs in comparison with the other pooling methods. The
code is available at https://github.com/tk1980/GaussianPooling.

1

Introduction

In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are applied to various visual recognition
tasks with great success [7, 8, 14]. Much research effort has been made in improving the CNN
architecture [7, 8] as well as the building blocks of CNNs [6, 11, 24, 29]. Local pooling is also a key
component of CNNs to downsize feature maps for increasing computational efficiency and robustness
to input variations.
From a biological viewpoint, the local pooling originates from the neuroscientific study on visual
cortex [10]. While some works biologically suggest the importance of max-pooling [20, 21, 23],
average-pooling also works for some CNNs in practice, and thus we can say that the optimal pooling
form is dependent on the type of CNN, dataset and task. To improve performance of CNNs, those
simple pooling methods are sophisticated by introducing some prior models related to pooling.
Based on the pooling functionality which is akin to image downsizing, some image processing
techniques are applied to the pooling operation such as Wavelet [18] for Wavelet pooling [28] and
image downscaling method [27] for detailed-preserving pooling (DPP) [22]. On the other hand, by
focusing on the pooling formulation, the mixed-pooling and gated-pooling are proposed in [15, 32]
by linearly combining the average- and max-pooling. Recently, in [1], the local pooling is formulated
based on the maximum entropy principle. Those methods [1, 15, 22] also provide trainable pooling
forms equipped with pooling parameters which are optimized throughout the end-to-end learning;
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

