KerGM: Kernelized Graph Matching

Zhen Zhang1 , Yijian Xiang1 , Lingfei Wu2 , Bing Xue1 , Arye Nehorai1
1
Washington University in St. Louis
2
IBM Research
1
{zhen.zhang, yijian.xiang, xuebing, nehorai}@wustl.edu
2
lwu@email.wm.edu

Abstract
Graph matching plays a central role in such fields as computer vision, pattern recognition, and bioinformatics. Graph matching problems can be cast as two types of
quadratic assignment problems (QAPs): Koopmans-Beckmann’s QAP or Lawler’s
QAP. In our paper, we provide a unifying view for these two problems by introducing new rules for array operations in Hilbert spaces. Consequently, Lawler’s QAP
can be considered as the Koopmans-Beckmann’s alignment between two arrays in
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHS), making it possible to efficiently solve
the problem without computing a huge affinity matrix. Furthermore, we develop the
entropy-regularized Frank-Wolfe (EnFW) algorithm for optimizing QAPs, which
has the same convergence rate as the original FW algorithm while dramatically
reducing the computational burden for each outer iteration. We conduct extensive
experiments to evaluate our approach, and show that our algorithm significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art in both matching accuracy and scalability.

1

Introduction

Graph matching (GM), which aims at finding the optimal correspondence between nodes of two given
graphs, is a longstanding problem due to its nonconvex objective function and binary constraints.
It arises in many applications, ranging from recognizing actions [3, 13] to identifying functional
orthologs of proteins [11, 41]. Typically, GM problems can be formulated as two kinds of quadratic
assignment problems (QAPs): Koopmans-Beckmann’s QAP [18] or Lawler’s QAP [22]. KoopmanBeckmann’s QAP is the structural alignment between two weighted adjacency matrices, which, as a
result, can be written as the standard Frobenius inner product between two n × n matrices, where n
denotes the number of nodes. However, Koopmans-Beckmann’s QAP cannot incorporate complex
edge attribute information, which is usually of great importance in characterizing the relation between
nodes. Lawler’s QAP can tackle this issue, because it attempts to maximize the overall similarity that
well encodes the attribute information. However, the key concern of the Lawler’s QAP is that it needs
to estimate the n2 × n2 pairwise affinity matrix, limiting its application to very small graphs.
In our work, we derive an equivalent formulation of Lawler’s QAP, based on a very mild assumption
that edge affinities are characterized by kernels [15, 34]. After introducing new rules for array
operations in Hilbert spaces, named as H−operations, we rewrite Lawler’s QAP as the KoopmannBeckmann’s alignment between two arrays in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), which allows us to solve it without computing the huge affinity matrix. Taking advantage of the H−operations,
we develop a path-following strategy for mitigating the local maxima issue of QAPs. In addition to
the kernelized graph matching (KerGM) formulation, we propose a numerical optimization algorithm,
the entropy-regularized Frank-Wolfe (EnFW) algorithm, for solving large-scale QAPs. The EnFW
has the same convergence rate as the original Frank-Wolfe algorithm, with far less computational
burden in each iteration. Extensive experimental results show that our KerGM, together with the
EnFW algorithm, achieves superior performance in both matching accuracy and scalability.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

