Semi-Parametric Efficient Policy Learning with
Continuous Actions
Mert Demirer
MIT
mdemirer@mit.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Greg Lewis
Microsoft Research
glewis@microsoft.com

Victor Chernozhukov
MIT
vchern@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider off-policy evaluation and optimization with continuous action spaces.
We focus on observational data where the data collection policy is unknown and
needs to be estimated. We take a semi-parametric approach where the value
function takes a known parametric form in the treatment, but we are agnostic
on how it depends on the observed contexts. We propose a doubly robust offpolicy estimate for this setting and show that off-policy optimization based on
this estimate is robust to estimation errors of the policy function or the regression
model. Our results also apply if the model does not satisfy our semi-parametric
form, but rather we measure regret in terms of the best projection of the true value
function to this functional space. Our work extends prior approaches of policy
optimization from observational data that only considered discrete actions. We
provide an experimental evaluation of our method in a synthetic data example
motivated by optimal personalized pricing and costly resource allocation.

1

Introduction

We consider off-policy evaluation and optimization with continuous action spaces from observational
data, where the data collection (logging) policy is unknown. We take a semi-parametric approach
where we assume that the value function takes a known parametric form in the treatment, but we are
agnostic on how it depends on the observed contexts/features. In particular, we assume that:
V (a, z) = hθ0 (z), φ(a, z)i

(1)

for some known feature functions φ but unknown functions θ0 . We assume that we are given
a set of n observational data points (x1 , ..., xn ) that consist of i.i.d copies of the random vector
x = (y, a, z) ∈ Y × A × Z, such that E[y | a, z] = V (a, z).1
Our goal is to estimate a policy π̂ : Z → A from a space of policies Π that achieves good regret:
sup E[V (π(z), z)] − E[V (π̂(z), z)] ≤ R(Π, n)

(2)

π∈Π

for some regret rate that depends on the policy space Π and the sample size n.
1
In most of the paper, we can allow for the case where z is endogenous, in the sense that E[y | a, z] =
V (a, z) + f0 (z). In other words, the noise in the random variable y can be potentially correlated with z.
However, we assume that conditional on z, there is no remaining endogeneity in the choice of the action in our
data. The latter is typically referred to as conditional ignorability/exogeneity [11].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

