On the Fairness of Disentangled Representations
Francesco Locatello2,5 , Gabriele Abbati3 , Tom Rainforth4 , Stefan Bauer5 , Bernhard Schölkopf5 , and
Olivier Bachem1
1

Google Research, Brain Team
Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
4
Dept. of Statistics, University of Oxford
5
Max-Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2

Abstract
Recently there has been a significant interest in learning disentangled representations, as they promise increased interpretability, generalization to unseen scenarios
and faster learning on downstream tasks. In this paper, we investigate the usefulness
of different notions of disentanglement for improving the fairness of downstream
prediction tasks based on representations. We consider the setting where the goal is
to predict a target variable based on the learned representation of high-dimensional
observations (such as images) that depend on both the target variable and an
unobserved sensitive variable. We show that in this setting both the optimal and empirical predictions can be unfair, even if the target variable and the sensitive variable
are independent. Analyzing the representations of more than 12 600 trained state-ofthe-art disentangled models, we observe that several disentanglement scores are consistently correlated with increased fairness, suggesting that disentanglement may be
a useful property to encourage fairness when sensitive variables are not observed.

1

Introduction

In representation learning, observations are often assumed to be samples from a random variable x
which is generated by a set of unobserved factors of variation z [6, 14, 53, 89]. Informally, the goal of
representation learning is to find a transformation r(x) of the data which is useful for different downstream classification tasks [6]. A recent line of work argues that disentangled representations offer
many of the desired properties of useful representations. Indeed, isolating each independent factor of
variation into the independent components of a representation vector should make it both interpretable
and simplify downstream prediction tasks [6, 7, 29, 35, 56, 58, 60, 74, 82, 87, 89, 90, 1, 28].
Previous work [54, 61] has alluded to a possible connection between the motivations of disentanglement and fair machine learning. Given the societal relevance of machine-learning driven decision
processes, fairness has become a highly active field [4]. Assuming the existence of a complex causal
graph with partially observed and potentially confounded observations [48], sensitive protected
attributes (e.g. gender, race, etc) can leak undesired information into a classification task in different
ways. For example, the inherent assumptions of the algorithm might cause discrimination towards
protected groups, the data collection process might be biased or the causal graph itself might allow
for unfairness because society is unfair [5, 11, 68, 73, 75, 83]. The goal of fair machine learning algorithms is to predict a target variable y through a classifier ŷ without being biased by some sensitive
factors s. The negative impact of s in terms of discrimination within the classification task can be
quantified using a variety of fairness notions, such as demographic parity [10, 97], individual fairness
[21], equalized odds or equal opportunity [34, 94], and concepts based on causal reasoning [48, 55].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

