Learning Disentangled Representations for
Recommendation
Jianxin Ma1,2∗, Chang Zhou1∗, Peng Cui2 , Hongxia Yang1 , Wenwu Zhu2
1
Alibaba Group, 2 Tsinghua University
majx13fromthu@gmail.com, ericzhou.zc@alibaba-inc.com,
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, yang.yhx@alibaba-inc.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
User behavior data in recommender systems are driven by the complex interactions
of many latent factors behind the users’ decision making processes. The factors are
highly entangled, and may range from high-level ones that govern user intentions,
to low-level ones that characterize a user’s preference when executing an intention.
Learning representations that uncover and disentangle these latent factors can bring
enhanced robustness, interpretability, and controllability. However, learning such
disentangled representations from user behavior is challenging, and remains largely
neglected by the existing literature. In this paper, we present the MACRo-mIcro
Disentangled Variational Auto-Encoder (MacridVAE) for learning disentangled
representations from user behavior. Our approach achieves macro disentanglement
by inferring the high-level concepts associated with user intentions (e.g., to buy
a shirt or a cellphone), while capturing the preference of a user regarding the
different concepts separately. A micro-disentanglement regularizer, stemming
from an information-theoretic interpretation of VAEs, then forces each dimension
of the representations to independently reflect an isolated low-level factor (e.g.,
the size or the color of a shirt). Empirical results show that our approach can
achieve substantial improvement over the state-of-the-art baselines. We further
demonstrate that the learned representations are interpretable and controllable,
which can potentially lead to a new paradigm for recommendation where users are
given fine-grained control over targeted aspects of the recommendation lists.

1

Introduction

Learning representations that reflect users’ preference, based chiefly on user behavior, has been a
central theme of research on recommender systems. Despite their notable success, the existing user
behavior-based representation learning methods, such as the recent deep approaches [49, 32, 31, 52,
11, 18], generally neglect the complex interaction among the latent factors behind the users’ decision
making processes. In particular, the latent factors can be highly entangled, and range from macro
ones that govern the intention of a user during a session, to micro ones that describe at a granular level
a user’s preference when implementing a specific intention. The existing methods fail to disentangle
the latent factors, and the learned representations are consequently prone to mistakenly preserve the
confounding of the factors, leading to non-robustness and low interpretability.
Disentangled representation learning, which aims to learn factorized representations that uncover
and disentangle the latent explanatory factors hidden in the observed data [3], has recently gained
much attention. Not only can disentangled representations be more robust, i.e., less sensitive to the
misleading correlations presented in the limited training data, the enhanced interpretability also finds
∗

Equal contribution. Work done at Alibaba.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

