Painless Stochastic Gradient:
Interpolation, Line-Search, and Convergence Rates
Sharan Vaswani
Mila, Université de Montréal
Issam Laradji
University of British Columbia
Element AI

Aaron Mishkin
University of British Columbia
Mark Schmidt
University of British Columbia, 1QBit
CCAI Affiliate Chair (Amii)

Gauthier Gidel
Mila, Université de Montréal
Element AI

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
Recent works have shown that stochastic gradient descent (SGD) achieves the fast
convergence rates of full-batch gradient descent for over-parameterized models
satisfying certain interpolation conditions. However, the step-size used in these
works depends on unknown quantities and SGD’s practical performance heavily
relies on the choice of this step-size. We propose to use line-search techniques
to automatically set the step-size when training models that can interpolate the
data. In the interpolation setting, we prove that SGD with a stochastic variant of
the classic Armijo line-search attains the deterministic convergence rates for both
convex and strongly-convex functions. Under additional assumptions, SGD with
Armijo line-search is shown to achieve fast convergence for non-convex functions.
Furthermore, we show that stochastic extra-gradient with a Lipschitz line-search
attains linear convergence for an important class of non-convex functions and
saddle-point problems satisfying interpolation. To improve the proposed methods’
practical performance, we give heuristics to use larger step-sizes and acceleration.
We compare the proposed algorithms against numerous optimization methods on
standard classification tasks using both kernel methods and deep networks. The
proposed methods result in competitive performance across all models and datasets,
while being robust to the precise choices of hyper-parameters. For multi-class
classification using deep networks, SGD with Armijo line-search results in both
faster convergence and better generalization.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants [18, 21, 35, 39, 72, 82, 87] are the preferred
optimization methods in modern machine learning. They only require the gradient for one training
example (or a small “mini-batch” of examples) in each iteration and thus can be used with large
datasets. These first-order methods have been particularly successful for training highly-expressive,
over-parameterized models such as non-parametric regression [7, 45] and deep neural networks [9,
88]. However, the practical efficiency of stochastic gradient methods is adversely affected by two
challenges: (i) their performance heavily relies on the choice of the step-size (“learning rate”) [9, 70]
and (ii) their slow convergence compared to methods that compute the full gradient (over all training
examples) in each iteration [58].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada
†
Canada CIFAR AI Chair..

