Equitable Stable Matchings in Quadratic Time

Nikolaos Tziavelis
Northeastern University

Ioannis Giannakopoulos
NTU Athens

Nectarios Koziris
NTU Athens

Katerina Doka
NTU Athens

Panagiotis Karras
Aarhus University

Abstract
Can we reach a stable matching that achieves high equity among the two sides
of a market in quadratic time? The Deferred Acceptance (DA) algorithm finds a
stable matching that is biased in favor of one side; optimizing apt equity measures
is strongly NP-hard. A proposed approximation algorithm offers a guarantee only
with respect to the DA solutions. Recent work introduced Deferred Acceptance
with Compensation Chains (DACC), a class of algorithms that can reach any stable
matching in O(n4 ) time, but did not propose a way to achieve good equity. In
this paper, we propose an alternative that is computationally simpler and achieves
high equity too. We introduce Monotonic Deferred Acceptance (MDA), a class of
algorithms that progresses monotonically towards a stable matching; we couple
MDA with a mechanism we call Strongly Deferred Acceptance (SDA), to build an
algorithm that reaches an equitable stable matching in quadratic time; we amend
this algorithm with a few low-cost local search steps to build Deferred Local Search
(DLS), which, as we demonstrate experimentally, outperforms previous solutions
in terms of equity measures and matches the most efficient ones in runtime.

1

Introduction

A matching process on a two-sided market can determine who gets which job [40, 31], school
place [44], or spouse. Gale and Shapley [16] proposed1 a model, in which each agent (e.g., woman
or man) ranks members of the other set by strict order of preference; then agents on the one side
issue proposals (i.e., offers) to those on the other side by that order; recipients hold the best proposal
they have received, without commitment, until nobody wishes to propose. This O(n2 ) algorithm,
called the Deferred Acceptance (DA) algorithm in contradistinction to immediate acceptance [41],
leads to a stable solution; that is, no pair of agents would rather be matched with each other than
with their assigned partners. The DA algorithm has had a profound influence on market design
and stands at the basis of a number of centralized labor market clearinghouses around the world,
allowing failed markets to be reorganized [41]. Roth and Shapley shared the Nobel Memorial Prize
in Economic Sciences for their work in “the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market
design”, reflecting also Roth’s application of these results to real-world markets [32].
The problem instance size may be large. In China, over 10 million students apply for admission to
higher education institutions annually through a centralized process [32]. Similar centralized schemes,
in which students apply for education programs and are ranked according to their scores [8], occur in
Germany [9], Greece, Hungary [7], Ireland, Spain [37], Turkey [6, 8, 4], and several school districts
in the USA [1, 3, 2]. Apart from the instance size, the set of possible stable matchings is large in
real-world markets [20], and exponentially growing in the worst case [29, 30]. Still, the DA algorithm
returns a solution optimal for proposers, as each proposer gets the best match possible in any stable
1

The US resident matching program had used this algorithm since 1952 for junior doctor recruitment [40].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

