Coresets for Archetypal Analysis

Sebastian Mair
Leuphana University, Germany
mair@leuphana.de

Ulf Brefeld
Leuphana University, Germany
brefeld@leuphana.de

Abstract
Archetypal analysis represents instances as linear mixtures of prototypes (the
archetypes) that lie on the boundary of the convex hull of the data. Archetypes are
thus often better interpretable than factors computed by other matrix factorization
techniques. However, the interpretability comes with high computational cost due
to additional convexity-preserving constraints. In this paper, we propose efficient
coresets for archetypal analysis. Theoretical guarantees are derived by showing that
quantization errors of k-means upper bound archetypal analysis; the computation
of a provable absolute-coreset can be performed in only two passes over the data.
Empirically, we show that the coresets lead to improved performance on several
data sets.

1

Introduction

Archetypal analysis (Cutler and Breiman, 1994) is an unsupervised learning method that represents
every data point as a convex combination of prototypes, the so-called archetypes. Every data point is
represented as a convex mixture of (a subset of) archetypes and, due to the convexity, these mixtures
are often interpreted probabilistically.
A key property of archetypal analysis is that the archetypes are themselves convex mixtures of data
points. Consequently, archetypes lie on the boundary of the convex hull of the data. Hence, archetypal
analysis approximates the convex hull with a given number of vertices. It follows that this approximation is equivalent to a matrix factorization of the design matrix. Due to the convexity constraints,
archetypal-based factorizations are not only better interpretable but unfortunately also much more
expensive than regular matrix factorization techniques, which hinders usage at even moderate scales.
Several approaches have been proposed to remedy the edacious nature of archetypal analysis,
proposing, e.g., efficient active-set quadratic programming (Chen et al., 2014), projected gradients
(Mørup and Hansen, 2012), or Frank-Wolfe techniques (Bauckhage et al., 2015) for optimization. Approximate solutions compute archetypes on a precomputed subset of the data, e.g., (Mair et al., 2017).
Although these approaches are useful contributions, they do not mitigate the inherent complexity
of archetypal analysis nor provide theoretical guarantees on the quality of the approximation.
A theoretically sound alternative is offered by coresets. Coresets compactly represent large data sets
by weighted subsets on which models perform provably competitive compared to operations on all
data. Coresets have successfully been leveraged to very different methods, including k-means (Lucic
et al., 2016; Bachem et al., 2018), support vector machines (Tsang et al., 2005), logistic regression
(Munteanu et al., 2018), and Bayesian inference (Huggins et al., 2016; Campbell and Broderick,
2018). The idea is as follows: A small subset of the data is selected (in linear time) according to
a strategy such that the subset approximates the original data very well. A learning algorithm will
then perform similarly on the original data and the subset, but training on the subset is much more
efficient. In this paper, we present coresets for archetypal analysis.
The key contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We show that the objective function of k-means
upper bounds the objective of archetypal analysis and show that every coreset for k-means is also a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

