A Universally Optimal Multistage Accelerated
Stochastic Gradient Method
Necdet Serhat Aybat∗
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA
nsa10@psu.edu
Mert Gürbüzbalaban∗
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, USA
mg1366@rutgers.edu

Alireza Fallah∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
afallah@mit.edu
Asuman Ozdaglar∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA, USA
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of minimizing a strongly convex, smooth function when we
have noisy estimates of its gradient. We propose a novel multistage accelerated
algorithm that is universally optimal in the sense that it achieves the optimal rate
both in the deterministic and stochastic case and operates without knowledge of
noise characteristics. The algorithm consists of stages that use a stochastic version
of Nesterov’s method with a specific restart and parameters selected to achieve the
fastest reduction in the bias-variance terms in the convergence rate bounds.

1

Introduction

First order optimization methods play a key role in solving large scale machine learning problems due
to their low iteration complexity and scalability with large data sets. In several cases, these methods
operate with noisy first order information either because the gradient is estimated from draws or
subset of components of the underlying objective function [3, 8, 13, 16, 17, 21, 36, 9, 11] or noise is
injected intentionally due to privacy or algorithmic considerations [4, 25, 30, 14, 15]. A fundamental
question in this setting is to design fast algorithms with optimal convergence rate, matching the lower
bounds on the oracle complexity in terms of target accuracy and other important parameters both for
the deterministic and stochastic case (i.e., with or without gradient errors).
In this paper, we design an optimal first order method to solve the problem
f ∗ , min f (x) such that f ∈ Sµ,L (Rd ),
x∈Rd

(1)

where, for scalars 0 < µ ≤ L, Sµ,L (Rd ) is the set of continuously differentiable functions f : Rd →
R that are strongly convex with modulus µ and have Lipschitz-continuous gradients with constant L,
which imply that for every x, y ∈ Rd , f satisfies (see e.g. [27])
L
µ
kx − yk2 ≤ f (x) − f (y) − ∇f (y)> (x − y) ≤ kx − yk2 .
2
2

(2)

For f ∈ Sµ,L (Rd ), the ratio κ , L
µ is called the condition number of f . Throughout the paper, we
denote the solution of problem (1) by f ∗ which is achieved at the unique optimal point x∗ .
∗

The authors are in alphabetical order.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

