Characterizing the Exact Behaviors of
Temporal Difference Learning Algorithms Using
Markov Jump Linear System Theory

Bin Hu,
Usman Ahmed Syed
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a unified analysis of temporal difference learning algorithms with linear function approximators by exploiting their connections to
Markov jump linear systems (MJLS). We tailor the MJLS theory developed in the
control community to characterize the exact behaviors of the first and second order
moments of a large family of temporal difference learning algorithms. For both
the IID and Markov noise cases, we show that the evolution of some augmented
versions of the mean and covariance matrix of the TD estimation error exactly follows the trajectory of a deterministic linear time-invariant (LTI) dynamical system.
Applying the well-known LTI system theory, we obtain closed-form expressions
for the mean and covariance matrix of the TD estimation error at any time step. We
provide a tight matrix spectral radius condition to guarantee the convergence of the
covariance matrix of the TD estimation error, and perform a perturbation analysis
to characterize the dependence of the TD behaviors on learning rate. For the IID
case, we provide an exact formula characterizing how the mean and covariance
matrix of the TD estimation error converge to the steady state values at a linear
rate. For the Markov case, we use our formulas to explain how the behaviors of TD
learning algorithms are affected by learning rate and the underlying Markov chain.
For both cases, upper and lower bounds for the mean square TD error are derived.
An exact formula for the steady state mean square TD error is also provided.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great promise in solving sequential decision making tasks
[5, 48]. One important topic for RL is policy evaluation whose objective is to evaluate the value
function of a given policy. A large family of temporal difference (TD) learning methods including
standard TD, GTD, TDC, GTD2, DTD, and ATD [47, 50, 49, 38] have been developed to solve the
policy evaluation problem. These TD learning algorithms have become important building blocks
for RL algorithms. See [17] for a comprehensive survey. Despite the popularity of TD learning,
the behaviors of these algorithms have not been fully understood from a theoretical viewpoint. The
standard ODE technique [51, 9, 7, 36, 8] can only be used to prove asymptotic convergence. Finite
sample bounds are challenging to obtain and typically developed in a case-by-case manner. Recently,
there have been intensive research activities focusing on establishing finite sample bounds for TD
learning methods with linear function approximations under various assumptions. The IID noise
case is covered in [16, 37, 41]. In [6], the analysis is extended for a Markov noise model but an
extra projection step in the algorithm is required. Very recently, finite sample bounds for the TD
method (without the projection step) under the Markov assumption have been obtained in [45].
The bounds in [45] actually work for any TD learning algorithm that can be modeled by a linear
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

