Importance Resampling for Off-policy Prediction
Matthew Schlegel
University of Alberta
mkschleg@ualberta.ca

Wesley Chung
University of Alberta
wchung@ualberta.ca

Jian Qian
University of Alberta
jq1@ulberta.ca

Daniel Graves
Huawei
daniel.graves@huawei.com
Martha White
University of Alberta
whitem@ulberta.ca

Abstract
Importance sampling (IS) is a common reweighting strategy for off-policy prediction in reinforcement learning. While it is consistent and unbiased, it can result
in high variance updates to the weights for the value function. In this work, we
explore a resampling strategy as an alternative to reweighting. We propose Importance Resampling (IR) for off-policy prediction, which resamples experience
from a replay buffer and applies standard on-policy updates. The approach avoids
using importance sampling ratios in the update, instead correcting the distribution
before the update. We characterize the bias and consistency of IR, particularly
compared to Weighted IS (WIS). We demonstrate in several microworlds that IR
has improved sample efficiency and lower variance updates, as compared to IS
and several variance-reduced IS strategies, including variants of WIS and V-trace
which clips IS ratios. We also provide a demonstration showing IR improves over
IS for learning a value function from images in a racing car simulator.

1

Introduction

An emerging direction for reinforcement learning systems is to learn many predictions, formalized
as value function predictions contingent on many different policies. The idea is that such predictions
can provide a powerful abstract model of the world. Some examples of systems that learn many value
functions are the Horde architecture composed of General Value Functions (GVFs) [Sutton et al.,
2011, Modayil et al., 2014], systems that use options [Sutton et al., 1999, Schaul et al., 2015a],
predictive representation approaches [Sutton et al., 2005, Schaul and Ring, 2013, Silver et al., 2017]
and systems with auxiliary tasks [Jaderberg et al., 2017]. Off-policy learning is critical for learning many value functions with different policies, because it enables data to be generated from one
behavior policy to update the values for each target policy in parallel.
The typical strategy for off-policy learning is to reweight updates using importance sampling (IS).
For a given state s, with action a selected according to behavior µ, the IS ratio is the ratio between the
probability of the action under the target policy ⇡ and the behavior: ⇡(a|s)
µ(a|s) . The update is multiplied
by this ratio, adjusting the action probabilities so that the expectation of the update is as if the actions
were sampled according to the target policy ⇡. Though the IS estimator is unbiased and consistent
[Kahn and Marshall, 1953, Rubinstein and Kroese, 2016], it can suffer from high or even infinite
variance due to large magnitude IS ratios, in theory [Andradottir et al., 1995] and in practice [Precup
et al., 2001, Mahmood et al., 2014, 2017].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

