Probabilistic Watershed:
Sampling all spanning forests
for seeded segmentation and semi-supervised learning

Enrique Fita Sanmartín,
Sebastian Damrich,
Fred A. Hamprecht
HCI/IWR at Heidelberg University, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany
{fita@stud, sebastian.damrich@iwr, fred.hamprecht@iwr}.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The seeded Watershed algorithm / minimax semi-supervised learning on a graph
computes a minimum spanning forest which connects every pixel / unlabeled node
to a seed / labeled node. We propose instead to consider all possible spanning
forests and calculate, for every node, the probability of sampling a forest connecting
a certain seed with that node. We dub this approach "Probabilistic Watershed".
Leo Grady (2006) already noted its equivalence to the Random Walker / Harmonic
energy minimization. We here give a simpler proof of this equivalence and establish
the computational feasibility of the Probabilistic Watershed with Kirchhoff’s matrix
tree theorem. Furthermore, we show a new connection between the Random Walker
probabilities and the triangle inequality of the effective resistance. Finally, we
derive a new and intuitive interpretation of the Power Watershed.

1

Introduction

Seeded segmentation in computer vision and graph-based semi-supervised machine learning are
essentially the same problem. In both, a popular paradigm is the following: given many unlabeled
pixels / nodes in a graph as well as a few seeds / labeled nodes, compute a distance from a given
query pixel / node to all of the seeds, and assign the query to a class based on the shortest distance.
There is obviously a large selection of distances to choose from, and popular choices include: i) the
shortest path distance (e.g. [19]), ii) the commute distance (e.g. [47, 46, 5, 26]) or iii) the bottleneck
shortest path distance (e.g. [28, 12]). Thanks to its matroid property, the latter can be computed
very efficiently – a greedy algorithm finds the global optimum – and is thus widely studied and
used in different fields under names including widest, minimax, maximum capacity, topographic and
watershed path distance. In computer vision, the corresponding algorithm known as “Watershed” is
popular in seeded segmentation not only because it is so efficient [13] but also because it works well
in a broad range of problems [45, 3], is well understood theoretically [17, 1], and unlike Markov
Random Fields induces no shrinkage bias [4]. Even though the Watershed’s optimization problem
can be solved efficiently, it is combinatorial in nature. One consequence is the “winner-takes-all”
characteristic of its solutions: a pixel or node is always unequivocally assigned to a single seed. Given
suitable graph edge-weights, this solution is often but not always correct, see Figures 1 and 21 .
Intrigued by the value of the Watershed to many computer vision pipelines, we have sought to
entropy-regularize the combinatorial problem to make it more amenable to end-to-end learning in
modern pipelines. Exploiting the equivalence of Watershed segmentations to minimum cost spanning
forests, we hence set out from the following question: Is it possible to compute not just the minimum,
but all (!) possible spanning forests, and to compute, in closed form, the probability that a pixel of
1

which were produced with the code at https://github.com/hci-unihd/Probabilistic_Watershed

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

