Wide Neural Networks of Any Depth Evolve as
Linear Models Under Gradient Descent
Jaehoon Lee⇤, Lechao Xiao⇤, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri
Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jeffrey Pennington
Google Brain
{jaehlee, xlc, schsam, yasamanb, romann, jaschasd, jpennin}@google.com

Abstract
A longstanding goal in deep learning research has been to precisely characterize
training and generalization. However, the often complex loss landscapes of neural
networks have made a theory of learning dynamics elusive. In this work, we show
that for wide neural networks the learning dynamics simplify considerably and
that, in the infinite width limit, they are governed by a linear model obtained from
the first-order Taylor expansion of the network around its initial parameters. Furthermore, mirroring the correspondence between wide Bayesian neural networks
and Gaussian processes, gradient-based training of wide neural networks with a
squared loss produces test set predictions drawn from a Gaussian process with a
particular compositional kernel. While these theoretical results are only exact in the
infinite width limit, we nevertheless find excellent empirical agreement between
the predictions of the original network and those of the linearized version even
for finite practically-sized networks. This agreement is robust across different
architectures, optimization methods, and loss functions.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models based on deep neural networks have achieved unprecedented performance
across a wide range of tasks [1, 2, 3]. Typically, these models are regarded as complex systems for
which many types of theoretical analyses are intractable. Moreover, characterizing the gradient-based
training dynamics of these models is challenging owing to the typically high-dimensional non-convex
loss surfaces governing the optimization. As is common in the physical sciences, investigating the
extreme limits of such systems can often shed light on these hard problems. For neural networks,
one such limit is that of infinite width, which refers either to the number of hidden units in a fullyconnected layer or to the number of channels in a convolutional layer. Under this limit, the output of
the network at initialization is a draw from a Gaussian process (GP); moreover, the network output
remains governed by a GP after exact Bayesian training using squared loss [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Aside from
its theoretical simplicity, the infinite-width limit is also of practical interest as wider networks have
been found to generalize better [5, 7, 9, 10, 11].
In this work, we explore the learning dynamics of wide neural networks under gradient descent and
find that the weight-space description of the dynamics becomes surprisingly simple: as the width
becomes large, the neural network can be effectively replaced by its first-order Taylor expansion with
respect to its parameters at initialization. For this linear model, the dynamics of gradient descent
become analytically tractable. While the linearization is only exact in the infinite width limit, we
nevertheless find excellent agreement between the predictions of the original network and those of
⇤
Both authors contributed equally to this work. Work done as a member of the Google AI Residency program
(https://g.co/airesidency).

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

