Fast Convergence of Natural Gradient Descent
for Overparameterized Neural Networks
Guodong Zhang1,2 , James Martens3 , Roger Grosse1,2
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2 , DeepMind3
{gdzhang, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu, jamesmartens@google.com

Abstract
Natural gradient descent has proven effective at mitigating the effects of pathological curvature in neural network optimization, but little is known theoretically
about its convergence properties, especially for nonlinear networks. In this work,
we analyze for the first time the speed of convergence of natural gradient descent
on nonlinear neural networks with squared-error loss. We identify two conditions
which guarantee efficient convergence from random initializations: (1) the Jacobian
matrix (of network’s output for all training cases with respect to the parameters)
has full row rank, and (2) the Jacobian matrix is stable for small perturbations
around the initialization. For two-layer ReLU neural networks, we prove that these
two conditions do in fact hold throughout the training, under the assumptions of
nondegenerate inputs and overparameterization. We further extend our analysis
to more general loss functions. Lastly, we show that K-FAC, an approximate
natural gradient descent method, also converges to global minima under the same
assumptions, and we give a bound on the rate of this convergence.

1

Introduction

Because training large neural networks is costly, there has been much interest in using secondorder optimization to speed up training [Becker and LeCun, 1989, Martens, 2010, Martens and
Grosse, 2015], and in particlar natural gradient descent [Amari, 1998, 1997]. Recently, scalable
approximations to natural gradient descent have shown practical success in a variety of tasks and
architectures [Martens and Grosse, 2015, Grosse and Martens, 2016, Wu et al., 2017, Zhang et al.,
2018a, Martens et al., 2018]. Natural gradient descent has an appealing interpretation as optimizing
over a Riemannian manifold using an intrinsic distance metric; this implies the updates are invariant
to transformations such as whitening [Ollivier, 2015, Luk and Grosse, 2018]. It is also closely
connected to Gauss-Newton optimization, suggesting it should achieve fast convergence in certain
settings [Pascanu and Bengio, 2013, Martens, 2014, Botev et al., 2017].
Does this intuition translate into faster convergence? Amari [1998] provided arguments in the
affirmative, as long as the cost function is well approximated by a convex quadratic. However, it
remains unknown whether natural gradient descent can optimize neural networks faster than gradient
descent — a major gap in our understanding. The problem is that the optimization of neural networks
is both nonconvex and non-smooth, making it difficult to prove nontrivial convergence bounds. In
general, finding a global minimum of a general non-convex function is an NP-complete problem, and
neural network training in particular is NP-complete [Blum and Rivest, 1992].
However, in the past two years, researchers have finally gained substantial traction in understanding
the dynamics of gradient-based optimization of neural networks. Theoretically, it has been shown
that gradient descent starting from a random initialization is able to find a global minimum if the
network is wide enough [Li and Liang, 2018, Du et al., 2018b,a, Zou et al., 2018, Allen-Zhu et al.,
2018, Oymak and Soltanolkotabi, 2019]. The key technique of those works is to show that neural
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

