REM: From Structural Entropy To Community
Structure Deception

Yiwei Liu1,2 , Jiamou Liu3 , Zijian Zhang1,3 , Liehuang Zhu1∗ , Angsheng Li4
School of Computer Science & Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
2
Institute of Cyberspace Research, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang 310027, China
3
School of Computer Science, The University of Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand
4
School of Computer Science, Beihang University, Beijing 100083, China
{yiweiliu, zhangzijian, liehuangz}@bit.edu.cn, jiamou.liu@auckland.ac.nz, angsheng@buaa.edu.cn

1

Abstract
This paper focuses on the privacy risks of disclosing the community structure
in an online social network. By exploiting the community affiliations of user
accounts, an attacker may infer sensitive user attributes. This raises the problem of
community structure deception (CSD), which asks for ways to minimally modify
the network so that a given community structure maximally hides itself from
community detection algorithms. We investigate CSD through an informationtheoretic lens. To this end, we propose a community-based structural entropy to
express the amount of information revealed by a community structure. This notion
allows us to devise residual entropy minimization (REM) as an efficient procedure
to solve CSD. Experimental results over 9 real-world networks and 6 community
detection algorithms show that REM is very effective in obfuscating the community
structure as compared to other benchmark methods.

1

Introduction

Social networking sites facilitate effective communication through the means of Web feeds, discussion
groups, timelines and more. Such a platform is characterized by a structure that consists of user
accounts and their links. Discovering hidden patterns in this network structure is a compelling
application of graph data mining algorithms. In particular, community detection stands out as one of
the most important graph mining methods [11, 16, 23, 26]. Communities emerge as people naturally
bond with those within the same working environment, family, or those who share similar tastes,
interests and political viewpoints. By exploiting users’ community affiliations, an attacker may infer
certain personal – and sometimes sensitive – features of the users in a social network. For example,
when the attacker has some background information asserting that several members of a community
all work for the same organization. It is easy in this case to infer that other members of the same
community also have ties with the organization. [29] showed that information about the community
memberships of a user (i.e., the groups of a social network to which a user belongs) is sufficient to
uniquely identify this person, or, at least, to significantly reduce the set of possible candidates. In
[25], communities are used to re-identify multiple addresses belonging to a same user in Bitcoin
trading networks. Therefore, there is a need to hide the community affiliations in order to preserve
the privacy of online users.
This paper addresses the privacy risks due to community detection. Our goal is to minimally modify
the network structure so that the community affiliations maximally hide themselves from community
∗
is a professor in the School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology. He is
selected into the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University from Ministry of Education, China.
His research interests include Internet of things, cloud computing security, and blockchain.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

