Compression with Flows via Local Bits-Back Coding

Jonathan Ho
UC Berkeley
jonathanho@berkeley.edu

Evan Lohn
UC Berkeley
evan.lohn@berkeley.edu

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley, covariant.ai
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Likelihood-based generative models are the backbones of lossless compression due
to the guaranteed existence of codes with lengths close to negative log likelihood.
However, there is no guaranteed existence of computationally efficient codes that
achieve these lengths, and coding algorithms must be hand-tailored to specific types
of generative models to ensure computational efficiency. Such coding algorithms
are known for autoregressive models and variational autoencoders, but not for
general types of flow models. To fill in this gap, we introduce local bits-back coding,
a new compression technique for flow models. We present efficient algorithms
that instantiate our technique for many popular types of flows, and we demonstrate
that our algorithms closely achieve theoretical codelengths for state-of-the-art flow
models on high-dimensional data.

1

Introduction

To devise a lossless compression algorithm means to devise a uniquely decodable code whose
expected length is as close as possible to the entropy of the data. A general recipe for this is to first
train a generative model by minimizing cross entropy to the data distribution, and then construct a
code that achieves lengths close to the negative log likelihood of the model. This recipe is justified
by classic results in information theory that ensure that the second step is possible—in other words,
optimizing cross entropy optimizes the performance of some hypothetical compressor. And, thanks
to recent advances in deep likelihood-based generative models, these hypothetical compressors are
quite good. Deep autoregressive models, latent variable models, and flow models are now achieving
state-of-the-art cross entropy scores on a wide variety of real-world datasets in speech, videos, text,
images, and other domains [45, 46, 39, 34, 5, 31, 6, 22, 10, 11, 23, 35, 19, 44, 25, 29].
But we are not interested in hypothetical compressors. We are interested in practical, computationally
efficient compressors that scale to high-dimensional data and harness the excellent cross entropy
scores of modern deep generative models. Unfortunately, naively applying existing codes, like Huffman coding [21], requires computing the model likelihood for all possible values of the data, which
expends computational resources scaling exponentially with the data dimension. This inefficiency
stems from the lack of assumptions about the generative model’s structure.
Coding algorithms must be tailored to specific types of generative models if we want them to be
efficient. There is already a rich literature of tailored coding algorithms for autoregressive models
and variational autoencoders built from conditional distributions which are already tractable for
coding [38, 12, 18, 13, 42], but there are currently no such algorithms for general types of flow
models [32]. It seems that this lack of efficient coding algorithms is a con of flow models that
stands at odds with their many pros, like fast and realistic sampling, interpretable latent spaces,
fast likelihood evaluation, competitive cross entropy scores, and ease of training with unbiased log
likelihood gradients [10, 11, 23, 19].
To rectify this situation, we introduce local bits-back coding, a new technique for turning a general,
pretrained, off-the-shelf flow model into an efficient coding algorithm suitable for continuous data
discretized to high precision. We show how to implement local bits-back coding without assumptions
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

