Learning metrics for persistence-based summaries
and applications for graph classification

Qi Zhao
zhao.2017@osu.edu

Yusu Wang
yusu@cse.ohio-state.edu

Computer Science and Engineering Department
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43221

Abstract
Recently a new feature representation framework based on a topological tool called
persistent homology (and its persistence diagram summary) has gained much
momentum. A series of methods have been developed to map a persistence diagram
to a vector representation so as to facilitate the downstream use of machine learning
tools. In these approaches, the importance (weight) of different persistence features
are usually pre-set. However often in practice, the choice of the weight-function
should depend on the nature of the specific data at hand. It is thus highly desirable
to learn a best weight-function (and thus metric for persistence diagrams) from
labelled data. We study this problem and develop a new weighted kernel, called
WKPI, for persistence summaries, as well as an optimization framework to learn
the weight (and thus kernel). We apply the learned kernel to the challenging task
of graph classification, and show that our WKPI-based classification framework
obtains similar or (sometimes significantly) better results than the best results
from a range of previous graph classification frameworks on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years a new data analysis methodology based on a topological tool called persistent
homology has started to attract momentum. The persistent homology is one of the most important
developments in the field of topological data analysis, and there have been fundamental developments
both on the theoretical front (e.g, [23, 10, 13, 8, 14, 5]), and on algorithms / implementations (e.g,
[43, 4, 15, 20, 29, 3]). On the high level, given a domain X with a function f : X → R on it, the
persistent homology summarizes “features” of X across multiple scales simultaneously in a single
summary called the persistence diagram (see the second picture in Figure 1). A persistence diagram
consists of a multiset of points in the plane, where each point p = (b, d) intuitively corresponds to
the birth-time (b) and death-time (d) of some (topological) features of X w.r.t. f . Hence it provides a
concise representation of X, capturing multi-scale features of it simultaneously. Furthermore, the
persistent homology framework can be applied to complex data (e.g, 3D shapes, or graphs), and
different summaries could be constructed by putting different descriptor functions on input data.
Due to these reasons, a new persistence-based feature vectorization and data analysis framework
(Figure 1) has become popular. Specifically, given a collection of objects, say a set of graphs modeling
chemical compounds, one can first convert each shape to a persistence-based representation. The
input data can now be viewed as a set of points in a persistence-based feature space. Equipping this
space with appropriate distance or kernel, one can then perform downstream data analysis tasks (e.g,
clustering).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

