Multi-objective Bayesian optimisation with
preferences over objectives

Majid Abdolshah, Alistair Shilton, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Svetha Venkatesh
The Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 ),
Deakin University, Australia
{majid,alistair.shilton,santu.rana,sunil.gupta,svetha.venkatesh}
@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
We present a multi-objective Bayesian optimisation algorithm that allows the user
to express preference-order constraints on the objectives of the type “objective A
is more important than objective B”. These preferences are defined based on the
stability of the obtained solutions with respect to preferred objective functions.
Rather than attempting to find a representative subset of the complete Pareto front,
our algorithm selects those Pareto-optimal points that satisfy these constraints. We
formulate a new acquisition function based on expected improvement in dominated
hypervolume (EHI) to ensure that the subset of Pareto front satisfying the constraints is thoroughly explored. The hypervolume calculation is weighted by the
probability of a point satisfying the constraints from a gradient Gaussian Process
model. We demonstrate our algorithm on both synthetic and real-world problems.

1

Introduction

In many real world problems, practitioners are required to sequentially evaluate a noisy black-box and
expensive to evaluate function f with the goal of finding its optimum in some domain X. Bayesian
optimisation is a well-known algorithm for such problems. There are a variety of studies such as
hyperparameter tuning [27, 13, 12], expensive multi-objective optimisation for Robotics [2, 1], and
experimentation optimisation in product design such as short polymer fiber materials [16].
Multi-objective Bayesian optimisation involves at least two conflicting, black-box, and expensive to
evaluate objectives to be optimised simultaneously. Multi-objective optimisation usually assumes
that all objectives are equally important, and solutions are found by seeking the Pareto front in the
objective space [4, 5, 3]. However, in most cases, users can stipulate preferences over objectives. This
information will impart on the relative importance on sections of the Pareto front. Thus using this
information to preferentially sample the Pareto front will boost the efficiency of the optimiser, which
is particularly advantageous when the objective functions are expensive.
In this study, preferences over objectives are stipulated based on the stability of the solutions with
respect to a set of objective functions. As an example, there are scenarios when investment strategists
are looking for Pareto optimal investment strategies that prefer stable solutions for return (objective
1) but more diverse solutions with respect to risk (objective 2) as they can later decide their appetite
for risk. As can be inferred, the stability in one objective produces more diverse solutions for the
other objectives. We believe in many real-world problems our proposed method can be useful in order
to reduce the cost, and improve the safety of experimental design.
Whilst multi-objective Bayesian optimisation for sample efficient discovery of Pareto front is an
established research track [9, 18, 8, 15], limited work has examined the incorporation of preferences.
Recently, there has been a study [18] wherein given a user specified preferred region in objective space,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

