Visualizing the PHATE of Neural Networks

Scott Gigante
Comp. Biol. and Bioinf. Program
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
scott.gigante@yale.edu
Smita Krishnaswamy
Depts. of Genetics and Computer Science
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
smita.krishnaswamy@yale.edu

Adam S. Charles
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ, 08544
adamsc@princeton.edu
Gal Mishne
Halıcıoğlu Data Science Institute
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
gmishne@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Understanding why and how certain neural networks outperform others is key to
guiding future development of network architectures and optimization methods.
To this end, we introduce a novel visualization algorithm that reveals the internal
geometry of such networks: Multislice PHATE (M-PHATE), the first method designed explicitly to visualize how a neural network’s hidden representations of data
evolve throughout the course of training. We demonstrate that our visualization
provides intuitive, detailed summaries of the learning dynamics beyond simple
global measures (i.e., validation loss and accuracy), without the need to access
validation data. Furthermore, M-PHATE better captures both the dynamics and
community structure of the hidden units as compared to visualization based on
standard dimensionality reduction methods (e.g., ISOMAP, t-SNE). We demonstrate M-PHATE with two vignettes: continual learning and generalization. In
the former, the M-PHATE visualizations display the mechanism of “catastrophic
forgetting” which is a major challenge for learning in task-switching contexts. In
the latter, our visualizations reveal how increased heterogeneity among hidden
units correlates with improved generalization performance. An implementation of
M-PHATE, along with scripts to reproduce the figures in this paper, is available at
https://github.com/scottgigante/M-PHATE.

1

Introduction

Despite their massive increase in popularity in recent years, deep networks are still regarded as
opaque and difficult to interpret or analyze. Understanding how and why certain neural networks
perform better than others remains an art. The design of neural networks and their training: choice of
architectures, regularization, activation functions, and hyperparameters, while informed by theory and
prior work, is often driven by intuition and tuned manually [1]. The combination of these intuitiondriven selections and long training times even on high-performance hardware (e.g., 3 weeks on 8
GPUs for the popular ResNet-200 network for image classification), means that the combinatorial
task of testing all possible choices is impossible, and must be guided by more principled evaluations
and explorations.
A natural and widely used measure of evaluation for the difference between network architectures and
optimizers is the validation loss. In some situations, the validation loss lacks a clearly defined global
meaning, i.e., when the loss function itself is learned, and other evaluations are required [2, 3]. While
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

