CXPlain: Causal Explanations for Model
Interpretation under Uncertainty

Patrick Schwab and Walter Karlen
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, ETH Zurich
patrick.schwab@hest.ethz.ch

Abstract
Feature importance estimates that inform users about the degree to which given
inputs influence the output of a predictive model are crucial for understanding,
validating, and interpreting machine-learning models. However, providing fast and
accurate estimates of feature importance for high-dimensional data, and quantifying
the uncertainty of such estimates remain open challenges. Here, we frame the task
of providing explanations for the decisions of machine-learning models as a causal
learning task, and train causal explanation (CXPlain) models that learn to estimate
to what degree certain inputs cause outputs in another machine-learning model.
CXPlain can, once trained, be used to explain the target model in little time, and
enables the quantification of the uncertainty associated with its feature importance
estimates via bootstrap ensembling. We present experiments that demonstrate that
CXPlain is significantly more accurate and faster than existing model-agnostic
methods for estimating feature importance. In addition, we confirm that the
uncertainty estimates provided by CXPlain ensembles are strongly correlated with
their ability to accurately estimate feature importance on held-out data.

1

Introduction

Explanation methods for machine-learning models play an important role in researching, developing,
and using predictive models as information on what features were important for a given output enable
us to better understand, validate, and interpret model decisions [1–5]. However, complex models,
such as ensemble models and deep neural networks, are often difficult to interrogate. To address
this apparent dichotomy between performance and interpretability [6], researchers have developed a
number of attribution methods that provide estimates of the importance of input features towards a
model’s output for specific types of models [4, 7–15], and for any machine-learning model [6, 16].
However, providing fast and accurate feature importance estimates for any machine-learning model
is challenging because there exists a wide variety of intricate machine-learning models with different
underlying model structures, algorithms, and decision functions, which makes it difficult to develop
an optimised and unified approach to importance attribution. Furthermore, importance estimates
of state-of-the-art methods are typically associated with significant uncertainty [3, 17–19], and it is
therefore difficult for users to judge when importance estimates can be expected to be accurate.
In this work, we present a new approach to estimating feature importance for any machine-learning
model using causal explanation (CXPlain) models. CXPlain uses a causal objective to train a supervised model to learn to explain another machine-learning model. This approach can be applied to any
machine-learning model, since it has no requirements on the predictive model to be explained. In particular, it does not require retraining or adapting the original model. We demonstrate experimentally
that CXPlain is significantly more accurate than most existing methods, fast, and able to produce
accurate uncertainty estimates. Source code is available at https://github.com/d909b/cxplain.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

