Learning Local Search Heuristics for
Boolean Satisfiability

Emre Yolcu
Carnegie Mellon University
eyolcu@cs.cmu.edu

Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present an approach to learn SAT solver heuristics from scratch through deep
reinforcement learning with a curriculum. In particular, we incorporate a graph
neural network in a stochastic local search algorithm to act as the variable selection
heuristic. We consider Boolean satisfiability problems from different classes and
learn specialized heuristics for each class. Although we do not aim to compete
with the state-of-the-art SAT solvers in run time, we demonstrate that the learned
heuristics allow us to find satisfying assignments in fewer steps compared to a
generic heuristic, and we provide analysis of our results through experiments.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a surge of interest in applying machine learning to combinatorial optimization [7, 24, 32, 27, 9]. The problems of interest are often NP-complete and traditional methods
efficient in practice usually rely on heuristics or produce approximate solutions. These heuristics
are commonly manually-designed, requiring significant insight into the problem. Similar to the way
that the recent developments in deep learning have transformed research in computer vision [28] and
artificial intelligence [43] by moving from engineered methods to ones that are learned from data and
experience, the expectation is that it will lead to advancements in search and optimization algorithms
as well. Interest in this line of work has been fueled by the developments in neural networks that
operate on graphs [5] since many combinatorial problems can be naturally represented using graphs.
A problem that is becoming a popular target for machine learning is satisfiability [11]. Boolean
satisfiability (abbreviated SAT) is the decision problem of determining whether there exists a satisfying
assignment for a given Boolean formula. The task of finding such assignments if they exist or proving
unsatisfiability otherwise is referred to as SAT solving. SAT is the canonical NP-complete problem
[13]. It is heavily researched, and there exist efficient heuristic algorithms that can solve problems
involving millions of variables and clauses. In addition to its fundamental place in complexity theory,
SAT is practically relevant, and there is a plethora of problems arising from artificial intelligence,
circuit design, planning, and automated theorem proving that can be reduced to SAT [37].
Assuming we are given instances from a known class of SAT problems, it is an interesting question
whether we can discover a heuristic from scratch specialized to that class which improves upon a
generic one. While handcrafting such heuristics for every single class is not feasible, an alternative is
to sample problems from a class and learn a heuristic by training to solve the problems. In practice,
we are often interested in solving similar problems coming from the same distribution, which makes
this setting worth studying. In this paper we focus on stochastic local search (SLS) and propose a
learnable algorithm with a variable selection heuristic computed by a graph neural network. Through
reinforcement learning, we train from scratch a suite of solvers with heuristics specialized to different
classes, and demonstrate that this approach can lead to algorithms that require fewer, although costlier,
steps to arrive at a solution compared to a generic heuristic.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

