Approximate Bayesian Inference for a Mechanistic
Model of Vesicle Release at a Ribbon Synapse

Cornelius Schröder∗
Institute for Ophthalmic Research
University of Tübingen
cornelius.schroeder@uni-tuebingen.de
Leon Lagnado
School of Life Sciences
University of Sussex
l.lagnado@sussex.ac.uk

Ben James∗
School of Life Sciences
University of Sussex
bmjame02@gmail.com

Philipp Berens
Institute for Ophthalmic Research
University of Tübingen
philipp.berens@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
The inherent noise of neural systems makes it difficult to construct models which
accurately capture experimental measurements of their activity. While much
research has been done on how to efficiently model neural activity with descriptive
models such as linear-nonlinear-models (LN), Bayesian inference for mechanistic
models has received considerably less attention. One reason for this is that these
models typically lead to intractable likelihoods and thus make parameter inference
difficult. Here, we develop an approximate Bayesian inference scheme for a
fully stochastic, biophysically inspired model of glutamate release at the ribbon
synapse, a highly specialized synapse found in different sensory systems. The
model translates known structural features of the ribbon synapse into a set of
stochastically coupled equations. We approximate the posterior distributions by
updating a parametric prior distribution via Bayesian updating rules and show that
model parameters can be efficiently estimated for synthetic and experimental data
from in vivo two-photon experiments in the zebrafish retina. Also, we find that the
model captures complex properties of the synaptic release such as the temporal
precision and outperforms a standard GLM. Our framework provides a viable path
forward for linking mechanistic models of neural activity to measured data.

1

Introduction

The activity of sensory neurons is noisy — a central goal of systems neuroscience has therefore been
to devise probabilistic models that allow to model the stimulus-response relationship of such neurons
while capturing their variability [1]. Specifically, linear-nonlinear (LN) models and their generalizations have been used extensively to describe neural activity in the retina [2, 3]. However, these type
of models cannot yield insights into the mechanistic foundations of the neural computations they aim
to describe, as they do not model their biophysical basis. On the other hand, mechanistic models on
the cellular or subcellular level have been rarely used to model stimulus-response relationships: they
require highly specialized experiments to estimate individual parameters [4, 5], making it difficult to
employ them directly in a stimulus-response model; alternatively, they often result in an intractable
likelihood, making parameter inference challenging [6].
∗

Equal contribution. Code available at https://github.com/berenslab/abc-ribbon

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

