LCA: Loss Change Allocation for
Neural Network Training

Janice Lan
Uber AI
janlan@uber.com

Rosanne Liu
Uber AI
rosanne@uber.com

Hattie Zhou
Uber
hattie@uber.com

Jason Yosinski
Uber AI
yosinski@uber.com

Abstract
Neural networks enjoy widespread use, but many aspects of their training, representation, and operation are poorly understood. In particular, our view into the training
process is limited, with a single scalar loss being the most common viewport into
this high-dimensional, dynamic process. We propose a new window into training
called Loss Change Allocation (LCA), in which credit for changes to the network
loss is conservatively partitioned to the parameters. This measurement is accomplished by decomposing the components of an approximate path integral along the
training trajectory using a Runge-Kutta integrator. This rich view shows which
parameters are responsible for decreasing or increasing the loss during training,
or which parameters “help” or “hurt” the network’s learning, respectively. LCA
may be summed over training iterations and/or over neurons, channels, or layers
for increasingly coarse views. This new measurement device produces several
insights into training. (1) We find that barely over 50% of parameters help during
any given iteration. (2) Some entire layers hurt overall, moving on average against
the training gradient, a phenomenon we hypothesize may be due to phase lag in
an oscillatory training process. (3) Finally, increments in learning proceed in a
synchronized manner across layers, often peaking on identical iterations.

1

Introduction

In the common stochastic gradient descent (SGD) training setup, a parameterized model is iteratively
updated using gradients computed from mini-batches of data chosen from some training set. Unfortunately, our view into the high-dimensional, dynamic training process is often limited to watching
a scalar loss quantity decrease over time. There has been much research attempting to understand
neural network training, with some work studying geometric properties of the objective function
[7, 20, 28, 24, 21], properties of whole networks and individual layers at convergence [4, 7, 15, 35],
and neural network training from an optimization perspective [30, 4, 5, 3, 19]. This body of work in
aggregate provides rich insight into the loss landscape arising from typical combinations of neural
network architectures and datasets. Literature on the dynamics of the training process itself is more
sparse, but a few salient works examine the learning phase through the diagonal of the Hessian,
mutual information between input and output, and other measures [1, 25, 14].
In this paper we propose a simple approach to inspecting training in progress by decomposing changes
in the overall network loss into a per-parameter Loss Change Allocation or LCA. The procedure for
computing LCA is straightforward, but to our knowledge it has not previously been employed for
investigating network training. We begin by defining this measure in more detail, and then apply it to
reveal several interesting properties of neural network training. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We define the Loss Change Allocation as a per-parameter, per-iteration decomposition
of changes to the overall network loss (Section 2). Exploring network training with this
measurement tool uncovers the following insights.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

