Partitioning Structure Learning for Segmented
Linear Regression Trees

Xiangyu Zheng
Peking University
zhengxiangyu@pku.edu.cn

Song Xi Chen
Peking University
csx@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a partitioning structure learning method for segmented linear
regression trees (SLRT), which assigns linear predictors over the terminal nodes.
The recursive partitioning process is driven by an adaptive split selection algorithm
that maximizes, at each node, a criterion function based on a conditional Kendall’s
τ statistic that measures the rank dependence between the regressors and the fitted linear residuals. Theoretical analysis shows that the split selection algorithm
permits consistent identification and estimation of the unknown segments. A sufficiently large tree is induced by applying the split selection algorithm recursively.
Then the minimal cost-complexity tree pruning procedure is applied to attain the
right-sized tree, that ensures (i) the nested structure of pruned subtrees and (ii)
consistent estimation to the number of segments. Implanting the SLRT as a built-in
base predictor, we obtain the ensemble predictors by random forests (RF) and the
proposed weighted random forests (WRF). The practical performance of the SLRT
and its ensemble versions are evaluated via numerical simulations and empirical
studies. The latter shows their advantageous predictive performance over a set of
state-of-the-art tree-based models on well-studied public datasets.

1

Introduction

Data partitioning is a fundamental pre-processing method that explores the partitioning structure of
the feature space such that the subspaces are more compliant to a simple model [1]. We consider the
segmented linear regression (SLR) models, which prescribes linear predictors over the partitions.
Partitioning structure learning is the core of SLR, that selects the split variables and levels as well as
determines the number of segments.
SLR has been studied in statistics and econometrics [2, 3, 4, 5], but the existing methods tend to
assume the split variable is known and univariate, with segments estimated by a costly simultaneous
optimization. We propose a tree-based approach for SLR called segmented linear regression trees
(SLRT), that does not require the pre-specified information about the split variables. SLRT is
completely data-driven and facilitates more efficient computation via recursive partitioning, which is
fundamentally based on a split selection algorithm and a tree pruning algorithm.
Split Selection Algorithm At each internal node of the tree, the optimal split variable and level pair
is selected to partition the feature space into two halves. Let ê be the fitted residuals by the ordinary
least square regression. Any non-linearity in the underlying regression function is reflected in the
dependence between ê and the regressors. Based on the conditional Kendall’s τ rank correlation [6],
we proposePthe following criterion function at a candidate split variable index j and a split level a,
p
C(j, a) = k=1 {|τ̂ (Xk , ê|Xj ≤ a)| + |τ̂ (Xk , ê|Xj > a)|}, where τ̂ is the sample version of the
Kendall’s τ , X is a p-dimensional regressors vector with Xk being its k-th component. The optimal
split is selected by maximizing C(j, a) over the candidate split variables {Xj } and levels {a} in the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

