Multi-relational Poincaré Graph Embeddings

Ivana Balažević1
Carl Allen1
Timothy Hospedales1,2
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
2
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, UK
{ivana.balazevic, carl.allen, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Hyperbolic embeddings have recently gained attention in machine learning due
to their ability to represent hierarchical data more accurately and succinctly than
their Euclidean analogues. However, multi-relational knowledge graphs often
exhibit multiple simultaneous hierarchies, which current hyperbolic models do not
capture. To address this, we propose a model that embeds multi-relational graph
data in the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space. Our Multi-Relational Poincaré
model (MuRP) learns relation-specific parameters to transform entity embeddings
by Möbius matrix-vector multiplication and Möbius addition. Experiments on
the hierarchical WN18RR knowledge graph show that our Poincaré embeddings
outperform their Euclidean counterpart and existing embedding methods on the
link prediction task, particularly at lower dimensionality.

1

Introduction

Hyperbolic space can be thought of as a continuous analogue of discrete trees, making it suitable for
modelling hierarchical data [28, 10]. Various types of hierarchical data have recently been embedded
in hyperbolic space [25, 26, 16, 32], requiring relatively few dimensions and achieving promising
results on downstream tasks. This demonstrates the advantage of modelling tree-like structures in
spaces with constant negative curvature (hyperbolic) over zero-curvature spaces (Euclidean).
Certain data structures, such as knowledge graphs, often exhibit multiple hierarchies simultaneously.
For example, lion is near the top of the animal food chain but near the bottom in a tree of taxonomic
mammal types [22]. Despite the widespread use of hyperbolic geometry in representation learning,
the only existing approach to embedding hierarchical multi-relational graph data in hyperbolic space
[31] does not outperform Euclidean models. The difficulty with representing multi-relational data in
hyperbolic space lies in finding a way to represent entities (nodes), shared across relations, such that
they form a different hierarchy under different relations, e.g. nodes near the root of the tree under one
relation may be leaf nodes under another. Further, many state-of-the-art approaches to modelling
multi-relational data, such as DistMult [37], ComplEx [34], and TuckER [2] (i.e. bilinear models),
rely on inner product as a similarity measure and there is no clear correspondence to the Euclidean
inner product in hyperbolic space [32] by which these models can be converted. Existing translational
approaches that use Euclidean distance to measure similarity, such as TransE [6] and STransE [23],
can be converted to the hyperbolic domain, but do not currently compete with the bilinear models
in terms of predictive performance. However, it has recently been shown in the closely related field
of word embeddings [1] that the difference (i.e. relation) between word pairs that form analogies
manifests as a vector offset, suggesting a translational approach to modelling relations.
In this paper, we propose MuRP, a theoretically inspired method to embed hierarchical multi-relational
data in the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space. By considering the surface area of a hypersphere
of increasing radius centered at a particular point, Euclidean space can be seen to “grow” polynomially,
whereas in hyperbolic space the equivalent growth is exponential [10]. Therefore, moving outwards
from the root of a tree, there is more “room” to separate leaf nodes in hyperbolic space than in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

