Modelling heterogeneous distributions with an
Uncountable Mixture of Asymmetric Laplacians

Axel Brando ∗
Jose A. Rodríguez-Serrano†
Jordi Vitrià‡
Alberto Rubio
BBVA Data & Analytics BBVA Data & Analytics Universitat de Barcelona BBVA Data & Analytics
Universitat de Barcelona

Abstract
In regression tasks, aleatoric uncertainty is commonly addressed by considering a
parametric distribution of the output variable, which is based on strong assumptions
such as symmetry, unimodality or by supposing a restricted shape. These assumptions are too limited in scenarios where complex shapes, strong skews or multiple
modes are present. In this paper, we propose a generic deep learning framework
that learns an Uncountable Mixture of Asymmetric Laplacians (UMAL), which will
allow us to estimate heterogeneous distributions of the output variable and we show
its connections to quantile regression. Despite having a fixed number of parameters,
the model can be interpreted as an infinite mixture of components, which yields a
flexible approximation for heterogeneous distributions. Apart from synthetic cases,
we apply this model to room price forecasting and to predict financial operations in
personal bank accounts. We demonstrate that UMAL produces proper distributions,
which allows us to extract richer insights and to sharpen decision-making.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Regression problem with heterogeneous output distributions modelled with UMAL.
In the last decade, deep learning has had significant success in many real-world tasks, such as image
classification [1] and natural language processing [2]. While most of the successful examples have
been in classification tasks, regression tasks can also be tackled with deep networks by considering
architectures where the last layer represents the continuous response variable(s) [3, 4, 5]. However,
∗

axel.brando@bbvadata.com | axelbrando@ub.edu.
joseantonio.rodriguez.serrano@bbvadata.com
‡
jordi.vitria@ub.edu
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

