An Algorithm to Learn Polytree Networks with
Hidden Nodes
Firoozeh Sepehr
Department of EECS
University of Tennessee Knoxville
1520 Middle Dr, Knoxville, TN 37996
dawn@utk.edu

Donatello Materassi
Department of EECS
University of Tennessee Knoxville
1520 Middle Dr, Knoxville, TN 37996
dmateras@utk.edu

Abstract
Ancestral graphs are a prevalent mathematical tool to take into account latent (hidden) variables in a probabilistic graphical model. In ancestral graph representations,
the nodes are only the observed (manifest) variables and the notion of m-separation
fully characterizes the conditional independence relations among such variables,
bypassing the need to explicitly consider latent variables. However, ancestral graph
models do not necessarily represent the actual causal structure of the model, and
do not contain information about, for example, the precise number and location of
the hidden variables. Being able to detect the presence of latent variables while
also inferring their precise location within the actual causal structure model is a
more challenging task that provides more information about the actual causal relationships among all the model variables, including the latent ones. In this article,
we develop an algorithm to exactly recover graphical models of random variables
with underlying polytree structures when the latent nodes satisfy specific degree
conditions. Therefore, this article proposes an approach for the full identification
of hidden variables in a polytree. We also show that the algorithm is complete
in the sense that when such degree conditions are not met, there exists another
polytree with fewer number of latent nodes satisfying the degree conditions and
entailing the same independence relations among the observed variables, making it
indistinguishable from the actual polytree.

1

Introduction

The presence of unmeasured variables is a fundamental challenge in discovery of causal relationships
[1, 2, 3]. When the causal diagram is a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) with unmeasured variables,
a common approach is to use ancestral graphs to describe the independence relations among the
measured variables [2]. The main advantage of ancestral graphs is that they involve only the measured
variables and successfully encode all their conditional independence relations via m-separation.
Furthermore, complete algorithms have been devised to obtain ancestral graphs from observational
data, e.g., the work in [3]. However, recovering the actual structure of the original DAG is something
that ancestral graphs somehow circumvent. For example, it might be known that the actual causal
diagram has a polytree structure including the hidden nodes, but the ancestral graph associated with
the measured variables might not even be a polytree [4]. Instead, the recovery of causal diagrams
including the location of their hidden variables is a very challenging task and algorithmic solutions
are available only for specific scenarios [5, 6, 7, 8]. For example, in the case of specific distributions
(i.e., Gaussian and Binomial) when the causal diagram is known to be a rooted tree, the problem
has been solved by exploiting the additivity of a metric along the paths of the tree [6, 7, 8, 9]. In the
case of generic distributions, though, additive metrics might be too difficult to define or cannot be
defined in general. Furthermore, rooted trees can be considered a rather limiting class of networks
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

