DAC: The Double Actor-Critic
Architecture for Learning Options

Shangtong Zhang, Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{shangtong.zhang, shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We reformulate the option framework as two parallel augmented MDPs. Under
this novel formulation, all policy optimization algorithms can be used off the shelf
to learn intra-option policies, option termination conditions, and a master policy
over options. We apply an actor-critic algorithm on each augmented MDP, yielding
the Double Actor-Critic (DAC) architecture. Furthermore, we show that, when
state-value functions are used as critics, one critic can be expressed in terms of the
other, and hence only one critic is necessary. We conduct an empirical study on
challenging robot simulation tasks. In a transfer learning setting, DAC outperforms
both its hierarchy-free counterpart and previous gradient-based option learning
algorithms.

1

Introduction

Temporal abstraction (i.e., hierarchy) is a key component in reinforcement learning (RL). A good
temporal abstraction usually improves exploration (Machado et al., 2017b) and enhances the interpretability of agents’ behavior (Smith et al., 2018). The option framework (Sutton et al., 1999), which
is commonly used to formulate temporal abstraction, gives rise to two problems: learning options
(i.e., temporally extended actions) and learning a master policy (i.e., a policy over options, a.k.a. an
inter-option policy).
A Markov Decision Process (MDP, Puterman 2014) with options can be interpreted as a Semi-MDP
(SMDP, Puterman 2014), and a master policy is used in this SMDP for option selection. While
in principle, any SMDP algorithm can be used to learn a master policy, such algorithms are data
inefficient as they cannot update a master policy during option execution. To address this issue, Sutton
et al. (1999) propose intra-option algorithms, which can update a master policy at every time step
during option execution. Intra-option Q-Learning (Sutton et al., 1999) is a value-based intra-option
algorithm and has enjoyed great success (Bacon et al., 2017; Riemer et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019b).
However, in the MDP setting, policy-based methods are often preferred to value-based ones because
they can cope better with large action spaces and enjoy better convergence properties with function
approximation. Unfortunately, theoretical study for learning a master policy with policy-based
intra-option methods is limited (Daniel et al., 2016; Bacon, 2018) and its empirical success has not
been witnessed. This is the first issue we address in this paper.
Recently, gradient-based option learning algorithms have enjoyed great success (Levy and Shimkin,
2011; Bacon et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2018; Riemer et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019b). However,
most require algorithms that are customized to the option-based SMDP. Consequently, we cannot
directly leverage recent advances in gradient-based policy optimization from MDPs (e.g., Schulman
et al. 2015, 2017; Haarnoja et al. 2018). This is the second issue we address in this paper.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

