Decentralized sketching of low-rank matrices

Rakshith S Srinivasa ∗
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
rsrinivasa6@gatech.edu

Kiryung Lee
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
lee.8763@osu.edu

Marius Junge
Dept. of Mathematics
University of Illinois-Urbana Champagne
Urbana, IL, 61801
mjunge@illinois.edu

Justin Romberg
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30318
jrom@ece.gatech.edu

Abstract
We address a low-rank matrix recovery problem where each column of a rank-r
matrix X ∈ Rd1 ×d2 is compressed beyond the point of individual recovery to RL
with L  d1 . Leveraging the joint structure among the columns, we propose a
method to recover the matrix to within an  relative error in the Frobenius norm
from a total of O(r(d1 + d2 ) log6 (d1 + d2 )/2 ) observations. This guarantee holds
uniformly for all incoherent matrices of rank r. In our method, we propose to use a
novel matrix norm called the mixed-norm along with the maximum `2 -norm of the
columns to design a new convex relaxation for low-rank recovery that is tailored to
our observation model. We also show that the proposed mixed-norm, the standard
nuclear norm, and the max-norm are particular instances of convex regularization
of low-rankness via tensor norms. Finally, we provide a scalable ADMM algorithm
for the mixed-norm-based method and demonstrate its empirical performance via
large-scale simulations.

1

Introduction

A fundamental structural model for data is that the data points lie close to an unknown subspace,
meaning that the matrix created by concatenating the data vectors has low rank. We address a
particular low-rank matrix recovery problem where we wish to recover a set of vectors from a
low-dimensional subspace after they have been individually compressed (or “sketched”). More
concretely, let x1 , · · · , xd2 be vectors from an unknown r-dimensional subspace in Rd1 . We observe
the vectors indirectly via linear sketches by corresponding sensing matrices B1 , . . . , Bd2 ∈ Rd1 ×L ,
where L < d1 , i.e., the observed measurement vectors are written as
yi = B>
i x i + zi ,

i = 1, . . . , d2 .

(1)

Although individual recovery of each vector is ill-posed, it is still possible to recover x1 , . . . , xd2
jointly by leveraging their mutual structure without knowing the underlying subspace a priori. This
indeed results in a low-rank matrix recovery problem with a column-wise observation model.
We are motivated mainly by large-scale inference problems where data is collected in a distributed
network or in a streaming setting. In both cases, it is desired to compress the data to lower the
∗
This work was supported in part NSF CCF-1718771, NSF DMS 18-00872 and in part by C-BRIC, one of
six centers in JUMP, a Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by DARPA.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

