A Robust Non-Clairvoyant Dynamic Mechanism for
Contextual Auctions
Yuan Deng
Duke University
Durham, NC
ericdy@cs.duke.edu

Sébastien Lahaie
Google Research
New York City, NY
slahaie@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
New York City, NY
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Dynamic mechanisms offer powerful techniques to improve on both revenue and
efficiency by linking sequential auctions using state information, but these techniques rely on exact distributional information of the buyers’ valuations (present
and future), which limits their use in learning settings. In this paper, we consider
the problem of contextual auctions where the seller gradually learns a model of
the buyer’s valuation as a function of the context (e.g., item features) and seeks a
pricing policy that optimizes revenue. Building on the concept of a bank account
mechanism—a special class of dynamic mechanisms that is known to be revenueoptimal—we develop a non-clairvoyant dynamic mechanism that is robust to both
estimation errors in the buyer’s value distribution and strategic behavior on the
part of the buyer. We then tailor its structure to achieve a policy with provably
low regret against a constant approximation of the optimal dynamic mechanism in
contextual auctions. Our result substantially improves on previous results that only
provide revenue guarantees against static benchmarks.

1

Introduction

As a fundamental problem in mechanism design, pricing in repeated auctions has been extensively
studied in recent years. This is partly motivated by the popularity of selling online ads via auctions,
an industry totalling annual revenue of hundreds of billions of dollars. Repeated auctions open up
the possibility of linking auctions across time using state information in order to enhance revenue
or welfare, but this introduces several challenges. To guarantee optimal outcomes, the process must
take into account the bidders’ incentives to possibly manipulate each individual auction as well as the
auction state across time. In practice, the seller must also rely on approximate models of the buyers’
preferences to effectively set auction parameters like reserve prices. These aspects of the problem
have so far been explored in two separate strands of the literature on repeated auctions, where items
arrive online and the allocation and payment decisions must be made as soon as an item arrives.
One strand, known as dynamic mechanism design, considers an environment in which the seller has
exact distributional information over the buyers’ values for the items, for the current stage and all
future stages, and designs revenue-maximizing dynamic mechanisms that adapt the auction state
based on the buyer’s historical bids [Thomas and Worrall, 1990, Bergemann and Välimäki, 2010,
Ashlagi et al., 2016, Mirrokni et al., 2016a,b]. However, this clairvoyant framework relies on the
seller having an accurate forecast of the buyer’s valuation distributions in future auctions. To address
this concern, Mirrokni et al. [2018] propose non-clairvoyant dynamic mechanisms, which do not rely
on any information about the future (but do rely on an accurate forecast of the present). They show
that a non-clairvoyant dynamic mechanism can achieve a constant approximation to the revenue of
the optimal clairvoyant mechanism. The other strand of literature, known as robust price learning,
focuses on a setting where the buyer’s value distributions across stages are parameterized by some
common private factors that are unknown to the seller, and designs robust policies to learn from the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

