Exact Gaussian Processes on a Million Data Points
Ke Alexander Wang1∗ Geoff Pleiss1∗ Jacob R. Gardner2
Stephen Tyree3 Kilian Q. Weinberger1 Andrew Gordon Wilson1,4
1
Cornell University, 2 Uber AI Labs, 3 NVIDIA, 4 New York University

Abstract
Gaussian processes (GPs) are flexible non-parametric models, with a capacity that
grows with the available data. However, computational constraints with standard
inference procedures have limited exact GPs to problems with fewer than about
ten thousand training points, necessitating approximations for larger datasets. In
this paper, we develop a scalable approach for exact GPs that leverages multiGPU parallelization and methods like linear conjugate gradients, accessing the
kernel matrix only through matrix multiplication. By partitioning and distributing
kernel matrix multiplies, we demonstrate that an exact GP can be trained on
over a million points, a task previously thought to be impossible with current
computing hardware, in less than 2 hours. Moreover, our approach is generally
applicable, without constraints to grid data or specific kernel classes. Enabled by
this scalability, we perform the first-ever comparison of exact GPs against scalable
GP approximations on datasets with 104 − 106 data points, showing dramatic
performance improvements.

1

Introduction

Gaussian processes (GPs) have seen great success in many machine learning settings, such as blackbox optimization [38], reinforcement learning [6, 8], and time-series forecasting [33]. These models
offer several advantages – principled uncertainty representations, model priors that require little
expert intervention, and the ability to adapt to any dataset size [31, 32]. GPs are not only ideal for
problems with few observations; they also have great promise to exploit the available information in
increasingly large datasets, especially when combined with expressive kernels [41] or hierarchical
structure [5, 35, 43, 45].
In practice, however, exact GP inference can be intractable for large datasets, as it naïvely requires
O(n3 ) computations and O(n2 ) storage for n training points [32]. Many approximate methods
have been introduced to improve scalability, relying on mixture-of-experts models [7], inducing
points [12, 37, 39, 42], random feature expansions [20, 30, 47], or stochastic variational optimization
[2, 16, 17, 36, 46]. However, due to the historical intractability of training exact GPs on large datasets,
it has been an open question how approximate methods compare to an exact approach when much
more data is available.
In this paper, we develop a methodology to scale exact GP inference well beyond what has previously
been achieved: we train a Gaussian process on over a million data points, performing predictions
without approximations. Such a result would be intractable with standard implementations which
rely on the Cholesky decomposition. The scalability we demonstrate is made feasible by the
recent Blackbox Matrix-Matrix multiplication (BBMM) inference procedure of Gardner et al. [11],
which uses conjugate gradients and related methods to reduce GP inference to iterations of matrix
multiplication. Gardner et al. [11] show that this procedure (1) achieves exponential convergence
using a pivoted Cholesky preconditioner under certain conditions, (2) requires relatively few number
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

