muSSP: Efficient Min-cost Flow Algorithm for
Multi-object Tracking

Congchao Wang, Yizhi Wang, Yinxue Wang, Chiung-Ting Wu, Guoqiang Yu*
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
{ccwang, yzwang, yxwang90, ctwu, yug}@vt.edu

Abstract
Min-cost flow has been a widely used paradigm for solving data association problems in multi-object tracking (MOT). However, most existing methods of solving
min-cost flow problems in MOT are either direct adoption or slight modifications
of generic min-cost flow algorithms, yielding sub-optimal computation efficiency
and holding the applications back from larger scale of problems. In this paper, by
exploiting the special structures and properties of the graphs formulated in MOT
problems, we develop an efficient min-cost flow algorithm, namely, minimumupdate Successive Shortest Path (muSSP). muSSP is proved to provide exact
optimal solution and we demonstrated its efficiency through 40 experiments on five
MOT datasets with various object detection results and a number of graph designs.
muSSP is always the most efficient in each experiment compared to the three peer
solvers, improving the efficiency by 5 to 337 folds relative to the best competing
algorithm and averagely 109 to 4089 folds to each of the three peer methods.

1

Introduction

Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision and has a wide range of
applications from traffic surveillance, self-driving cars to cell/particle tracking in microscopy images
[7, 20, 15]. In recent years, the min-cost flow formulation of MOT has enjoyed popularity and served
as a workhorse in addressing MOT problems [21, 16, 4, 14, 13]. On the one hand, it is a result of the
substantial improvement of object detectors which enables the tracking-by-detection strategy [20, 13].
On the other hand, this formulation has great flexibility, for example, it can automatically determine
the number of trajectories and deal with missing or spurious detections [15, 4]. Since the min-cost
flow problems have been well studied and there exist polynomial-time algorithms [1], it was natural
to directly apply the existing algorithms or modify them slightly. Indeed, Zhang et al. [21] used the
cost-scaling approach and Pirsiavash et al. [16] proposed to adopt the successive shortest path (SSP)
approach. These approaches can guarantee global optimality and are widely considered as the most
efficient solvers for generic min-cost flow problems. However, their efficiency is suboptimal by a
large margin for the MOT problems [14] as confirmed in our experiments.
With the ever increasing number of objects and duration of tracking, more efficient algorithms for
solving MOT min-cost flow problems are in urgent need. In this paper, we identify several important
special structures and properties of the graph in the MOT min-cost flow problem and show that they
can be used to design efficient algorithms, resulting in a dramatic reduction of computation time.
Specifically, the graph in a min-cost flow problem for MOT has the following four specialties: (1)
It is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with single source node s and single sink node t. (2) All arcs’
capacities are one. (3) Each detection is represented with a pair of nodes, a pre-node and a post-node,
with a transition arc between them to incorporate detection confidence. (4) For each detection, the
pre-node is linked from s through an inward arc and the post-node is linked to t through an outward
arc. Such arcs allow every detection to be the start or the end of a trajectory. An example of a typical
min-cost flow graph generated from MOT problem is shown in Fig. 1(b).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

