A Game Theoretic Approach to Class-wise Selective
Rationalization
Shiyu Chang1,2∗
Yang Zhang1,2∗
Mo Yu2∗
Tommi S. Jaakkola3
1
2
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research
CSAIL MIT
{shiyu.chang,yang.zhang2}@ibm.com yum@us.ibm.com tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Selection of input features such as relevant pieces of text has become a common
technique of highlighting how complex neural predictors operate. The selection can
be optimized post-hoc for trained models or incorporated directly into the method
itself (self-explaining). However, an overall selection does not properly capture the
multi-faceted nature of useful rationales such as pros and cons for decisions. To this
end, we propose a new game theoretic approach to class-dependent rationalization,
where the method is specifically trained to highlight evidence supporting alternative
conclusions. Each class involves three players set up competitively to find evidence
for factual and counterfactual scenarios. We show theoretically in a simplified
scenario how the game drives the solution towards meaningful class-dependent
rationales. We evaluate the method in single- and multi-aspect sentiment classification tasks and demonstrate that the proposed method is able to identify both factual
(justifying the ground truth label) and counterfactual (countering the ground truth
label) rationales consistent with human rationalization. The code for our method is
publicly available2 .

1

Introduction

Interpretability is rapidly rising alongside performance as a key operational characteristics across
NLP and other applications. Perhaps the most straightforward means of highlighting how a complex
method works is by selecting input features relevant for the prediction (e.g., [19]). If the selected
subset is short and concise (for text), it can potentially be understood and verified against domain
knowledge. The selection of features can be optimized to explain already trained models [24],
incorporated directly into the method itself as in self-explaining models [19, 12], or optimized to
mimic available human rationales [8].
One of the key questions motivating our work is extending how rationales are defined and estimated.
The common paradigm to date is to make an overall selection of a feature subset that maximally
explains the target output/decision. For example, maximum mutual information criterion [12, 19]
chooses an overall subset of features such that the mutual information between the feature subset and
the target output decision is maximized, or, equivalently, the entropy of the target output decision
conditional on this subset is minimized. Rationales can be multi-faceted, however, involving support
for different outcomes, just with different degrees. For example, we could understand the overall
sentiment associated with a product in terms of weighing associated pros and cons contained in the
review. Existing rationalization techniques strive for a single overall selection, therefore lumping
together the facets supporting different outcomes.
We propose the notion of class-wise rationales, which is defined as multiple sets of rationales
that respectively explain support for different output classes (or decisions). Unlike conventional
∗
2

Authors contributed equally to this paper.
https://github.com/code-terminator/classwise_rationale

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

