Scalable Bayesian dynamic covariance modeling with
variational Wishart and inverse Wishart processes

Creighton Heaukulani
No Affiliation
Bangkok, Thailand
c.k.heaukulani@gmail.com

Mark van der Wilk
PROWLER.io
Cambridge, United Kingdom
mark@prowler.io

Abstract
We implement gradient-based variational inference routines for Wishart and inverse Wishart processes, which we apply as Bayesian models for the dynamic,
heteroskedastic covariance matrix of a multivariate time series. The Wishart and
inverse Wishart processes are constructed from i.i.d. Gaussian processes, existing
variational inference algorithms for which form the basis of our approach. These
methods are easy to implement as a black-box and scale favorably with the length
of the time series, however, they fail in the case of the Wishart process, an issue we
resolve with a simple modification into an additive white noise parameterization
of the model. This modification is also key to implementing a factored variant
of the construction, allowing inference to additionally scale to high-dimensional
covariance matrices. Through experimentation, we demonstrate that some (but
not all) model variants outperform multivariate GARCH when forecasting the
covariances of returns on financial instruments.

1

Introduction

Estimating the (time series of) covariance matrices between the variables in a multivariate time
series is a principal problem of interest in many domains, including the construction of financial
trading portfolios [15] and the study of brain activity measurements in neurological studies [7].
Estimating the entries of the covariance matrices is a challenging problem, however, because there are
O(N D2 ) parameters to estimate for a time series of length N with D variables, yet we only record
a single observation of the time series consisting of O(N D) data points. Bayesian models (and
their corresponding inference procedures) often perform well in these overparameterized problems;
indeed, Fox and West [7], Wilson and Ghahramani [24] and Fox and Dunson [6] show that Bayesian
approaches based on the Wishart and inverse Wishart processes produce better estimates of dynamic
covariance matrices than the venerable multivariate GARCH approaches [3, 4].
The Wishart and inverse Wishart processes are two related stochastic processes in the state space of
symmetric, positive definite matrices, making them appropriate models for (heteroskedastic) time
series of covariance matrices. They are themselves constructed from i.i.d. Gaussian processes, in
analogy to the construction of Wishart or inverse Wishart random variables from i.i.d. Gaussian
random variables. Exact posterior inference for these models is intractable, and so previous authors
have suggested approximate inference routines based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms. We instead propose a gradient-based variational inference routine, derived from approaches
to approximate inference with (sparse and/or multi-output) Gaussian process models. Taking the
variational approach has several advantages including a simple, black-box implementation and the
ability to scale down the computational cost of inference with respect to N , the length of the time
series, if required. Furthermore, we derive a factored variant of the model that may additionally scale
inference to large numbers of variables D, i.e., the dimensionality of the covariance matrix. In our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

