Single-Model Uncertainties for Deep Learning

Natasa Tagasovska
Department of Information Systems
HEC Lausanne, Switzerland
natasa.tagasovska@unil.ch

David Lopez-Paz
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
dlp@fb.com

Abstract
We provide single-model estimates of aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty for deep
neural networks. To estimate aleatoric uncertainty, we propose Simultaneous
Quantile Regression (SQR), a loss function to learn all the conditional quantiles
of a given target variable. These quantiles can be used to compute well-calibrated
prediction intervals. To estimate epistemic uncertainty, we propose Orthonormal
Certificates (OCs), a collection of diverse non-constant functions that map all
training samples to zero. These certificates map out-of-distribution examples to
non-zero values, signaling epistemic uncertainty. Our uncertainty estimators are
computationally attractive, as they do not require ensembling or retraining deep
models, and achieve competitive performance.

1

Introduction

Deep learning permeates our lives, with prospects to drive our cars and decide on our medical
treatments. These ambitions will not materialize if deep learning models remain unable to assess
their confidence when performing under diverse situations. Being aware of uncertainty in prediction
is crucial in multiple scenarios. First, uncertainty plays a central role on deciding when to abstain
from prediction. Abstention is a reasonable strategy to deal with anomalies [11], outliers [39],
out-of-distribution examples [69], detect and defend against adversaries [75], or delegate high-risk
predictions to humans [14, 27, 12]. Deep classifiers that “do not know what they know” may
confidently assign one of the training categories to objects that they have never seen. Second,
uncertainty is the backbone of active learning [68], the problem of deciding what examples should
humans annotate to maximally improve the performance of a model. Third, uncertainty estimation is
important when analyzing noise structure, such as in causal discovery [52] and in the estimation of
predictive intervals. Fourth, uncertainty quantification is one step towards model interpretability [3].
Being a wide-reaching concept, most taxonomies consider three sources of uncertainty: approximation, aleatoric, and epistemic uncertainties [20]. First, approximation uncertainty describes the
errors made by simplistic models unable to fit complex data (e.g., the error made by a linear model
fitting a sinusoidal curve). Since the sequel focuses on deep neural networks, which are known to
be universal approximators [15], we assume that the approximation uncertainty is negligible and
omit its analysis. Second, aleatoric uncertainty (from the Greek word alea, meaning “rolling a
dice”) accounts for the stochasticity of the data. Aleatoric uncertainty describes the variance of the
conditional distribution of our target variable given our features. This type of uncertainty arises due
to hidden variables or measurement errors, and cannot be reduced by collecting more data under the
same experimental conditions. Third, epistemic uncertainty (from the Greek word episteme, meaning
“knowledge”) describes the errors associated to the lack of experience of our model at certain regions
of the feature space. Therefore, epistemic uncertainty is inversely proportional to the density of
training examples, and could be reduced by collecting data in those low density regions. Figure 1
depicts our aleatoric uncertainty (gray shade) and epistemic uncertainty (pink shade) estimates for a
simple one-dimensional regression example.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

