Manifold-regression to predict from MEG/EEG brain
signals without source modeling

David Sabbagh ∗†‡, Pierre Ablin, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Denis A. Engemann §
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA, Palaiseau, 91120, France

Abstract
Magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography (M/EEG) can reveal neuronal dynamics non-invasively in real-time and are therefore appreciated methods in
medicine and neuroscience. Recent advances in modeling brain-behavior relationships have highlighted the effectiveness of Riemannian geometry for summarizing
the spatially correlated time-series from M/EEG in terms of their covariance. However, after artefact-suppression, M/EEG data is often rank deficient which limits
the application of Riemannian concepts. In this article, we focus on the task of
regression with rank-reduced covariance matrices. We study two Riemannian approaches that vectorize the M/EEG covariance between-sensors through projection
into a tangent space. The Wasserstein distance readily applies to rank-reduced
data but lacks affine-invariance. This can be overcome by finding a common subspace in which the covariance matrices are full rank, enabling the affine-invariant
geometric distance. We investigated the implications of these two approaches in
synthetic generative models, which allowed us to control estimation bias of a linear
model for prediction. We show that Wasserstein and geometric distances allow
perfect out-of-sample prediction on the generative models. We then evaluated
the methods on real data with regard to their effectiveness in predicting age from
M/EEG covariance matrices. The findings suggest that the data-driven Riemannian
methods outperform different sensor-space estimators and that they get close to
the performance of biophysics-driven source-localization model that requires MRI
acquisitions and tedious data processing. Our study suggests that the proposed
Riemannian methods can serve as fundamental building-blocks for automated
large-scale analysis of M/EEG.

1

Introduction

Magnetoencephalography and electroencephalography (M/EEG) measure brain activity with millisecond precision from outside the head [23]. Both methods are non-invasive and expose rhythmic
signals induced by coordinated neuronal firing with characteristic periodicity between minutes and
milliseconds [10]. These so-called brain-rhythms can reveal cognitive processes as well as health
status and are quantified in terms of the spatial distribution of the power spectrum over the sensor
array that samples the electromagnetic fields around the head [3].
Statistical learning from M/EEG commonly relies on covariance matrices estimated from bandpass filtered signals to capture the characteristic scale of the neuronal events of interest [7, 22,
16]. However, covariance matrices do not live in an Euclidean space but a Riemannian manifold.
∗

Additional affiliation: Inserm, UMRS-942, Paris Diderot University, Paris, France
Additional affiliation: Department of Anaesthesiology and Critical Care, Lariboisière Hospital, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France
‡
dav.sabbagh@gmail.com
§
denis-alexander.engemann@inria.fr
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

