Regret Bounds for Thompson Sampling in
Episodic Restless Bandit Problems

Young Hun Jung
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yhjung@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
Restless bandit problems are instances of non-stationary multi-armed bandits.
These problems have been studied well from the optimization perspective, where
the goal is to efficiently find a near-optimal policy when system parameters are
known. However, very few papers adopt a learning perspective, where the parameters are unknown. In this paper, we analyze the performance of Thompson sampling
in episodic restless bandits with unknown parameters.
We consider a general policy
√
map to define our competitor and prove an Õ( T ) Bayesian regret bound. Our
competitor is flexible enough to represent various benchmarks including the best
fixed action policy, the optimal policy, the Whittle index policy, or the myopic
policy. We also present empirical results that support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Restless bandits [Whittle, 1988] are variants of multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems [Robbins, 1952].
Unlike the classical MABs, the arms have non-stationary reward distributions. Specifically, we
will focus on the class of restless bandits whose arms change their states based on Markov chains.
Restless bandits are also distinguished from rested bandits where only the active arms evolve and
the passive arms remain frozen. We will assume that each arm changes according to two different
Markov chains depending on whether it is played or not. Because of their extra flexibility in modeling
non-stationarity, restless bandits have been applied to practical problems such as dynamic channel
access problems [Liu et al., 2011, 2013] and online recommendation systems [Meshram et al., 2017].
Due to the arms’ non-stationary nature, playing the same set of arms for every round usually
does not produce the optimal performance. This makes the optimal policy highly non-trivial, and
Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis [1999] show that it is generally PSPACE hard to identify the optimal
policy for restless bandits. As a consequence, many researchers have been devoted to find an efficient
way to approximate the optimal policy [Liu and Zhao, 2010, Meshram et al., 2018]. This line of work
primarily focuses on the optimization perspective in that the system parameters are already known.
Since the true system parameters are unavailable in many cases, it becomes important to examine
restless bandits from a learning perspective. Due to the learner’s additional uncertainty, however,
analyzing a learning algorithm in restless bandits is significantly challenging. Liu et al. [2011, 2013]
and Tekin and Liu [2012] prove O(log T ) bounds for confidence bound based algorithms, but their
competitor always selects a fixed set of actions, which is known to be weak (see Section 5 for an
empirical example of the weakness of the best fixed action competitor). Dai et al. [2011, 2014] show
O(log T ) bounds against the optimal policy,
√ but their assumptions on the underlying model are very
limited. Ortner et al. [2012] prove an Õ( T ) bound in general restless bandits, but their algorithm is
intractable in general.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

