Theoretical Limits of Pipeline Parallel Optimization
and Application to Distributed Deep Learning

Igor Colin

Ludovic Dos Santos
Kevin Scaman
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
We investigate the theoretical limits of pipeline parallel learning of deep learning architectures, a distributed setup in which the computation is distributed per
layer instead of per example. For smooth convex and non-convex objective functions, we provide matching lower and upper complexity bounds and show that a
naive pipeline parallelization of Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent is optimal.
For non-smooth convex functions, we provide a novel algorithm coined Pipeline
Parallel Random Smoothing (PPRS) that is within a d1/4 multiplicative factor of
the optimal convergence rate, where d is the underlying dimension. While the
convergence rate still obeys a slow ε−2 convergence rate, the depth-dependent
part is accelerated, resulting in a near-linear speed-up and convergence time that
only slightly depends on the depth of the deep learning architecture. Finally, we
perform an empirical analysis of the non-smooth non-convex case and show that,
for difficult and highly non-smooth problems, PPRS outperforms more traditional
optimization algorithms such as gradient descent and Nesterov’s accelerated gradient descent for problems where the sample size is limited, such as few-shot or
adversarial learning.

1

Introduction

The recent advances in deep neural networks have brought these methods into indispensable work in
previously hard-to-deal-with tasks, such as speech or image recognition. The ever growing number
of samples available along with the increasing need for complex models have quickly raised the need
of efficient ways of distributing the training of deep neural networks. Pipeline methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
are proven frameworks for parallelizing algorithms both from the samples and the parameters point
of view. While several pipelining approaches for deep networks have arisen in the last few years,
GPipe [1] offers a solid and efficient way of applying pipelining techniques to neural network training.
In this framework, network layers are partitioned and training samples flow across them, only waiting
for the next layer to be free, increasing the overall efficiency in a nearly linear way.
Although pipelining is essentially designed for tackling both parameters and samples distribution over
a network, some specific fields such as few-shot learning, deep reinforcement learning or adversarial
learning present imbalanced needs between data and model distribution. Indeed, these problems
typically require the training of a large model with very few examples, thus encouraging the use of
methods leveraging the information in each sample to its best potential. Randomized smoothing for
machine learning [6, 7] evidenced a way of using data samples more efficiently. The overall idea is
to replace the usual gradient information with an average of gradients sampled around the current
parameter; this approach is particularly effective when dealing with non-smooth problems as it is
equivalent to smoothing the objective function.
The objective of this paper is to provide a theoretical analysis of pipeline parallel optimization, and
show that accelerated convergence rates are possible using randomized smoothing in this setting.
Related work.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

