Efficient Forward Architecture Search
Hanzhang Hu,1 John Langford,2 Rich Caruana,2
Saurajit Mukherjee,2 Eric Horvitz,2 Debadeepta Dey2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Microsoft Research
hanzhang@cs.cmu.edu, {jcl,rcaruana,saurajim,horvitz,dedey}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a neural architecture search (NAS) algorithm, Petridish, to iteratively
add shortcut connections to existing network layers. The added shortcut connections effectively perform gradient boosting on the augmented layers. The proposed
algorithm is motivated by the feature selection algorithm forward stage-wise linear
regression, since we consider NAS as a generalization of feature selection for
regression, where NAS selects shortcuts among layers instead of selecting features.
In order to reduce the number of trials of possible connection combinations, we
train jointly all possible connections at each stage of growth while leveraging
feature selection techniques to choose a subset of them. We experimentally show
this process to be an efficient forward architecture search algorithm that can find
competitive models using few GPU days in both the search space of repeatable
network modules (cell-search) and the space of general networks (macro-search).
Petridish is particularly well-suited for warm-starting from existing models crucial
for lifelong-learning scenarios.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance on large scale supervised learning tasks
across domains like computer vision, natural language processing, audio and speech-related tasks
using architectures manually designed by skilled practitioners, often via trial and error. Neural
architecture search (NAS) (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2018; Pham et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2019; Han Cai, 2019) algorithms attempt to automatically find good architectures
given data-sets. In this work, we view NAS as a bi-level combinatorial optimization problem (Liu
et al., 2019), where we seek both the optimal architecture and its associated optimal parameters.
Interestingly, this formulation generalizes the well-studied problem of feature selection for linear
regression (Tibshirani, 1994; Efron et al., 2004; Das & Kempe, 2011). This observation permits us to
draw and leverage parallels between NAS algorithms and feature selection algorithms.
A plethora of NAS works have leveraged sampling methods including reinforcement learning (Zoph &
Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018), evolutionary algorithms (Real et al., 2017, 2018; Elsken
et al., 2018a), and Bayesian optimization (Kandasamy et al., 2018) to enumerate architectures that
are then independently trained. Interestingly, these approaches are uncommon for feature selection.
Indeed, sample-based NAS often takes hundreds of GPU-days to find good architectures, and can be
barely better than random search (Elsken et al., 2018b).
Another common NAS approach is analogous to sparse optimization (Tibshirani, 1994) or backward
elimination for feature selection, e.g., (Liu et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2018; Han Cai, 2019; Xie et al.,
2019). The approach starts with a super-graph that is the union of all possible architectures, and learns
to down-weight the unnecessary edges gradually via gradient descent or reinforcement learning. Such
approaches drastically cut down the search time of NAS. However, these methods require domain
knowledge to create the initial super-graphs, and typically need to reboot the search if the domain
knowledge is updated.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

