Category Anchor-Guided Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation

1

Qiming Zhang∗ 1 Jing Zhang∗ 1 Wei Liu2 Dacheng Tao1
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
2
Tencent AI Lab, China
qzha2506@uni.sydney.edu.au, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au
wl2223@columbia.edu, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to enhance the generalization capability of a certain model from a source domain to a target domain. UDA is of
particular significance since no extra effort is devoted to annotating target domain
samples. However, the different data distributions in the two domains, or domain
shift/discrepancy, inevitably compromise the UDA performance. Although there
has been a progress in matching the marginal distributions between two domains,
the classifier favors the source domain features and makes incorrect predictions
on the target domain due to category-agnostic feature alignment. In this paper, we
propose a novel category anchor-guided (CAG) UDA model for semantic segmentation, which explicitly enforces category-aware feature alignment to learn shared
discriminative features and classifiers simultaneously. First, the category-wise
centroids of the source domain features are used as guided anchors to identify the
active features in the target domain and also assign them pseudo-labels. Then,
we leverage an anchor-based pixel-level distance loss and a discriminative loss
to drive the intra-category features closer and the inter-category features further
apart, respectively. Finally, we devise a stagewise training mechanism to reduce the
error accumulation and adapt the proposed model progressively. Experiments on
both the GTA5→Cityscapes and SYNTHIA→Cityscapes scenarios demonstrate
the superiority of our CAG-UDA model over the state-of-the-art methods. The
code is available at https://github.com/RogerZhangzz/CAG_UDA.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation is a classical computer vision task that refers to assigning pixel-wise category
labels to a given image to facilitate downstream applications such as autonomous driving, video
surveillance, and image editing. The recent progress in semantic segmentation has been dominated
by deep neural networks trained on large datasets. Despite their success, annotating labels at the pixel
level is prohibitively expensive and time-consuming, e.g., about 90 minutes for a single image in
the Cityscapes dataset [8]. One economical alternative is to exploit computer graphics techniques to
simulate a virtual 3D environment and automatically generate images and labels, e.g., GTA5 [31] and
SYNTHIA [32]. Although synthetic images have similar appearances to real images, there still exist
subtle differences in textures, layouts, colors, and illumination conditions [11, 42–44], which result
in different data distributions, or domain discrepancy. Consequently, the performance of a certain
model trained on synthetic datasets degrades drastically when applied to realistic scenes. To address
this issue, one promising approach is domain adaptation [1, 45, 15, 34, 36, 27, 33, 40, 47, 13] to
∗

indicates equal contributions.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

