No-Regret Learning in Unknown Games with
Correlated Payoffs
Pier Giuseppe Sessa
ETH Zürich
sessap@ethz.ch

Ilija Bogunovic
ETH Zürich
ilijab@ethz.ch

Maryam Kamgarpour
ETH Zürich
maryamk@ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning to play a repeated multi-agent game with an
unknown reward function. Single player online learning algorithms attain strong
regret bounds when provided with full information feedback, which unfortunately
is unavailable in many real-world scenarios. Bandit feedback alone, i.e., observing
outcomes only for the selected action, yields substantially worse performance. In
this paper, we consider a natural model where, besides a noisy measurement of
the obtained reward, the player can also observe the opponents’ actions. This
feedback model, together with a regularity assumption on the reward function,
allows us to exploit the correlations among different game outcomes by means of
Gaussian processes (GPs). We propose a novel confidence-bound based bandit
algorithm GP-MW, which utilizes the GP model for the reward function and runs
a multiplicative weight (MW) method. We obtain novel kernel-dependent regret
bounds that are comparable to the known bounds in the full information setting,
while substantially improving upon the existing bandit results. We experimentally
demonstrate the effectiveness of GP-MW in random matrix games, as well as realworld problems of traffic routing and movie recommendation. In our experiments,
GP-MW consistently outperforms several baselines, while its performance is often
comparable to methods that have access to full information feedback.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems, such as traffic routing [14], market prediction [10], and social network
dynamics [21], involve multiple learning agents that interact and compete with each other. Such
problems can be described as repeated games, in which the goal of every agent is to maximize her
cumulative reward. In most cases, the underlying game is unknown to the agents, and the only way to
learn about it is by repeatedly playing and observing the corresponding game outcomes.
The performance of an agent in a repeated game is often measured in terms of regret. For example,
in traffic routing, the regret of an agent quantifies the reduction in travel time had the agent known
the routes chosen by the other agents. No-regret algorithms for playing unknown repeated games
exist, and their performance depends on the information available at every round. In the case of
full information feedback, the agent observes the obtained reward, as well as the rewards of other
non-played actions. While these algorithms attain strong regret guarantees, such full information
feedback is often unrealistic in real-world applications. In traffic routing, for instance, agents only
observe the incurred travel times and cannot observe the travel times for the routes not chosen.
In this paper, we address this challenge by considering a more realistic feedback model, where at
every round of the game, the agent plays an action and observes the noisy reward outcome. In
addition to this bandit feedback, the agent also observes the actions played by other agents. Under
this feedback model and further regularity assumptions on the reward function, we present a novel
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

