Flattening a Hierarchical Clustering through Active
Learning

Fabio Vitale
Department of Computer Science
INRIA Lille, France &
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
fabio.vitale@inria.fr

Anand Rajagopalan
Google Research NY
New York, USA
anandbr@google.com

Claudio Gentile
Google Research NY
New York, USA
cgentile@google.com

Abstract
We investigate active learning by pairwise similarity over the leaves of trees originating from hierarchical clustering procedures. In the realizable setting, we
provide a full characterization of the number of queries needed to achieve perfect
reconstruction of the tree cut. In the non-realizable setting, we rely on known
important-sampling procedures to obtain regret and query complexity bounds. Our
algorithms come with theoretical guarantees on the statistical error and, more
importantly, lend themselves to linear-time implementations in the relevant parameters of the problem. We discuss such implementations, prove running time
guarantees for them, and present preliminary experiments on real-world datasets
showing the compelling practical performance of our algorithms as compared to
both passive learning and simple active learning baselines.

1

Introduction

Active learning is a learning scenario where labeled data are scarse and/or expensive to gather, as they
require careful assessment by human labelers. This is often the case in several practical settings where
machine learning is routinely deployed, from image annotation to document classification, from
speech recognition to spam detection, and beyond. In all such cases, an active learning algorithm
tries to limit human intervention by seeking as little supervision as possible, still obtaining accurate
prediction on unseen samples. This is an attractive learning framework offering substantial practical
benefits, but also presenting statistical and algorithmic challenges.
A main argument that makes active learning effective is when combined with methods that exploit
the cluster structure of data (e.g., [11, 21, 10], and references therein), where a cluster typically
encodes some notion of semantic similarity across the involved data points. An ubiquitous solution to
clustering is to organize data into a hierarchy, delivering clustering solutions at different levels of
resolution. An (agglomerative) Hierarchical Clustering (HC) procedure is an unsupervised learning
method parametrized by a similarity function over the items to be clustered and a linkage function
that lifts similarity from items to clusters of items. Finding the “right” level of resolution amounts to
turning a given HC into a flat clustering by cutting the resulting tree appropriately. We would like
to do so by resorting to human feedback in the form of pairwise similarity queries, that is, yes/no
questions of the form “are these two products similar to one another ?” or “are these two news items
covering similar events ?”. It is well known that such queries are relatively easy to respond to, but are
also intrinsically prone to subjectiveness and/or noise. More importantly, the hierarchy at hand need
not be aligned with the similarity feedback we actually receive.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of cutting a tree originating from a pre-specified HC
procedure through pairwise similarity queries generated by active learning algorithms. Since the
tree is typically not consistent with the similarity feedback, that is to say, the feedback is noisy, we
are lead to tackle this problem under a variety of assumptions about the nature of this noise (from
noiseless to random but persistent to general agnostic). Moreover, because different linkage functions
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

