Calculating Optimistic Likelihoods
Using (Geodesically) Convex Optimization

Viet Anh Nguyen
Soroosh Shafieezadeh-Abadeh
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
{viet-anh.nguyen, soroosh.shafiee}@epfl.ch
Man-Chung Yue
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
manchung.yue@polyu.edu.hk
Daniel Kuhn
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
daniel.kuhn@epfl.ch
Wolfram Wiesemann
Imperial College Business School, United Kingdom
ww@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
A fundamental problem arising in many areas of machine learning is the evaluation
of the likelihood of a given observation under different nominal distributions.
Frequently, these nominal distributions are themselves estimated from data, which
makes them susceptible to estimation errors. We thus propose to replace each
nominal distribution with an ambiguity set containing all distributions in its vicinity
and to evaluate an optimistic likelihood, that is, the maximum of the likelihood
over all distributions in the ambiguity set. When the proximity of distributions
is quantified by the Fisher-Rao distance or the Kullback-Leibler divergence, the
emerging optimistic likelihoods can be computed efficiently using either geodesic
or standard convex optimization techniques. We showcase the advantages of
working with optimistic likelihoods on a classification problem using synthetic as
well as empirical data.

1

Introduction

n
Assume that a set of i.i.d. data points xM
1 , x1 , . . . , xM ∈ R is generated from one of several
Gaussian distributions Pc , c ∈ C with |C| < ∞. To determine the distribution Pc? , c? ∈ C, under
M
which xM
1 has the highest likelihood `(x1 , Pc ) across all Pc , c ∈ C, we can solve the problem
(
)
M
1 X
?
M
> −1
c ∈ arg max `(x1 , Pc ) , −
(xm − µc ) Σc (xm − µc ) − log det Σc ,
(1)
M m=1
c∈C

where µc and Σc denote the means and covariance matrices that unambiguously characterize the
distributions Pc , c ∈ C, and the log-likelihood function `(xM
1 , Pc ) quantifies the (logarithm of the)
relative probability of observing xM
1 under the Gaussian distribution Pc . Problem (1) naturally
arises in various machine learning applications. In quadratic discriminant analysis, for example,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

