Provably Efficient Q-Learning
with Low Switching Cost

Yu Bai
Stanford University
yub@stanford.edu

Tengyang Xie
Nan Jiang
UIUC
{tx10, nanjiang}@illinois.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
UC Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We take initial steps in studying PAC-MDP algorithms with limited adaptivity,
that is, algorithms that change its exploration policy as infrequently as possible
during regret minimization. This is motivated by the difficulty of running fully
adaptive algorithms in real-world applications (such as medical domains), and we
propose to quantify adaptivity using the notion of local switching cost. Our main
contribution, Q-Learning with UCB2 exploration, is a model-free algorithm for
H-step episodic MDP that achieves sublinear regret whose local switching cost in
K episodes is O(H 3 SA log K), and we provide a lower bound of Ω(HSA) on the
local switching cost for any no-regret algorithm. Our algorithm can be naturally
adapted to the concurrent setting [13], which yields nontrivial results that improve
upon prior work in certain aspects.

1

Introduction

This paper is concerned with reinforcement learning (RL) under limited adaptivity or low switching
cost, a setting in which the agent is allowed to act in the environment for a long period but is
constrained to switch its policy for at most N times. A small switching cost N restricts the agent
from frequently adjusting its exploration strategy based on feedback from the environment.
There are strong practical motivations for developing RL algorithms under limited adaptivity. The
setting of restricted policy switching captures various real-world settings where deploying new
policies comes at a cost. For example, in medical applications where actions correspond to treatments,
it is often unrealistic to execute fully adaptive RL algorithms – instead one can only run a fixed policy
approved by the domain experts to collect data, and a separate approval process is required every
time one would like to switch to a new policy [19, 2, 3]. In personalized recommendation [25], it
is computationally impractical to adjust the policy online based on instantaneous data (for instance,
think about online video recommendation where there are millions of users generating feedback at
every second). A more common practice is to aggregate data in a long period before deploying a
new policy. In problems where we run RL for compiler optimization [4] and hardware placements
[20], as well as for learning to optimize databases [18], often it is desirable to limit the frequency
of changes to the policy since it is costly to recompile the code, to run profiling, to reconfigure an
FPGA devices, or to restructure a deployed relational database. The problem is even more prominent
in the RL-guided new material discovery as it takes time to fabricate the materials and setup the
experiments [24, 21]. In many of these applications, adaptivity turns out to be really the bottleneck.
Understanding limited adaptivity RL is also important from a theoretical perspective. First, algorithms
with low adaptivity (a.k.a. “batched” algorithms) that are as effective as their fully sequential
counterparts have been established in bandits [23, 12], online learning [8], and optimization [11],
and it would be interesting to extend such undertanding into RL. Second, algorithms with few policy
switches are naturally easy to parallelize as there is no need for parallel agents to communicate if
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

