Inducing brain-relevant bias
in natural language processing models

Dan Schwartz
Carnegie Mellon University
drschwar@cs.cmu.edu

Mariya Toneva
Carnegie Mellon University
mariya@cmu.edu

Leila Wehbe
Carnegie Mellon University
lwehbe@cmu.edu

Abstract
Progress in natural language processing (NLP) models that estimate representations
of word sequences has recently been leveraged to improve the understanding of
language processing in the brain. However, these models have not been specifically
designed to capture the way the brain represents language meaning. We hypothesize that fine-tuning these models to predict recordings of brain activity of people
reading text will lead to representations that encode more brain-activity-relevant
language information. We demonstrate that a version of BERT, a recently introduced and powerful language model, can improve the prediction of brain activity
after fine-tuning. We show that the relationship between language and brain activity
learned by BERT during this fine-tuning transfers across multiple participants. We
also show that, for some participants, the fine-tuned representations learned from
both magnetoencephalography (MEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) are better for predicting fMRI than the representations learned from fMRI
alone, indicating that the learned representations capture brain-activity-relevant
information that is not simply an artifact of the modality. While changes to language representations help the model predict brain activity, they also do not harm
the model’s ability to perform downstream NLP tasks. Our findings are notable for
research on language understanding in the brain.

1

Introduction

The recent successes of self-supervised natural language processing (NLP) models have inspired
researchers who study how people process and understand language to look to these NLP models for
rich representations of language meaning. In these works, researchers present language stimuli to
participants (e.g. reading a chapter of a book word-by-word or listening to a story) while recording
their brain activity with neuroimaging devices (fMRI, MEG, or EEG), and model the recorded brain
activity using representations extracted from NLP models for the corresponding text. While this
approach has opened exciting avenues in understanding the processing of longer word sequences and
context, having NLP models that are specifically designed to capture the way the brain represents
language meaning may lead to even more insight. We posit that we can introduce a brain-relevant
language bias in an NLP model by explicitly training the NLP model to predict language-induced
brain recordings.
In this study we propose that a pretrained language model — BERT by Devlin et al. (2018) — which
is then fine-tuned to predict brain activity will modify its language representations to better encode
the information that is relevant for the prediction of brain activity. We further propose fine-tuning
Code available at https://github.com/danrsc/bert_brain_neurips_2019
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

