Learning Hawkes Processes from a Handful of Events
Farnood Salehi⇤
EPFL
farnood.salehi@epfl.ch

William Trouleau⇤
EPFL
william.trouleau@epfl.ch

Matthias Grossglauser
EPFL
matthias.grossglauser@epfl.ch

Patrick Thiran
EPFL
patrick.thiran@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning the causal-interaction network of multivariate Hawkes processes is a
useful task in many applications. Maximum-likelihood estimation is the most common approach to solve the problem in the presence of long observation sequences.
However, when only short sequences are available, the lack of data amplifies the
risk of overfitting and regularization becomes critical. Due to the challenges of
hyper-parameter tuning, state-of-the-art methods only parameterize regularizers by
a single shared hyper-parameter, hence limiting the power of representation of the
model. To solve both issues, we develop in this work an efficient algorithm based
on variational expectation-maximization. Our approach is able to optimize over an
extended set of hyper-parameters. It is also able to take into account the uncertainty
in the model parameters by learning a posterior distribution over them. Experimental results on both synthetic and real datasets show that our approach significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art methods under short observation sequences.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, including finance, computational biology, social-network studies,
criminology, and epidemiology, it is important to gain insight from the interactions of multivariate
time series of discrete events. For example, in finance, changes in the price of a stock might affect
the market [4]; and in epidemiology, individuals infected by an infectious disease might spread the
disease to their neighbors [15]. Such networks of time series often exhibit mutually exciting patterns
of diffusion. Hence, a recurring issue is to learn in an unsupervised way the causal structure of
interacting networks. This task is usually tackled by defining a so-called causal graph of entities
where an edge from a node i to a node j means that events in node j depend on the history of node
i. Such causal interactions are typically learned with either directed information [24, 23], transfer
entropy [26], or Granger causality [2, 11].
A widely used model for capturing mutually exciting patterns in a multi-dimensional time series
is the Multivariate Hawkes process (MHP), a particular type of temporal point process where an
event in one dimension can affect future arrivals in other dimensions. It has been shown that learning
the excitation matrix of an MHP encodes the causal structure between the processes, both in terms
of Granger causality [12] and directed information [13]. Most studies focus on the scalability of
MHPs to large datasets. However, in many applications, data can be very expensive to collect, or
simply not available. For example, in economic and public health studies, collecting survey data
is usually an expensive process. Similarly, in the case of epidemic modeling, it is critical to learn
as fast as possible the patterns of diffusion of a spreading disease. As a result, the amount of data
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

