Learning Stable Deep Dynamics Models

J. Zico Kolter
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
and Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Gaurav Manek
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
gmanek@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep networks are commonly used to model dynamical systems, predicting how
the state of a system will evolve over time (either autonomously or in response to
control inputs). Despite the predictive power of these systems, it has been difficult
to make formal claims about the basic properties of the learned systems. In this
paper, we propose an approach for learning dynamical systems that are guaranteed
to be stable over the entire state space. The approach works by jointly learning
a dynamics model and Lyapunov function that guarantees non-expansiveness of
the dynamics under the learned Lyapunov function. We show that such learning
systems are able to model simple dynamical systems and can be combined with
additional deep generative models to learn complex dynamics, such as video
textures, in a fully end-to-end fashion.

1

Introduction

This paper deals with the task of learning (continuous time) dynamical systems. That is, given a state
at time t, x(t) ∈ Rn we want to model the time-derivative of the state
ẋ(t) ≡

d
x(t) = f (x(t))
dt

(1)

for some function f : Rn → Rn . Modeling the time evolution of such dynamical systems (or their
counterparts with control inputs ẋ(t) = f (x(t), u(t)) for u(t) ∈ Rm ) is a foundational problem, with
applications in reinforcement learning, control, forecasting, and many other settings. Owing to their
representational power, neural networks have long been a natural choice for modeling the function
f [7, 14, 13, 6]. However, when using a generic neural network to model dynamics in this setting,
very little can be guaranteed about the behavior of the learned system. For example, it is extremely
difficult to say anything about the stability properties of a learned model (informally, the tendency
of the system to remain within some invariant bounded set). While some recent work has begun
to consider stability properties of neural networks [5, 17, 19], it has typically done so by (“softly”)
enforcing stability as an additional loss term on the training data. Consequently, they can say little
about the stability of the system in unseen states.
In this paper, we propose an approach to learning neural network dynamics that are provably stable
over the entirety of the state space. To do so, we jointly learn the system dynamics and a Lyapunov
function. This stability is a hard constraint imposed upon the model: unlike recent approaches, we
do not enforce stability via an imposed loss function but build it directly into the dynamics of the
model (i.e. Even a randomly initialized model in our proposed model class will be provably stable
everywhere in state space). The key to this is the design of a proper Lyapunov function, based on
input convex neural networks [1], which ensures global exponential stability to an equilibrium point
while still allowing for expressive dynamics.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

