Input-Cell Attention Reduces Vanishing Saliency
of Recurrent Neural Networks
Aya Abdelsalam Ismail1 , Mohamed Gunady1 , Luiz Pessoa2
Héctor Corrada Bravo∗1 , Soheil Feizi ∗1
{asalam,mgunady}@cs.umd.edu, pessoa@umd.edu,
hcorrada@umiacs.umd.edu, sfeizi@cs.umd.edu
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
2
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland

Abstract
Recent efforts to improve the interpretability of deep neural networks use saliency to
characterize the importance of input features to predictions made by models. Work
on interpretability using saliency-based methods on Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNNs) has mostly targeted language tasks, and their applicability to time series
data is less understood. In this work we analyze saliency-based methods for
RNNs, both classical and gated cell architectures. We show that RNN saliency
vanishes over time, biasing detection of salient features only to later time steps and
are, therefore, incapable of reliably detecting important features at arbitrary time
intervals. To address this vanishing saliency problem, we propose a novel RNN
cell structure (input-cell attention† ), which can extend any RNN cell architecture.
At each time step, instead of only looking at the current input vector, input-cell
attention uses a fixed-size matrix embedding, each row of the matrix attending to
different inputs from current or previous time steps. Using synthetic data, we show
that the saliency map produced by the input-cell attention RNN is able to faithfully
detect important features regardless of their occurrence in time. We also apply the
input-cell attention RNN on a neuroscience task analyzing functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data for human subjects performing a variety of tasks.
In this case, we use saliency to characterize brain regions (input features) for which
activity is important to distinguish between tasks. We show that standard RNN
architectures are only capable of detecting important brain regions in the last few
time steps of the fMRI data, while the input-cell attention model is able to detect
important brain region activity across time without latter time step biases.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are successfully applied to a variety of tasks in different domains,
often achieving accuracy that was not possible with conventional statistical and analysis methods.
Nevertheless, practitioners in fields such as neuroscience, medicine, and finance are hesitant to use
models like DNNs that can be difficult to interpret. For example, in clinical research, one might like
to ask, "Why did you predict this person as more likely to develop Alzheimer’s disease?" Making
DNNs amenable to queries like this remains an open area of research.
The problem of interpretability for deep networks has been tackled in a variety of ways [20, 30, 22,
3, 19, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 31]. The majority of this work focuses on vision and language tasks and
their application to time series data, specifically when using recurrent neural nets (RNNs), is poorly
∗
†

Authors contributed equally
Code available at https://github.com/ayaabdelsalam91/Input-Cell-Attention

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

