Piecewise Strong Convexity of Neural Networks

Tristan Milne
Department of Mathematics
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
tmilne@math.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study the loss surface of a feed-forward neural network with ReLU nonlinearities, regularized with weight decay. We show that the regularized loss
function is piecewise strongly convex on an important open set which contains,
under some conditions, all of its global minimizers. This is used to prove that
local minima of the regularized loss function in this set are isolated, and that every
differentiable critical point in this set is a local minimum, partially addressing
an open problem given at the Conference on Learning Theory (COLT) 2015; our
result is also applied to linear neural networks to show that with weight decay
regularization, there are no non-zero critical points in a norm ball obtaining training
error below a given threshold. We also include an experimental section where we
validate our theoretical work and show that the regularized loss function is almost
always piecewise strongly convex when restricted to stochastic gradient descent
trajectories for three standard image classification problems.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are an extremely popular tool with a variety of applications, from object ([SHK+ 14],
[HZRS15]) and speech recognition [GMH13] to the automatic creation of realistic synthetic images
[WLZ+ 17]. The optimization problem of finding the weights of a neural network such that the
resulting function approximates a target function on training data is the focus of this paper.
Despite strong empirical success on this optimization problem, there is still much to know about the
landscape of the loss function besides the fact that it is not globally convex. How many local minima
does this function have? Are the local minima isolated from each other? What about the existence of
local maxima or saddle points? We aim to answer several of these questions in this paper, at least for
the loss function restricted to an important set of weights.
Important papers on the study of a neural network’s loss function include [CHM+ 15] and [Kaw16].
In [CHM+ 15], the authors study the loss surface of a non-linear neural network. Under some
assumptions, including independence of the network’s input and the non-linearities, the loss function
of the non-linear network can be reduced to a loss function for a linear network, which is then written
as the Hamiltonian of a spin glass model. Recent ideas from spin glass theory are then used on
the network’s loss function, proving statements about the distribution of its critical values. This
paper established an important first step in the direction of understanding the loss surface of neural
networks, but leaves a gap between theory and practise due to its analysis of the expected value of
the non-linear network over the behaviour of the ReLU non-linearities, which reduces the non-linear
network to a linear one. Moreover, the authors assume that the components of the input data vector are
independently distributed, which need not be true in important applications such as object recognition,
where the pixel values of the input image are strongly correlated.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

