Localized Structured Prediction
Carlo Ciliberto 1

c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk

Francis Bach 2

francis.bach@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi 2

alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College, London, UK.
2
INRIA - Département d’informatique, École Normale Supérieure - PSL Research University, Paris, France.

Abstract
Key to structured prediction is exploiting the problem’s structure to simplify the
learning process. A major challenge arises when data exhibit a local structure
(i.e., are made “by parts”) that can be leveraged to better approximate the relation
between (parts of) the input and (parts of) the output. Recent literature on signal
processing, and in particular computer vision, shows that capturing these aspects is
indeed essential to achieve state-of-the-art performance. However, in this context
algorithms are typically derived on a case-by-case basis. In this work we propose
the first theoretical framework to deal with part-based data from a general perspective and study a novel method within the setting of statistical learning theory.
Our analysis is novel in that it explicitly quantifies the benefits of leveraging the
part-based structure of a problem on the learning rates of the proposed estimator.

1

Introduction

Structured prediction deals with supervised learning problems where the output space is not endowed
with a canonical linear metric but has a rich semantic or geometric structure [5, 29]. Typical
examples are settings in which the outputs correspond to strings (e.g., captioning [19]), images (e.g.,
segmentation [1]), rankings [16, 20], points on a manifold [33], probability distributions [24] or
protein foldings [18]. While the lack of linearity poses several modeling and computational challenges,
this additional complexity comes with a potentially significant advantage: when suitably incorporated
within the learning model, knowledge about the structure allows to capture key properties of the data.
This could potentially lower the sample complexity of the problem, attaining better generalization
performance with less training examples. A natural scenario in this sense is the case where both
input and output data are organized into “parts” that can interact with one another according to a
specific structure. Examples can be found in computer vision (e.g., segmentation [1], localization
[6, 22], pixel-wise classification [41]), speech recognition [4, 40], natural language processing [43],
trajectory planing [31] or hierarchical classification [44].
Recent literature on the topic has empirically shown that the local structure in the data can indeed
lead to significantly better predictions than global approaches [17, 45]. However in practice, these
ideas are typically investigated on a case-by-case basis, leading to ad-hoc algorithms that cannot
be easily adapted to new settings. On the theoretical side, few works have considered less specific
part-based factorizations [12] and a comprehensive theory analyzing the effect of local interactions
between parts within the context of learning theory is still missing.
In this paper, we propose: 1) a novel theoretical framework that can be applied to a wide family of
structured prediction settings able to capture potential local structure in the data, and 2) a structured
prediction algorithm, based on this framework for which we prove universal consistency and generalization rates. The proposed approach builds on recent results from the structured prediction literature
that leverage the concept of implicit embeddings [8, 9, 28, 15, 25], also related to [30, 39]. A key
contribution of our analysis is to quantify the impact of the part-based structure of the problem on the
learning rates of the proposed estimator. In particular, we prove that under natural assumptions on
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

