MelGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for
Conditional Waveform Synthesis

Rithesh Kumar∗
Lyrebird AI
rithesh@descript.com

Kundan Kumar∗
Lyrebird AI, Mila, University of Montreal
kundan@descript.com
Thibault de Boissiere
Lyrebird AI

Lucas Gestin
Lyrebird AI

Alexandre de Brebisson
Lyrebird AI, Mila

Wei Zhen Teoh
Lyrebird AI

Jose Sotelo
Lyrebird AI, Mila

Yoshua Bengio
Mila
University of Montreal, CIFAR Program Co-director

Aaron Courville
Mila
University of Montreal, CIFAR Fellow

Abstract
Previous works (Donahue et al., 2018a; Engel et al., 2019a) have found that generating coherent raw audio waveforms with GANs is challenging. In this paper,
we show that it is possible to train GANs reliably to generate high quality coherent waveforms by introducing a set of architectural changes and simple training
techniques. Subjective evaluation metric (Mean Opinion Score, or MOS) shows
the effectiveness of the proposed approach for high quality mel-spectrogram inversion. To establish the generality of the proposed techniques, we show qualitative
results of our model in speech synthesis, music domain translation and unconditional music synthesis. We evaluate the various components of the model through
ablation studies and suggest a set of guidelines to design general purpose discriminators and generators for conditional sequence synthesis tasks. Our model is
non-autoregressive, fully convolutional, with significantly fewer parameters than
competing models and generalizes to unseen speakers for mel-spectrogram inversion. Our pytorch implementation runs at more than 100x faster than realtime on
GTX 1080Ti GPU and more than 2x faster than real-time on CPU, without any
hardware specific optimization tricks.

1

Introduction

Modelling raw audio is a particularly challenging problem because of the high temporal resolution
of the data (usually atleast 16,000 samples per second) and the presence of structure at different
timescales with short and long-term dependencies. Thus, instead of modelling the raw temporal
audio directly, most approaches simplify the problem by modelling a lower-resolution representation
that can be efficiently computed from the raw temporal signal. Such a representation is typically
chosen to be easier to model than raw audio while preserving enough information to allow faithful
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

