Multi-resolution Multi-task Gaussian Processes
Oliver Hamelijnck
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Computer Science
University of Warwick
ohamelijnck@turing.ac.uk

Theodoros Damoulas
The Alan Turing Institute
Depts. of Computer Science & Statistics
University of Warwick
tdamoulas@turing.ac.uk

Kangrui Wang
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
kwang@turing.ac.uk

Mark A. Girolami
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mgirolami@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider evidence integration from potentially dependent observation processes
under varying spatio-temporal sampling resolutions and noise levels. We offer a
multi-resolution multi-task (MRGP) framework that allows for both inter-task and
intra-task multi-resolution and multi-fidelity. We develop shallow Gaussian Process
(GP) mixtures that approximate the difficult to estimate joint likelihood with a
composite one and deep GP constructions that learn mappings between resolutions
and naturally handle biases. In doing so, we generalize existing approaches and
offer information-theoretic corrections and efficient variational approximations.
We demonstrate the competitiveness of MRGPs on synthetic settings and on the
challenging problem of hyper-local estimation of air pollution levels across London
from multiple sensing modalities operating at disparate spatio-temporal resolutions.

1

Introduction

The increased availability of ground and remote sensing networks coupled with new modalities,
arising from e.g. citizen science initiatives and mobile platforms, is creating new challenges for
performing formal evidence integration. These multiple observation processes and sensing modalities
can be dependent, with different signal-to-noise ratios and varying sampling resolutions across
space and time. In our motivating application, London authorities measure air pollution from
multiple sensor networks; high-fidelity ground sensors that provide frequent multi-pollutant readings,
low fidelity diffusion tubes that only provide monthly single-pollutant readings, hourly satellitederived information at large spatial scales, and high frequency medium-fidelity multi-pollutant sensor
networks. Such a multi-sensor multi-resolution multi-task evidence integration setting is becoming
prevalent across many real world applications of spatio-temporal problems.
The current state of the art, see also Section 5, is assuming independent and unbiased observation
processes and cannot handle the challenges of real world settings that are jointly non-stationary,
multi-task, multi-fidelity, and multi-resolution [2, 7, 14, 22, 23, 28, 29]. The latter challenge has
recently attracted the interest of the machine learning community under the context of working
with aggregate, binned observations [2, 14, 29] or the special case of natural language generation at
multiple levels of abstraction [28]. When the independence and unbiasedness assumptions are not
satisfied they lead to posterior contraction, degradation of predictive performance and insufficient
uncertainty quantification.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

