Slice-based Learning: A Programming Model for
Residual Learning in Critical Data Slices

Vincent S. Chen, Sen Wu, Zhenzhen Weng, Alexander Ratner, Christopher Ré
Stanford University
vincentsc@cs.stanford.edu, senwu@stanford.edu, zzweng@stanford.edu,
ajratner@stanford.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In real-world machine learning applications, data subsets correspond to especially
critical outcomes: vulnerable cyclist detections are safety-critical in an autonomous
driving task, and “question” sentences might be important to a dialogue agent’s
language understanding for product purposes. While machine learning models
can achieve high quality performance on coarse-grained metrics like F1-score and
overall accuracy, they may underperform on critical subsets—we define these as
slices, the key abstraction in our approach. To address slice-level performance,
practitioners often train separate “expert” models on slice subsets or use multi-task
hard parameter sharing. We propose Slice-based Learning, a new programming
model in which the slicing function (SF), a programming interface, specifies critical
data subsets for which the model should commit additional capacity. Any model
can leverage SFs to learn slice expert representations, which are combined with an
attention mechanism to make slice-aware predictions. We show that our approach
maintains a parameter-efficient representation while improving over baselines by up
to 19.0 F1 on slices and 4.6 F1 overall on datasets spanning language understanding
(e.g. SuperGLUE), computer vision, and production-scale industrial systems.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, some model outcomes are more important than others: for example, a data
subset might correspond to safety-critical but rare scenarios in an autonomous driving setting (e.g.
detecting cyclists or trolley cars [19]) or critical but lower-frequency healthcare demographics (e.g.
bone X-rays associated with degenerative joint disease [27]). Traditional machine learning systems
optimize for overall quality, which may be too coarse-grained; models that achieve high overall
performance might produce unacceptable failure rates on slices of the data. In many production
settings, the key challenge is to maintain overall model quality while improving slice-specific metrics.
To formalize this challenge, we introduce the notion of slices: application-critical data subsets,
specified programmatically by machine learning practitioners, for which we would like to improve
model performance. This leads to three technical challenges:
• Coping with Noise: Defining slices precisely can be challenging. While engineers often have a
clear intuition of a slice, typically as a result of an error analysis, translating that intuition into a
machine-understandable description can be a challenging problem, e.g., “the slice of data that
contains a yellow light at dusk.” As a result, any method must be able to cope with imperfect,
overlapping definitions of data slices, as specified by noisy or weak supervision.
• Stable Improvement of the Model: Given a description of a set of slices, we want to improve
the prediction quality on each of the slices without hurting overall model performance. Often,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

