Rethinking the CSC Model for Natural Images

Dror Simon
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
dror.simon@cs.technion.ac.il

Michael Elad
Department of Computer Science
Technion, Israel
elad@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Sparse representation with respect to an overcomplete dictionary is often used
when regularizing inverse problems in signal and image processing. In recent
years, the Convolutional Sparse Coding (CSC) model, in which the dictionary
consists of shift invariant filters, has gained renewed interest. While this model
has been successfully used in some image processing problems, it still falls behind
traditional patch-based methods on simple tasks such as denoising. In this work we
provide new insights regarding the CSC model and its capability to represent natural
images, and suggest a Bayesian connection between this model and its patch-based
ancestor. Armed with these observations, we suggest a novel feed-forward network
that follows an MMSE approximation process to the CSC model, using strided
convolutions. The performance of this supervised architecture is shown to be on
par with state of the art methods while using much fewer parameters.

1

Introduction

The field of image restoration deals with the recovery of degraded images. Popular forms of
degradation include an additive noise, a blurring kernel, missing pixels, and more. Retrieving an
image from its degraded version is typically an ill-posed problem. Therefore, to enable the inversion
task, it is necessary to include prior information on the original signal. An image prior, also referred
to as an image model, relates to a mathematical description of the image true distribution. In the past
2-3 decades, many such models have been suggested and deployed. Some of these include reliance
on spatial smoothness, self-similarity, and sparse representation [1–4]. The later is the focus of this
work.
The sparse representation model has been successfully incorporated in various signal and image
processing applications [2, 5–9]. This model assumes that a signal X ∈ RN is formed by a linear
combination of only a few atoms, taken from the dictionary D ∈ RN ×M , i.e. X = DΓ, where
Γ ∈ RM is sparse. When a noisy signal Y = X + V ∈ RN is at hand (V is a bounded energy noise:
b leads to an estimation of the original signal via
kV k2 ≤ ), seeking for its sparse representation Γ,
c
b
b
X = D Γ. Finding Γ is commonly referred to as sparse-coding or a pursuit, formulated as
min kΓk0 s.t. kDΓ − Y k2 ≤ ,
(1)
Γ

where the `0 pseudo-norm counts the number of non-zeros in the vector.1 Sparse coding is NP-hard
in general [10], hence approximation methods are used. A common approach replaces the `0 pseudonorm with the `1 , leading to a convex problem termed Basis-Pursuit (BP) [11]. The BP method has
been theoretically analyzed [12], shown to successfully recover a solution close to the original sparse
representation, depending on properties of the dictionary and the cardinality of the sought solution.
The dictionary is an important ingredient in the formation of this prior, as its atoms characterize the
signals that this model can represent sparsely. Learning the dictionary from the corrupted signal
1

`0 is not formally a norm since it does not satisfy the homogeneity property.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

