Certifiable Robustness to Graph Perturbations

Aleksandar Bojchevski
Technical University of Munich
a.bojchevski@in.tum.de

Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich
guennemann@in.tum.de

Abstract
Despite the exploding interest in graph neural networks there has been little effort
to verify and improve their robustness. This is even more alarming given recent
findings showing that they are extremely vulnerable to adversarial attacks on
both the graph structure and the node attributes. We propose the first method for
verifying certifiable (non-)robustness to graph perturbations for a general class
of models that includes graph neural networks and label/feature propagation. By
exploiting connections to PageRank and Markov decision processes our certificates
can be efficiently (and under many threat models exactly) computed. Furthermore,
we investigate robust training procedures that increase the number of certifiably
robust nodes while maintaining or improving the clean predictive accuracy.

1

Introduction

As the number of machine learning models deployed in the real world grows, questions regarding
their robustness become increasingly important. In particular, it is critical to assess their vulnerability
to adversarial attacks – deliberate perturbations of the data designed to achieve a specific (malicious)
goal. Graph-based models suffer from poor adversarial robustness [13, 60], yet in domains where
they are often deployed (e.g. the Web) [50], adversaries are pervasive and attacks have a low cost
[9, 26]. Even in scenarios where adversaries are not present such analysis is important since it allows
us to reason about the behavior of our models in the worst case (i.e. treating nature as an adversary).
Here we focus on semi-supervised node classification – given a single large (attributed) graph and
the class labels of a few nodes the goal is to predict the labels of the remaining unlabelled nodes.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as the de-facto way to tackle this task, significantly
improving performance over the previous state-of-the-art. They are used for various high impact
applications across many domains such as: protein interface prediction [20], classification of scientific
papers [28], fraud detection [44], and breast cancer classification [36]. Therefore, it is crucial to asses
their sensitivity to adversaries and ensure they behave as expected.
However, despite their popularity there is scarcely any work on certifying or improving the robustness
of GNNs. As shown in Zügner et al. [60] node classification with GNNs is not robust and can even
be attacked on multiple fronts – slight perturbations of either the node features or the graph structure
can lead to wrong predictions. Moreover, since we are dealing with non i.i.d. data by taking the
graph structure into account, robustifying GNNs is more difficult compared to traditional models –
perturbing only a few edges affects the predictions for all nodes. What can we do to fortify GNNs
and make sure they produce reliable predictions in the presence of adversarial perturbations?
We propose the first method for provable robustness regarding perturbations of the graph structure.
Our approach is applicable to a general family of models where the predictions are a linear function
of (personalized) PageRank. This family includes GNNs [29] and other graph-based models such as
label/feature propagation [7, 53]. Specifically, we provide: 1. Certificates: Given a trained model
and a general set of admissible graph perturbations we can efficiently verify whether a node is
certifiably robust – there exists no perturbation that can change its prediction. We also provide non33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

