Maximum Entropy Monte-Carlo Planning

Chenjun Xiao1

Jincheng Mei1

Ruitong Huang2 Dale Schuurmans1 Martin Müller1
University of Alberta
2
Borealis AI
{chenjun, jmei2, daes, mmueller}@ualberta.com, ruitong.huang@borealisai.com
1

Abstract
We develop a new algorithm for online planning in large scale sequential decision
problems that improves upon the worst case efficiency of UCT. The idea is to
augment Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with maximum entropy policy optimization, evaluating each search node by softmax values back-propagated from
simulation. To establish the effectiveness of this approach, we first investigate the
single-step decision problem, stochastic softmax bandits, and show that softmax
values can be estimated at an optimal convergence rate in terms of mean squared
error. We then extend this approach to general sequential decision making by developing a general MCTS algorithm, Maximum Entropy for Tree Search (MENTS).
We prove that the probability of MENTS failing to identify the best decision at the
root decays exponentially, which fundamentally improves the polynomial convergence rate of UCT. Our experimental results also demonstrate that MENTS is more
sample efficient than UCT in both synthetic problems and Atari 2600 games.

1

Introduction

Monte Carlo planning algorithms have been widely applied in many challenging problems [12, 13].
One particularly powerful and general algorithm is the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [3]. The
key idea of MCTS is to construct a search tree of states that are evaluated by averaging over outcomes
from simulations. MCTS provides several major advantages over traditional online planning methods.
It breaks the curse of dimensionality by simulating state-action trajectories using a domain generative
model, and building a search tree online by collecting information gathered during the simulations in
an incremental manner. It can be combined with domain knowledge such as function approximations
learned either online [17] or offline [12, 13]. It is highly selective, where bandit algorithm are applied
to balance between exploring the most uncertain branches and exploiting the most promising ones [9].
MCTS has demonstrated outstanding empirical performance in many game playing problems, but
most importantly, it is provable to converge to the optimal policy if the exploitation and exploration
balanced appropriately [9, 7].
The convergence property of MCTS highly replies on the state value estimations. At each node of the
search tree, the value estimation is also used to calculate the value of the action leading to that node.
Hence, the convergence rate of the state value estimation influences the rate of convergence for states
further up in the tree. However, the Monte Carlo value estimate (average over simulations outcomes)
used in MCTS does not enjoy effective convergence guarantee when this value is back-propagated
in the search tree, since for any given node, the sampling policy in the subtree is changing and the
payoff sequences experienced will drift in time. In summary, the compounding error, caused by the
structure of the search tree as well as the uncertainty of the Monte Carlo estimation, makes that UCT
can only guarantee a polynomial convergence rate of finding the best action at the root.
Ideally, one would like to adopt a state value that can be efficiently estimated and back-propagated in
a search tree. In this paper, we exploit the usage of softmax value estimate in MCTS based on the
maximum entropy policy optimization framework. To establish the effectiveness of this approach,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

