Self-Supervised Generalisation with
Meta Auxiliary Learning

Shikun Liu
Andrew J. Davison
Edward Johns
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
{shikun.liu17, a.davison, e.johns}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning with auxiliary tasks can improve the ability of a primary task to generalise.
However, this comes at the cost of manually labelling auxiliary data. We propose a
new method which automatically learns appropriate labels for an auxiliary task,
such that any supervised learning task can be improved without requiring access to
any further data. The approach is to train two neural networks: a label-generation
network to predict the auxiliary labels, and a multi-task network to train the
primary task alongside the auxiliary task. The loss for the label-generation network
incorporates the loss of the multi-task network, and so this interaction between the
two networks can be seen as a form of meta learning with a double gradient. We
show that our proposed method, Meta AuXiliary Learning (MAXL), outperforms
single-task learning on 7 image datasets, without requiring any additional data.
We also show that MAXL outperforms several other baselines for generating
auxiliary labels, and is even competitive when compared with human-defined
auxiliary labels. The self-supervised nature of our method leads to a promising
new direction towards automated generalisation. Source code can be found at
https://github.com/lorenmt/maxl.

1

Introduction

Auxiliary learning is a method to improve the ability of a primary task to generalise to unseen data,
by training on additional auxiliary tasks alongside this primary task. The sharing of features across
tasks results in additional relevant features being available, which otherwise would not have been
learned from training only on the primary task. The broader support of these features, across new
interpretations of input data, then allows for better generalisation of the primary task. Auxiliary
learning is similar to multi-task learning [5], except that only the performance of the primary task is
of importance, and the auxiliary tasks are included purely to assist the primary task.
We now rethink this generalisation by considering that not all auxiliary tasks are created equal. In
supervised auxiliary learning [21, 33], auxiliary tasks can be manually chosen to complement the
primary task. However, this requires both domain knowledge to choose the auxiliary tasks, and
labelled data to train the auxiliary tasks. Unsupervised auxiliary learning [11, 36, 35, 16, 1] removes
the need for labelled data, but at the expense of a limited set of auxiliary tasks which may not
be beneficial for the primary task. By combining the merits of both supervised and unsupervised
auxiliary learning, the ideal framework would be one with the flexibility to automatically determine
the optimal auxiliary tasks, but without the need to manually label these auxiliary tasks.
In this paper, we propose to achieve such a framework with a simple and general meta-learning
algorithm, which we call Meta AuXiliary Learning (MAXL). We first observe that in supervised
learning, defining a task can equate to defining the labels for that task. Therefore, for a given primary
task, an optimal auxiliary task is one which has optimal labels. The goal of MAXL is then to
automatically discover these auxiliary labels using only the labels for the primary task.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

