Social-BiGAT: Multimodal Trajectory Forecasting
using Bicycle-GAN and Graph Attention Networks

Vineet Kosaraju1∗ Amir Sadeghian1,2∗ Roberto Martín-Martín1
S. Hamid Rezatofighi1,3 Silvio Savarese1
1

Stanford University

2

Aibee Inc

3

Ian Reid3

University of Adelaide

vineetk@stanford.edu

Abstract
Predicting the future trajectories of multiple interacting agents in a scene has become an increasingly important problem for many different applications ranging
from control of autonomous vehicles and social robots to security and surveillance.
This problem is compounded by the presence of social interactions between humans
and their physical interactions with the scene. While the existing literature has
explored some of these cues, they mainly ignored the multimodal nature of each
human’s future trajectory. In this paper, we present Social-BiGAT, a graph-based
generative adversarial network that generates realistic, multimodal trajectory predictions by better modelling the social interactions of pedestrians in a scene. Our
method is based on a graph attention network (GAT) that learns reliable feature
representations that encode the social interactions between humans in the scene,
and a recurrent encoder-decoder architecture that is trained adversarially to predict,
based on the features, the humans’ paths. We explicitly account for the multimodal
nature of the prediction problem by forming a reversible transformation between
each scene and its latent noise vector, as in Bicycle-GAN. We show that our framework achieves state-of-the-art performance comparing it to several baselines on
existing trajectory forecasting benchmarks.

1

Introduction

For a variety of applications, accurate pedestrian trajectory forecasting is becoming a crucial component. Autonomous vehicles such as self-driving cars, and social robotics such as delivery vehicles
must be able to understand human movement to avoid collisions [1–4]. Intelligent tracking and
surveillance systems used for city planning must be able to understand how crowds will interact to better manage infrastructure [5–8]. Trajectory prediction is also becoming crucial enabling downstream
tasks, such as tracking and re-identification [9]. However, trajectory prediction is still a challenging
task because of several properties inherent to human behavior:
• Social Interactions When humans move in public, they often interact socially with other pedestrians [10]. From taking actions to avoid collisions, to walking in groups, there are several ways
humans interact while moving that require prediction methods to model social behavior [11, 12].
These social interactions may not be necessarily influenced by people’s spatial proximity.
• Scene Context Pedestrian behavior is not only dependent on the people around them, but is also
highly dependent on the physical scene around them [12–16]. This includes not just stationary
obstacles that cannot be avoided, such as buildings, but also different physical cues present visually,
such as sidewalks or grass which may enable or restrict human movement.
∗

indicates equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

