End-to-End Learning on
3D Protein Structure for Interface Prediction
Raphael J. L. Townshend
Stanford University
raphael@cs.stanford.edu

Rishi Bedi
Stanford University
rbedi@cs.stanford.edu

Patricia A. Suriana
Stanford University
psuriana@stanford.edu

Ron O. Dror
Stanford University
rondror@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Despite an explosion in the number of experimentally determined, atomically detailed structures of biomolecules, many critical tasks in structural biology remain
data-limited. Whether performance in such tasks can be improved by using large
repositories of tangentially related structural data remains an open question. To
address this question, we focused on a central problem in biology: predicting how
proteins interact with one another—that is, which surfaces of one protein bind to
those of another protein. We built a training dataset, the Database of Interacting
Protein Structures (DIPS), that contains biases but is two orders of magnitude larger
than those used previously. We found that these biases significantly degrade the
performance of existing methods on gold-standard data. Hypothesizing that assumptions baked into the hand-crafted features on which these methods depend were the
source of the problem, we developed the first end-to-end learning model for protein
interface prediction, the Siamese Atomic Surfacelet Network (SASNet). Using only
spatial coordinates and identities of atoms, SASNet outperforms state-of-the-art
methods trained on gold-standard structural data, even when trained on only 3% of
our new dataset. Code and data available at https://github.com/drorlab/DIPS.

1

Introduction

Proteins are large molecules responsible for executing almost every cellular process. Their function
depends critically on their ability to bind to one another in specific ways, forming larger machines
known as protein complexes. In this work we tackle the problem of paired protein interface prediction:
given the separate structures of two proteins, we wish to predict which surfaces of the two proteins
will come into contact upon binding. This is in contrast to the single-interface prediction problem,
where one wishes to predict which parts of a single protein are likely to form interfaces. Correctly
predicting protein interfaces has important applications in protein engineering and drug development.
A large number of experimental structures of protein complexes are available, but—as in many structural biology tasks—the amount of supervised data available for paired protein interface prediction
remains limited. Few gold-standard cases exist in which structures are available both for two proteins
bound to one another and for each of the two proteins on its own. We wondered if much larger sets of
structural data might be deployed in service of tasks such as protein interface prediction.
To investigate this problem, we mine the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [1] to construct a large dataset
of protein complex structures for which structures of the individual proteins on their own are not
available. We introduce the Database of Interacting Protein Structures (DIPS), which comprises
42,826 binary protein interactions—an increase of more than two orders of magnitude over previously
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

