The Point Where Reality Meets Fantasy: Mixed
Adversarial Generators for Image Splice Detection

Vladimir V. Kniaz1,2 , Vladimir A. Knyaz1,2
State Res. Institute of Aviation Systems (GosNIIAS)
125319, 7, Victorenko str., Moscow, Russia
{vl.kniaz, knyaz}@gosniias.ru
2
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (MIPT)
141701, 9 Institutskiy per., Dolgoprudny, Russia
1

Fabio Remondino
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK)
Via Sommarive 18, Trento, Italy
remondino@fbk.eu

Abstract
Modern photo editing tools allow creating realistic manipulated images easily.
While fake images can be quickly generated, learning models for their detection
is challenging due to the high variety of tampering artifacts and the lack of large
labeled datasets of manipulated images. In this paper, we propose a new framework
for training of discriminative segmentation model via an adversarial process. We
simultaneously train four models: a generative retouching model GR that translates
manipulated image to the real image domain, a generative annotation model GA that
estimates the pixel-wise probability of image patch being either real or fake, and two
discriminators DR and DA that qualify the output of GR and GA . The aim of model
GR is to maximize the probability of model GA making a mistake. Our method
extends the generative adversarial networks framework with two main contributions:
(1) training of a generative model GR against a deep semantic segmentation
network GA that learns rich scene semantics for manipulated region detection, (2)
proposing per class semantic loss that facilitates semantically consistent image
retouching by the GR . We collected large-scale manipulated image dataset to
train our model. The dataset includes 16k real and fake images with pixel-level
annotations of manipulated areas. The dataset also provides ground truth pixellevel object annotations. We validate our approach on several modern manipulated
image datasets, where quantitative results and ablations demonstrate that our
method achieves and surpasses the state-of-the-art in manipulated image detection.
We made our code and dataset publicly available 1 .

1

Introduction

While every image captured by the human eye is real, digital photos can be easily manipulated to
present scenes that never existed in reality. Such manipulated image can be easily generated by
copying the part of one image into another. This image manipulation is called an image splice and
can be used maliciously to create fake news or change historical photos [1]. Recent research [1, 2]
suggests that training a model for splice localization is more challenging than other types of object
detection problems as the domain of manipulated images is extensive and diverse. Therefore, the
collection of the representative training dataset is difficult. Moreover, the forger can adapt to the
detection algorithm by changing the manipulation technique. This principle is used in Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) to train a generator network to synthesize images from noise [3], text
descriptions [4], scene graphs [5] or by image-to-image translation [6, 7, 8, 9]. Fake images produced
by the generator are evaluated against real images by an adversarial discriminator network that learns
1

http://zefirus.org/MAG

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

