Differentially Private Bayesian Linear Regression
Garrett Bernstein
University of Massachusetts Amherst
gbernstein@cs.umass.edu

Daniel Sheldon
University of Massachusetts Amherst
sheldon@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Linear regression is an important tool across many fields that work with sensitive
human-sourced data. Significant prior work has focused on producing differentially
private point estimates, which provide a privacy guarantee to individuals while still
allowing modelers to draw insights from data by estimating regression coefficients.
We investigate the problem of Bayesian linear regression, with the goal of computing posterior distributions that correctly quantify uncertainty given privately
released statistics. We show that a naive approach that ignores the noise injected
by the privacy mechanism does a poor job in realistic data settings. We then
develop noise-aware methods that perform inference over the privacy mechanism
and produce correct posteriors across a wide range of scenarios.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is one of the most widely used statistical methods, especially in the social sciences [Agresti and Finlay, 2009] and other domains where data comes from humans. It is important
to develop robust tools that can realize the benefits of regression analyses but maintain the privacy
of individuals. Differential privacy [Dwork et al., 2006] is a widely accepted formalism to provide
algorithmic privacy guarantees: a differentially private algorithm randomizes its computation to
provably limit the risk that its output discloses information about individuals.
Existing work on differentially private linear regression focuses on frequentist approaches. A variety
of privacy mechanisms have been applied to point estimation of regression coefficients, including
sufficient statistic perturbation (SSP) [Foulds et al., 2016, McSherry and Mironov, 2009, Vu and
Slavkovic, 2009, Wang, 2018, Zhang et al., 2016], posterior sampling (OPS) [Dimitrakakis et al.,
2014, Geumlek et al., 2017, Minami et al., 2016, Wang, 2018, Wang et al., 2015, Zhang et al., 2016],
subsample and aggregate [Dwork and Smith, 2010, Smith, 2008], objective perturbation [Kifer et al.,
2012], and noisy stochastic gradient descent [Bassily et al., 2014]. Only a few recent works address
uncertainty quantification through confidence interval estimation [Sheffet, 2017] and hypothesis
tests [Barrientos et al., 2019] for regression coefficients.
We develop a differentially private method for Bayesian linear regression. A Bayesian approach
naturally quantifies parameter uncertainty through a full posterior distribution and provides other
Bayesian capabilities such as the ability to incorporate prior knowledge and compute posterior
predictive distributions. Existing approaches to private Bayesian inference include OPS (see above),
MCMC [Wang et al., 2015], variational inference (VI; Honkela et al. [2018], Jälkö et al. [2017],
Park et al. [2016]), and SSP [Bernstein and Sheldon, 2018, Foulds et al., 2016], but none provide
a fully satisfactory approach for Bayesian regression modeling. OPS does not naturally produce a
representation of a full posterior distribution. MCMC approaches incur per-iteration privacy costs
and satisfy only approximate (✏, )-differential privacy. Private VI approaches also incur per-iteration
privacy costs, and are most relevant when the original inference problem requires VI. When applicable,
SSP is a very desirable approach — sufficient statistics are perturbed once and then used in conjugate
updates to obtain parameters of full posterior distributions — and often outperforms other methods in
practice [Foulds et al., 2016, Wang, 2018]. However, Bernstein and Sheldon [2018] demonstrated
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

