Abstraction based Output Range Analysis for Neural
Networks
Pavithra Prabhakar∗, Zahra Rahimi Afzal∗
Department of Computer Science
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66506
{pprabhakar,zrahimi}@ksu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of output range analysis for feed-forward
neural networks with ReLU activation functions. The existing approaches reduce
the output range analysis problem to satisfiability and optimization solving, which
are NP-hard problems, and whose computational complexity increases with the
number of neurons in the network. To tackle the computational complexity, we
present a novel abstraction technique that constructs a simpler neural network
with fewer neurons, albeit with interval weights called interval neural network
(INN), which over-approximates the output range of the given neural network. We
reduce the output range analysis on the INNs to solving a mixed integer linear
programming problem. Our experimental results highlight the trade-off between
the computation time and the precision of the computed output range.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are extensively used today in safety critical control systems such as autonomous
vehicles and airborne collision avoidance systems [1, 16, 17, 18]. Hence, rigorous methods to ensure
correct functioning of neural network controlled systems is imperative. Formal verification refers to a
broad class of techniques that provide strong guarantees of correctness by exhibiting a proof. Formal
verification of neural networks has attracted a lot of attention in the recent years [2, 5, 18, 28, 29, 31].
However, verifying neural networks is extremely challenging due to the large state-space, and the
presence of nonlinear activation functions, and the verification problem is known to be NP-hard for
even simple properties [18].
Our broad objective is to investigate techniques to verify neural network controlled physical systems
such as autonomous vehicles. These systems consist of a physical system and a neural network
controller that are connected in a feedback, that is, the output of the neural network is the control
input (actuator values) to the physical system and the output of the physical system (sensor values) is
input to the neural network controller. An important verification problem is that of safety, wherein,
one seeks to ensure that the state of the neural network controlled system never reaches an unsafe set
of states. This is established by computing the reachable set, the set of states reached by the system,
and ensuring that the reach set does not intersect the unsafe states. An important primitive towards
computing the reachable set is to compute the output range of a neural network controller given a set
of input valuations.
In this paper, we focus on neural networks with rectified linear unit (ReLU) function as an activation
function, and we investigate the output range computation problem for feed-forward neural networks [5]. Recently, there have been several efforts to address this problem that rely on satisfiability
∗

Both authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

