ADDIS: an adaptive discarding algorithm
for online FDR control with conservative nulls
Jinjin Tian
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jinjint@andrew.cmu.edu

Aaditya Ramdas
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
aramdas@cmu.edu

Abstract
Major internet companies routinely perform tens of thousands of A/B tests each
year. Such large-scale sequential experimentation has resulted in a recent spurt of
new algorithms that can provably control the false discovery rate (FDR) in a fully
online fashion. However, current state-of-the-art adaptive algorithms can suffer
from a significant loss in power if null p-values are conservative (stochastically
larger than the uniform distribution), a situation that occurs frequently in practice.
In this work, we introduce a new adaptive discarding method called ADDIS
that provably controls the FDR and achieves the best of both worlds: it enjoys
appreciable power increase over all existing methods if nulls are conservative (the
practical case), and rarely loses power if nulls are exactly uniformly distributed
(the ideal case). We provide several practical insights on robust choices of tuning
parameters, and extend the idea to asynchronous and offline settings as well.

1

Introduction

Rapid data collection is making the online testing of hypotheses increasingly essential, where a
stream of hypotheses H1 , H2 , . . . is tested sequentially one by one. On observing the data for the t-th
test which is usually summarized as a p-value Pt , and without knowing the outcomes of the future
tests, we must make the decision of whether to reject the corresponding null hypothesis Ht (thus
proclaiming a “discovery”). Typically, a decision takes the form I(Pt ≤ αt ) for some αt ∈ (0, 1),
meaning that we reject the null hypothesis when the p-value is smaller than some threshold αt . An
incorrectly rejected null hypothesis is called a false discovery. Let R(T ) represent the set of rejected
null hypotheses until time T , and H0 be the unknown set of true null hypotheses; then, R(T ) ∩ H0
is the set of false discoveries. Then some natural error metrics are the false discovery rate (FDR),
modified FDR (mFDR) and power, which are defined as


 c

|H0 ∩ R(T )|
E [|H0 ∩ R(T )|]
|H0 ∩ R(T )|
FDR(T ) ≡ E
, mFDR(T ) ≡
, power ≡ E
.
|R(T )| ∨ 1
E [|R(T )| ∨ 1]
|H0c |
(1)
The typical aim is to maximize power, while have FDR(T ) ≤ α at any time T ∈ N, for some
prespecified constant α ∈ (0, 1). It is well known that setting every αt ≡ α does not provide any
control of the FDR in general. Indeed, the FDR can be as large as one in this case, see [1, Section
1] for an example. This motivates the need for special methods for online FDR control (that is, for
determining αt in an online manner).
Past work. Foster and Stine [2] proposed the first “alpha-investing” (AI) algorithm for online FDR
control, which was later extended to the generalized alpha-investing methods (GAI) by Aharoni and
Rosset [3]. A particularly powerful GAI algorithm called LORD was proposed by Javanmard and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

