Phase Transitions and Cyclic Phenomena in Bandits
with Switching Constraints

David Simchi-Levi
Institute for Data, Systems and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
dslevi@mit.edu

Yunzong Xu
Institute for Data, Systems and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
yxu@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider the classical stochastic multi-armed bandit problem with a constraint
on the total cost incurred by switching between actions. Under the unit switching
cost structure, where the constraint limits the total number of switches, we prove
matching upper and lower bounds on regret and provide near-optimal algorithms
for this problem. Surprisingly, we discover phase transitions and cyclic phenomena
of the optimal regret. That is, we show that associated with the multi-armed bandit
problem, there are equal-length phases defined by the number of arms and switching
costs, where the regret upper and lower bounds in each phase remain the same and
drop significantly between phases. The results enable us to fully characterize the
trade-off between regret and incurred switching cost in the stochastic multi-armed
bandit problem, contributing new insights to this fundamental problem. Under
the general switching cost structure, our analysis reveals a surprising connection
between the bandit problem and the shortest Hamiltonian path problem.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most fundamental problems in online learning,
with diverse applications ranging from pricing and online advertising to clinical trails. In a traditional
MAB problem, the learner (i.e., decision-maker) is allowed to switch freely between actions, and
an effective learning policy may incur frequent switching — indeed, the learner’s task is to balance
the exploration-exploitation trade-off, and both exploration (i.e., acquiring new information) and
exploitation (i.e., optimizing decisions based on up-to-date information) require switching. However,
in many real-world scenarios, it is costly to switch between different alternatives, and a learning
policy with limited switching behavior is preferred. The learner thus has to consider the cost of
switching in her learning task.
The conventional model: switching cost as a penalty. There is rich literature studying stochastic
MAB with switching costs. Most of the papers model the switching cost as a penalty in the learner’s
objective, i.e., they measure a policy’s regret and incurred switching cost using the same metric and
the objective is to minimize the sum of these two terms (e.g., [1, 2, 7, 8]; there are other variations
with discounted rewards [5, 4, 6], see [12] for a survey). Though this conventional “switching
penalty” model has attracted significant research interest in the past, it has two limitations. First,
under this model, the learner’s total switching cost is a complete output determined by the learning
algorithm. However, in many real-world applications, there are strict limits on the learner’s switching
behavior, which should be modeled as a hard constraint, and hence the learner’s total budget of
switching cost should be an input that helps determine the algorithm. In√particular, while the algorithm
in [8] developed for the “switching penalty” model can achieve Õ( T ) (distribution-free) regret
with O(log log T ) switches, if the learner wants a policy that always incurs finite switching cost
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

