Learning Sparse Distributions using Iterative Hard
Thresholding
Jacky Y. Zhang
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
yiboz@illinois.edu
Anastasios Kyrillidis
Department of Computer Science
Rice University
rajivak@berkeley.edu

Rajiv Khanna
Department of Statistics
University of California at Berkeley
rajivak@berkeley.edu

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
sanmi@illinois.edu

Abstract
Iterative hard thresholding (IHT) is a projected gradient descent algorithm, known
to achieve state of the art performance for a wide range of structured estimation
problems, such as sparse inference. In this work, we consider IHT as a solution
to the problem of learning sparse discrete distributions. We study the hardness
of using IHT on the space of measures. As a practical alternative, we propose a
greedy approximate projection which simultaneously captures appropriate notions
of sparsity in distributions, while satisfying the simplex constraint, and investigate
the convergence behavior of the resulting procedure in various settings. Our results
show, both in theory and practice, that IHT can achieve state of the art results for
learning sparse distributions.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models provide a flexible approach for capturing uncertainty in real world processes, with
a variety of applications which include latent variable models and density estimation, among others.
Like other machine learning tools, probabilistic models can be enhanced by encouraging parsimony,
as this captures useful inductive biases. In practice, this often improves the interpretability and
generalization performance of the resulting models, and is particularly useful in applied settings with
limited samples compared to the model degrees of freedom. One of the most effective parsimonious
assumptions is sparsity. As such, learning sparse distributions is a problem of broad interest in
machine learning, with many applications [1–7].
The majority of approaches for sparse probabilistic modeling have focused on the construction of
appropriate priors based on inputs from domain experts. The technical challenges there involve
the challenges of prior design and inference [3, 1, 8], including methods that are additionally
designed to exploit special structures [5, 4, 7] . More recently, there has been an interest in studying
these algorithmic approaches from an optimization perspective [9–11], with the goal of a deeper
understanding and, in some cases, even suggesting improvements over previous methods [12, 13].In
this work, we consider an optimization-based approach to learning sparse discrete distributions.
Despite wide applicability, when compared to classical constrained optimization, there are limited
studies that focus on the understanding, both in theory and in practice, of optimization methods over
the space of probability densities, under sparsity constraints.
Our present work proposes and investigates the use of Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT [14–18]) for
the problem of sparse probabilistic estimation. IHT is an iterative algorithm that is well-studied in the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

