Implicit Generation and Modeling with Energy-Based
Models
Yilun Du ∗
MIT CSAIL

Igor Mordatch
Google Brain

Abstract
Energy based models (EBMs) are appealing due to their generality and simplicity
in likelihood modeling, but have been traditionally difficult to train. We present
techniques to scale MCMC based EBM training on continuous neural networks,
and we show its success on the high-dimensional data domains of ImageNet32x32,
ImageNet128x128, CIFAR-10, and robotic hand trajectories, achieving better
samples than other likelihood models and nearing the performance of contemporary
GAN approaches, while covering all modes of the data. We highlight some unique
capabilities of implicit generation such as compositionality and corrupt image
reconstruction and inpainting. Finally, we show that EBMs are useful models across
a wide variety of tasks, achieving state-of-the-art out-of-distribution classification,
adversarially robust classification, state-of-the-art continual online class learning,
and coherent long term predicted trajectory rollouts.

1

Introduction

Learning models of the data distribution and generating samples are important problems in machine
learning for which a number of methods have been proposed, such as Variational Autoencoders
(VAEs) [Kingma and Welling, 2014] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goodfellow
et al., 2014].In this work, we advocate for continuous energy-based models (EBMs), represented as
neural networks, for generative modeling tasks and as a building block for a wide variety of tasks.
These models aim to learn an energy function E(x) that assigns low energy values to inputs x in the
data distribution and high energy values to other inputs. Importantly, they allow the use of an implicit
sample generation procedure, where sample x is found from x ∼ e−E(x) through MCMC sampling.
Combining implicit sampling with energy-based models for generative modeling has a number of
conceptual advantages compared to methods such as VAEs and GANs which use explicit functions to
generate samples:
Simplicity and Stability: An EBM is the only object that needs to be trained and designed. Separate
networks are not tuned to ensure balance (for example, [He et al., 2019] point out unbalanced training
can result in posterior collapse in VAEs or poor performance in GANs [Kurach et al., 2018]).
Sharing of Statistical Strength: Since the EBM is the only trained object, it requires fewer model
parameters than approaches that use multiple networks. More importantly, the model being concentrated in a single network allows the training process to develop a shared set of features as opposed to
developing them redundantly in separate networks.
Adaptive Computation Time: Implicit sample generation in our work is an iterative stochastic
optimization process, which allows for a trade-off between generation quality and computation time.
∗

Work done at OpenAI
Correspondence to: yilundu@mit.edu
∗
Additional results, source code, and pre-trained models are available at https://sites.google.com/view/igebm
∗

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

