Search-Guided, Lightly-Supervised Training of
Structured Prediction Energy Networks
Amirmohammad Rooshenas, Dongxu Zhang, Gopal Sharma, and Andrew McCallum
College of Information of Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
{pedram,dongxuzhang,gopalsharma,mccallum}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
In structured output prediction tasks, labeling ground-truth training output is often
expensive. However, for many tasks, even when the true output is unknown,
we can evaluate predictions using a scalar reward function, which may be easily
assembled from human knowledge or non-differentiable pipelines. But searching
through the entire output space to find the best output with respect to this reward
function is typically intractable. In this paper, we instead use efficient truncated
randomized search in this reward function to train structured prediction energy
networks (SPENs), which provide efficient test-time inference using gradientbased search on a smooth, learned representation of the score landscape, and have
previously yielded state-of-the-art results in structured prediction. In particular,
this truncated randomized search in the reward function yields previously unknown
local improvements, providing effective supervision to SPENs, avoiding their
traditional need for labeled training data.

1

Introduction

Structured output prediction tasks are common in computer vision, natural language processing,
robotics, and computational biology. The goal is to find a function from an input vector x to multiple
coordinated output variables y. For example, such coordination can represent constrained structures,
such as natural language parse trees, foreground-background pixel maps in images, or intertwined
binary labels in multi-label classification.
Structured prediction energy networks (SPENs) (Belanger & McCallum, 2016) are a type of energybased model (LeCun et al., 2006) in which inference is done by gradient descent. SPENs learn an
energy landscape E(x, y) on pairs of input x and structured outputs y. In a successfully trained
SPEN, an input x yields an energy landscape over structured outputs such that the lowest energy
occurs at the target structured output y⇤ . Therefore, we can infer the target output by finding the
minimum of energy function E conditioned on input x: y⇤ = argminy E(x, y).
Traditional supervised training of SPENs requires knowledge of the target structured output in
order to learn the energy landscape, however such labeled examples are expensive to collect in
many tasks, which suggests the use of other cheaply acquirable supervision. For example, Mann
and McCallum (2010) use labeled features instead of labeled output, or Ganchev et al. (2010) use
constraints on posterior distributions of output variables, however both directly add constraints as
features, requiring the constraints to be decomposable and also be compatible with the underlying
model’s factorization to avoid intractable inference.
Alternatively, scalar reward functions are another widely used source of supervision, mostly in
reinforcement learning (RL), where the environment evaluates a sequence of actions with a scalar
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

