Cross Attention Network for Few-shot Classification

1

Ruibing Hou1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, China
ruibing.hou@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {changhong, sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Few-shot classification aims to recognize unlabeled samples from unseen classes
given only few labeled samples. The unseen classes and low-data problem make
few-shot classification very challenging. Many existing approaches extracted features from labeled and unlabeled samples independently, as a result, the features
are not discriminative enough. In this work, we propose a novel Cross Attention
Network to address the challenging problems in few-shot classification. Firstly,
Cross Attention Module is introduced to deal with the problem of unseen classes.
The module generates cross attention maps for each pair of class feature and query
sample feature so as to highlight the target object regions, making the extracted feature more discriminative. Secondly, a transductive inference algorithm is proposed
to alleviate the low-data problem, which iteratively utilizes the unlabeled query set
to augment the support set, thereby making the class features more representative.
Extensive experiments on two benchmarks show our method is a simple, effective
and computationally efficient framework and outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Few-shot classification aims at classifying unlabeled samples (query set) into unseen classes given
very few labeled samples (support set). Compared to traditional classification, few-shot classification
has two main challenges: One is unseen classes, i.e., the non-overlap between training and test
classes; The other is the low-data problem, i.e., very few labeled samples for the test unseen classes.
Solving few-shot classification problem requires the model trained with seen classes to generalize
well to unseen classes with only few labeled samples. A straightforward approach is fine-tuning a pretrained model using the few labeled samples from the unseen classes. However, it may cause severe
overfitting. Regularization and data augmentation can alleviate but cannot fully solve the overfitting
problem. Recently, meta-learning paradigm [38, 39, 22] is widely used for few-shot learning. In
meta-learning, the transferable meta-knowledge, which can be an optimization strategy [31, 1], a
good initial condition [7, 16, 24], or a metric space [35, 40, 37], is extracted from a set of training
tasks and generalizes to new test tasks. The tasks in the training phase usually mimic the settings in
the test phase to reduce the gap between training and test settings and enhance the generalization
ability of the model.
While promising, few of them pay enough attention to the discriminability of the extracted features.
They generally extract features from the support classes and unlabeled query samples independently,
as a result, the features are not discriminative enough. For one thing, the test images in the
support/query set are from unseen classes, thus their features can hardly attend to the target
objects. To be specific, for a test image containing multiple objects, the extracted feature may attend
to the objects from seen classes which have large number of labeled samples in the training set,
while ignore the target object from unseen class. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (c) and (d), for the two
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

