Accurate Layerwise Interpretable Competence
Estimation
Vickram Rajendran, William LeVine
The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
Laurel, MD 20723
{vickram.rajendran, william.levine}@jhuapl.edu

Abstract
Estimating machine learning performance “in the wild” is both an important and
unsolved problem. In this paper, we seek to examine, understand, and predict the
pointwise competence of classification models. Our contributions are twofold:
First, we establish a statistically rigorous definition of competence that generalizes the common notion of classifier confidence; second, we present the ALICE
(Accurate Layerwise Interpretable Competence Estimation) Score, a pointwise
competence estimator for any classifier. By considering distributional, data, and
model uncertainty, ALICE empirically shows accurate competence estimation in
common failure situations such as class-imbalanced datasets, out-of-distribution
datasets, and poorly trained models.
Our contributions allow us to accurately predict the competence of any classification
model given any input and error function. We compare our score with state-ofthe-art confidence estimators such as model confidence and Trust Score, and show
significant improvements in competence prediction over these methods on datasets
such as DIGITS, CIFAR10, and CIFAR100.

1

Introduction

Machine learning algorithms have achieved tremendous success in areas such as classification [12],
object detection [24], and segmentation [1]. However, as these algorithms become more prevalent
in society it is essential to understand their limitations. In particular, a supervised machine learning
model’s performance on a reserved test point is characterized by the difference between that point’s
label and the model’s prediction on that point. A model is considered performant on that point if
this difference is sufficiently small; unfortunately, this difference is impossible to compute once the
model is deployed since the point’s true label is unknown.
This problem is exacerbated when we consider the difference between real world data and the curated
datasets that the models are evaluated on — often these datasets are significantly different, and it is
not clear whether performance on a held aside test set is indicative of real-world performance. It is
essential to have a predictive measure of performance that does not require ground truth in order to
determine whether or not a machine learning algorithm’s prediction should be trusted "in the wild"
— a measure of model competence. However, competence is currently not defined in any rigorous
manner and is often restricted to the more specific idea of model confidence.
In this paper, we define competence to be a generalized form of predictive uncertainty, and so we must
account for all of its’ generating facets. Predictive uncertainty arises from three factors: distributional,
data, and model uncertainty. Distributional uncertainty [4] arises from mismatched training and
test distributions (i.e. dataset shift [23]). Data uncertainty [4] is inherent in the complex nature
of the data (e.g. input noise, class overlap, etc.). Finally, model uncertainty measures error in the
approximation of the true model used to generate the data (e.g. overfitting, underfitting, etc.) [4] —
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

