Explicitly disentangling image content from
translation and rotation with spatial-VAE

Tristan Bepler
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
tbepler@mit.edu

Ellen D. Zhong
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
zhonge@mit.edu

Kotaro Kelley
New York Structural Biology Center
New York, NY
kkelley@nysbc.org

Edward Brignole
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
brignole@mit.edu

Bonnie Berger∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA
bab@mit.edu

Abstract
Given an image dataset, we are often interested in finding data generative factors
that encode semantic content independently from pose variables such as rotation
and translation. However, current disentanglement approaches do not impose any
specific structure on the learned latent representations. We propose a method for
explicitly disentangling image rotation and translation from other unstructured
latent factors in a variational autoencoder (VAE) framework. By formulating the
generative model as a function of the spatial coordinate, we make the reconstruction
error differentiable with respect to latent translation and rotation parameters. This
formulation allows us to train a neural network to perform approximate inference
on these latent variables while explicitly constraining them to only represent
rotation and translation. We demonstrate that this framework, termed spatialVAE, effectively learns latent representations that disentangle image rotation and
translation from content and improves reconstruction over standard VAEs on several
benchmark datasets, including applications to modeling continuous 2-D views of
proteins from single particle electron microscopy and galaxies in astronomical
images. 2

1

Introduction

A central problem in computer vision is unsupervised learning on image datasets. Often, this takes the
form of latent variable models in which we seek to encode semantic information about images into
discrete (as in mixture models) or continuous (as in recent generative neural network models) vector
representations. However, in many imaging domains, image content is confounded by variability from
general image transformations, such as rotation and translation. In single particle electron microscopy,
this emerges from particles being randomly oriented in the microscope images. In astronomy, objects
∗
2

To whom correspondences should be addressed.
Source code and data are available at: https://github.com/tbepler/spatial-VAE

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

