Multiclass Learning from Contradictions

Vladimir Cherkassky
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
cherk001@umn.edu

Sauptik Dhar
LG Electronics
Santa Clara, CA 95054
sauptik.dhar@lge.com

Mohak Shah
LG Electronics
Santa Clara, CA 95054
mohak.shah@lge.com

Abstract
We introduce the notion of learning from contradictions, a.k.a Universum learning,
for multiclass problems and propose a novel formulation for multiclass universum
SVM (MU-SVM). We show that learning from contradictions (using MU-SVM) incurs lower sample complexity compared to multiclass SVM (M-SVM) by deriving
the Natarajan dimension for sample complexity for PAC-learnability of MU-SVM.
We also propose an analytic span bound for MU-SVM and demonstrate its utility
for model selection resulting in ∼ 2 − 4× faster computation times than standard
resampling techniques. We empirically demonstrate the efficacy of MU-SVM
on several real world datasets achieving > 20% improvement in test accuracies
compared to M-SVM. Insights into the underlying behavior of MU-SVM using a
histograms-of-projections method are also provided.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems in domains such as, healthcare, autonomous driving, and prognostics and health management involve learning from high-dimensional data with limited labeled
samples. In such domains labeling very large quantities of data is either extremely expensive, or
entirely prohibitive due to the manual effort required. Standard inductive learning methods, including
data intensive deep architectures [1], may not be sufficient for such high-dimensional limited-labeleddata problems. The learning from contradictions paradigm (popularly known as Universum learning)
has shown to be particularly effective for binary classification problems of this nature [2–11]. In
this paradigm, along with the labeled training data we are also given a set of unlabeled universum
samples. These universum samples belong to the same application domain as the training data, but
are known not to belong to either of the two classes. The rationale behind this setting comes from the
fact that even though obtaining labels is very difficult, obtaining such additional unlabeled samples
is relatively easier. These unlabeled universum samples act as contradictions and should not be
explained by the binary decision rule. However, this paradigm has been mostly limited to binary
classification problems making it impractical for most real applications involving classification of
more than two categories. Further, this limits incorporation of a priori knowledge by discarding
available universum data for such applications.
Previous works such as [12, 13] have hinted on adopting an Error Correcting Output Code (ECOC)
based setting such as one-vs-one (OVO) and one-vs-all (OVA), where several binary UniversumSVM [12] classifiers are combined to solve the multiclass problem. However, such studies lack
a complete formalization and analysis. An alternative is the adoption of a direct approach [14]
where the entire multiclass problem is solved through a single larger optimization formulation by
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

