Beyond Online Balanced Descent: An Optimal
Algorithm for Smoothed Online Optimization
Gautam Goel*1 Yiheng Lin*2,1 Haoyuan Sun*1 Adam Wierman1
2

1
California Institute of Technology
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University

Abstract
We study online convex optimization in a setting where the learner seeks to minimize the sum of a per-round hitting cost and a movement cost which is incurred
when changing decisions between rounds. We prove a new lower bound on the
competitive ratio of any online algorithm in the setting where the costs are mstrongly convex and the movement costs are the squared `2 norm. This lower
bound shows that no algorithm can achieve a competitive ratio that is o(m−1/2 )
as m tends to zero. No existing algorithms have competitive ratios matching this
bound, and we show that the state-of-the-art algorithm, Online Balanced Decent
(OBD), has a competitive ratio that is Ω(m−2/3 ). We additionally propose two new
algorithms, Greedy OBD (G-OBD) and Regularized OBD (R-OBD) and prove that
both algorithms have an O(m−1/2 ) competitive ratio. The result for G-OBD holds
when the hitting costs are quasiconvex and the movement costs are the squared
`2 norm, while the result for R-OBD holds when the hitting costs are m-strongly
convex and the movement costs are Bregman Divergences. Further, we show that
R-OBD simultaneously achieves constant, dimension-free competitive ratio and
sublinear regret when hitting costs are strongly convex.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of Smoothed Online Convex Optimization (SOCO), a variant of online
convex optimization (OCO) where the online learner pays a movement cost for changing actions
between rounds. More precisely, we consider a game where an online learner plays a series of
rounds against an adaptive adversary. In each round, the adversary picks a convex cost function
ft : Rd → R≥0 and shows it to the learner. After observing the cost function, the learner chooses an
action xt and pays a hitting cost ft (xt ), as well as a movement cost c(xt , xt−1 ), which penalizes the
online learner for switching points between rounds.
SOCO was originally proposed in the context of dynamic power management in data centers [28].
Since then it has seen a wealth of applications, from speech animation to management of electric
vehicle charging [24–26], and more recently applications in control [21,22] and power systems [5,27].
SOCO has been widely studied in the machine learning community with the special cases of online
logistic regression and smoothed online maximum likelihood estimation receiving recent attention
[22].
Additionally, SOCO has connections to a number of other important problems in online algorithms
and learning. Convex Body Chasing (CBC), introduced in [20], is a special case of SOCO [14]. The
Gautam Goel, Yiheng Lin, and Haoyuan Sun contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by
NSF grants AitF-1637598 and CNS-1518941, with additional support for Gautam Goel provided by an Amazon
AWS AI Fellowship.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

