Likelihood-Free Overcomplete ICA and Applications
in Causal Discovery

Chenwei Ding
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
University of Sydney
cdin2224@uni.sydney.edu.au

Mingming Gong
School of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Melbourne
mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

Kun Zhang
Department of Philosophy
Carnegie Mellon University
kunz1@cmu.edu
Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
University of Sydney
dacheng.tao@uni.sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Causal discovery witnessed significant progress over the past decades. In particular,
many recent causal discovery methods make use of independent, non-Gaussian
noise to achieve identifiability of the causal models. Existence of hidden direct
common causes, or confounders, generally makes causal discovery more difficult;
whenever they are present, the corresponding causal discovery algorithms can
be seen as extensions of overcomplete independent component analysis (OICA).
However, existing OICA algorithms usually make strong parametric assumptions
on the distribution of independent components, which may be violated on real
data, leading to sub-optimal or even wrong solutions. In addition, existing OICA
algorithms rely on the Expectation Maximization (EM) procedure that requires
computationally expensive inference of the posterior distribution of independent
components. To tackle these problems, we present a Likelihood-Free Overcomplete ICA algorithm (LFOICA1 ) that estimates the mixing matrix directly by
back-propagation without any explicit assumptions on the density function of independent components. Thanks to its computational efficiency, the proposed method
makes a number of causal discovery procedures much more practically feasible.
For illustrative purposes, we demonstrate the computational efficiency and efficacy
of our method in two causal discovery tasks on both synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

Discovering causal relations among variables has been an important problem in various fields such
as medical science and social sciences. Because conducting randomized controlled trials is usually
expensive or infeasible, discovering causal relations from observational data, i.e.,causal discovery
1

Code for LFOICA can be found here

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

