Kalman Filter, Sensor Fusion, and Constrained
Regression: Equivalences and Insights

Maria Jahja
Department of Statistics
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
maria@stat.cmu.edu

David Farrow
Computational Biology Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
dfarrow0@gmail.com

Roni Rosenfeld
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
roni@cs.cmu.edu

Ryan J. Tibshirani
Department of Statistics
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
ryantibs@stat.cmu.edu

Abstract
The Kalman filter (KF) is one of the most widely used tools for data assimilation
and sequential estimation. In this work, we show that the state estimates from the
KF in a standard linear dynamical system setting are equivalent to those given by
the KF in a transformed system, with infinite process noise (i.e., a “flat prior”)
and an augmented measurement space. This reformulation—which we refer to as
augmented measurement sensor fusion (SF)—is conceptually interesting, because
the transformed system here is seemingly static (as there is effectively no process
model), but we can still capture the state dynamics inherent to the KF by folding
the process model into the measurement space. Further, this reformulation of the
KF turns out to be useful in settings in which past states are observed eventually
(at some lag). Here, when the measurement noise covariance is estimated by the
empirical covariance, we show that the state predictions from SF are equivalent to
those from a regression of past states on past measurements, subject to particular
linear constraints (reflecting the relationships encoded in the measurement map).
This allows us to port standard ideas (say, regularization methods) in regression
over to dynamical systems. For example, we can posit multiple candidate process
models, fold all of them into the measurement model, transform to the regression
perspective, and apply `1 penalization to perform process model selection. We give
various empirical demonstrations, and focus on an application to nowcasting the
weekly incidence of influenza in the US.

1

Introduction

Let xt ∈ Rk , t = 1, 2, 3, . . . denote states and zt ∈ Rd , t = 1, 2, 3, . . . denote measurements evolving
according to the time-invariant linear dynamical system:
xt = F xt−1 + δt ,
(1)
zt = Hxt + t ,
(2)
for t = 1, 2, 3, . . .. We assume the noise terms δt , t have mean zero and covariances Q ∈ Rk×k and
R ∈ Rd×d , respectively, for all t = 1, 2, 3, . . .. Also, we assume that the initial state x0 and all noise
terms are mutually independent. We call (1) the process model and (2) the measurement model.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

