Locality-Sensitive Hashing for f -Divergences
and Kreı̆n Kernels: Mutual Information Loss
and Beyond

Lin Chen1,2

Hossein Esfandiari2
Thomas Fu2
Vahab S. Mirrokni2
1
Yale University 2 Google Research
lin.chen@yale.edu, {esfandiari,thomasfu,mirrokni}@google.com

Abstract
Computing approximate nearest neighbors in high dimensional spaces is a
central problem in large-scale data mining with a wide range of applications
in machine learning and data science. A popular and effective technique in
computing nearest neighbors approximately is the locality-sensitive hashing
(LSH) scheme. In this paper, we aim to develop LSH schemes for distance
functions that measure the distance between two probability distributions,
particularly for f -divergences as well as a generalization to capture mutual
information loss. First, we provide a general framework to design LHS
schemes for f -divergence distance functions and develop LSH schemes for
the generalized Jensen-Shannon divergence and triangular discrimination in
this framework. We show a two-sided approximation result for approximation
of the generalized Jensen-Shannon divergence by the Hellinger distance,
which may be of independent interest. Next, we show a general method of
reducing the problem of designing an LSH scheme for a Kreı̆n kernel (which
can be expressed as the difference of two positive definite kernels) to the
problem of maximum inner product search. We exemplify this method by
applying it to the mutual information loss, due to its several important
applications such as model compression.

1

Introduction

A central problem in machine learning and data mining is to find top-k similar items to each
item in a dataset. Such problems, referred to as approximate nearest neighbor problems, are
especially challenging in high dimensional spaces and are an important part of a wide range
of data mining tasks such as finding near-duplicate pages in a corpus of images or web pages,
or clustering items in a high-dimensional metric space. A popular technique for solving these
problems is the locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) technique [19]. In this method, items in a
high-dimensional metric space are first mapped into buckets (via a hashing scheme) with
the property that closer items have a higher chance of being assigned to the same bucket.
LSH-based nearest neighbor methods limit their scope of search to the items that fall into
the same bucket in which the target item resides 1 .
Locality sensitive hashing was first introduced and studied by [19]. They provide a family of
basic locality-sensitive hash functions for the Hamming distance in a d-dimensional space
1
We note that LSH is a popular data-independent technique for nearest neighbor search. Another
category of nearest neighbor search algorithms, referred to as data-dependent techniques, are
learning-to-hash methods [37] which learn a hash function that maps each item to a compact code.
However, this line of work is out of the scope of this paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

