Discrimination in Online Markets: Effects of Social
Bias on Learning from Reviews and Policy Design

Faidra Monachou
Stanford University
monachou@stanford.edu

Itai Ashlagi
Stanford University
iashlagi@stanford.edu

Abstract
The increasing popularity of online two-sided markets such as ride-sharing, accommodation and freelance labor platforms, goes hand in hand with new socioeconomic challenges. One major issue remains the existence of bias and discrimination
against certain social groups. We study this problem using a two-sided large market
model with employers and workers mediated by a platform. Employers who seek
to hire workers face uncertainty about a candidate worker’s skill level. Therefore,
they base their hiring decision on learning from past reviews about an individual
worker as well as on their (possibly misspecified) prior beliefs about the ability
level of the social group the worker belongs to. Drawing upon the social learning
literature with bounded rationality and limited information, uncertainty combined
with social bias leads to unequal hiring opportunities between workers of different
social groups. Although the effect of social bias decreases as the number of reviews
increases (consistent with empirical findings), minority workers still receive lower
expected payoffs. Finally, we consider a simple directed matching policy (DM),
which combines learning and matching to make better matching decisions for
minority workers. Under this policy, there exists a steady-state equilibrium, in
which DM reduces the discrimination gap.

1

Introduction

Online markets such as ride-sharing, accommodation, and freelance labor platforms have grown
rapidly over the past few years, thus shaping the future of work. However, a major issue, which
is common in traditional markets, is the existence of bias and discrimination against certain social
groups. Indeed, several empirical studies document the existence of racial, gender and other forms of
discrimination in popular online platforms. In experiments on Airbnb, an online accommodationsharing platform, Edelman et al. [18] and Cui et al. [16] find that accommodation applications from
guests with distinctively African-American names are about 16%-19% less likely to be accepted
relative to identical guests with distinctively white-sounding names. A study by Ge et al. [25]
confirms analogous results for race discrimination on the ridesharing platform Uber while Ameri
et al. [5] document discrimination against travelers with disabilities on Airbnb. Hannák et al. [27]
examine racial and gender discrimination in two freelance labor markets, TaskRabbit and Fiverr;
on both platforms, workers perceived to be black get worse ratings than similarly qualified workers
perceived to be white while on TaskRabbit women receive fewer reviews than men with equivalent
work experience.
Understanding the effects of social bias on learning from reviews will help designing successful
interventions that reduce the existing discrimination. Towards this goal, we consider a two-sided
large market model of employers and workers mediated by platform. Workers belong to one of

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

