Function-Space Distributions over Kernels
Gregory W. Benton∗1 Wesley J. Maddox∗2 Jayson P. Salkey∗1
Júlio Albinati‡3 Andrew Gordon Wilson1,2
1

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
2
Center for Data Science, New York University
3
Microsoft

Abstract
Gaussian processes are flexible function approximators, with inductive biases
controlled by a covariance kernel. Learning the kernel is the key to representation
learning and strong predictive performance. In this paper, we develop functional
kernel learning (FKL) to directly infer functional posteriors over kernels. In
particular, we place a transformed Gaussian process over a spectral density, to
induce a non-parametric distribution over kernel functions. The resulting approach
enables learning of rich representations, with support for any stationary kernel,
uncertainty over the values of the kernel, and an interpretable specification of a
prior directly over kernels, without requiring sophisticated initialization or manual
intervention. We perform inference through elliptical slice sampling, which is
especially well suited to marginalizing posteriors with the strongly correlated
priors typical to function space modeling. We develop our approach for nonuniform, large-scale, multi-task, and multidimensional data, and show promising
performance in a wide range of settings, including interpolation, extrapolation, and
kernel recovery experiments.

1

Introduction

Practitioners typically follow a two-step modeling procedure: (1) choosing the functional form of
a model, such as a neural network; (2) focusing learning efforts on training the parameters of that
model. While inference of these parameters consume our efforts, they are rarely interpretable, and are
only of interest insomuch as they combine with the functional form of the model to make predictions.
Gaussian processes (GPs) provide an alternative function space approach to machine learning, directly
placing a distribution over functions that could fit data [25]. This approach enables great flexibility,
and also provides a compelling framework for controlling the inductive biases of the model, such as
whether we expect the solutions to be smooth, periodic, or have conditional independence properties.
These inductive biases, and thus the generalization properties of the GP, are determined by a kernel
function. The performance of the GP, and what representations it can learn, therefore crucially depend
on what we can learn about the kernel function itself. Accordingly, kernel functions are becoming
increasingly expressive and parametrized [15, 31, 34]. There is, however, no a priori reason to assume
that the true data generating process is driven by a particular parametric family of kernels.
We propose extending the function-space view to kernel learning itself – to represent uncertainty over
the kernel function, and to reflect the belief that the kernel does not have a simple parametric form.
Just as one uses GPs to directly specify a prior and infer a posterior over functions that can fit data,
we propose to directly reason about priors and posteriors over kernels. In Figure 1, we illustrate the
shift from standard function-space GP regression, to a function-space view of kernel learning.
Specifically, our contributions are as follows:
∗

Equal contribution. ‡Work done while interning with AGW.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

