PerspectiveNet: 3D Object Detection from
a Single RGB Image via Perspective Points

Siyuan Huang
Department of Statistics
huangsiyuan@ucla.edu
Siyuan Qi
Department of Computer Science
syqi@cs.ucla.edu

Yixin Chen
Department of Statistics
ethanchen@ucla.edu
Yixin Zhu
Department of Statistics
yixin.zhu@ucla.edu

Tao Yuan
Department of Statistics
taoyuan@ucla.edu
Song-Chun Zhu
Department of Statistics
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Detecting 3D objects from a single RGB image is intrinsically ambiguous, thus requiring appropriate prior knowledge and intermediate representations as constraints
to reduce the uncertainties and improve the consistencies between the 2D image
plane and the 3D world coordinate. To address this challenge, we propose to adopt
perspective points as a new intermediate representation for 3D object detection,
defined as the 2D projections of local Manhattan 3D keypoints to locate an object;
these perspective points satisfy geometric constraints imposed by the perspective
projection. We further devise PerspectiveNet, an end-to-end trainable model that
simultaneously detects the 2D bounding box, 2D perspective points, and 3D object
bounding box for each object from a single RGB image. PerspectiveNet yields
three unique advantages: (i) 3D object bounding boxes are estimated based on
perspective points, bridging the gap between 2D and 3D bounding boxes without
the need of category-specific 3D shape priors. (ii) It predicts the perspective points
by a template-based method, and a perspective loss is formulated to maintain
the perspective constraints. (iii) It maintains the consistency between the 2D perspective points and 3D bounding boxes via a differentiable projective function.
Experiments on SUN RGB-D dataset show that the proposed method significantly
outperforms existing RGB-based approaches for 3D object detection.

1

Introduction
If one hopes to achieve a full understanding of a system as complicated as a
nervous system, . . . , or even a large computer program, then one must be prepared
to contemplate different kinds of explanation at different levels of description that
are linked, at least in principle, into a cohesive whole, even if linking the levels in
complete details is impractical.
— David Marr [1], pp. 20–21

In a classic view of computer vision, David Marr [1] conjectured that the perception of a 2D image
is an explicit multi-phase information process, involving (i) an early vision system of perceiving
textures [2, 3] and textons [4, 5] to form a primal sketch as a perceptually lossless conversion from
the raw image [6, 7], (ii) a mid-level vision system to construct 2.1D (multiple layers with partial
occlusion) [8–10] and 2.5D [11] sketches, and (iii) a high-level vision system that recovers the full
3D [12–14]. In particular, he highlighted the importance of different levels of organization and the
internal representation [15].
In parallel, the school of Gestalt Laws [16–23] and perceptual organization [24, 25] aims to resolve
the 3D reconstruction problem from a single RGB image without forming the depth cues; but rather,
they often use some sorts of priors—groupings and structural cues [26, 27] that are likely to be
invariant over wide ranges of viewpoints [28], resulting in the birth of the SIFT feature [29]. Later,
from a Bayesian perspective at a scene level, such priors, independent of any 3D scene structures,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

