Differential Privacy Has Disparate Impact on
Model Accuracy

Eugene Bagdasaryan
Cornell Tech
eugene@cs.cornell.edu

Omid Poursaeed∗
Cornell Tech
op63@cornell.edu

Vitaly Shmatikov
Cornell Tech
shmat@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy (DP) is a popular mechanism for training machine learning
models with bounded leakage about the presence of specific points in the training
data. The cost of differential privacy is a reduction in the model’s accuracy.
We demonstrate that in the neural networks trained using differentially private
stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD), this cost is not borne equally: accuracy of
DP models drops much more for the underrepresented classes and subgroups.
For example, a gender classification model trained using DP-SGD exhibits much
lower accuracy for black faces than for white faces. Critically, this gap is bigger
in the DP model than in the non-DP model, i.e., if the original model is unfair,
the unfairness becomes worse once DP is applied. We demonstrate this effect
for a variety of tasks and models, including sentiment analysis of text and image
classification. We then explain why DP training mechanisms such as gradient
clipping and noise addition have disproportionate effect on the underrepresented
and more complex subgroups, resulting in a disparate reduction of model accuracy.

1

Introduction

-differential privacy (DP) [12] bounds the influence of any single input on the output of a computation.
DP machine learning bounds the leakage of training data from a trained model. The  parameter
controls this bound and thus the tradeoff between “privacy” and accuracy of the model.
Recently proposed methods [1] for differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) clip
gradients during training, add random noise to them, and employ the “moments accountant” technique
to track the resulting privacy loss. DP-SGD has enabled the development of deep image classification
and language models [1, 24, 26, 36] that achieve DP with  in the single digits at the cost of a modest
reduction in the model’s test accuracy.
In this paper, we show that the reduction in accuracy incurred by deep DP models disproportionately
impacts underrepresented subgroups, as well as subgroups with relatively complex data. Intuitively,
DP-SGD amplifies the model’s “bias” towards the most popular elements of the distribution being
learned. We empirically demonstrate this effect for (1) gender classification—already notorious for
bias in the existing models [7]—and age classification on facial images, where DP-SGD degrades
accuracy for the darker-skinned faces more than for the lighter-skinned ones; (2) sentiment analysis of
tweets, where DP-SGD disproportionately degrades accuracy for users writing in African-American
English; (3) species classification on the iNaturalist dataset, where DP-SGD disproportionately
degrades accuracy for the underrepresented classes; and (4) federated learning of language models,
where DP-SGD disproportionately degrades accuracy for users with bigger vocabularies. Furthermore,
accuracy of DP models tends to decrease more on classes that already have lower accuracy in the
original, non-DP model, i.e., “the poor become poorer.”
∗

Poursaeed contributed the iNaturalist experiments. He did not participate in drafting or revision of this
paper.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

