Neural Attribution for Semantic Bug-Localization in
Student Programs

Rahul Gupta1
Aditya Kanade1,2
Shirish Shevade1
1
Department of Computer Science and Automation,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, KA 560012, India
2
Google Brain, CA, USA
{rahulg, kanade, shirish}@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Providing feedback is an integral part of teaching. Most open online courses on
programming make use of automated grading systems to support programming
assignments and give real-time feedback. These systems usually rely on test
results to quantify the programs’ functional correctness. They return failing tests
to the students as feedback. However, students may find it difficult to debug their
programs if they receive no hints about where the bug is and how to fix it. In this
work, we present NeuralBugLocator, a deep learning based technique, that can
localize the bugs in a faulty program with respect to a failing test, without even
running the program. At the heart of our technique is a novel tree convolutional
neural network which is trained to predict whether a program passes or fails a given
test. To localize the bugs, we analyze the trained network using a state-of-the-art
neural prediction attribution technique and see which lines of the programs make
it predict the test outcomes. Our experiments show that NeuralBugLocator is
generally more accurate than two state-of-the-art program-spectrum based and one
syntactic difference based bug-localization baselines.

1

Introduction

Automated grading systems for student programs both check the functional correctness of assignment
submissions and provide real-time feedback to students. The feedback helps students learn from
their mistakes, allowing them to revise and resubmit their work. In the current practice, automated
grading systems rely on running the submissions against a test suite. The failing tests are returned
to the students as feedback. However, students may find it difficult to debug their programs if they
receive no hints about where the bug is and how to fix it. Although instructors may inspect the code
and manually provide such hints in a traditional classroom setting, doing this in an online course
with a large number of students is often infeasible. Therefore, our aim in this work is to develop an
automated technique for generating feedback about the error locations corresponding to the failing
tests. Such a technique benefits both instructors and students by allowing instructors to automatically
generate hints for students without giving away the complete solution.
Towards this, we propose a deep learning based semantic bug-localization technique. While running
a program against a test suite can detect the presence of bugs in the program, locating these bugs
requires careful analysis of the program behavior. Our proposed technique can localize the bugs in
a buggy program with respect to a failing test, without even running the program. It works in two
phases. In the first phase, we train a novel tree convolutional neural network to predict whether or
not a program passes a given test. The input to this network is a pair of a program and a test ID. In
the second phase, we query a state-of-the-art neural prediction attribution technique [25] to find out
which lines of a buggy program make the network predict the failure to localize the bugs. We call our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

