Learning Distributions Generated by
One-Layer ReLU Networks

Shanshan Wu, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Sujay Sanghavi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Texas at Austin
shanshan@utexas.edu, dimakis@austin.utexas.edu, sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the parameters of a d-dimensional rectified
Gaussian distribution from i.i.d. samples. A rectified Gaussian distribution is
defined by passing a standard Gaussian distribution through a one-layer ReLU
neural network. We give a simple algorithm to estimate the parameters (i.e., the
weight matrix and bias vector of the ReLU neural network) up to an error kW kF
O(1/2 ) samples and e
O(d2 /2 ) time (log factors are ignored for simplicity).
using e
This implies that we can estimate the distribution up to  in total variation distance
using e
O(κ2 d2 /2 ) samples, where κ is the condition number of the covariance
matrix. Our only assumption is that the bias vector is non-negative. Without
this non-negativity assumption, we show that estimating the bias vector within
any error requires the number of samples at least exponential in the infinity norm
of the bias vector. Our algorithm is based on the key observation that vector
norms and pairwise angles can be estimated separately. We use a recent result
on learning from truncated samples. We also prove two sample complexity lower
bounds: Ω(1/2 ) samples are required to estimate the parameters up to error ,
while Ω(d/2 ) samples are necessary to estimate the distribution up to  in total
variation distance. The first lower bound implies that our algorithm is optimal for
parameter estimation. Finally, we show an interesting connection between learning
a two-layer generative model and non-negative matrix factorization. Experimental
results are provided to support our analysis.

1

Introduction

Estimating a high-dimensional distribution from observed samples is a fundamental problem in
machine learning and statistics. A popular recent generative approach is to model complex distributions by passing a simple distribution (typically a standard Gaussian) through a neural network.
Parameters of the neural network are then learned from data. Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [GPAM+ 14] and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [KW13] are built on this method of
modeling high-dimensional distributions.
Current methods for learning such deep generative models do not have provable guarantees or sample
complexity bounds. In this paper we obtain the first such results for a single-layer ReLU generative
model. Specifically, we study the following problem: Assume that the latent variable z is selected
from a standard Gaussian which then drives the generation of samples from a one-layer ReLU
activated neural network with weights W and bias b. We observe the output samples (but not the
latent variable realizations z) and we would like to provably learn the parameters W and b. More
formally:
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

