From Complexity to Simplicity: Adaptive ES-Active
Subspaces for Blackbox Optimization
Krzysztof Choromanski⇤
Google Brain Robotics
kchoro@google.com

Aldo Pacchiano⇤
UC Berkeley
pacchiano@berkeley.edu

Yunhao Tang⇤
Columbia University
yt2541@columbia.edu

Jack Parker-Holder⇤
University of Oxford
jackph@robots.ox.ac.uk

Vikas Sindhwani
Google Brain Robotics
sindhwani@google.com

Abstract
We present a new algorithm (ASEBO) for optimizing high-dimensional blackbox
functions. ASEBO adapts to the geometry of the function and learns optimal
sets of sensing directions, which are used to probe it, on-the-fly. It addresses the
exploration-exploitation trade-off of blackbox optimization with expensive blackbox queries by continuously learning the bias of the lower-dimensional model used
to approximate gradients of smoothings of the function via compressed sensing and
contextual bandits methods. To obtain this model, it leverages techniques from the
emerging theory of active subspaces [8] in a novel ES blackbox optimization context. As a result, ASEBO learns the dynamically changing intrinsic dimensionality
of the gradient space and adapts to the hardness of different stages of the optimization without external supervision. Consequently, it leads to more sample-efficient
blackbox optimization than state-of-the-art algorithms. We provide theoretical
results and test ASEBO advantages over other methods empirically by evaluating
it on the set of reinforcement learning policy optimization tasks as well as functions
from the recently open-sourced Nevergrad library.

1

Introduction

Consider a high-dimensional function F : Rd ! R. We assume that querying it is expensive.
Examples include reinforcement learning (RL) blackbox functions taking as inputs vectors ✓ encoding
policies ⇡ : S ! A mapping states to actions and outputting total (expected/discounted) rewards
obtained by agents applying ⇡ in given environments [6]. For this class of functions evaluations
usually require running a simulator. Other examples include wind configuration design optimization
problems for high speed civil transport aircrafts, optimizing computer codes (e.g. NASA synthetic
tool FLOPS/ENGENN used to size the aircraft and propulsion system [2]), crash tests, medical and
chemical reaction experiments [37].
Evolution strategy (ES) methods have traditionally been used in low-dimensional regimes (e.g.
hyperparameter tuning), and considered ill-equipped for higher dimensional problems due to poor
sampling complexity [27]. However, a flurry of recent work has shown they can scale better than
previously believed [33, 11, 29, 25, 7, 30, 21]. This is thanks to a couple of reasons.
First of all, new ES methods apply several efficient heuristics (filtering, various normalization
techniques as in [25] and new exploration strategies as in [11]) in order to substantially improve
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

