Same-Cluster Querying for Overlapping Clusters

Arya Mazumdar
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
arya@cs.umass.edu

Wasim Huleihel
Department of Electrical Engineering
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv, Israel 6997801
wasimh@mail.tau.ac.il
Muriel Médard
Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
medard@mit.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
College of Information & Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
soumyabratap@umass.edu

Abstract
Overlapping clusters are common in models of many practical data-segmentation
applications. Suppose we are given n elements to be clustered into k possibly
overlapping clusters, and an oracle that can interactively answer queries of the form
“do elements u and v belong to the same cluster?” The goal is to recover the clusters
with minimum number of such queries. This problem has been of recent interest for
the case of disjoint clusters. In this paper, we look at the more practical scenario of
overlapping clusters, and provide upper bounds (with algorithms) on the sufficient
number of queries. We provide algorithmic results under both arbitrary (worst-case)
and statistical modeling assumptions. Our algorithms are parameter free, efficient,
and work in the presence of random noise. We also derive information-theoretic
lower bounds on the number of queries needed, proving that our algorithms are
order optimal. Finally, we test our algorithms over both synthetic and real-world
data, showing their practicality and effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Recently, semi-supervised models of clustering that allow active querying during data segmentation
have become quite popular. This includes active learning, as well as data labeling by amateurs via
crowdsourcing. Clever implementation of interactive querying framework can improve the accuracy
of clustering and help in inferring labels of large amount of data by issuing only a small number
of queries. Interactions can easily be implemented (e.g., via captcha), especially if queries involve
few data points, like pairwise queries of whether two points belong to the same cluster or not
[1, 2, 4, 9, 13, 15, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 25].
Until now, the querying model and algorithms/lower bounds are highly tailored towards flat clustering that produces a partition of the data. Consider the problem of clustering from pairwise
queries such as above when an element can be part of multiple clusters. Such overlapping clustering instances are ubiquitous across areas and many time are more practical model of data
segmentation, see [3, 5, 20, 26]. Indeed, overlapping models are quite natural for communities in social networks or topic models [16]. In the supervised version of the problem every
element (or data-point) can have multiple labels, and we would like to know all the labels. To
see how the querying might work here consider the following input: {Tiger Shark, Grizzly
Bear, Blue Whale, Bush Dog, Giant Octopus, Ostrich, Komodo Dragon}. This set
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

