Propagating Uncertainty in Reinforcement Learning
via Wasserstein Barycenters

Alberto Maria Metelli∗
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

Amarildo Likmeta∗
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

Marcello Restelli
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy

albertomaria.metelli@polimi.it

amarildo.likmeta@polimi.it

marcello.restelli@polimi.it

Abstract
How does the uncertainty of the value function propagate when performing temporal difference learning? In this paper, we address this question by proposing a
Bayesian framework in which we employ approximate posterior distributions to
model the uncertainty of the value function and Wasserstein barycenters to propagate it across state-action pairs. Leveraging on these tools, we present an algorithm,
Wasserstein Q-Learning (WQL), starting in the tabular case and then, we show how
it can be extended to deal with continuous domains. Furthermore, we prove that,
under mild assumptions, a slight variation of WQL enjoys desirable theoretical
properties in the tabular setting. Finally, we present an experimental campaign
to show the effectiveness of WQL on finite problems, compared to several RL
algorithms, some of which are specifically designed for exploration, along with
some preliminary results on Atari games.

1

Introduction

Effectively balancing exploration and exploitation is a key challenge in Reinforcement Learning [RL,
43]. When an agent takes decisions under uncertainty, it faces the dilemma between exploiting the
information collected so far to execute what is believed to be the best action or to choose a possibly
suboptimal action to explore new portions of the environment and gather new information, leading
to more profitable behaviors in the future. Traditional exploration strategies, such as -greedy and
Boltzmann exploration [43], inject random noise into the action-selection process, i.e., the policy, to
guarantee that each action is tried often enough. Although these methods allow RL algorithms to learn
the optimal value function under mild assumptions [39], they are not efficient, since exploration is
random and not driven by confidence on the value function estimate. Therefore, they might converge
towards the optimal behavior after an exponential number of steps [24].
The exploration-exploitation dilemma has been extensively analyzed in the RL community, focusing
on the definition of proper indices for provably-efficient exploration and devising algorithms with
strong theoretical guarantees [25, 11, 21, 30]. Most of these algorithms are inherently model-based,
i.e., they need to maintain and update estimates of the environment dynamics and the reward function
during the learning process. For this reason, model-based methods are rather unsuited to problems
with large state spaces and inapplicable to continuous environments. Apart from rare exceptions [41],
the RL community has only recently focused on devising efficient model-free exploration strategies.
Some works have succeeded in obtaining provably-efficient algorithms [35, 31, 23]; whereas others
are more empirically-oriented [30, 29, 6].
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

