Landmark Ordinal Embedding

Nikhil Ghosh∗
UC Berkeley
nikhil_ghosh@berkeley.edu

Yuxin Chen∗
UChicago
chenyuxin@uchicago.edu

Yisong Yue
Caltech
yyue@caltech.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to learn a low-dimensional Euclidean representation from
a set of constraints of the form “item j is closer to item i than item k”. Existing
approaches for this “ordinal embedding” problem require expensive optimization
procedures, which cannot scale to handle increasingly larger datasets. To address
this issue, we propose a landmark-based strategy, which we call Landmark Ordinal
Embedding (LOE). Our approach trades off statistical efficiency for computational
efficiency by exploiting the low-dimensionality of the latent embedding. We derive
bounds establishing the statistical consistency of LOE under the popular BradleyTerry-Luce noise model. Through a rigorous analysis of the computational complexity, we show that LOE is significantly more efficient than conventional ordinal
embedding approaches as the number of items grows. We validate these characterizations empirically on both synthetic and real datasets. We also present a practical
approach that achieves the “best of both worlds”, by using LOE to warm-start
existing methods that are more statistically efficient but computationally expensive.

1

Introduction

Understanding similarities between data points is critical for numerous machine learning problems
such as clustering and information retrieval. However, we usually do not have a “good" notion of
similarity for our data a priori. For example, we may have a collection of images of objects, but
the natural Euclidean distance between the vectors of pixel values does not capture an interesting
notion of similarity. To obtain a more natural similarity measure, we can rely on (weak) supervision
from an oracle (e.g. a human expert). A popular form of weak supervision is ordinal feedback of the
form “item j is closer to item i than item k” [8]. Such feedback has been shown to be substantially
more reliable to elicit than cardinal feedback (i.e. how close item i is to item j), especially when
the feedback is subjective [11]. Furthermore, ordinal feedback arises in a broad range of real-world
domains, most notably in user interaction logs from digital systems such as search engines and
recommender systems [10, 15, 2, 24, 19, 17].
We thus study the ordinal embedding problem [18, 22, 14, 13, 21], which pertains finding lowdimensional representations that respect ordinal feedback. One major limitation with current state-ofthe-art ordinal embedding methods is their high computational complexity, which often makes them
unsuitable for large datasets. Given the dramatic growth in real-world dataset sizes, it is desirable to
develop methods that can scale computationally.
Our contribution. In this paper, we develop computationally efficient methods for ordinal embedding that are also statistically consistent (i.e. run on large datasets and converge to the “true” solution
with enough data). Our method draws inspiration from Landmark Multidimensional Scaling [7],
which approximately embeds points given distances to a set of “landmark” points. We adapt this
technique to the ordinal feedback setting, by using results from ranking with pairwise comparisons
∗

Research done when Nikhil Ghosh and Yuxin Chen were at Caltech.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

