Graph Agreement Models
for Semi-Supervised Learning

Otilia Stretcu‡∗, Krishnamurthy Viswanathan† , Dana Movshovitz-Attias† ,
Emmanouil Antonios Platanios‡ , Andrew Tomkins† , Sujith Ravi†
†
Google Research, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University
ostretcu@cs.cmu.edu,{kvis,danama}@google.com,
e.a.platanios@cs.cmu.edu,{tomkins,sravi}@google.com

Abstract
Graph-based algorithms are among the most successful paradigms for solving semisupervised learning tasks. Recent work on graph convolutional networks and neural
graph learning methods has successfully combined the expressiveness of neural
networks with graph structures. We propose a technique that, when applied to these
methods, achieves state-of-the-art results on semi-supervised learning datasets.
Traditional graph-based algorithms, such as label propagation, were designed with
the underlying assumption that the label of a node can be imputed from that of
the neighboring nodes. However, real-world graphs are either noisy or have edges
that do not correspond to label agreement. To address this, we propose Graph
Agreement Models (GAM), which introduces an auxiliary model that predicts the
probability of two nodes sharing the same label as a learned function of their
features. The agreement model is used when training a node classification model
by encouraging agreement only for the pairs of nodes it deems likely to have the
same label, thus guiding its parameters to better local optima. The classification
and agreement models are trained jointly in a co-training fashion. Moreover, GAM
can also be applied to any semi-supervised classification problem, by inducing a
graph whenever one is not provided. We demonstrate that our method achieves
a relative improvement of up to 72% for various node classification models, and
obtains state-of-the-art results on multiple established datasets.

1

Introduction

In many practical settings, it is often expensive, if not impossible, to obtain large amounts of labeled
data. Unlabeled data, on the other hand, is often readily available. Semi-supervised learning (SSL)
algorithms leverage the information contained in both the labeled and unlabeled samples, thus
often achieving better generalization capabilities than supervised learning algorithms. Graph-based
semi-supervised learning [43, 41] has been one of the most successful paradigms for solving SSL
problems when a graph connecting the samples is available. In this paradigm, both labeled and
unlabeled samples are represented as nodes in a graph. The edges of the graph can arise naturally
(e.g., links connecting Wikipedia pages, or citations between research papers), but oftentimes they
are constructed automatically using an appropriately chosen similarity metric. This similarity score
may also be used as a weight for each constructed edge (e.g., for a document classification problem,
Zhu et al. [43] set the edge weights to the cosine similarity between the tf-idf vectors of documents).
There exist several lines of work that leverage graph structure in different ways, from label propagation
methods [43, 41] to neural graph learning methods [7, 37] to graph convolution approaches [15, 35],
which we describe in more detail in Sections 2 and 5. Most of these methods rely on the assumption
that graph edges correspond in some way to label similarity (or agreement). For instance, label
propagation assumes that node labels are distributed according to a jointly Gaussian distribution
∗

This work was done during an internship at Google.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

