Adaptive Density Estimation for Generative Models

Thomas Lucas∗
Inria†
Cordelia Schmid
Inria†

Konstantin Shmelkov∗,‡
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
Karteek Alahari
Inria†

Jakob Verbeek
Inria†

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of generative models has seen tremendous progress over recent years, in particular due to generative adversarial networks (GANs), variational
autoencoders, and flow-based models. GANs have dramatically improved sample
quality, but suffer from two drawbacks: (i) they mode-drop, i.e., do not cover the
full support of the train data, and (ii) they do not allow for likelihood evaluations on
held-out data. In contrast, likelihood-based training encourages models to cover the
full support of the train data, but yields poorer samples. These mutual shortcomings
can in principle be addressed by training generative latent variable models in a
hybrid adversarial-likelihood manner. However, we show that commonly made
parametric assumptions create a conflict between them, making successful hybrid
models non trivial. As a solution, we propose to use deep invertible transformations
in the latent variable decoder. This approach allows for likelihood computations
in image space, is more efficient than fully invertible models, and can take full
advantage of adversarial training. We show that our model significantly improves
over existing hybrid models: offering GAN-like samples, IS and FID scores that
are competitive with fully adversarial models, and improved likelihood scores.

1

Introduction

Successful recent generative models of natural images can be divided into two broad families, which
are trained in fundamentally different ways. The first is trained using likelihood-based criteria,
which ensure that all training data points are well covered by the model. This category includes
variational autoencoders (VAEs) [25, 26, 39, 40], autoregressive models such as PixelCNNs [46, 53],
and flow-based models such as Real-NVP [9, 20, 24]. The second category is trained based on a
signal that measures to what extent (statistics of) samples from the model can be distinguished from
(statistics of) the training data, i.e., based on the quality of samples drawn from the model. This is the
case for generative adversarial networks (GANs) [2, 15, 22], and moment matching methods [28].
Despite tremendous recent progress, existing methods exhibit a number of drawbacks. Adversarially
trained models such as GANs do not provide a density function, which poses a fundamental problem
as it prevents assessment of how well the model fits held out and training data. Moreover, adversarial
models typically do not allow to infer the latent variables that underlie observed images. Finally,
adversarial models suffer from mode collapse [2], i.e., they do not cover the full support of the
training data. Likelihood-based model on the other hand are trained to put probability mass on all
elements of the training set, but over-generalise and produce samples of substantially inferior quality
as compared to adversarial models. The models with the best likelihood scores on held-out data
are autoregressive models [35], which suffer from the additional problem that they are extremely
∗

†
The authors contributed equally.
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000
‡
Grenoble, France.
Work done while at Inria.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

