Learning Compositional Neural Programs
with Recursive Tree Search and Planning

Thomas Pierrot
InstaDeep
t.pierrot@instadeep.com
Olivier Sigaud
Sorbonne Université
olivier.sigaud@upmc.fr
David Kas
InstaDeep
d.kas@instadeep.com

Guillaume Ligner
InstaDeep
g.ligner@instadeep.com
Nicolas Perrin
CNRS, Sorbonne Université
perrin@isir.upmc.fr
Karim Beguir
InstaDeep
kb@instadeep.com

Scott Reed
DeepMind
reedscot@google.com
Alexandre Laterre
InstaDeep
a.laterre@instadeep.com

Nando de Freitas
DeepMind
nandodefreitas@google.com

Abstract
We propose a novel reinforcement learning algorithm, AlphaNPI, that incorporates the strengths of Neural Programmer-Interpreters (NPI) and AlphaZero. NPI
contributes structural biases in the form of modularity, hierarchy and recursion,
which are helpful to reduce sample complexity, improve generalization and increase interpretability. AlphaZero contributes powerful neural network guided
search algorithms, which we augment with recursion. AlphaNPI only assumes
a hierarchical program specification with sparse rewards: 1 when the program
execution satisfies the specification, and 0 otherwise. This specification enables
us to overcome the need for strong supervision in the form of execution traces
and consequently train NPI models effectively with reinforcement learning. The
experiments show that AlphaNPI can sort as well as previous strongly supervised
NPI variants. The AlphaNPI agent is also trained on a Tower of Hanoi puzzle with
two disks and is shown to generalize to puzzles with an arbitrary number of disks.
The experiments also show that when deploying our neural network policies, it is
advantageous to do planning with guided Monte Carlo tree search.

1

Introduction

Learning a wide variety of skills, which can be reused and repurposed to learn more complex skills
or to solve new problems, is one of the central challenges of artificial intelligence (AI). As argued in
Bengio et al. [2019], beyond achieving good generalization when both the training and test data come
from the same distribution, we want knowledge acquired in one setting to transfer to other settings
with different but possibly related distributions.
Modularity is a powerful inductive bias for achieving this goal with neural networks [Parascandolo
et al., 2018, Bengio et al., 2019]. Here, we focus on a particular modular representation known as
Neural Programmer-Interpreters (NPI) [Reed and de Freitas, 2016]. The NPI architecture consists
of a library of learned program embeddings that can be recomposed to solve different tasks, a core
recurrent neural network that learns to interpret arbitrary programs, and domain-specific encoders
for different environments. NPI achieves impressive multi-task results, with strong improvements in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

