Surround Modulation: A Bio-inspired Connectivity
Structure for Convolutional Neural Networks
Hosein Hasani
Department of Electrical Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
hasani.hosein@ee.sharif.edu
Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah
Department of Computer Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
soleymani@sharif.edu

Hamid Aghajan
Department of Electrical Engineering
Sharif University of Technology
aghajan@ee.sharif.edu

Abstract
Numerous neurophysiological studies have revealed that a large number of the
primary visual cortex neurons operate in a regime called surround modulation.
Surround modulation has a substantial effect on various perceptual tasks, and it
also plays a crucial role in the efficient neural coding of the visual cortex. Inspired
by the notion of surround modulation, we designed new excitatory-inhibitory
connections between a unit and its surrounding units in the convolutional neural
network (CNN) to achieve a more biologically plausible network. Our experiments
show that this simple mechanism can considerably improve both the performance
and training speed of traditional CNNs in visual tasks. We further explore additional
outcomes of the proposed structure. We first evaluate the model under several visual
challenges, such as the presence of clutter or change in lighting conditions and show
its superior generalization capability in handling these challenging situations. We
then study possible changes in the statistics of neural activities such as sparsity and
decorrelation and provide further insight into the underlying efficiencies of surround
modulation. Experimental results show that importing surround modulation into the
convolutional layers ensues various effects analogous to those derived by surround
modulation in the visual cortex.

1

Introduction

The classical receptive field of a neuron is determined by the region of sensory space where stimuli
elicit neural responses. In a sizable population of neurons in the visual cortex, the classical receptive
field is surrounded by the nonclassical receptive field, through which the same stimulus can influence
the neural response away from that of a mere classical receptive field response [20, 2]. This effect
is often referred to as surround or contextual modulation and has been frequently reported in the
mammalian visual cortex [20, 2, 29]. The strength of suppression depends on the disparity between
the visual features of the stimuli in the classical and nonclassical receptive fields. Various visual
features can induce surround suppression, such as spatial frequency, orientation, color, direction of
motion, and luminance [2, 29, 59, 53]. Surround modulation has a maximum effect when the center
and surround carry similar features. Thus, neurons become more sensitive to the contrast and less
sensitive to constant features, and this may enhance the visual perception of objects.
The neural mechanism behind surround modulation is a matter of debate in the literature. However,
in general, three types of connections have been identified to be involved in the modulation of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

