Kernelized Bayesian Softmax for Text Generation

Ning Miao

Hao Zhou Chengqi Zhao Wenxian Shi Lei Li
ByteDance AI lab
{miaoning,zhouhao.nlp,zhaochengqi.d,shiwenxian,lileilab}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Neural models for text generation require a softmax layer with proper word embeddings during the decoding phase. Most existing approaches adopt single point
embedding for each word. However, a word may have multiple senses according
to different context, some of which might be distinct. In this paper, we propose
KerBS, a novel approach for learning better embeddings for text generation. KerBS
embodies two advantages: a) it employs a Bayesian composition of embeddings
for words with multiple senses; b) it is adaptive to semantic variances of words and
robust to rare sentence context by imposing learned kernels to capture the closeness
of words (senses) in the embedding space. Empirical studies show that KerBS
significantly boosts the performance of several text generation tasks.

1

Introduction

Text generation has been significantly improved with deep learning approaches in tasks such as
language modeling [Bengio et al., 2003, Mikolov et al., 2010], machine translation [Sutskever et al.,
2014, Bahdanau et al., 2015, Vaswani et al., 2017], and dialog generation [Sordoni et al., 2015]. All
these models include a softmax final layer to yield words. The softmax layer takes a context state (h)
from an upstream network such as RNN cells as the input, and transforms h into the word probability
with a linear projection (W · h) and an exponential activation. Each row of W can be viewed as the
embedding of a word. Essentially, softmax conducts embedding matching with inner-product scoring
between a calculated context vector h and word embeddings W in the vocabulary.
The above commonly adopted setting for softmax imposes a strong hypothesis on the embedding
space — it assumes that each word corresponds to a single vector and the context vector h from the
decoding network must be indiscriminately close to the desired word embedding vector in certain
distance metric. We discover that such an assumption does not coincide with practical cases. Fig. 1
visualizes examples of the context vectors for utterances containing the examined words, calculated
from the BERT model Devlin et al. [2019]. We make three interesting observations. a) Multi-sense:
Not every word’s context vectors form a single cluster. There are words with multiple clusters
(Fig. 1b). b) Varying-variance: The variances of context vectors vary significantly across clusters.
Some words correspond to smaller variances while others to larger variances (Fig. 1c). c) Robustness:
There are outliers in the context space (Fig. 1b). These observations explain the ineffectiveness during
training with the traditional softmax. The traditional way brings word embedding W ill-centered
with all context vectors of the same word – even though they might belong to multiple clusters. At
the same time, the variances of different words are completely ignored in the plain softmax with
inner-product as the similarity score. It is also vulnerable to outliers since a single anomally would
lead the word embedding to be far from the main cluster. In short, the softmax layer doesn’t have
sufficient expressiveness capacity.
Yang et al. [2018] propose Mixture-of-Softmax (MoS) to enhance the expressiveness of softmax. It
replaces a single softmax layer with a weighted average of M softmax layers. However, all words
share the same fixed number of components M and averaging weights, which heavily restrict MoS’s
capacity. Furthermore, the variances of context vectors are not taken into the consideration.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

