Multi-Criteria Dimensionality Reduction with
Applications to Fairness
Uthaipon (Tao) Tantipongpipat⇤ †
Mohit Singh⇤ †

Jamie Morgenstern⇤

Samira Samadi ⇤ ‡
Santosh Vempala⇤ ‡

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction is a classical technique widely used for data analysis.
One foundational instantiation is Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which
minimizes the average reconstruction error. In this paper, we introduce the multicriteria dimensionality reduction problem where we are given multiple objectives
that need to be optimized simultaneously. As an application, our model captures
several fairness criteria for dimensionality reduction such as the Fair-PCA problem
introduced by Samadi et al. [2018] and the Nash Social Welfare (NSW) problem.
In the Fair-PCA problem, the input data is divided into k groups, and the goal is to
find a single d-dimensional representation for all groups for which the maximum
reconstruction error of any one group is minimized. In NSW the goal is to maximize
the product of the individual variances of the groups achieved by the common
low-dimensional space.
Our main result is an exact polynomial-time algorithm for the two-criteria dimensionality reduction problem when the two criteria are increasing concave functions.
As an application of this result, we obtain a polynomial time algorithm for FairPCA for k = 2 groups, resolving an open problem of Samadi et al. [2018], and
a polynomial time algorithm for NSW objective for k = 2 groups. We also give
approximation algorithms for k > 2. Our technical contribution in the above results
is to prove new low-rank properties of extreme point solutions to semi-definite
programs. We conclude with experiments indicating the effectiveness of algorithms
based on extreme point solutions of semi-definite programs on several real-world
datasets.

1

Introduction

Dimensionality reduction is the process of choosing a low-dimensional representation of a large,
high-dimensional data set. It is a core primitive for modern machine learning and is being used
in image processing, biomedical research, time series analysis, etc. Dimensionality reduction can
be used during the preprocessing of the data to reduce the computational burden as well as at the
final stages of data analysis to facilitate data summarization and data visualization [Raychaudhuri
et al., 1999; Iezzoni and Pritts, 1991]. Among the most ubiquitous and effective of dimensionality
reduction techniques in practice are Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [Pearson, 1901; Jolliffe,
1986; Hotelling, 1933], multidimensional scaling [Kruskal, 1964], Isomap [Tenenbaum et al., 2000],
locally linear embedding [Roweis and Saul, 2000], and t-SNE [Maaten and Hinton, 2008].
⇤

Georgia Institute of Technology.
{tao,ssamadi6}@gatech.edu,
jamiemmt.cs@gatech.edu, vempala@cc.gatech.edu
†
Supported by NSF-AF:1910423 and NSF-AF:1717947.
‡
Supported in part by NSF awards CCF-1563838 and CCF-1717349.

mohit.singh@isye.gatech.edu,

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

