Self-supervised GAN: Analysis and Improvement
with Multi-class Minimax Game
Ngoc-Trung Tran, Viet-Hung Tran, Ngoc-Bao Nguyen, Linxiao Yang, Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
Corresponding author: Ngai-Man Cheung <ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg>

Abstract
Self-supervised (SS) learning is a powerful approach for representation learning
using unlabeled data. Recently, it has been applied to Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) training. Specifically, SS tasks were proposed to address the
catastrophic forgetting issue in the GAN discriminator. In this work, we perform
an in-depth analysis to understand how SS tasks interact with learning of generator. From the analysis, we identify issues of SS tasks which allow a severely
mode-collapsed generator to excel the SS tasks. To address the issues, we propose
new SS tasks based on a multi-class minimax game. The competition between our
proposed SS tasks in the game encourages the generator to learn the data distribution and generate diverse samples. We provide both theoretical and empirical
analysis to support that our proposed SS tasks have better convergence property.
We conduct experiments to incorporate our proposed SS tasks into two different
GAN baseline models. Our approach establishes state-of-the-art FID scores on
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, STL-10, CelebA, Imagenet 32 × 32 and Stacked-MNIST
datasets, outperforming existing works by considerable margins in some cases. Our
unconditional GAN model approaches performance of conditional GAN without
using labeled data. Our code: https://github.com/tntrung/msgan

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). GAN [12] have become one of the most important
methods to learn generative models. GAN has shown remarkable results in various tasks, such as:
image generation [17, 2, 18], image transformation [16, 53], super-resolution [23], text to image
[38, 50], anomaly detection [41, 26]. The idea behind GAN is the mini-max game. It uses a binary
classifier, so-called the discriminator, to distinguish the data (real) versus generated (fake) samples.
The generator of GAN is trained to confuse the discriminator to classify the generated samples as the
real ones. By having the generator and discriminator competing with each other in this adversarial
process, they are able to improve themselves. The end goal is to have the generator capturing the
data distribution. Although considerable improvement has been made for GAN under the conditional
settings [34, 49, 2], i.e., using ground-truth labels to support the learning, it is still very challenging
with unconditional setup. Fundamentally, using only a single signal (real/fake) to guide the generator
to learn the high-dimensional, complex data distribution is very challenging [11, 1, 3, 5, 30, 40].
Self-supervised Learning. Self-supervised learning is an active research area [6, 35, 51, 52, 33, 10].
Self-supervised learning is a paradigm of unsupervised learning. Self-supervised methods encourage
the classifier to learn better feature representation with pseudo-labels. In particular, these methods
propose to learn image feature by training the model to recognize some geometric transformation
that is applied to the image which the model receives as the input. A simple-yet-powerful method
proposed in [10] is to use image rotations by 0, 90, 180, 270 degrees as the geometric transformation.
The model is trained with the 4-way classification task of recognizing one of the four rotations. This
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

