Computational Separations between Sampling and
Optimization

Kunal Talwar
Google Brain
Mountain View, CA
kunal@google.com

Abstract
Two commonly arising computational tasks in Bayesian learning are Optimization
(Maximum A Posteriori estimation) and Sampling (from the posterior distribution). In the convex case these two problems are efficiently reducible to each
other. Recent work [Ma et al., 2019] shows that in the non-convex case, sampling
can sometimes be provably faster. We present a simpler and stronger separation.
We then compare sampling and optimization in more detail and show that they
are provably incomparable: there are families of continuous functions for which
optimization is easy but sampling is NP-hard, and vice versa. Further, we show
function families that exhibit a sharp phase transition in the computational complexity of sampling, as one varies the natural temperature parameter. Our results
draw on a connection to analogous separations in the discrete setting which are
well-studied.

1

Introduction

Given a a compact set X ⊆ Rd and function f : X → R, one can define two natural problems:
Optimize(f, X , ε) : Find x ∈ X such that f (x) ≤ f (x0 ) + ε for all x0 ∈ X .
Sample(f, X , η) : Sample from a distribution on X that is η-close to µ? (x) ∝ exp(−f (x)).
These problems arise naturally in machine learning settings. When f is the negative log likelihood
function of a posterior distribution, the optimization problem corresponds to the Maximum A
Posteriori (MAP) estimate, whereas the Sampling problem gives us a sample from the posterior. In
this work we are interested in the computational complexities of these tasks for specific families of
functions.
When f and X are both convex, these two problems have a deep connection (see e.g. Lovasz and
Vempala [2006]) and are efficiently reducible to each other in a very general setting. There has been
considerable interest in both these problems in the non-convex setting. Given that in practice, we
are often able to practically optimize certain non-convex loss functions, it would be appealing to
extend this equivalence beyond the convex case. If sampling could be reduced to optimization for our
function of interest (e.g. differentiable Lipschitz functions), that might allow us to design sampling
algorithms for the function that are usually efficient in practice. Ma et al. [2019] recently showed
that in the case when f is not necessarily convex (and X = Rd ), these problems are not equivalent.
They exhibit a family of continuous, differentiable functions for which approximate sampling can be
done efficiently, but where approximate optimization requires exponential time (in an oracle model à
la Nemirovsky and Yudin [1983]). In this work, we study the relationship of these two problems in
more detail.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

