Learning elementary structures
for 3D shape generation and matching
∗

Theo Deprelle1 , Thibault Groueix1 , Matthew Fisher2 , Vladimir G. Kim2 ,
Bryan C. Russell2 , Mathieu Aubry1
1
LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts, UPE, 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
We propose to represent shapes as the deformation and combination of learnable
elementary 3D structures, which are primitives resulting from training over a
collection of shapes. We demonstrate that the learned elementary 3D structures
lead to clear improvements in 3D shape generation and matching. More precisely,
we present two complementary approaches for learning elementary structures: (i)
patch deformation learning and (ii) point translation learning. Both approaches can
be extended to abstract structures of higher dimensions for improved results. We
evaluate our method on two tasks: reconstructing ShapeNet objects and estimating
dense correspondences between human scans (FAUST inter challenge). We show
16% improvement over surface deformation approaches for shape reconstruction
and outperform FAUST inter and intra challenge state of the art by 2% and 7%,
respectively.

1

Introduction

Current surface-parametric approaches for generating a surface or aligning two surfaces, such as
AtlasNet [11] and 3D-CODED [10], rely on alignment of one or more shape primitives to a target
shape. The shape primitives can be a set of patches or a sphere, as in AtlasNet, or a human template
shape, as in 3D-CODED. These approaches could easily be extended to other parametric shapes, such
as blocks [22], generalized cylinders [4], or modern shape abstractions [16, 26, 28]. While surfaceparametric approaches have achieved state-of-the-art results for (single-view) shape reconstruction
[11] and 3D shape correspondences [10], they rely on hand-chosen parametric shape primitives tuned
for the target shape collection and task. In this paper, we ask – what is the right set of primitives to
represent a collection of diverse shapes?
To address this question, we seek to go beyond manually choosing shape primitives and automatically
learn what we call “learnable elementary structures” from a shape collection, which can be used for
shape reconstruction and matching. The ability to automatically learn elementary structures allows
the shape generator to find a better set of primitives for a shape collection and target task. We find
that learned elementary structures correspond to recurrent parts among 3D objects. For example, in
Figure 1, we show automatically learned elementary structures roughly corresponding to the tail,
wing, and reactor of an airplane. Moreover, we find that learning the elementary structures leads to
an improvement in shape reconstruction and correspondence accuracy.
We explore two approaches for learning elementary structures – patch deformation learning and point
translation learning. For patch deformation learning, similar to AtlasNet [11], we start from a surface
element, such as a 2D square, and deform it into the learned structure using a multi-layer perceptron
[23]. This approach has the advantage that the learned elementary structures are continuous surfaces.
Its key difference with respect to AtlasNet is that the deformations, and thus the elementary structures,
are common to all shapes. For point translation learning, starting from a fixed set of points, we
optimize their position to reconstruct the target objects. The drawback of this approach is that it does
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

