Correlation Priors for Reinforcement Learning
Bastian Alt⇤
Adrian Šošić⇤
Heinz Koeppl
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
Technische Universität Darmstadt
{bastian.alt, adrian.sosic, heinz.koeppl}@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Many decision-making problems naturally exhibit pronounced structures inherited
from the characteristics of the underlying environment. In a Markov decision process model, for example, two distinct states can have inherently related semantics
or encode resembling physical state configurations. This often implies locally correlated transition dynamics among the states. In order to complete a certain task in
such environments, the operating agent usually needs to execute a series of temporally and spatially correlated actions. Though there exists a variety of approaches to
capture these correlations in continuous state-action domains, a principled solution
for discrete environments is missing. In this work, we present a Bayesian learning framework based on Pólya-Gamma augmentation that enables an analogous
reasoning in such cases. We demonstrate the framework on a number of common
decision-making related problems, such as imitation learning, subgoal extraction,
system identification and Bayesian reinforcement learning. By explicitly modeling
the underlying correlation structures of these problems, the proposed approach
yields superior predictive performance compared to correlation-agnostic models,
even when trained on data sets that are an order of magnitude smaller in size.

1

Introduction

Correlations arise naturally in many aspects of decision-making. The reason for this phenomenon is
that decision-making problems often exhibit pronounced structures, which substantially influence
the strategies of an agent. Examples of correlations are even found in stateless decision-making
problems, such as multi-armed bandits, where prominent patterns in the reward mechanisms of
different arms can translate into correlated action choices of the operating agent [7, 9]. However,
these statistical relationships become more pronounced in the case of contextual bandits, where
effective decision-making strategies not only exhibit temporal correlation but also take into account
the state context at each time point, introducing a second source of correlation [12].
In more general decision-making models, such as Markov decision processes (MDPs), the agent can
directly affect the state of the environment through its action choices. The effects caused by these
actions often share common patterns between different states of the process, e.g., because the states
have inherently related semantics or encode similar physical state configurations of the underlying
system. Examples of this general principle are omnipresent in all disciplines and range from robotics,
where similar actuator outputs result in similar kinematic responses for similar states of the robot’s
joints, to networking applications, where the servicing of a particular queue affects the surrounding
network state (Section 4.3.3). The common consequence is that the structures of the environment are
usually reflected in the decisions of the operating agent, who needs to execute a series of temporally
and spatially correlated actions in order to complete a certain task. This is particularly true when two or
more agents interact with each other in the same environment and need coordinate their behavior [2].
⇤

The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

