PHYRE: A New Benchmark for Physical Reasoning

Anton Bakhtin
Laurens van der Maaten
Justin Johnson
Laura Gustafson
Ross Girshick
Facebook AI Research
{yolo,lvdmaaten,jcjohns,lgustafson,rbg}@fb.com

Abstract
Understanding and reasoning about physics is an important ability of intelligent
agents. We develop the PHYRE benchmark for physical reasoning that contains
a set of simple classical mechanics puzzles in a 2D physical environment. The
benchmark is designed to encourage the development of learning algorithms that
are sample-efficient and generalize well across puzzles. We test several modern
learning algorithms on PHYRE and find that these algorithms fall short in solving
the puzzles efficiently. We expect that PHYRE will encourage the development of
novel sample-efficient agents that learn efficient but useful models of physics. For
code and to play PHYRE for yourself, please visit https://player.phyre.ai.

1

Introduction

Understanding and reasoning about physics is a hallmark of intelligence [9]. Humans can make
sense of novel physical situations by reasoning about abstract concepts like gravity, mass, inertia, and
friction. For this reason, testing the ability to solve novel physics puzzles has been used to measure
the reasoning abilities of human children [7, 53] as well as non-human animals such as capuchin
monkeys [52, 54], chimpanzees [40], crows [19, 48], finches [49], and rooks [5]. A key aspect of
physical intelligence is generalization: after learning to solve a physics puzzle, an intelligent agent
should be able to generalize that knowledge and quickly solve related tasks. Robust generalization
may set humans apart from other species—prior research showed that four species of non-human
primates can learn to solve novel physics puzzles, but struggle to generalize to related tasks [30].
We want to develop artificial systems that can reason and generalize about physics as well as
people. However, we hypothesize that in the realm of physical reasoning, present-day machine
learning methods will struggle to quickly solve new puzzles. We anticipate that more effective
methods may involve fundamental improvements to sample-efficient learning and the ability to learn
computationally efficient but useful models of physics.
Towards this goal, we have developed the PHYRE (PHYsical REasoning) benchmark. PHYRE
provides a set of physics puzzles in a simulated 2D world. Each puzzle has a goal state (e.g., “make
the green ball touch the blue wall”) and an initial state in which the goal is not satisfied; see Figure 1.
A puzzle can be solved by placing one or more new bodies in the environment such that when the
physical simulation is run the goal is satisfied. An agent playing this game must solve previously
unseen puzzles in as few attempts as possible. PHYRE was designed to satisfy three main goals:
• Focus on physical reasoning: Tasks are as simple as possible but still require nontrivial physical
reasoning. Scenes are built only from balls and rectangular bars. Dynamics are deterministic, with
only collision, gravity, and friction. Goals are symbolic, so natural language is not required.
• Focus on generalization: After training on one set of tasks, we should expect an effective agent
to solve new, previously unseen puzzles. The benchmark is structured such that puzzles are split
into training tasks and evaluation tasks, and involves two different degrees of generalization.
• Focus on sample-efficiency: Our evaluation rewards solving tasks with as few attempts as possible.
Methods that master a task only after thousands of attempts will not perform well.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

