Optimal Statistical Rates for Decentralised
Non-Parametric Regression with Linear Speed-Up

Dominic Richards
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB
dominic.richards@spc.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
24-29 St Giles’, Oxford, OX1 3LB
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We analyse the learning performance of Distributed Gradient Descent in the context
of multi-agent decentralised non-parametric regression with the square loss function
when i.i.d. samples are assigned to agents. We show that if agents hold sufficiently
many samples with respect to the network size, then Distributed Gradient Descent
achieves optimal statistical rates with a number of iterations that scales, up to a
threshold, with the inverse of the spectral gap of the gossip matrix divided by the
number of samples owned by each agent raised to a problem-dependent power.
The presence of the threshold comes from statistics. It encodes the existence of a
“big data” regime where the number of required iterations does not depend on the
network topology. In this regime, Distributed Gradient Descent achieves optimal
statistical rates with the same order of iterations as gradient descent run with all the
samples in the network. Provided the communication delay is sufficiently small,
the distributed protocol yields a linear speed-up in runtime compared to the singlemachine protocol. This is in contrast to decentralised optimisation algorithms that
do not exploit statistics and only yield a linear speed-up in graphs where the spectral
gap is bounded away from zero. Our results exploit the statistical concentration
of quantities held by agents and shed new light on the interplay between statistics
and communication in decentralised methods. Bounds are given in the standard
non-parametric setting with source/capacity assumptions.

1

Introduction

In machine learning a canonical goal is to use training data sampled independently from an unknown
distribution to fit a model that performs well on unseen data from the same distribution. With a loss
function measuring the performance of a model on a data point, a common approach is to find a
model that minimises the average loss on the training data with some form of explicit regularisation
to control model complexity and avoid overfitting. Due to the increasingly large size of datasets
and high model complexity, direct minimisation of the regularised problem is posing more and
more computational challenges. This has led to growing interest in approaches that improve models
incrementally using gradient descent methods [8], where model complexity is controlled through
forms of implicit/algorithmic regularisation such as early stopping and step-size tuning [57, 58, 27].
The growth in the size of modern datasets has also meant that the coordination of multiple machines
is often required to fit machine learning models. In the centralised server-clients setup, a single
machine (server) is responsible to aggregate and disseminate information to other machines (clients)
in what is an effective star topology. In some settings, such as ad-hoc wireless and peer-to-peer
networks, network instability, bandwidth limitation and privacy concerns make centralised approaches
less feasible. This has motivated research into scalable methods that can avoid the bottleneck
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

