Can SGD Learn Recurrent Neural Networks
with Provable Generalization?∗
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) are among the most popular models in sequential data analysis. Yet, in the foundational PAC learning language, what concept class can it learn? Moreover, how can the same recurrent unit simultaneously
learn functions from different input tokens to different output tokens, without affecting each other? Existing generalization bounds for RNN scale exponentially
with the input length, significantly limiting their practical implications.
In this paper, we show using the vanilla stochastic gradient descent (SGD), RNN
can actually learn some notable concept class efficiently, meaning that both time
and sample complexity scale polynomially in the input length (or almost polynomially, depending on the concept). This concept class at least includes functions
where each output token is generated from inputs of earlier tokens using a smooth
two-layer neural network.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) is one of the most popular models in sequential data analysis [25]. When processing an input sequence, RNNs repeatedly and sequentially apply the same
operation to each input token. The recurrent structure of RNNs allows it to capture the dependencies among different tokens inside each sequence, which is empirically shown to be effective in
many applications such as natural language processing [28], speech recognition [12] and so on.
The recurrent structure in RNNs shows great power in practice, however, it also imposes great
challenge in theory. Until now, RNNs remains to be one of the least theoretical understood models
in deep learning. Many fundamental open questions are still largely unsolved in RNNs, including
1. (Optimization). When can RNNs be trained efficiently?
2. (Generalization). When do the results learned by RNNs generalize to test data?
Question 1 is technically challenging due to the notorious question of vanishing/exploding gradients,
and the non-convexity of the training objective induced by non-linear activation functions.
Question 2 requires even deeper understanding of RNNs. For example, in natural language processing, “Juventus beats Bacerlona” and “Bacerlona beats Juventus” have completely different meanings. How can the same operation in RNN encode a different rule for “Juventus” at token 1 vs.
“Juventus” at token 3, instead of merely memorizing each training example?
There have been some recent progress towards obtaining more principled understandings of these
questions. On the optimization side, Hardt, Ma, and Recht [13] show that over-parameterization
can help in the training process of a linear dynamic system, which is a special case of RNNs with
linear activation functions. Allen-Zhu, Li, and Song [2] show that over-parameterization also helps
in training RNNs with ReLU activations. This latter result gives no generalization guarantee.
∗

Full version and future updates can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.01028.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

