Sequential Neural Processes

Gautam Singh∗
Rutgers University
singh.gautam@rutgers.edu

Jaesik Yoon∗
SAP
jaesik.yoon01@sap.com

Youngsung Son
ETRI
ysson@etri.re.kr

Sungjin Ahn
Rutgers University
sungjin.ahn@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Neural Processes combine the strengths of neural networks and Gaussian processes to achieve both flexible learning and fast prediction in stochastic processes.
However, a large class of problems comprises underlying temporal dependency
structures in a sequence of stochastic processes that Neural Processes (NP) do not
explicitly consider. In this paper, we propose Sequential Neural Processes (SNP)
which incorporates a temporal state-transition model of stochastic processes and
thus extends its modeling capabilities to dynamic stochastic processes. In applying
SNP to dynamic 3D scene modeling, we introduce the Temporal Generative Query
Networks. To our knowledge, this is the first 4D model that can deal with the temporal dynamics of 3D scenes. In experiments, we evaluate the proposed methods
in dynamic (non-stationary) regression and 4D scene inference and rendering.

1

Introduction

Neural networks consume all training data and computation through a costly training phase to engrave
a single function into its weights. While this makes us entertain fast prediction on the learned function,
under this rigid regime changing the target function means costly retraining of the network. This lack
of flexibility thus plays as a major obstacle in tasks such as meta-learning and continual learning where
the function needs to be changed over time or on-demand. Gaussian processes (GP) do not suffer from
this problem. Conditioning on observations, it directly performs inference on the target stochastic
process. Consequently, Gaussian processes show the opposite properties to neural networks: it is
flexible in making predictions because of its non-parametric nature, but this flexibility comes at a
cost of having slow prediction. GPs can also capture the uncertainty on the estimated function.
Neural Processes (NP) (Garnelo et al., 2018b) are a new class of methods that combine the strengths
of both worlds. By taking the meta-learning framework, Neural Processes learn to learn a stochastic
process quickly from observations while experiencing multiple tasks of stochastic process modeling.
Thus, in Neural Processes, unlike typical neural networks, learning a function is fast and uncertaintyaware while, unlike Gaussian processes, prediction at test time is still efficient.
An important aspect for which Neural Processes can be extended is that in many cases, certain
temporal dynamics underlies in a sequence of stochastic processes. This covers a broad range of
problems from learning RL agents being exposed to increasingly more challenging tasks to modeling
dynamic 3D scenes. For instance, Eslami et al. (2018) proposed a variant of Neural Processes, called
the Generative Query Networks (GQN), to learn representation and rendering of 3D scenes. Although
this was successful in modeling static scenes like fixed objects in a room, we argue that to handle
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

