Learning to Propagate for Graph Meta-Learning

Lu Liu1 , Tianyi Zhou2 , Guodong Long1 , Jing Jiang1 , Chengqi Zhang1
1
Center for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
2
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
lu.liu-10@student.uts.edu.au, tianyizh@uw.edu, guodong.long@uts.edu.au
jing.jiang@uts.edu.au, chengqi.zhang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Meta-learning extracts the common knowledge from learning different tasks and
uses it for unseen tasks. It can significantly improve tasks that suffer from insufficient training data, e.g., few-shot learning. In most meta-learning methods, tasks
are implicitly related by sharing parameters or optimizer. In this paper, we show
that a meta-learner that explicitly relates tasks on a graph describing the relations of
their output dimensions (e.g., classes) can significantly improve few-shot learning.
The graph’s structure is usually free or cheap to obtain but has rarely been explored
in previous works. We develop a novel meta-learner of this type for prototype
based classification, in which a prototype is generated for each class, such that
the nearest neighbor search among the prototypes produces an accurate classification. The meta-learner, called “Gated Propagation Network (GPN)”, learns
to propagate messages between prototypes of different classes on the graph, so
that learning the prototype of each class benefits from the data of other related
classes. In GPN, an attention mechanism aggregates messages from neighboring
classes of each class, with a gate choosing between the aggregated message and
the message from the class itself. We train GPN on a sequence of tasks from
many-shot to few-shot generated by subgraph sampling. During training, it is
able to reuse and update previously achieved prototypes from the memory in a
life-long learning cycle. In experiments, under different training-test discrepancy
and test task generation settings, GPN outperforms recent meta-learning methods
on two benchmark datasets. The code of GPN and dataset generation is available
at https://github.com/liulu112601/Gated-Propagation-Net.

1

Introduction

The success of machine learning (ML) during the past decade has relied heavily on the rapid growth
of computational power, new techniques training larger and more representative neural networks, and
critically, the availability of enormous amounts of annotated data. However, new challenges have
arisen with the move from cloud computing to edge computing and Internet of Things (IoT), and
demands for customized models and local data privacy are increasing, which raise the question: how
can a powerful model be trained for a specific user using only a limited number of local data? Metalearning, or “learning to learn”, can address this few-shot challenge by training a shared meta-learner
model on top of distinct learner models for implicitly related tasks. The meta-learner aims to extract
the common knowledge of learning different tasks and adapt it to unseen tasks in order to accelerate
their learning process and mitigate their lack of training data. Intuitively, it allows new learning tasks
to leverage the “experiences” from the learned tasks via the meta-learner, though these tasks do not
directly share data or targets.
Meta-learning methods have demonstrated clear advantages on few-shot learning problems in recent
years. The form of a meta-learner model can be a similarity metric (for K-nearest neighbor (KNN)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

