Statistical bounds for entropic optimal transport:
sample complexity and the central limit theorem

Gonzalo Mena
Harvard

Jonathan Niles-Weed
NYU

Abstract
We prove several fundamental statistical bounds for entropic OT with the squared
Euclidean cost between subgaussian probability measures in arbitrary dimension.
First, through a new sample complexity result we establish the rate of convergence
of entropic OT for empirical measures. Our analysis improves exponentially on
the bound of Genevay et al. (2019) and extends their work to unbounded measures.
Second, we establish a central limit theorem for entropic OT, based on techniques
developed by Del Barrio and Loubes (2019). Previously, such a result was only
known for finite metric spaces. As an application of our results, we develop and
analyze a new technique for estimating the entropy of a random variable corrupted
by gaussian noise.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport is an increasingly popular tool for the analysis of large data sets in high dimension,
with applications in domain adaptation (Courty et al., 2014, 2017), image recognition (Li et al.,
2013; Rubner et al., 2000; Sandler and Lindenbaum, 2011), and word embedding (Alvarez-Melis and
Jaakkola, 2018; Grave et al., 2018). Its flexibility and simplicity have made it an attractive choice for
practitioners and theorists alike, and its ubiquity as a machine learning tool continues to grow (see,
e.g., Peyré et al., 2019; Kolouri et al., 2017, for surveys).
Much of the recent interest in optimal transport has been driven by algorithmic advances, chief
among them the popularization of entropic regularization as a tool of solving large-scale OT problems
quickly (Cuturi, 2013). Not only has this proposal been shown to yield near-linear-time algorithms for
the original optimal transport problem (Altschuler et al., 2017), but it also appears to possess useful
statistical properties which make it an attractive choice for machine learning applications (Rigollet and
Weed, 2018; Genevay et al., 2017; Schiebinger et al., 2019; Montavon et al., 2016). For instance, in a
recent breakthrough work, Genevay et al. (2019) established that even though the empirical version of
standard OT suffers from the “curse of dimensionality” √
(see, e.g. Dudley, 1969), the empirical version
of entropic OT always converges at the parametric 1/ n rate for compactly supported probability
measures. This result suggests that entropic OT may be significantly more useful than unregularized
OT for inference tasks when the dimension is large. However, obtaining rigorous guarantees for
the performance of entropic OT in practice requires a more thorough understanding of its statistical
behavior.
1.1

Summary of contributions

We prove new results on the relation between the population and empirical version of the entropic
cost, that is, between S(P, Q) and S(Pn , Qn ) (defined in Section 1.2, below). These results give
the first characterization of the large-sample behavior of entropic OT for unbounded probability
measures in arbitrary dimension. Specifically, we obtain: (i) New sample complexity bounds on
E|S(P, Q) − S(Pn , Qn )|: first, we improve on the results of Genevay et al. (2019) by an exponential
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

