Variational Mixture-of-Experts Autoencoders
for Multi-Modal Deep Generative Models

Yuge Shi∗
N. Siddharth∗
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

Brooks Paige
Alan Turing Institute &
University of Cambridge

{yshi, nsid}@robots.ox.ac.uk

bpaige@turing.ac.uk

Philip H.S. Torr
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning generative models that span multiple data modalities, such as vision and language, is
often motivated by the desire to learn more useful, generalisable representations that faithfully
capture common underlying factors between the modalities. In this work, we characterise successful learning of such models as the fulfilment of four criteria: i) implicit latent decomposition
into shared and private subspaces, ii) coherent joint generation over all modalities, iii) coherent
cross-generation across individual modalities, and iv) improved model learning for individual
modalities through multi-modal integration. Here, we propose a mixture-of-experts multimodal
variational autoencoder (MMVAE) to learn generative models on different sets of modalities,
including a challenging image ↔ language dataset, and demonstrate its ability to satisfy all four
criteria, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code, data, and models are provided at this url.

1

Introduction

de

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

ar

he

see

∗

t

lec

/se

sc
rib

aw

e

dr

understand

Abstract Bird
Human learning in the real world involves a multitude of perspectives
M
of the same underlying phenomena, such as perception of the same en1
od
ty
al
La
ity
vironment through visual observation, linguistic description, or physical Modali ision
ng
2
ua
ge
V
interaction. Given the lack explicit labels available for observations
A red-throated
in the real world, observing across modalities can provided important
hummingbird
in flight.
information in the form of correlations between the observations. Studies
have provided evidence that the brain jointly embeds information across
different modalities (Quiroga et al., 2009; Stein et al., 2009), and that
such integration benefits reasoning and understanding through expression along these modalities (Bauer and Johnson-Laird, 1993; Fan et al.,
2018), further facilitating information transfer between (Yildirim, 2014)
them. We take inspiration from this to design algorithms that handle Figure 1: A schematic for
such multi-modal observations, while being capable of a similar breadth multi-modal perception.
of behaviour. Figure 1 shows an example of such a situation, where an abstract notion of a bird is
perceived through both visual observation as well as linguistic description. A thorough understanding
of what a bird is involves understanding not just the characteristics of its visual and linguistic features
individually, but also how they relate to each other (Barsalou, 2008; Siskind, 1994). Moreover,
demonstrating such understanding involves being able to visualise, or discriminate birds against
other things, or describe birds’ attributes. Crucially, this process involves flow of information in both
ways—from observations to representations and vice versa.

