Surrogate Objectives for Batch Policy Optimization
in One-step Decision Making

Minmin Chen∗ Ramki Gummadi∗ Chris Harris∗ Dale Schuurmans∗ †
∗
†
Google
University of Alberta

Abstract
We investigate batch policy optimization for cost-sensitive classification and contextual bandits—two related tasks that obviate exploration but require generalizing
from observed rewards to action selections in unseen contexts. When rewards are
fully observed, we show that the expected reward objective exhibits suboptimal
plateaus and exponentially many local optima in the worst case. To overcome
the poor landscape, we develop a convex surrogate that is calibrated with respect
to entropy regularized expected reward. We then consider the partially observed
case, where rewards are recorded for only a subset of actions. Here we generalize
the surrogate to partially observed data, and uncover novel objectives for batch
contextual bandit training. We find that surrogate objectives remain provably sound
in this setting and empirically demonstrate state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction

Cost-sensitive classification [1] and batch contextual bandits [34–36] are two problems that share the
goal of inferring, given a batch of training data, a policy that chooses high reward actions in potentially
unseen contexts. The problems differ in the assumed completeness of the data: in cost-sensitive
classification, rewards are given (or inferable [8]) for every action, whereas in batch contextual
bandits, rewards are only observed for a small subset of actions (typically one). The batch contextual
bandit problem is more prevalent in practice, since massive data logs routinely record contexts
encountered, actions taken in response, and the outcomes that resulted [18]. Rarely, if ever, are
counterfactual outcomes recorded for actions that might have been taken instead [3]. Nevertheless, we
find it helpful to reconsider cost-sensitive classification, since a core learning challenge is orthogonal
to reward incompleteness: both tasks create difficult optimization landscapes.
There is an extensive literature on cost-sensitive classification. Problems with two actions have been
particularly well studied [5, 8], and subsequent work has sought to reduce multiple-action learning
to learning binary decisions [1, 19]. A reduction strategy has also been used to convert simply
trained stochastic policies to cost-sensitive variants via post-processing [24]. Unfortunately, such
reductions do not compose well with current policy learning methods, which are gradient based and
best formulated as optimizing a single policy model over a well formed optimization objective.
In this paper we investigate cost-sensitive classification with stochastic policy representations, to
ensure the developments are compatible with current deep learning methods. Our first result is
negative: for natural policy representations, the expected reward objective generates a poor optimization landscape that exhibits plateaus and potentially an exponential number of local maxima.
In response, we develop surrogate objectives for training [28]. Supervised learning research has
observed that solution quality can be ensured by using surrogates that satisfy “calibration” with
respect to a difficult to optimize target loss [32, 37, 42]. This idea has also recently been applied to
cost-sensitive classification [26]. We extend this approach to stochastic policies and deep models by
considering expected reward augmented with entropy regularization. This allows a convex surrogate
to be developed that improves trainability while approximating expected cost to controllable accuracy.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

