Finding Friend and Foe in Multi-Agent Games
Jack Serrino⇤
MIT
jserrino@mit.edu

Max Kleiman-Weiner⇤
Harvard, MIT, Diffeo
maxkleimanweiner@fas.harvard.edu

David C. Parkes
Harvard University
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT, CBMM
jbt@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in AI for multi-agent games like Go, Poker, and Dota, have
seen great strides in recent years. Yet none of these games address the real-life
challenge of cooperation in the presence of unknown and uncertain teammates.
This challenge is a key game mechanism in hidden role games. Here we develop
the DeepRole algorithm, a multi-agent reinforcement learning agent that we test on
The Resistance: Avalon, the most popular hidden role game. DeepRole combines
counterfactual regret minimization (CFR) with deep value networks trained through
self-play. Our algorithm integrates deductive reasoning into vector-form CFR to
reason about joint beliefs and deduce partially observable actions. We augment
deep value networks with constraints that yield interpretable representations of
win probabilities. These innovations enable DeepRole to scale to the full Avalon
game. Empirical game-theoretic methods show that DeepRole outperforms other
hand-crafted and learned agents in five-player Avalon. DeepRole played with and
against human players on the web in hybrid human-agent teams. We find that
DeepRole outperforms human players as both a cooperator and a competitor.

1

Introduction

Cooperation enables agents to achieve feats together that no individual can achieve on her own [16, 39].
Cooperation is challenging, however, because it is embedded within a competitive world [15]. Many
multi-party interactions start off by asking: who is on my team? Who will collaborate with me and
who do I need to watch out for? These questions arise whether it is your first day of kindergarten or
your first day at the stock exchange. Figuring out who to cooperate with and who to protect oneself
against is a fundamental challenge for any agent in a diverse multi-agent world. This has been explored
in cognitive science, economics, and computer science [2, 7, 8, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31, 44].
Core to this challenge is that information about who to cooperate with is often noisy and ambiguous.
Typically, we only get this information indirectly through others’ actions [1, 3, 21, 41]. Since different
agents may act in different ways, these inferences must be robust and take into account ad-hoc factors
that arise in an interaction. Furthermore, these inferences might be carried out in the presence of a
sophisticated adversary with superior knowledge and the intention to deceive. These adversaries could
intentionally hide their non-cooperative intentions and try to appear cooperative for their own benefit
[36]. The presence of adversaries makes communication challenging— when intent to cooperate is
unknown, simple communication is unreliable or “cheap” [14].
This challenge has not been addressed by recent work in multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL). In
particular, the impressive results in imperfect-information two-player zero-sum games such as poker
⇤

indicates equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

