Optimizing Generalized PageRank Methods for
Seed-Expansion Community Detection

Pan Li
UIUC
panli2@illinois.edu

Eli Chien
UIUC
ichien3@illinois.edu

Olgica Milenkovic
UIUC
milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract
Landing probabilities (LP) of random walks (RW) over graphs encode rich information regarding graph topology. Generalized PageRanks (GPR), which represent
weighted sums of LPs of RWs, utilize the discriminative power of LP features to
enable many graph-based learning studies. Previous work in the area has mostly
focused on evaluating suitable weights for GPRs, and only a few studies so far have
attempted to derive the optimal weights of GPRs for a given application. We take a
fundamental step forward in this direction by using random graph models to better
our understanding of the behavior of GPRs. In this context, we provide a rigorous
non-asymptotic analysis for the convergence of LPs and GPRs to their mean-field
values on edge-independent random graphs. Although our theoretical results apply
to many problem settings, we focus on the task of seed-expansion community
detection over stochastic block models. There, we find that the predictive power of
LPs decreases significantly slower than previously reported based on asymptotic
findings. Given this result, we propose a new GPR, termed Inverse PR (IPR), with
LP weights that increase for the initial few steps of the walks. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real, large-scale networks illustrate the superiority of
IPR compared to other GPRs for seeded community detection. 1

1

Introduction

PageRank (PR), an algorithm originally proposed by Page et al. for ranking web-pages [1] has
found many successful applications, including community detection [2, 3], link prediction [4] and
recommender system design [5, 6]. The PR algorithm involves computing the stationary distribution of
a Markov process by starting from a seed vertex and then performing either a one-step of random walk
(RW) to the neighbors of the current seed or jumping to another vertex according to a predetermined
probability distribution. The RW aids in capturing topological information about the graph, while the
jump probabilities incorporate modeling preferences [7]. A proper selection of the RW probabilities
ensures that the stationary distribution induces an ordering of the vertices that may be used to
determine the “relevance” of vertices or the structure of their neighborhoods.
Despite the wide utility of PR [7, 8], recent work in the field has shifted towards investigating various
generalizations of PR. Generalized PR (GPR) values enable more accurate characterizations of
vertex distances and similarities, and hence lead to improved performance of various graph learning
techniques [9]. GPR methods make use of arbitrarily weighted linear combinations of landing
probabilities (LP) of RWs of different length, defined as follows. Given a seed vertex and another
(k)
arbitrary vertex v in the graph, the k-step LP of v, xv , equals the probability that a RW starting
P∞
(k)
from the seed lands at v after k steps; the GPR value for vertex v is defined as k=0 γk xv , for
some weight sequence {γk }k≥0 . Certain GPR representations, such as personalized PR (PPR)[10] or
heat-kernel PR (HPR)[11], are associated with weight sequences chosen in a heuristic manner: PPR
1

Pan Li and Eli Chien contribute equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

