Deliberative Explanations: visualizing network
insecurities
Pei Wang and Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{pew062, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
A new approach to explainable AI, denoted deliberative explanations, is proposed.
Deliberative explanations are a visualization technique that aims to go beyond
the simple visualization of the image regions (or, more generally, input variables)
responsible for a network prediction. Instead, they aim to expose the deliberations
carried by the network to arrive at that prediction, by uncovering the insecurities
of the network about the latter. The explanation consists of a list of insecurities,
each composed of 1) an image region (more generally, a set of input variables),
and 2) an ambiguity formed by the pair of classes responsible for the network
uncertainty about the region. Since insecurity detection requires quantifying the
difficulty of network predictions, deliberative explanations combine ideas from the
literature on visual explanations and assessment of classification difficulty. More
specifically, the proposed implementation combines attributions with respect to
both class predictions and a difficulty score. An evaluation protocol that leverages
object recognition (CUB200) and scene classification (ADE20K) datasets that
combine part and attribute annotations is also introduced to evaluate the accuracy of
deliberative explanations. Finally, an experimental evaluation shows that the most
accurate explanations are achieved by combining non self-referential difficulty
scores and second-order attributions. The resulting insecurities are shown to
correlate with regions of attributes shared by different classes. Since these regions
are also ambiguous for humans, deliberative explanations are intuitive, suggesting
that the deliberative process of modern networks correlates with human reasoning.

1

Introduction

While deep learning systems enabled significant advances in computer vision, the black box nature
of their predictions causes difficulties to many applications. In general, it is difficult to trust a
system unable to justify its decisions. This has motivated a large literature in explainable AI [22,
42, 21, 44, 43, 26, 28, 13, 18, 49, 3, 8, 34]. In computer vision, most approaches provide visual
explanations, in the form of heatmaps or segments that localize image regions responsible for network
predictions [37, 51, 49, 31, 20]. More generally, explanations can be derived from attribution models
that identify input variables to which the prediction can be attributed [2, 34, 40, 1]. While insightful,
all these explanations fall short of the richness of those produced by humans, which tend to reflect
the deliberative nature of the inference process.
In general, explanations are most needed for inputs that have some types of ambiguity, such that
the prediction could reasonably oscillate between different interpretations. In the limit of highly
ambiguous inputs it is even acceptable for different systems (or people) to make conflicting predictions,
as long as they provide a convincing justification. A prime example of this is visual illusion, such as
that depicted in the left of Figure 1, where different image regions provide support for conflicting
image interpretations. In this example, the image could depict a “country scene” or a “face”. While
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

