Dual Variational Generation for Low Shot
Heterogeneous Face Recognition

Chaoyou Fu1,2∗, Xiang Wu1∗ , Yibo Hu1 , Huaibo Huang1 , Ran He1,2,3†
1
NLPR & CRIPAC, CASIA
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{chaoyou.fu, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, alfredxiangwu@gmail.com
{yibo.hu, huaibo.huang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Heterogeneous Face Recognition (HFR) is a challenging issue because of the large
domain discrepancy and a lack of heterogeneous data. This paper considers HFR
as a dual generation problem, and proposes a novel Dual Variational Generation
(DVG) framework. It generates large-scale new paired heterogeneous images with
the same identity from noise, for the sake of reducing the domain gap of HFR.
Specifically, we first introduce a dual variational autoencoder to represent a joint
distribution of paired heterogeneous images. Then, in order to ensure the identity
consistency of the generated paired heterogeneous images, we impose a distribution
alignment in the latent space and a pairwise identity preserving in the image space.
Moreover, the HFR network reduces the domain discrepancy by constraining the
pairwise feature distances between the generated paired heterogeneous images. Extensive experiments on four HFR databases show that our method can significantly
improve state-of-the-art results.

1

Introduction

With the development of deep learning, face recognition has made significant progress [34, 2] in recent
years. However, in many real-world applications, such as video surveillance, facial authentication on
mobile devices and computer forensics, it is still a great challenge to match heterogeneous face images
in different modalities, including sketch images [37], near infrared images [24] and polarimetric
thermal images [36]. Heterogeneous face recognition (HFR) has attracted much attention in the face
recognition community. Due to the large domain gap, one challenge is that the face recognition model
trained on VIS data often degrades significantly for HFR. Therefore, lots of cross domain feature
matching methods [10] are introduced to reduce the large domain gap between heterogeneous face
images. However, since it is expensive and time-consuming to collect a large number of heterogeneous
face images, there is no public large-scale heterogeneous face database. With the limited training
data, CNNs trained for HFR often tend to be overfitting.
Recently, the great progress of high-quality face synthesis [38, 5, 33, 39] has made “recognition via
generation” possible. TP-GAN [16] and CAPG-GAN [13] introduce face synthesis to improve the
quantitative performance of large pose face recognition. For HFR, [32] proposes a two-path model
to synthesize VIS images from NIR images. [36] utilizes a GAN based multi-stream feature fusion
technique to generate VIS images from polarimetric thermal faces. However, all these methods are
based on conditional image-to-image translation framework, leading to two potential challenges: 1)
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

