A Geometric Perspective on Optimal Representations
for Reinforcement Learning
Marc G. Bellemare1 , Will Dabney2 , Robert Dadashi1 , Adrien Ali Taiga1,3 ,
Pablo Samuel Castro1 , Nicolas Le Roux1 , Dale Schuurmans1,4 , Tor Lattimore2 , Clare Lyle5

Abstract
We propose a new perspective on representation learning in reinforcement learning
based on geometric properties of the space of value functions. We leverage this
perspective to provide formal evidence regarding the usefulness of value functions
as auxiliary tasks. Our formulation considers adapting the representation to minimize the (linear) approximation of the value function of all stationary policies for
a given environment. We show that this optimization reduces to making accurate
predictions regarding a special class of value functions which we call adversarial
value functions (AVFs). We demonstrate that using value functions as auxiliary
tasks corresponds to an expected-error relaxation of our formulation, with AVFs
a natural candidate, and identify a close relationship with proto-value functions
(Mahadevan, 2005). We highlight characteristics of AVFs and their usefulness as
auxiliary tasks in a series of experiments on the four-room domain.

1

Introduction

A good representation of state is key to practical success in reinforcement learning. While early
applications used hand-engineered features (e.g. Samuel, 1959), these have proven onerous to generate
and difficult to scale. As a result, methods in representation learning have flourished, ranging from
basis adaptation (Menache et al., 2005; Keller et al., 2006), gradient-based learning (Yu and Bertsekas,
2009), proto-value functions (Mahadevan and Maggioni, 2007), feature generation schemes such as
tile coding (Sutton, 1996) and the domain-independent features used in some Atari 2600 game-playing
agents (Bellemare et al., 2013; Liang et al., 2016), and nonparametric methods (Ernst et al., 2005;
Farahmand et al., 2016; Tosatto et al., 2017). Today, the method of choice is deep learning. Deep
learning has made its mark by showing it can learn complex representations of relatively unprocessed
inputs using gradient-based optimization (Tesauro, 1995; Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016).
Most current deep reinforcement learning methods augment their main objective with additional
losses called auxiliary tasks, typically with the aim of facilitating and regularizing the representation
learning process. The UNREAL algorithm, for example, makes predictions about future pixel
values (Jaderberg et al., 2017); recent work approximates a one-step transition model to achieve a
similar effect (François-Lavet et al., 2018; Gelada et al., 2019). The good empirical performance of
distributional reinforcement learning (Bellemare et al., 2017) has also been attributed to representation
learning effects, with recent visualizations supporting this claim (Such et al., 2019). However, while
there is now conclusive empirical evidence of the usefulness of auxiliary tasks, their design and
justification remain on the whole ad-hoc. One of our main contributions is to provides a formal
framework in which to reason about auxiliary tasks in reinforcement learning.
We begin by formulating an optimization problem whose solution is a form of optimal representation.
Specifically, we seek a state representation from which we can best approximate the value function of
any stationary policy for a given Markov Decision Process. Simultaneously, the largest approximation
1

Google Research 2 DeepMind 3 Mila, Université de Montréal 4 University of Alberta 5 University of Oxford

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

