Re-randomized Densification for One Permutation
Hashing and Bin-wise Consistent Weighted Sampling

Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
liping11@baidu.com

Xiaoyun Li∗
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
xiaoyun.li@rutgers.edu

Cun-Hui Zhang†
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
cunhui@stat.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Jaccard similarity is widely used as a distance measure in many machine learning
and search applications. Typically, hashing methods are essential for the use of
Jaccard similarity to be practical in large-scale settings. For hashing binary (0/1)
data, the idea of one permutation hashing (OPH) with densification significantly
accelerates traditional minwise hashing algorithms while providing unbiased and
accurate estimates. In this paper, we propose a “re-randomization” strategy in the
process of densification and we show that it achieves the smallest variance among
existing densification schemes. The success of this idea inspires us to generalize one
permutation hashing to weighted (non-binary) data, resulting in the so-called “binwise consistent weighted sampling (BCWS)” algorithm. We analyze the behavior of
BCWS and compare it with a recent alternative. Experiments on a range of datasets
and tasks confirm the effectiveness of proposed methods. We expect that BCWS
will be adopted in practice for training kernel machines and fast similarity search.

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in studying the following measure of similarity for
nonnegative data [17, 6, 12, 26, 14, 20, 29, 21, 22]:
PD
i=1 min(Si , Ti )
J(S, T ) = PD
(1)
i=1 max(Si , Ti )
where S, T ∈ RD are two D-dimensional data vectors with only nonnegative entries. This “min-max”
measure is a generalization of the “Jaccard similarity” in binary (0/1) data. For simplicity, in this paper,
we will use “Jaccard” regardless whether the data are binary or non-binary. We should also mention
that J(S, T ) has been successfully extended to include data
√ with negative entries [21, 22]. In fact,
under a fairly general distributional assumption, J →

1−
1+

√(1−ρ)/2 , where ρ is the correlation [25].
(1−ρ)/2

While J(S, T ) in Eq. (1) appears deceivingly simple, the work of [20, 21, 22] demonstrated that,
through extensive empirical studies, this measure of similarity is surprisingly effective when it is
used as a kernel for classification (e.g., SVM and logistic regression). In many public datasets, using
this (tuning-free) kernel resulted in a substantial increase in classification accuracy, compared to the
(best-tuned) radial basis function (RBF) kernel. Furthermore, the “tunable” version [22] of J(S, T )
is even able to achieve classification accuracy comparable to boosted trees (and deep nets) [18, 19].
Since J(S, T ) is a type of nonlinear kernels. In order to use it for mere medium-scale datasets, we
must be able to “linearize” this kernel. Scaling nonlinear kernel machines is a known non-trivial
task [2]. For example, we cannot even store a kernel matrix in the memory for a dataset with only
1,000,000 training samples, which has 1012 ≈ 240 entries and will need multiple terabyptes of storage.
∗
†

The work of Xiaoyun Li was conducted during the internship at Baidu Research.
The work of Cun-Hui Zhang was conducted as a consulting researcher at Baidu Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

