Lower Bounds on Adversarial Robustness from
Optimal Transport

Arjun Nitin Bhagoji ∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
abhagoji@princeton.edu

Daniel Cullina ∗,†
Department of Electrical Engineering
Pennsylvania State University
cullina@psu.edu

Prateek Mittal
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
pmittal@princeton.edu

Abstract
While progress has been made in understanding the robustness of machine learning
classifiers to test-time adversaries (evasion attacks), fundamental questions remain
unresolved. In this paper, we use optimal transport to characterize the minimum
possible loss in an adversarial classification scenario. In this setting, an adversary
receives a random labeled example from one of two classes, perturbs the example
subject to a neighborhood constraint, and presents the modified example to the
classifier. We define an appropriate cost function such that the minimum transportation cost between the distributions of the two classes determines the minimum
0 − 1 loss for any classifier. When the classifier comes from a restricted hypothesis
class, the optimal transportation cost provides a lower bound. We apply our framework to the case of Gaussian data with norm-bounded adversaries and explicitly
show matching bounds for the classification and transport problems as well as
the optimality of linear classifiers. We also characterize the sample complexity
of learning in this setting, deriving and extending previously known results as a
special case. Finally, we use our framework to study the gap between the optimal
classification performance possible and that currently achieved by state-of-the-art
robustly trained neural networks for datasets of interest, namely, MNIST, Fashion
MNIST and CIFAR-10.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) has become ubiquitous due to its impressive performance in a wide variety of
domains such as image recognition [48,72], natural language and speech processing [22,25,37], gameplaying [12, 59, 71] and aircraft collision avoidance [42]. This ubiquity, however, provides adversaries
with both the opportunity and incentive to strategically fool machine learning systems during both
the training (poisoning attacks) [5, 9, 40, 60, 67] and test (evasion attacks) [8, 17, 34, 57, 58, 63, 77]
phases. In an evasion attack, an adversary adds imperceptible perturbations to inputs in the test phase
to cause misclassification. A large number of adversarial example-based evasion attacks have been
proposed against ML algorithms used for tasks such as image classification [8, 17, 19, 34, 63, 77],
object detection [21, 53, 83], image segmentation [2, 31] and speech recognition [18, 86]; generative
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at Princeton University

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

