Deep Random Splines for Point Process Intensity
Estimation of Neural Population Data

Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
gl2480@columbia.edu
Karen E. Schroeder
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
ks3381@columbia.edu

Sean M. Perkins
Department of Biomedical Engineering
Columbia University
sp3222@columbia.edu
Mark M. Churchland
Department of Neuroscience
Columbia University
mc3502@columbia.edu

John P. Cunningham
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Gaussian processes are the leading class of distributions on random functions, but
they suffer from well known issues including difficulty scaling and inflexibility with
respect to certain shape constraints (such as nonnegativity). Here we propose Deep
Random Splines, a flexible class of random functions obtained by transforming
Gaussian noise through a deep neural network whose output are the parameters
of a spline. Unlike Gaussian processes, Deep Random Splines allow us to readily
enforce shape constraints while inheriting the richness and tractability of deep
generative models. We also present an observational model for point process data
which uses Deep Random Splines to model the intensity function of each point
process and apply it to neural population data to obtain a low-dimensional representation of spiking activity. Inference is performed via a variational autoencoder
that uses a novel recurrent encoder architecture that can handle multiple point
processes as input. We use a newly collected dataset where a primate completes
a pedaling task, and observe better dimensionality reduction with our model than
with competing alternatives.1

1

Introduction

Gaussian Processes (GPs) are one of the main tools for modeling random functions [31]. They allow
control of the smoothness of the function by choosing an appropriate kernel but have the disadvantage
that, except in special cases (for example Gilboa et al. [17], Flaxman et al. [15]), inference in GP
models scales poorly in both memory and runtime. Furthermore, GPs cannot easily handle shape
constraints. It can often be of interest to model a function under some shape constraint, for example
nonnegativity, monotonicity or convexity/concavity [29, 33, 30, 26]. While some shape constraints
can be enforced by transforming the GP or by enforcing them at a finite number of points, doing so
cannot always be done and usually makes inference harder, see for example Lin and Dunson [24].
Splines are another popular tool for modeling unknown functions [37]. When there are no shape
constraints, frequentist inference is straightforward and can be performed using linear regression,
by writing the spline as a linear combination of basis functions. Under shape constraints, the basis
function expansion usually no longer applies, since the space of shape constrained splines is not
typically a vector space. However, the problem can usually still be written down as a tractable
1

Our code is available at https://github.com/cunningham-lab/drs.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

