Meta Learning with Relational Information
for Short Sequences
Yujia Xie
College of Computing, Georgia Tech
Xie.Yujia000@gmail.com
Feng Liu
Florida Atlantic University
FLIU2016@fau.edu

Haoming Jiang
College of Engineering, Georgia Tech
jianghm@gatech.edu
Tuo Zhao
College of Engineering, Georgia Tech
tuo.zhao@isye.gatech.edu

Hongyuan Zha0
Institute for Data and Decision Analytics, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
zhahy@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a new meta-learning method – named HARMLESS (HAwkes
Relational Meta LEarning method for Short Sequences) for learning heterogeneous
point process models from short event sequence data along with a relational network. Specifically, we propose a hierarchical Bayesian mixture Hawkes process
model, which naturally incorporates the relational information among sequences
into point process modeling. Compared with existing methods, our model can
capture the underlying mixed-community patterns of the relational network, which
simultaneously encourages knowledge sharing among sequences and facilitates
adaptive learning for each individual sequence. We further propose an efficient
stochastic variational meta expectation maximization algorithm that can scale to
large problems. Numerical experiments on both synthetic and real data show that
HARMLESS outperforms existing methods in terms of predicting the future events.

1

Introduction

Event sequence data naturally arises in analyzing the temporal behavior of real world subjects
(Cleeremans and McClelland, 1991). These sequences often contain rich information, which can
predict the future evolution of the subjects. For example, the timestamps of tweets of a twitter user
reflect his activeness and certain state of mind, and can be used to show when he will tweet next time
(Kobayashi and Lambiotte, 2016). The job hopping history of a person usually suggests when he will
hop next time (Xu et al., 2017b). Unlike usual sequential data such as text data, event sequences are
always asynchronous and tend to be noisy (Ross et al., 1996). Therefore specialized algorithms are
needed to learn from such data.
In this paper, we are interested in short sequences, a type of sequence data that commonly appears
in many real-world applications. Such data is usually short for two possible reasons. One is that
the event sequences are short in nature, such as the job hopping history. Another is the observation
window is narrow. For example, we are interested in the criminal incidents of an area after a specific
regulation is published. Moreover, this kind of data usually appears as a collection of sequences,
such as the timestamps of many user’s tweets. Our goal is to extract information that can predict the
occurrence of future events from a large collection of such short sequences.
0

Corresponding author. On leave from College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

