Ordered Memory

Yikang Shen∗
Mila/Université de Montréal
and Microsoft Research
Montréal, Canada
Zhouhan Lin
Mila/Université de Montréal
Montréal, Canada

Shawn Tan∗
Mila/Université de Montréal
Montréal, Canada

Alessandro Sordoni
Microsoft Research
Montréal, Canada

Arian Hosseini∗
Mila/Université de Montréal
and Microsoft Research
Montréal, Canada
Aaron Courville
Mila/Université de Montréal
Montréal, Canada

Abstract
Stack-augmented recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been of interest to the
deep learning community for some time. However, the difficulty of training memory models remains a problem obstructing the widespread use of such models.
In this paper, we propose the Ordered Memory architecture. Inspired by Ordered Neurons (Shen et al., 2018), we introduce a new attention-based mechanism
and use its cumulative probability to control the writing and erasing operation of
memory. We also introduce a new Gated Recursive Cell to compose lower level
representations into higher level representation. We demonstrate that our model
achieves strong performance on the logical inference task (Bowman et al., 2015)
and the ListOps (Nangia and Bowman, 2018) task. We can also interpret the model
to retrieve the induced tree structure, and find that these induced structures align
with the ground truth. Finally, we evaluate our model on the Stanford Sentiment
Treebank tasks (Socher et al., 2013), and find that it performs comparatively with
the state-of-the-art methods in the literature2 .

1

Introduction

A long-sought after goal in natural language processing is to build models that account for the compositional nature of language — granting them an ability to understand complex, unseen expressions
from the meaning of simpler, known expressions (Montague, 1970; Dowty, 2007). Despite being
successful in language generation tasks, recurrent neural networks (RNNs, Elman (1990)) fail at
tasks that explicitly require and test compositional behavior (Lake and Baroni, 2017; Loula et al.,
2018). In particular, Bowman et al. (2015), and later Bahdanau et al. (2018) give evidence that,
by exploiting the appropriate compositional structure of the task, models can generalize better to
out-of-distribution test examples. Results from Andreas et al. (2016) also indicate that recursively
composing smaller modules results in better representations. The remaining challenge, however, is
learning the underlying structure and the rules governing composition from the observed data alone.
This is often referred to as the grammar induction (Chen, 1995; Cohen et al., 2011; Roark, 2001;
Chelba and Jelinek, 2000; Williams et al., 2018).
Fodor and Pylyshyn (1988) claim that “cognitive capacities always exhibit certain symmetries, so
that the ability to entertain a given thought implies the ability to entertain thoughts with semantically related contents,” and use the term systematicity to describe this phenomenon. Exploiting
∗
2

yi-kang.shen@umontreal.ca, tanjings@mila.quebec, arian.hosseini9@gmail.com.
The code can be found at https://github.com/yikangshen/Ordered-Memory

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

