Fast Convergence of Belief Propagation to Global
Optima: Beyond Correlation Decay

Frederic Koehler
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02141
fkoehler@mit.edu

Abstract
Belief propagation is a fundamental message-passing algorithm for probabilistic
reasoning and inference in graphical models. While it is known to be exact on
trees, in most applications belief propagation is run on graphs with cycles. Understanding the behavior of “loopy” belief propagation has been a major challenge for
researchers in machine learning and other fields, and positive convergence results
for BP are known under strong assumptions which imply the underlying graphical model exhibits decay of correlations. We show, building on previous work of
Dembo and Montanari, that under a natural initialization BP converges quickly to
the global optimum of the Bethe free energy for Ising models on arbitrary graphs,
as long as the Ising model is ferromagnetic (i.e. neighbors prefer to be aligned).
This holds even though such models can exhibit long range correlations and may
have multiple suboptimal BP fixed points. We also show an analogous result for
iterating the (naive) mean-field equations; perhaps surprisingly, both results are
dimension-free in the sense that a constant number of iterations already provides
a good estimate to the Bethe/mean-field free energy.

1

Introduction

Undirected graphical models, also known as Markov Random Fields, are a general, powerful, and
popular framework for modeling and reasoning about high dimensional distributions. These models
explain the dependency structure of a probability distribution in terms of interactions along the edges
of a (hyper-) graph, which gives rise to a factorization of the joint probability distribution, and the
absence of edges in this graph encodes conditional independence relations.
Ising models are a special class of graphical models with a long history and which are popular in
applications; they model the interaction of random variables valued in a binary alphabet ({±1}) with
exclusively pairwise interactions. Explicitly, the joint pmf of an Ising model is


1 T
Pr(X = x) = exp
x Jx + h · x − log Z
(1)
2
where x ∈ {±1}n , J : n × n is an arbitrary matrix describing the pairwise interactions between
nodes (with zero diagonal), h is an arbitrary vector encoding node biases, and Z is a proportionality
constant called the partition function. Historically, Ising models originated in the statistical physics
community as a way to model and study phase transition phenomena in magnetic materials; since
then, they have attracted significant interest in the machine learning community and have been applied in a wide variety of domains including finance, social networks, neuroscience, and computer
vision (see e.g. references in [18, 23, 30, 11].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

