Pseudo-Extended Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Christopher Nemeth
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Lancaster University
United Kingdom
c.nemeth@lancaster.ac.uk

Fredrik Lindsten
Department of Computer and Information Science
Linköping University
Sweden
fredrik.lindsten@liu.se

Maurizio Filippone
Department of Data Science
EURECOM
France
maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr

James Hensman
PROWLER.io
Cambridge
United Kingdom
james@prowler.io

Abstract
Sampling from posterior distributions using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods can require an exhaustive number of iterations, particularly when the
posterior is multi-modal as the MCMC sampler can become trapped in a local
mode for a large number of iterations. In this paper, we introduce the pseudoextended MCMC method as a simple approach for improving the mixing of the
MCMC sampler for multi-modal posterior distributions. The pseudo-extended
method augments the state-space of the posterior using pseudo-samples as auxiliary
variables. On the extended space, the modes of the posterior are connected, which
allows the MCMC sampler to easily move between well-separated posterior modes.
We demonstrate that the pseudo-extended approach delivers improved MCMC
sampling over the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo algorithm on multi-modal posteriors,
including Boltzmann machines and models with sparsity-inducing priors.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods (see, e.g., Brooks et al. (2011)) are generally regarded
as the gold standard approach for sampling from high-dimensional distributions. In particular,
MCMC algorithms have been extensively applied within the field of Bayesian statistics to sample
from posterior distributions when the posterior density can only be evaluated up to a constant of
proportionality. Under mild conditions, it can be shown that asymptotically, the limiting distribution
of the samples generated from the MCMC algorithm will converge to the posterior distribution of
interest. While theoretically elegant, one of the main drawbacks of MCMC methods is that running
the algorithm to stationarity can be prohibitively expensive if the posterior distribution is of a complex
form, for example, contains multiple unknown modes. Notable examples of multi-modality include
the posterior over model parameters in mixture models (McLachlan and Peel, 2000), deep neural
networks (Neal, 2012), and differential equation models (Calderhead and Girolami, 2009).
In this paper, we present the pseudo-extended Markov chain Monte Carlo method as an approach
for augmenting the state-space of the original posterior distribution to allow the MCMC sampler
to easily move between areas of high posterior density. The pseudo-extended method introduces
pseudo-samples on the extended space to improve the mixing of the Markov chain. To illustrate
how this method works, in Figure 1 we plot a mixture of two univariate Gaussian distributions (left).
The area of low probability density between the two Gaussians will make it difficult for an MCMC
sampler to traverse between them. Using the pseudo-extended approach (as detailed in Section 2), we
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

