Two Time-scale Off-Policy TD Learning:
Non-asymptotic Analysis over Markovian Samples

Tengyu Xu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
xu.3260@osu.edu
Shaofeng Zou
Department of Electrical Engineering
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York
szou3@buffalo.edu
Yingbin Liang
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Gradient-based temporal difference (GTD) algorithms are widely used in off-policy
learning scenarios. Among them, the two time-scale TD with gradient correction
(TDC) algorithm has been shown to have superior performance. In contrast to
previous studies that characterized the non-asymptotic convergence rate of TDC
only under identical and independently distributed (i.i.d.) data samples, we provide
the first non-asymptotic convergence analysis for two time-scale TDC under a
non-i.i.d. Markovian sample path and linear function approximation. We show
t
that the two time-scale TDC can converge as fast as O( log
) under diminishing
t2/3
stepsize, and can converge exponentially fast under constant stepsize, but at the cost
of a non-vanishing error. We further propose a TDC algorithm with blockwisely
diminishing stepsize, and show that it asymptotically converges with an arbitrarily
small error at a blockwisely linear convergence rate. Our experiments demonstrate
that such an algorithm converges as fast as TDC under constant stepsize, and still
enjoys comparable accuracy as TDC under diminishing stepsize.

1

Introduction

In practice, it is very common that we wish to learn the value function of a target policy based on
data sampled by a different behavior policy, in order to make maximum use of the data available. For
such off-policy scenarios, it has been shown that conventional temporal difference (TD) algorithms
[24, 25] and Q-learning [33] may diverge to infinity when using linear function approximation
[2]. To overcome the divergence issue in off-policy TD learning, [27, 26, 17] proposed a family
of gradient-based TD (GTD) algorithms, which were shown to have guaranteed convergence in
off-policy settings and are more flexible than on-policy learning in practice [18, 23]. Among those
GTD algorithms, the TD with gradient correction (TDC) algorithm has been verified to have superior
performance [17] [9] and is widely used in practice. To elaborate, TDC uses the mean squared
projected Bellman error as the objective function, and iteratively updates the function approximation
parameter with the assistance of an auxiliary parameter that is also iteratively updated. These two
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

