Neural Jump Stochastic Differential Equations

Junteng Jia
Cornell University
jj585@cornell.edu

Austin R. Benson
Cornell University
arb@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Many time series are effectively generated by a combination of deterministic
continuous flows along with discrete jumps sparked by stochastic events. However,
we usually do not have the equation of motion describing the flows, or how they are
affected by jumps. To this end, we introduce Neural Jump Stochastic Differential
Equations that provide a data-driven approach to learn continuous and discrete
dynamic behavior, i.e., hybrid systems that both flow and jump. Our approach
extends the framework of Neural Ordinary Differential Equations with a stochastic
process term that models discrete events. We then model temporal point processes
with a piecewise-continuous latent trajectory, where the discontinuities are caused
by stochastic events whose conditional intensity depends on the latent state. We
demonstrate the predictive capabilities of our model on a range of synthetic and
real-world marked point process datasets, including classical point processes (such
as Hawkes processes), awards on Stack Overflow, medical records, and earthquake
monitoring.

1

Introduction

In a wide variety of real-world problems, the system of interest evolves continuously over time, but
may also be interrupted by stochastic events [1, 2, 3]. For instance, the reputation of a Stack Overflow
user may gradually build up over time and determines how likely the user gets a certain badge, while
the event of earning a badge may steer the user to participate in different future activities [4]. How
can we simultaneously model these continuous and discrete dynamics?
One approach is with hybrid systems, which are dynamical systems characterized by piecewise
continuous trajectories with a finite number of discontinuities introduced by discrete events [5].
Hybrid systems have long been used to describe physical scenarios [6], where the equation of motion
is often given by an ordinary differential equation. A simple example is table tennis — the ball follows
physical laws of motion and changes trajectory abruptly when bouncing off paddles. However, for
problems arising in social and information sciences, we usually know little about the time evolution
mechanism. And in general, we also have little insight about how the stochastic events are generated.
Here, we present Neural Jump Stochastic Differential Equations (JSDEs) for learning the continuous
and discrete dynamics of a hybrid system in a data-driven manner. In particular, we use a latent vector
z(t) to encode the state of a system. The latent vector z(t) flows continuously over time until an event
happens at random, which introduces an abrupt jump and changes its trajectory. The continuous flow
is described by Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Neural ODEs), while the event conditional
intensity and the influence of the jump are parameterized with neural networks as functions of z(t).
The Neural ODEs framework models continuous transformation of a latent vector as an ODE flow
and parameterizes the flow dynamics with a neural network [7]. The approach is a continuous analogy
to residual networks, ones with infinite depth and infinitesimal step size, which brings about many
desirable properties. Remarkably, the derivative of the loss function can be computed via the adjoint
method, which integrates the adjoint equation backwards in time with constant memory regardless of
the network depth. However, the downside of these continuous models is that they cannot incorporate
discrete events (or inputs) that abruptly change the latent vector. To address this limitation, we extend
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

