Defense Against Adversarial Attacks Using
Feature Scattering-based Adversarial Training

Haichao Zhang∗
Horizon Robotics

Jianyu Wang
Baidu Research

hczhang1@gmail.com

wjyouch@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce a feature scattering-based adversarial training approach for improving
model robustness against adversarial attacks. Conventional adversarial training
approaches leverage a supervised scheme (either targeted or non-targeted) in generating attacks for training, which typically suffer from issues such as label leaking
as noted in recent works. Differently, the proposed approach generates adversarial
images for training through feature scattering in the latent space, which is unsupervised in nature and avoids label leaking. More importantly, this new approach
generates perturbed images in a collaborative fashion, taking the inter-sample
relationships into consideration. We conduct analysis on model robustness and
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach through extensively experiments on different datasets compared with state-of-the-art approaches. Code is
available: https://github.com/Haichao-Zhang/FeatureScatter.

1

Introduction

While breakthroughs have been made in many fields such as image classification leveraging deep
neural networks, these models could be easily fooled by the so call adversarial examples [55, 4].
In terms of the image classification, an adversarial example for a natural image is a modified
version which is visually indistinguishable from the original but causes the classifier to produce a
different label prediction [4, 55, 24]. Adversarial examples have been shown to be ubiquitous beyond
classification, ranging from object detection [64, 18] to speech recognition [11, 9].
Many encouraging progresses been made towards improving model robustness against adversarial
examples under different scenarios [58, 36, 33, 67, 72, 16, 71]. Among them, adversarial training [24, 36] is one of the most popular technique [2], which conducts model training using the
adversarially perturbed images in place of the original ones. However, several challenges remain to
be addressed. Firstly, some adverse effects such as label leaking is still an issue hindering adversarial
training [32]. Currently available remedies either increase the number of iterations for generating the
attacks [36] or use classes other than the ground-truth for attack generation [32, 65, 61]. Increasing
the attack iterations will increase the training time proportionally while using non-ground-truth
targeted approach cannot fully eliminate label leaking. Secondly, previous approaches for both
standard and adversarial training treat each training sample individually and in isolation w.r.t.other
samples. Manipulating each sample individually this way neglects the inter-sample relationships and
does not fully leverage the potential for attacking and defending, thus limiting the performance.
Manifold and neighborhood structure have been proven to be effective in capturing the inter-sample
relationships [51, 22]. Natural images live on a low-dimensional manifold, with the training and
testing images as samples from it [26, 51, 44, 56]. Modern classifiers are over-complete in terms of
parameterizations and different local minima have been shown to be equally effective under the clean
image setting [14]. However, different solution points might leverage different set of features for
∗

Work done while with Baidu Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

