Fully Dynamic Consistent Facility Location

Vincent Cohen-Addad,
CNRS & Sorbonne Université
vcohen@di.ens.fr
David Saulpic,
Ecole normale supérieure
Sorbonne Univeristé
david.saulpic@lip6.fr

Niklas Hjuler,
University of Copenhagen
hjuler@di.ku.dk

Nikos Parotsidis,
University of Copenhagen
nipa@di.ku.dk

Chris Schwiegelshohn
Sapienza University of Rome
schwiegelshohn@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract
We consider classic clustering problems in fully dynamic data streams, where
data elements can be both inserted and deleted. In this context, there are several
important parameters: (1) the quality of the solution after each insertion or deletion,
(2) the time it takes to update the solution, and (3) how different consecutive
solutions are. The question of obtaining efficient algorithms in this context for
facility location, k-median and k-means has been raised in a recent paper by
Hubert-Chan et al. [WWW’18] and also appears as a natural follow-up on the
online model with recourse studied by Lattanzi and Vassilvitskii [ICML’17] (i.e.:
in insertion-only streams).
In this paper, we focus on general metric spaces and mainly on the facility location
problem. We give an arguably simple algorithm that maintains a constant factor
approximation, with O(n log n) update time, and total recourse O(n). This improves over the naive algorithm which consists in recomputing a solution after each
update and that can take up to O(n2 ) update time, and O(n2 ) total recourse. Our
bounds are nearly optimal: in general metric space, inserting a point takes O(n)
times to describe the distances to other points, and we give a simple lower bound
of O(n) for the recourse. Moreover, we generalize this result for the k-medians
and k-means problems: our algorithms maintain a constant factor approximation
e + k 2 ) time per update.
in O(n
We complement our analysis with experiments showing that the cost of the solution
maintained by our algorithm at any time t is very close to the cost of a solution
obtained by quickly recomputing a solution from scratch at time t while having a
much better running time.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a core procedure in unsupervised machine learning and data analysis. Due to the large
number of applications, clustering problems have been extensively studied for several decades. The
existing literature includes both very precise algorithms[1, 18, 31], and very fast ones [34]. Due to
the importance of the task, clustering problems have also been studied in several computing settings,
such as the streaming model [11] and the sliding-window model [7], the distributed model [4], in the
dynamic model [24], and others.
Applications nowadays operate on dynamically evolving data, e.g., pictures are constantly added and
deleted from picture repositories, purchases are continuously added into online shopping systems,
reviews are added or being edited in retail systems, etc. Due to the scale and the dynamic nature
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

