Game Design for Eliciting Distinguishable Behavior

Fan Yang1∗ , Liu Leqi1∗ , Yifan Wu1∗ ,
Zachary C. Lipton , Pradeep Ravikumar1∗ , William W. Cohen1,2∗ , Tom Mitchell1†
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Google Inc.
∗
{fanyang1,leqil,yw4,pradeepr,wcohen}@cs.cmu.edu
†
{zlipton, tom.mitchell}@cmu.edu
1†

Abstract
The ability to inferring latent psychological traits from human behavior is key to
developing personalized human-interacting machine learning systems. Approaches
to infer such traits range from surveys to manually-constructed experiments and
games. However, these traditional games are limited because they are typically
designed based on heuristics. In this paper, we formulate the task of designing
behavior diagnostic games that elicit distinguishable behavior as a mutual information maximization problem, which can be solved by optimizing a variational lower
bound. Our framework is instantiated by using prospect theory to model varying
player traits, and Markov Decision Processes to parameterize the games. We validate our approach empirically, showing that our designed games can successfully
distinguish among players with different traits, outperforming manually-designed
ones by a large margin.

1

Introduction

Human behavior can vary widely across individuals. For instance, due to varying risk preferences,
some people arrive extremely early at an airport, while others arrive the last minute. Being able to
infer these latent psychological traits, such as risk preferences or discount factors for future rewards,
is of broad multi-disciplinary interest, within psychology, behavioral economics, as well as machine
learning. As machine learning finds broader societal usage, understanding users’ latent preferences is
crucial to personalizing these data-driven systems to individual users.
In order to infer such psychological traits, which require cognitive rather than physiological assessment (e.g. blood tests), we need an interactive environment to engage users and elicit their behavior.
Approaches to do so have ranged from questionnaires [7, 17, 9, 24] to games [2, 10, 21, 20] that
involve planning and decision making. It is this latter approach of game that we consider in this
paper. However, there has been some recent criticism of such manually-designed games [3, 5, 8]. In
particular, a game is said to be effective, or behavior diagnostic, if the differing latent traits of players
can be accurately inferred based on their game play behavior. However, manually-designed games
are typically specified using heuristics that may not always be reliable or efficient for distinguishing
human traits given game play behavior.
As a motivating example, consider a game environment where the player can choose to stay or
moveRight on a Path. Each state on the Path has a reward. The player accumulates the reward as
they move to a state. Suppose players have different preferences (e.g. some might magnify positive
reward and not care too much about negative reward, while others might be the opposite), but are
otherwise rational, so that they choose optimal strategies given their respective preferences. If we
want to use this game to tell apart such players, how should we assign reward to each state in the
Path? Heuristically, one might suggest there should be positive reward to lure gain-seeking players
and negative reward to discourage the loss-averse ones, as shown in Figure 1a. However, as shown
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

