High-Dimensional Optimization in Adaptive Random
Subspaces

Jonathan Lacotte
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
lacotte@stanford.edu

Mert Pilanci
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University

Marco Pavone
Department of Aeronautics &Astronautics
Stanford University

Abstract
We propose a new randomized optimization method for high-dimensional problems
which can be seen as a generalization of coordinate descent to random subspaces.
We show that an adaptive sampling strategy for the random subspace significantly
outperforms the oblivious sampling method, which is the common choice in the
recent literature. The adaptive subspace can be efficiently generated by a correlated
random matrix ensemble whose statistics mimic the input data. We prove that
the improvement in the relative error of the solution can be tightly characterized
in terms of the spectrum of the data matrix, and provide probabilistic upperbounds. We then illustrate the consequences of our theory with data matrices of
different spectral decay. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed
approach offers significant speed ups in machine learning problems including
logistic regression, kernel classification with random convolution layers and shallow
neural networks with rectified linear units. Our analysis is based on convex analysis
and Fenchel duality, and establishes connections to sketching and randomized
matrix decomposition.

1

Introduction

Random Fourier features, Nystrom method and sketching techniques have been successful in large
scale machine learning problems. The common practice is to employ oblivious sampling or sketching
matrices, which are typically randomized and fixed ahead of the time. However, it is not clear
whether one can do better by adapting the sketching matrices to data. In this paper, we show that
adaptive sketching matrices can significantly improve the approximation quality. We characterize the
approximation error on the optimal solution in terms of the smoothness of the function, and spectral
properties of the data matrix.
Many machine learning problems end up being high dimensional optimization problems, which
typically follow from forming the kernel matrix of a large dataset or mapping the data trough a high
dimensional feature map, such as random Fourier features [20] or convolutional neural networks [13].
Such high dimensional representations induce higher computational and memory complexities, and
result in slower training of the models. Random projections are a classical way of performing
dimensionality reduction, and are widely used in many algorithmic contexts [25]. Nevertheless, only
recently these methods have captured great attention as an effective way of performing dimensionality
reduction in convex optimization. In the context of solving a linear system Ax = b and least-squares
optimization, the authors of [14] propose a randomized iterative method with linear convergence rate,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

