Random deep neural networks are biased towards
simple functions

Giacomo De Palma
MechE & RLE
MIT
Cambridge MA 02139, USA
gdepalma@mit.edu

Bobak T. Kiani
MechE & RLE
MIT
Cambridge MA 02139, USA
bkiani@mit.edu

Seth Lloyd
MechE, Physics & RLE
MIT
Cambridge MA 02139, USA
slloyd@mit.edu

Abstract
We prove that the binary classifiers of bit strings generated by random wide deep
neural networks with ReLU activation function are biased towards simple functions.
The simplicity is captured by the following two properties. For any given input
bit string, the average Hamming
pdistance of the closest input bit string with a
different classification is at least n/(2π ln n), where n is the length of the string.
Moreover, if the bits of the initial string are flipped randomly, the average number
of flips required to change the classification grows linearly with n. These results
are confirmed by numerical experiments on deep neural networks with two hidden
layers, and settle the conjecture stating that random deep neural networks are biased
towards simple functions. This conjecture was proposed and numerically explored
in [Valle Pérez et al., ICLR 2019] to explain the unreasonably good generalization
properties of deep learning algorithms. The probability distribution of the functions
generated by random deep neural networks is a good choice for the prior probability
distribution in the PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds. Our results constitute
a fundamental step forward in the characterization of this distribution, therefore
contributing to the understanding of the generalization properties of deep learning
algorithms.

1

Introduction

The field of deep learning provides a broad family of algorithms to fit an unknown target function via
a deep neural network and is having an enormous success in the fields of computer vision, machine
learning and artificial intelligence [1–5]. The input of a deep learning algorithm is a training set,
which is a set of inputs of the target function together with the corresponding outputs. The goal of the
learning algorithm is to determine the parameters of the deep neural network that best reproduces the
training set.
Deep learning algorithms generalize well when trained on real-world data [6]: the deep neural
networks that they generate usually reproduce the target function even for inputs that are not part of
the training set and do not suffer from over-fitting even if the number of parameters of the network is
larger than the number of elements of the training set [7–10]. A thorough theoretical understanding
of this unreasonable effectiveness is still lacking. The bounds to the generalization error of learning
algorithms are proven in the probably approximately correct (PAC) learning framework [11]. Most of
these bounds depend on complexity measures such as the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension [12, 13] or
the Rademacher complexity [14, 15] which are based on the worst-case analysis and are not sufficient
to explain the observed effectiveness since they become void when the number of parameters is
larger than the number of training samples [10, 16–21]. A complementary approach is provided
by the PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds [19, 22–25], which apply to nondeterministic learning
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

