Alleviating Label Switching with Optimal Transport

Pierre Monteiller
ENS Ulm
pierre.monteiller@ens.fr

Sebastian Claici
MIT CSAIL & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
sclaici@mit.edu

Edward Chien
MIT CSAIL & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
edchien@mit.edu

Farzaneh Mirzazadeh
IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
farzaneh@ibm.com

Justin Solomon
MIT CSAIL & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
jsolomon@mit.edu

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Abstract
Label switching is a phenomenon arising in mixture model posterior inference that
prevents one from meaningfully assessing posterior statistics using standard Monte
Carlo procedures. This issue arises due to invariance of the posterior under actions
of a group; for example, permuting the ordering of mixture components has no
effect on the likelihood. We propose a resolution to label switching that leverages
machinery from optimal transport. Our algorithm efficiently computes posterior
statistics in the quotient space of the symmetry group. We give conditions under
which there is a meaningful solution to label switching and demonstrate advantages
over alternative approaches on simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

Mixture models are powerful tools for understanding multimodal data. In the Bayesian setting, to
fit a mixture model to such data, we typically assume a prior number of components and optimize
or sample from the posterior distribution over the component parameters. If prior components are
exchangeable, this leads to an identifiability issue known as label switching. In particular, permuting
the ordering of mixture components does not change the likelihood, since it produces the same
model. The underlying problem is that a group acts on the parameters of the mixture model; posterior
probabilities are invariant under the action of the group.
To formalize this intuition, suppose our input is a data set X and a parameter K denoting the number of
mixture components. In the most common application, we want to fit a mixture of K Gaussians to the
data; our parameter set is Θ = {θ1 , . . . , θK } where θk = {µk , Σk , πk } gives the parameters of each
PK
component. The likelihood of x ∈ X conditioned on Θ is p(x|Θ) = k=1 πk f (x; µk , Σk ), where
f (x; µk , Σk ) is the density function of N (µk , Σk ). Any permutation of the labels k = 1, . . . , K
yields the same likelihood. The prior is also permutation invariant. When we compute statistics of the
posterior p(Θ|x), however, this permutation invariance leads to K! symmetric regions in the posterior
landscape. Sampling and inference algorithms behave poorly as the number of modes increases,
and this problem is only exacerbated in this context since increasing the number of components in
the mixture model leads to a super-exponential increase in the number of modes of the posterior.
Previous methods such as the invariant losses of Celeux et al. (2000) and pivot alignments of Marin
et al. (2005) do not identify modes in a principled manner.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

