Personalizing Many Decisions with High-Dimensional
Covariates
Nima Hamidi∗

Mohsen Bayati†

Kapil Gupta‡

Abstract
We consider the k-armed stochastic contextual bandit problem with d dimensional
features, when both k and d can be large. To the best of our knowledge, all existing
algorithms for this problem have regret bounds that scale as polynomials of degree
at least two, in k and d. The main contribution of this paper is to introduce and
theoretically analyse a new algorithm (REAL-Bandit) with a regret that scales
by r2 (k + d) when r is the rank of the k × d matrix of unknown parameters.
REAL-Bandit relies on ideas from low-rank matrix estimation literature and a new
row-enhancement subroutine that yields sharper bounds for estimating each row
of the parameter matrix that may be of independent interest. We also show via
simulations that REAL-Bandit algorithm outperforms existing algorithms that do
not leverage the low-rank structure of the problem.

1

Introduction

Running online experiments has recently become a popular approach in data-centric enterprises.
However, running an experiment involves an opportunity cost or regret (e.g., exposing some users to
potentially inferior experiences). To reduce this opportunity cost, a growing number of companies
leverage multi-armed bandit (MAB) experiments [38, 39, 19] that were initially motivated by the
cost of experimentation in clinical trials [41, 27]. Another common feature of online experiments is
personalization; users have heterogenous preferences that means the optimal decisions depend on
user or product characteristics (also known as context). MAB approach for personalizing decisions
is therefore called contextual MAB (or contextual bandit) [29]. For example, [30] used contextual
bandits to propose a personalized news article recommender system.
There is a large body of literature on algorithms with theoretical guarantees for contextual bandits
with linear reward functions. An admittedly incomplete list is [5, 13, 2, 12, 14, 4, 34, 37, 42, 25, 6],
and we defer to [7] for additional references. While these papers study the problem under a variety of
different assumptions, they can be divided into two groups: (A) when context vectors are arbitrary
and can be potentially selected by an adversary, and (B) when context vectors are i.i.d. samples from
a fixed (but unknown) probability distribution. Our focus in this paper is the latter group (first studied
by [14]). As the number
√ of decisions T (time horizon) grows, the regret bounds for the algorithms in
group (A) grow with T . But the algorithms in group (B) take advantage of the i.i.d. assumption
and have a significantly lower (logarithmic) dependence in T .
Two other important parameters are the number of arms k, and the dimension of context vectors d.
For example, when d grows, the regret bound of [14] grows as d3 which can dominate the dependence
on T . [6] tackled this difficulty by imposing sparseness assumption and replaced d3 with s2 (up to
logarithmic factors) where s is sparsity of the parameter vectors for the reward functions. On the
other hand, a careful inspection of the bounds in [14, 6] reveals that their regret bounds could grow
by k 3 (in the worst case) that can be very large in applications such as assortment optimization [21].
∗

Department of Statistics, Stanford University, hamidi@stanford.edu
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, bayati@stanford.edu
‡
Airbnb, kapil.gupta@airbnb.com
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

