You Only Propagate Once: Accelerating Adversarial
Training via Maximal Principle

Dinghuai Zhang∗ , Tianyuan Zhang∗
Peking University
{zhangdinghuai, 1600012888}@pku.edu.cn

Yiping Lu∗
Stanford University
yplu@stanford.edu

Zhanxing Zhu†
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
zhanxing.zhu@pku.edu.cn
Bin Dong†
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
Beijing Institute of Big Data Research
dongbin@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning achieves state-of-the-art results in many tasks in computer vision
and natural language processing. However, recent works have shown that deep
networks can be vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, which raised a serious
robustness issue of deep networks. Adversarial training, typically formulated as a
robust optimization problem, is an effective way of improving the robustness of
deep networks. A major drawback of existing adversarial training algorithms is
the computational overhead of the generation of adversarial examples, typically
far greater than that of the network training. This leads to the unbearable overall
computational cost of adversarial training. In this paper, we show that adversarial
training can be cast as a discrete time differential game. Through analyzing the
Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle (PMP) of the problem, we observe that the
adversary update is only coupled with the parameters of the first layer of the
network. This inspires us to restrict most of the forward and back propagation
within the first layer of the network during adversary updates. This effectively
reduces the total number of full forward and backward propagation to only one
for each group of adversary updates. Therefore, we refer to this algorithm YOPO
(You Only Propagate Once). Numerical experiments demonstrate that YOPO can
achieve comparable defense accuracy with approximately 1/5 ∼ 1/4 GPU time
of the projected gradient descent (PGD) algorithm .3

∗

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Authors
3
Our codes are available at https://github.com/a1600012888/YOPO-You-Only-Propagate-Once

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

