On the Transfer of Inductive Bias
from Simulation to the Real World:
a New Disentanglement Dataset
Muhammad Waleed Gondal1⇤†
Manuel Wüthrich1⇤
Ðord̄e Miladinović2
12
3
Francesco Locatello
Martin Breidt
Valentin Volchkov1
Joel Akpo1
4
1
Olivier Bachem
Bernhard Schölkopf
Stefan Bauer1†
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Department of Computer Science ETH Zurich
3
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
4
Google Research, Brain Team
1

2

Abstract
Learning meaningful and compact representations with disentangled semantic
aspects is considered to be of key importance in representation learning. Since
real-world data is notoriously costly to collect, many recent state-of-the-art disentanglement models have heavily relied on synthetic toy data-sets. In this paper,
we propose a novel data-set which consists of over one million images of physical
3D objects with seven factors of variation, such as object color, shape, size and
position. In order to be able to control all the factors of variation precisely, we
built an experimental platform where the objects are being moved by a robotic
arm. In addition, we provide two more datasets which consist of simulations of
the experimental setup. These datasets provide for the first time the possibility to
systematically investigate how well different disentanglement methods perform on
real data in comparison to simulation, and how simulated data can be leveraged
to build better representations of the real world. We provide a first experimental
study of these questions and our results indicate that learned models transfer poorly,
but that model and hyperparameter selection is an effective means of transferring
information to the real world.

1

Introduction

In representation learning it is commonly assumed that a high-dimensional observation X is generated
from low-dimensional factors of variation G. The goal is usually to revert this process by searching
for a latent embedding Z which replicates the underlying generative factors G, e.g. shape, size or
color. Learning well-disentangled representations of complex sensory data has been identified as
one of the key challenges in the quest for artificial intelligence (AI) [2, 45, 31, 3, 48, 29, 54], since
they should contain all the information present in the observations in a compact and interpretable
structure [2, 26, 8] while being independent from the task at hand [15, 33].
Disentangled representations may be useful for (semi-)supervised learning of downstream tasks,
transfer and few-shot learning [2, 49, 39]. Further, such representations allow to filter out nuisance
factors [27], to perform interventions and to answer counterfactual questions [44, 50, 45]. First
⇤
†

These authors contributed equally.
Correspondence to: waleed.gondal@tue.mpg.de, stefan.bauer@inf.ethz.ch

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

