Implicit Regularization in Deep Matrix Factorization
Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University and Institute for Advanced Study
arora@cs.princeton.edu

Nadav Cohen
Tel Aviv University
cohennadav@cs.tau.ac.il

Wei Hu
Princeton University
huwei@cs.princeton.edu

Yuping Luo
Princeton University
yupingl@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Efforts to understand the generalization mystery in deep learning have led to the
belief that gradient-based optimization induces a form of implicit regularization, a
bias towards models of low “complexity.” We study the implicit regularization of
gradient descent over deep linear neural networks for matrix completion and sensing, a model referred to as deep matrix factorization. Our first finding, supported by
theory and experiments, is that adding depth to a matrix factorization enhances an
implicit tendency towards low-rank solutions, oftentimes leading to more accurate
recovery. Secondly, we present theoretical and empirical arguments questioning
a nascent view by which implicit regularization in matrix factorization can be
captured using simple mathematical norms. Our results point to the possibility that
the language of standard regularizers may not be rich enough to fully encompass
the implicit regularization brought forth by gradient-based optimization.

1

Introduction

It is a mystery how deep neural networks generalize despite having far more learnable parameters than
training examples. Explicit regularization techniques alone cannot account for this generalization,
as they do not prevent the networks from being able to fit random data (see [52]). A view by which
gradient-based optimization induces an implicit regularization has thus arisen. Of course, this view
would be uninsightful if “implicit regularization” were treated as synonymous with “promoting generalization” — the question is whether we can characterize the implicit regularization independently
of any validation data. Notably, the mere use of the term “regularization” already predisposes us
towards characterizations based on known explicit regularizers (e.g. a constraint on some norm of the
parameters), but one must also be open to the possibility that something else is afoot.
An old argument (cf. [25, 29]) traces implicit regularization in deep learning to beneficial effects of
noise introduced by small-batch stochastic optimization. The feeling is that solutions that do not
generalize correspond to “sharp minima,” and added noise prevents convergence to such solutions.
However, recent evidence (e.g. [26, 51]) suggests that deterministic (or near-deterministic) gradientbased algorithms can also generalize, and thus a different explanation is in order.
A major hurdle in this study is that implicit regularization in deep learning seems to kick in only
with certain types of data (not with random data for example), and we lack mathematical tools for
reasoning about real-life data. Thus one needs a simple test-bed for the investigation, where data
admits a crisp mathematical formulation. Following earlier works, we focus on the problem of
matrix completion: given a randomly chosen subset of entries from an unknown matrix W ∗ , the
task is to recover the unseen entries. To cast this as a prediction problem, we may view each entry
in W ∗ as a data point: observed entries constitute the training set, and the average reconstruction
error over the unobserved entries is the test error, quantifying generalization. Fitting the observed
entries is obviously an underdetermined problem with multiple solutions. However, an extensive
body of work (see [11] for a survey) has shown that if W ∗ is low-rank, certain technical assumptions
(e.g. “incoherence”) are satisfied and sufficiently many entries are observed, then various algorithms
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

