On the Power and Limitations of Random Features
for Understanding Neural Networks

Gilad Yehudai
Ohad Shamir
Weizmann Institute of Science
{gilad.yehudai,ohad.shamir}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Recently, a spate of papers have provided positive theoretical results for training
over-parameterized neural networks (where the network size is larger than what
is needed to achieve low error). The key insight is that with sufficient overparameterization, gradient-based methods will implicitly leave some components
of the network relatively unchanged, so the optimization dynamics will behave as if
those components are essentially fixed at their initial random values. In fact, fixing
these explicitly leads to the well-known approach of learning with random features
(e.g. [27, 29]). In other words, these techniques imply that we can successfully
learn with neural networks, whenever we can successfully learn with random
features. In this paper, we formalize the link between existing results and random
features, and argue that despite the impressive positive results, random feature
approaches are also inherently limited in what they can explain. In particular, we
prove that random features cannot be used to learn even a single ReLU neuron
(over standard Gaussian inputs in Rd and poly(d) weights), unless the network size
(or magnitude of its weights) is exponentially large in d. Since a single neuron
is known to be learnable with gradient-based methods, we conclude that we are
still far from a satisfying general explanation for the empirical success of neural
networks. For completeness we also provide a simple self-contained proof, using
a random features technique, that one-hidden-layer neural networks can learn
low-degree polynomials.

1

Introduction

Deep learning, in the form of artificial neural networks, has seen a dramatic resurgence in popularity
in recent years. This is mainly due to impressive performance gains on various difficult learning
problems, in fields such as computer vision, natural language processing and many others. Despite the
practical success of neural networks, our theoretical understanding of them is still very incomplete.
A key aspect of modern networks is that they tend to be very large, usually with many more parameters
than the size of the training data: In fact, so many that in principle, they can simply memorize all
the training examples (as shown in the influential work of Zhang et al. [40]). The fact that such
huge, over-parameterized networks are still able to learn and generalize is one of the big mysteries
concerning deep learning. A current leading hypothesis is that over-parameterization makes the
optimization landscape more benign, and encourages standard gradient-based training methods to find
weight configurations that fit the training data as well as generalize (even though there might be many
other configurations which fit the training data without any generalization). However, pinpointing the
exact mechanism by which over-parameterization helps is still an open problem.
Recently, a spate of papers (such as [4, 11, 14, 2, 23, 15, 9, 3, 1]) provided positive results for training
and learning with over-parameterized neural networks. Although they differ in details, they are
all based on the following striking observation: When the networks are sufficiently large, standard
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

