Noise-tolerant fair classification
Alexandre Lamy⇤
Columbia University
a.lamy@columbia.edu

Ziyuan Zhong⇤
Columbia University
ziyuan.zhong@columbia.edu

Aditya Krishna Menon
Google
adityakmenon@google.com

Nakul Verma
Columbia University
verma@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Fairness-aware learning involves designing algorithms that do not discriminate
with respect to some sensitive feature (e.g., race or gender). Existing work on the
problem operates under the assumption that the sensitive feature available in one’s
training sample is perfectly reliable. This assumption may be violated in many
real-world cases: for example, respondents to a survey may choose to conceal or
obfuscate their group identity out of fear of potential discrimination. This poses
the question of whether one can still learn fair classifiers given noisy sensitive
features. In this paper, we answer the question in the affirmative: we show that
if one measures fairness using the mean-difference score, and sensitive features
are subject to noise from the mutually contaminated learning model, then owing
to a simple identity we only need to change the desired fairness-tolerance. The
requisite tolerance can be estimated by leveraging existing noise-rate estimators
from the label noise literature. We finally show that our procedure is empirically
effective on two case-studies involving sensitive feature censoring.

1

Introduction

Classification is concerned with maximally discriminating between a number of pre-defined groups.
Fairness-aware classification concerns the analysis and design of classifiers that do not discriminate
with respect to some sensitive feature (e.g., race, gender, age, income). Recently, much progress
has been made on devising appropriate measures of fairness (Calders et al., 2009; Dwork et al.,
2011; Feldman, 2015; Hardt et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2017b,a; Kusner et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018;
Speicher et al., 2018; Heidari et al., 2019), and means of achieving them (Zemel et al., 2013; Zafar
et al., 2017b; Calmon et al., 2017; Dwork et al., 2018; Agarwal et al., 2018; Donini et al., 2018;
Cotter et al., 2018; Williamson & Menon, 2019; Mohri et al., 2019).
Typically, fairness is achieved by adding constraints which depend on the sensitive feature, and then
correcting one’s learning procedure to achieve these fairness constraints. For example, suppose the
data comprises of pairs of individuals and their loan repay status, and the sensitive feature is gender.
Then, we may add a constraint that we should predict equal loan repayment for both men and women
(see §3.2 for a more precise statement). However, this and similar approaches assume that we are able
to correctly measure or obtain the sensitive feature. In many real-world cases, one may only observe
noisy versions of the sensitive feature. For example, survey respondents may choose to conceal or
obfuscate their group identity out of concerns of potential mistreatment or outright discrimination.
One is then brought to ask whether fair classification in the presence of such noisy sensitive features
is still possible. Indeed, if the noise is high enough and all original information about the sensitive
⇤

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

