Adaptive Influence Maximization with
Myopic Feedback

Binghui Peng∗
Columbia University
bp2601@columbia.edu

Wei Chen
Microsoft Research
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the adaptive influence maximization problem with myopic feedback
under the independent cascade model: one sequentially selects k nodes as seeds
one by one from a social network, and each selected seed returns the immediate
neighbors it activates as the feedback available for later selections, and the goal is
to maximize the expected number of total activated nodes, referred as the influence
spread. We show that the adaptivity gap, the ratio between the optimal adaptive
influence spread and the optimal non-adaptive influence spread, is at most 4 and at
least e/(e − 1), and the approximation ratios with respect to the optimal adaptive
influence spread of both the non-adaptive greedy and adaptive greedy algorithms
e2 +1
1
are at least 14 (1 − 1e ) and at most (e+1)
2 < 1 − e . Moreover, the approximation
ratio of the non-adaptive greedy algorithm is no worse than that of the adaptive
greedy algorithm, when considering all graphs. Our result confirms a long-standing
open conjecture of Golovin and Krause (2011) on the constant approximation ratio
of adaptive greedy with myopic feedback, and it also suggests that adaptive greedy
may not bring much benefit under myopic feedback.

1

Introduction

Influence maximization is the task of given a social network and a stochastic diffusion model on
the network, finding the k seed nodes with the largest expected influence spread in the model [11].
Influence maximization and its variants have applications in viral marketing, rumor control, etc. and
have been extensively studied (cf. [6, 12]).
In this paper, we focus on the adaptive influence maximization problem, where seed nodes are
sequentially selected one by one, and after each seed selection, partial or full diffusion results from
the seed are returned as the feedback, which could be used for subsequent seed selections. Two main
types of feedback have been proposed and studied before: (a) full-adoption feedback, where the entire
diffusion process from the seed selected is returned as the feedback, and (b) myopic feedback, where
only the immediate neighbors activated by the selected seed are returned as the feedback. Under
the common independent cascade (IC) model where every edge in the graph has an independent
probability of passing influence, Golovin and Krause [7] show that the full-adoption feedback model
satisfies the key adaptive submodularity property, which enables a simple adaptive greedy algorithm
to achieve a (1 − 1/e) approximation to the adaptive optimal solution. However, the IC model with
myopic feedback is not adaptive submodular, and Golovin and Krause [7] only conjecture that in
this case the adaptive greedy algorithm still guarantees a constant approximation. To the best of our
knowledge, this conjecture is still open before our result in this paper, which confirms that indeed
adaptive greedy is a constant approximation of the adaptive optimal solution.
∗
Work is mostly done while Binghui was at Tsinghua University and visiting Microsoft Research Asia as an
intern.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

