Hypothesis Set Stability and Generalization

Dylan J. Foster
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
dylanf@mit.edu

Spencer Greenberg
Spark Wave
admin@sparkwave.tech

Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyen@satyenkale.com

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research and Courant Institute
mohri@google.com

Karthik Sridharan
Cornell University
sridharan@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We present a study of generalization for data-dependent hypothesis sets. We give a
general learning guarantee for data-dependent hypothesis sets based on a notion of
transductive Rademacher complexity. Our main result is a generalization bound
for data-dependent hypothesis sets expressed in terms of a notion of hypothesis set
stability and a notion of Rademacher complexity for data-dependent hypothesis sets
that we introduce. This bound admits as special cases both standard Rademacher
complexity bounds and algorithm-dependent uniform stability bounds. We also
illustrate the use of these learning bounds in the analysis of several scenarios.

1

Introduction

Most generalization bounds in learning theory hold for a fixed hypothesis set, selected before
receiving a sample. This includes learning bounds based on covering numbers, VC-dimension,
pseudo-dimension, Rademacher complexity, local Rademacher complexity, and other complexity
measures [Pollard, 1984, Zhang, 2002, Vapnik, 1998, Koltchinskii and Panchenko, 2002, Bartlett
et al., 2002]. Some alternative guarantees have also been derived for specific algorithms. Among
them, the most general family is that of uniform stability bounds given by Bousquet and Elisseeff
[2002]. These bounds were recently significantly improved by Feldman and Vondrak [2019], who
proved guarantees that are informative, even when the stability parameter β is only in o(1), as
√
opposed to o(1/ m). The log2 m factor in these bounds was later reduced to log m by Bousquet
et al. [2019]. Bounds for a restricted class of algorithms were also recently presented by Maurer
[2017], under a number of assumptions on the smoothness of the loss function. Appendix A gives
more background on stability.
In practice, machine learning engineers commonly resort to hypothesis sets depending on the same
sample as the one used for training. This includes instances where a regularization, a feature
transformation, or a data normalization is selected using the training sample, or other instances
where the family of predictors is restricted to a smaller class based on the sample received. In other
instances, as is common in deep learning, the data representation and the predictor are learned using
the same sample. In ensemble learning, the sample used to train models sometimes coincides with
the one used to determine their aggregation weights. However, standard generalization bounds are
not directly applicable for these scenarios since they assume a fixed hypothesis set.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

