Practical Two-Step Look-Ahead
Bayesian Optimization
Jian Wu
wujian046@gmail.com

Peter I. Frazier⇤
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
pf98@cornell.edu

Abstract
Expected improvement and other acquisition functions widely used in Bayesian optimization use a “one-step” assumption: they value objective function evaluations
assuming no future evaluations will be performed. Because we usually evaluate
over multiple steps, this assumption may leave substantial room for improvement.
Existing theory gives acquisition functions looking multiple steps in the future but
calculating them requires solving a high-dimensional continuous-state continuousaction Markov decision process (MDP). Fast exact solutions of this MDP remain
out of reach of today’s methods. As a result, previous two- and multi-step lookahead Bayesian optimization algorithms are either too expensive to implement in
most practical settings or resort to heuristics that may fail to fully realize the
promise of two-step lookahead. This paper proposes a computationally efficient
algorithm that provides an accurate solution to the two-step lookahead Bayesian
optimization problem in seconds to at most several minutes of computation per
batch of evaluations. The resulting acquisition function provides increased query
efficiency and robustness compared with previous two- and multi-step lookahead
methods in both single-threaded and batch experiments. This unlocks the value of
two-step lookahead in practice. We demonstrate the value of our algorithm with
extensive experiments on synthetic test functions and real-world problems.

1

Introduction

We consider minimization of a continuous black-box function f over a hyperrectangle A ✓ Rd .
We suppose evaluations f (x) are time-consuming to obtain, do not provide first- or second-order
derivative information and are noise-free. Such problems arise when tuning hyperparameters of
complex machine learning models [Snoek et al., 2012] and optimizing engineering systems using
physics-based simulators [Forrester et al., 2008].
We consider this problem within a Bayesian optimization (BayesOpt) framework [Brochu et al., 2010,
Frazier, 2018]. BayesOpt methods contain two components: (1) a statistical model over f , typically a
Gaussian process [Rasmussen and Williams, 2006]; and (2) an acquisition function computed from
the statistical model that quantifies the value of evaluating f . After a first stage of evaluations of f ,
often at points chosen uniformly at random from A, we behave iteratively: we fit the statistical model
to all available data; then optimize the resulting acquisition function (which can be evaluated quickly
and often provides derivative information) to find the best point(s) at which to evaluate f ; perform
these evaluations; and repeat until our evaluation budget is exhausted.
⇤

Peter Frazier is also a Staff Data Scientist at Uber

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

