Consistency-based Semi-supervised Learning for
Object Detection

Jisoo Jeong∗ , Seungeui Lee∗, Jeesoo Kim & Nojun Kwak
Department of Transdisciplinary Studies
Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
{soo3553, seungeui.lee, kimjiss0305, nojunk}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Making a precise annotation in a large dataset is crucial to the performance of object
detection. While the object detection task requires a huge number of annotated
samples to guarantee its performance, placing bounding boxes for every object
in each sample is time-consuming and costs a lot. To alleviate this problem, we
propose a Consistency-based Semi-supervised learning method for object Detection
(CSD), which is a way of using consistency constraints as a tool for enhancing
detection performance by making full use of available unlabeled data. Specifically,
the consistency constraint is applied not only for object classification but also
for the localization. We also proposed Background Elimination (BE) to avoid the
negative effect of the predominant backgrounds on the detection performance. We
have evaluated the proposed CSD both in single-stage2 and two-stage detectors3
and the results show the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Large datasets with complete annotations are essential to the success of object detection. Training
an object detection algorithm requires annotations in the level of bounding box as shown in Fig. 1
(a). Labeling for object detection requires a pair of a category and a bounding box location for each
object within each image and it is known that it takes about 10 seconds for labeling an object [1, 2].
As such, labeling for object detection consumes enormous cost, time, and effort. For example, the
Caltech pedestrian detection benchmark took about 400 hours to annotate 250k images [3].
To reduce the cost of such labeling, weakly supervised learning and Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL)
methods have been studied. Weakly supervised object detection methods [4, 5, 6, 7] are required to
learn only with image-level labeled data, as shown in Figure 1 (b). Although this takes less efforts than
the existing box-level labeling method, it results in a far inferior localization performance compared
to fully supervised learning. The weakly semi-supervised object detection method [8, 9] uses fully
labeled data as well as weakly labeled data, as shown in Figure 1 (c). The complete semi-supervised
object detection method is to improve performance by using unlabeled data in combination with
the box-level labeled data, as shown in Figure 1 (d). Studies on complete semi-supervised object
detection have recently studied [10, 11] and we also deal with this problem.
Recently, there have been studies that have improved the performance of semi-supervised learning
using self-training [10, 11]. They have improved the performance by utilizing high-confident samples
∗

Equal contribution
https://github.com/soo89/CSD-SSD
3
https://github.com/soo89/CSD-RFCN
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

