Neural Proximal/Trust Region Policy Optimization
Attains Globally Optimal Policy
Boyi Liu⇤†

Qi Cai⇤‡

Zhuoran Yang§

Zhaoran Wang¶

Abstract
Proximal policy optimization and trust region policy optimization (PPO and
TRPO) with actor and critic parametrized by neural networks achieve significant
empirical success in deep reinforcement learning. However, due to nonconvexity,
the global convergence of PPO and TRPO remains less understood, which separates theory from practice. In this paper, we prove that a variant of PPO and TRPO
equipped with overparametrized neural networks converges to the globally optimal policy at a sublinear rate. The key to our analysis is the global convergence
of infinite-dimensional mirror descent under a notion of one-point monotonicity,
where the gradient and iterate are instantiated by neural networks. In particular, the desirable representation power and optimization geometry induced by the
overparametrization of such neural networks allow them to accurately approximate the infinite-dimensional gradient and iterate.

1

Introduction

Policy optimization aims to find the optimal policy that maximizes the expected total reward through
gradient-based updates. Coupled with neural networks, proximal policy optimization (PPO) [40]
and trust region policy optimization (TRPO) [39] are among the most important workhorses behind
the empirical success of deep reinforcement learning across applications such as games [34] and
robotics [13]. However, the global convergence of policy optimization, including PPO and TRPO,
remains less understood due to multiple sources of nonconvexity, including (i) the nonconvexity of
the expected total reward over the infinite-dimensional policy space and (ii) the parametrization of
both policy (actor) and action-value function (critic) using neural networks, which leads to nonconvexity in optimizing their parameters. As a result, PPO and TRPO are only guaranteed to monotonically improve the expected total reward over the infinite-dimensional policy space [23, 24, 39, 40],
while the global optimality of the attained policy, the rate of convergence, as well as the impact
of parametrizing policy and action-value function all remain unclear. Such a gap between theory
and practice hinders us from better diagnosing the possible failure of deep reinforcement learning
[37, 19, 21] and applying it to critical domains such as healthcare [28] and autonomous driving [38]
in a more principled manner.
Closing such a theory-practice gap boils down to answering three key questions: (i) In the ideal case
that allows for infinite-dimensional policy updates based on exact action-value functions, how do
PPO and TRPO converge to the optimal policy? (ii) When the action-value function is parametrized
by a neural network, how does temporal-difference learning (TD) [41] converge to an approximate
action-value function with sufficient accuracy within each iteration of PPO and TRPO? (iii) When
⇤

equal contribution
Northwestern University; boyiliu2018@u.northwestern.edu
‡
Northwestern University; qicai2022@u.northwestern.edu
§
Princeton University; zy6@princeton.edu
¶
Northwestern University; zhaoranwang@gmail.com
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

