One-Shot Object Detection
with Co-Attention and Co-Excitation
Ting-I Hsieh1 , Yi-Chen Lo1 , Hwann-Tzong Chen1,3 , Tyng-Luh Liu2,4
National Tsing Hua University, 2 Academia Sinica, Taiwan, 3 Aeolus Robotics, 4 Taiwan AI Labs
{tingihsieh.tw,howardyclo}@gmail.com, htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw, liutyng@ailabs.tw
1

Abstract
This paper aims to tackle the challenging problem of one-shot object detection.
Given a query image patch whose class label is not included in the training data,
the goal of the task is to detect all instances of the same class in a target image. To
this end, we develop a novel co-attention and co-excitation (CoAE) framework that
makes contributions in three key technical aspects. First, we propose to use the nonlocal operation to explore the co-attention embodied in each query-target pair and
yield region proposals accounting for the one-shot situation. Second, we formulate a
squeeze-and-co-excitation scheme that can adaptively emphasize correlated feature
channels to help uncover relevant proposals and eventually the target objects. Third,
we design a margin-based ranking loss for implicitly learning a metric to predict
the similarity of a region proposal to the underlying query, no matter its class label
is seen or unseen in training. The resulting model is therefore a two-stage detector
that yields a strong baseline on both VOC and MS-COCO under one-shot setting
of detecting objects from both seen and never-seen classes. Codes are available at
https://github.com/timy90022/One-Shot-Object-Detection.

1

Introduction

The ability of humans to learn new concepts under limited guidance is remarkable. Take, for example,
the task of learning to identify and localize a never-before-seen object in an image based on a given
query template. Even without prior knowledge about the object’s category, the human visual system
has evolved to be able to handle such a task by performing different functionalities that include
grouping the pixels of objects as a whole, extracting distinctive cues for comparison, and exhibiting
attention or fixation for localization. All these can be done under a wide range of variations in object
appearances, viewing angles, lighting conditions, and so on.
The goal of this work is to address the problem of one-shot object detection by taking account of
achieving the aforementioned capability and flexibility of the human visual system when a similar
one-shot task of perceptual categorization and localization is performed. We assume that a query
image of an object will be provided as an exemplar or a prototype of some unseen class, and the
task is to localize the most likely occurrences of the query object in a new target image. Further,
we require that the query object must not belong to any seen class at any level in the categorical
hierarchies during training. It is also worth noting that the definition of object category may vary
over different context [1]. The contextual information for our one-shot scenario of object detection
comes in two forms. First, the target image provides the spatial context, implying the likelihood of
observing an object at a specific location with respect to the background and other foreground objects.
Second, the query image and the target image jointly provide the categorical context. The exact level
in the categorical hierarchies that both the query and the target objects belong to is determined by
how they share significant numbers of attributes (such as color, texture, and shape) in common.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

