Efficient Regret Minimization Algorithm for
Extensive-Form Correlated Equilibrium∗
Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Chun Kai Ling
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu

Fei Fang
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
feif@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Self-play methods based on regret minimization have become the state of the art
for computing Nash equilibria in large two-players zero-sum extensive-form games.
These methods fundamentally rely on the hierarchical structure of the players’
sequential strategy spaces to construct a regret minimizer that recursively minimizes
regret at each decision point in the game tree. In this paper, we introduce the first
efficient regret minimization algorithm for computing extensive-form correlated
equilibria in large two-player general-sum games with no chance moves. Designing
such an algorithm is significantly more challenging than designing one for the Nash
equilibrium counterpart, as the constraints that define the space of correlation plans
lack the hierarchical structure and might even form cycles. We show that some of
the constraints are redundant and can be excluded from consideration, and present
an efficient algorithm that generates the space of extensive-form correlation plans
incrementally from the remaining constraints. This structural decomposition is
achieved via a special convexity-preserving operation that we coin scaled extension.
We show that a regret minimizer can be designed for a scaled extension of any
two convex sets, and that from the decomposition we then obtain a global regret
minimizer. Our algorithm produces feasible iterates. Experiments show that it
significantly outperforms prior approaches and for larger problems it is the only
viable option.

1

Introduction

In recent years, self-play methods based on regret minimization, such as counterfactual regret
minimization (CFR) [Zinkevich et al., 2007] and its faster variants [Tammelin et al., 2015; Brown
et al., 2017; Brown and Sandholm, 2019a] have emerged as powerful tools for computing Nash
equilibria in large extensive-form games, and have been instrumental in several recent milestones
in poker [Bowling et al., 2015; Brown and Sandholm, 2017a,b; Moravčík et al., 2017; Brown and
Sandholm, 2019b]. These methods exploit the hierarchical structure of the sequential strategy spaces
of the players to construct a regret minimizer that recursively minimizes regret locally at each decision
∗

The full version of this paper is available on arXiv.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

