On the Downstream Performance of Compressed
Word Embeddings

Avner May
Jian Zhang
Tri Dao
Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{avnermay, zjian, trid, chrismre}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Compressing word embeddings is important for deploying NLP models in memoryconstrained settings. However, understanding what makes compressed embeddings
perform well on downstream tasks is challenging—existing measures of compression quality often fail to distinguish between embeddings that perform well and
those that do not. We thus propose the eigenspace overlap score as a new measure.
We relate the eigenspace overlap score to downstream performance by developing
generalization bounds for the compressed embeddings in terms of this score, in the
context of linear and logistic regression. We then show that we can lower bound the
eigenspace overlap score for a simple uniform quantization compression method,
helping to explain the strong empirical performance of this method. Finally, we
show that by using the eigenspace overlap score as a selection criterion between
embeddings drawn from a representative set we compressed, we can efficiently
identify the better performing embedding with up to 2× lower selection error rates
than the next best measure of compression quality, and avoid the cost of training a
model for each task of interest.

1

Introduction

In recent years, word embeddings [22, 28, 23, 29, 10] have brought large improvements to a wide range
of applications in natural language processing (NLP) [1, 5, 37]. However, these word embeddings can
occupy a large amount of memory, making it expensive to deploy them in data centers, and impractical
to use them in memory-constrained environments like smartphones. To reduce and amortize these
costs, embeddings can be compressed [e.g., 33] and shared across many downstream tasks [7].
Recently, there have been numerous successful methods proposed for compressing embeddings; these
methods take a variety of approaches, ranging from compression using k-means clustering [2] to
dictionary learning using neural networks [33, 6].
The goal of this work is to gain a deeper understanding of what makes compressed embeddings
perform well on downstream tasks. Practically, this understanding could allow for evaluating the
quality of a compressed embedding without having to train a model for each task of interest. Our work
is motivated by two surprising empirical observations: First, we find that existing ways [40, 3, 41] of
measuring the quality of compressed embeddings do not effectively explain the relative downstream
performance of different compressed embeddings—for example, failing to discriminate between
embeddings that perform well and those that do not. Second, we observe that a simple uniform
quantization method can match or outperform the state-of-the-art deep compositional code learning
method [33] and the k-means compression method [2] in terms of downstream performance. These
observations suggest that there is currently an incomplete understanding of what makes a compressed
embedding perform well on downstream tasks. One way to narrow this gap in our understanding is to
find a measure of compression quality that (i) is directly related to generalization performance, and
(ii) can be used to analyze the performance of uniformly quantized embeddings.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

