Neural Temporal-Difference Learning
Converges to Global Optima
Qi Cai ⇤

Zhuoran Yang †

Jason D. Lee ‡

Zhaoran Wang ⇤

Abstract
Temporal-difference learning (TD), coupled with neural networks, is among the
most fundamental building blocks of deep reinforcement learning. However, due
to the nonlinearity in value function approximation, such a coupling leads to nonconvexity and even divergence in optimization. As a result, the global convergence
of neural TD remains unclear. In this paper, we prove for the first time that neural
TD converges at a sublinear rate to the global optimum of the mean-squared projected Bellman error for policy evaluation. In particular, we show how such global
convergence is enabled by the overparametrization of neural networks, which also
plays a vital role in the empirical success of neural TD.1

1

Introduction

Given a policy, temporal-different learning (TD) [49] aims to learn the corresponding (action)value function by following the semigradients of the mean-squared Bellman error in an online
manner. As the most-used policy evaluation algorithm, TD serves as the “critic” component of many
reinforcement learning algorithms, such as the actor-critic algorithm [31] and trust-region policy
optimization [47]. In particular, in deep reinforcement learning, TD is often applied to learn value
functions parametrized by neural networks [36, 39, 24], which gives rise to neural TD. As policy
improvement relies crucially on policy evaluation, the optimization efficiency and statistical accuracy
of neural TD are critical to the performance of deep reinforcement learning. Towards theoretically
understanding deep reinforcement learning, the goal of this paper is to characterize the convergence
of neural TD.
Despite the broad applications of neural TD, its convergence remains rarely understood. Even
with linear value function approximation, the nonasymptotic convergence of TD remains open until
recently [6, 33, 14, 48, 45], although its asymptotic convergence is well understood [28, 55, 9, 32,
8]. Meanwhile, with nonlinear value function approximation, TD is known to diverge in general
[4, 11, 55]. To remedy this issue, [7] propose nonlinear (gradient) TD, which uses the tangent
vectors of nonlinear value functions in place of the feature vectors in linear TD. Unlike linear TD,
which converges to the global optimum of the mean-squared projected Bellman error (MSPBE),
nonlinear TD is only guaranteed to converge to a local optimum asymptotically. As a result, the
statistical accuracy of the value function learned by nonlinear TD remains unclear. In contrast to such
conservative theory, neural TD, which straightforwardly combines TD with neural networks without
the explicit local linearization in nonlinear TD, often learns a desired value function that generalizes
well to unseen states in practice [18, 2, 26]. Hence, a gap separates theory from practice.
⇤

Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences, Northwestern University
Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University
‡
Department of Electronic Engineering, Princeton University
1
Beyond policy evaluation, we establish the global convergence of neural (soft) Q-learning, which is further
connected to that of policy gradient algorithms. See https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10027 for the full
version.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

