Copulas as High-Dimensional Generative Models:
Vine Copula Autoencoders
Natasa Tagasovska
Department of Information Systems
HEC Lausanne, Switzerland
natasa.tagasovska@unil.ch

Damien Ackerer
Swissquote Bank
Gland, Switzerland
damien.ackerer@swissquote.ch

Thibault Vatter
Department of Statistics
Columbia University, New York, USA
thibault.vatter@columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce the vine copula autoencoder (VCAE), a flexible generative model
for high-dimensional distributions built in a straightforward three-step procedure.
First, an autoencoder (AE) compresses the data into a lower dimensional representation. Second, the multivariate distribution of the encoded data is estimated with
vine copulas. Third, a generative model is obtained by combining the estimated
distribution with the decoder part of the AE. As such, the proposed approach
can transform any already trained AE into a flexible generative model at a low
computational cost. This is an advantage over existing generative models such as
adversarial networks and variational AEs which can be difficult to train and can
impose strong assumptions on the latent space. Experiments on MNIST, Street
View House Numbers and Large-Scale CelebFaces Attributes datasets show that
VCAEs can achieve competitive results to standard baselines.

1

Introduction

Exploiting the statistical structure of high-dimensional distributions behind audio, images, or video
data is at the core of machine learning. Generative models aim not only at creating feature representations, but also at providing means of sampling new realistic data points. Two classes are typically
distinguished: explicit and implicit generative models. Explicit generative models make distributional
assumptions on the data generative process. For example, variational autoencoders (VAEs) assume
that the latent features are independent and normally distributed [37]. Implicit generative models
make no statistical assumption but leverage another mechanism to transform noise into realistic data.
For example, generative adversarial networks (GANs) use a discriminant model penalizing the loss
function of a generative model producing unrealistic data [22]. Interestingly, adversarial autoencoders (AAEs) combined both features as they use a discriminant model penalizing the loss function
of an encoder when the encoded data distribution differs from the prior (Gaussian) distribution [48].
All of these new types of generative models have achieved unprecedent results and also proved to
be computationally more efficient than the first generation of deep generative models which require
Markov chain Monte Carlo methods [32, 30]. However, adversarial approaches require multiple
models to be trained, leading to difficulties and computational burden [62, 26, 24], and variational
approaches make (strong) distributional assumptions, potentially detrimental to the generative model
performance [64].
We present a novel approach to construct a generative model which is simple, makes no prior
distributional assumption (over the input or latent space), and is computationally efficient: the vine
copula autoencoders (VCAEs). Our approach, schematized in Figure 1 combines three tasks. First, an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

