Learning From Brains How to Regularize Machines

Zhe Li1-2,* , Wieland Brendel4-5 , Edgar Y. Walker1-2,7 , Erick Cobos1-2 ,
Taliah Muhammad1-2 , Jacob Reimer1-2 , Matthias Bethge4-6 ,
Fabian H. Sinz2,5,7 , Xaq Pitkow1-3 , Andreas S. Tolias1-3
1

2

Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine
Center for Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence, Baylor College of Medicine
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
4
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen
5
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of Tübingen
6
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Tübingen
7
Institute Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen
*

zhel@bcm.edu

Abstract
Despite impressive performance on numerous visual tasks, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) — unlike brains — are often highly sensitive to small perturbations of their input, e.g. adversarial noise leading to erroneous decisions. We
propose to regularize CNNs using large-scale neuroscience data to learn more
robust neural features in terms of representational similarity. We presented natural
images to mice and measured the responses of thousands of neurons from cortical
visual areas. Next, we denoised the notoriously variable neural activity using strong
predictive models trained on this large corpus of responses from the mouse visual
system, and calculated the representational similarity for millions of pairs of images
from the model’s predictions. We then used the neural representation similarity
to regularize CNNs trained on image classification by penalizing intermediate
representations that deviated from neural ones. This preserved performance of
baseline models when classifying images under standard benchmarks, while maintaining substantially higher performance compared to baseline or control models
when classifying noisy images. Moreover, the models regularized with cortical
representations also improved model robustness in terms of adversarial attacks.
This demonstrates that regularizing with neural data can be an effective tool to
create an inductive bias towards more robust inference.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural network (CNN) models are widely used in computer vision tasks, and can
achieve super-human performance on many classification tasks [1, 2]. However, there is a still huge
gap between these models and the human visual system in terms of robustness and generalization
[3, 4, 5]. In fact, the invariant neural representations and the ability to generalize across complex
transformations has been seen as the hallmark of visual intelligence [6, 7, 8, 9]. Understanding why
the visual system has superior performance on so many perceptual problems is one of the central
questions of neuroscience and machine learning. In particular, CNNs are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks and noise distortions [10, 3, 4] while human perception is barely affected by these small
image perturbations. This highlights that state-of-the-art CNNs lack human level scene understanding
and do not rely on the same causal features as humans for visual perception [4, 5, 11].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

