Adversarial Training for Free!

Ali Shafahi
University of Maryland
ashafahi@cs.umd.edu

Mahyar Najibi
University of Maryland
najibi@cs.umd.edu

Amin Ghiasi
University of Maryland
amin@cs.umd.edu

Zheng Xu
University of Maryland
xuzh@cs.umd.edu

John Dickerson
University of Maryland
john@cs.umd.edu

Christoph Studer
Cornell University
studer@cornell.edu

Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland
lsd@umiacs.umd.edu

Gavin Taylor
United States Naval Academy
taylor@usna.edu

Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
tomg@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Adversarial training, in which a network is trained on adversarial examples, is one
of the few defenses against adversarial attacks that withstands strong attacks. Unfortunately, the high cost of generating strong adversarial examples makes standard
adversarial training impractical on large-scale problems like ImageNet. We present
an algorithm that eliminates the overhead cost of generating adversarial examples
by recycling the gradient information computed when updating model parameters.
Our “free” adversarial training algorithm achieves comparable robustness to PGD
adversarial training on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets at negligible additional cost compared to natural training, and can be 7 to 30 times faster than other
strong adversarial training methods. Using a single workstation with 4 P100 GPUs
and 2 days of runtime, we can train a robust model for the large-scale ImageNet
classification task that maintains 40% accuracy against PGD attacks.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been widely applied to various computer vision tasks with excellent performance.
Prior to the realization of the adversarial example phenomenon by Biggio et al. [2013], Szegedy et al.
[2013], model performance on clean examples was the the main evaluation criteria. However, in
security-critical applications, robustness to adversarial attacks has emerged as a critical factor.
A robust classifier is one that correctly labels adversarially perturbed images. Alternatively, robustness
may be achieved by detecting and rejecting adversarial examples [Ma et al., 2018, Meng and Chen,
2017, Xu et al., 2017]. Recently, Athalye et al. [2018] broke a complete suite of allegedly robust
defenses, leaving adversarial training, in which the defender augments each minibatch of training
data with adversarial examples [Madry et al., 2017], among the few that remain resistant to attacks.
Adversarial training is time-consuming—in addition to the gradient computation needed to update
the network parameters, each stochastic gradient descent (SGD) iteration requires multiple gradient
computations to produce adversarial images. In fact, it takes 3-30 times longer to form a robust
network with adversarial training than forming a non-robust equivalent. Put simply, the actual
slowdown factor depends on the number of gradient steps used for adversarial example generation.
The high cost of adversarial training has motivated a number of alternatives. Some recent works
replace the perturbation generation in adversarial training with a parameterized generator network
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

