Discovery of Useful Questions as Auxiliary Tasks

Vivek Veeriah1

Matteo Hessel2

Janarthanan Rajendran1

Zhongwen Xu2

Junhyuk Oh2

Hado van Hasselt2

Richard Lewis1
David Silver2

Satinder Singh1,2

Abstract
Arguably, intelligent agents ought to be able to discover their own questions so
that in learning answers for them they learn unanticipated useful knowledge and
skills; this departs from the focus in much of machine learning on agents learning
answers to externally defined questions. We present a novel method for a reinforcement learning (RL) agent to discover questions formulated as general value
functions or GVFs, a fairly rich form of knowledge representation. Specifically,
our method uses non-myopic meta-gradients to learn GVF-questions such that
learning answers to them, as an auxiliary task, induces useful representations for
the main task faced by the RL agent. We demonstrate that auxiliary tasks based
on the discovered GVFs are sufficient, on their own, to build representations that
support main task learning, and that they do so better than popular hand-designed
auxiliary tasks from the literature. Furthermore, we show, in the context of Atari
2600 videogames, how such auxiliary tasks, meta-learned alongside the main task,
can improve the data efficiency of an actor-critic agent.

An increasingly important component of recent approaches to developing flexible, autonomous
agents is posing useful questions about the future for the agent to learn to answer from experience.
The questions can take many forms and serve many purposes. The answers to prediction or control
questions about suitable features of states may directly form useful representations of state (Singh
et al., 2004). Alternatively, prediction and control questions may define auxiliary tasks, that drive
representation learning in the aid of a main task (Jaderberg et al., 2017). Goal-conditional questions
may also drive the acquisition of a diverse set of skills, even before the main task is known, forming a basis for policy composition or exploration (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Veeriah et al., 2018;
Eysenbach et al., 2018; Florensa et al., 2018; Mankowitz et al., 2018; Riedmiller et al., 2018).
In this paper, we consider questions in the form of general value functions (GVFs, Sutton et al.,
2011), with the purpose of using the discovered GVFs as auxiliary tasks to aid the learning of a main
reinforcement learning (RL) task. We chose the GVF formulation for its flexibility: according to the
reward hypothesis (Sutton & Barto, 2018), any goal might be formulated in terms of a scalar signal,
or cumulant (White, 2015), whose discounted sum must be maximized. Additionally, GVF-based
auxiliary tasks have been shown in previous work to improve the sample efficiency of reinforcement
learning agents engaged in learning complex tasks (Mirowski et al., 2017; Jaderberg et al., 2017).
In the literature, GVF-based auxiliary tasks typically required an agent to estimate discounted sums
of suitable handcrafted functions of state, cumulants in the GVF terminology, under handcrafted discount factors. It was then shown that by combining gradients from learning the auxiliary GVFs with
1
2

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. Corresponding author: Vivek Veeriah hvveeriah@umich.edui
DeepMind, London.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

