The Geometry of Deep Networks:
Power Diagram Subdivision

Randall Balestriero, Romain Cosentino, Behnaam Aazhang, Richard G. Baraniuk
Rice University
Houston, Texas, USA

Abstract
We study the geometry of deep (neural) networks (DNs) with piecewise affine and
convex nonlinearities. The layers of such DNs have been shown to be max-affine
spline operators (MASOs) that partition their input space and apply a regiondependent affine mapping to their input to produce their output. We demonstrate
that each MASO layer’s input space partition corresponds to a power diagram
(an extension of the classical Voronoi tiling) with a number of regions that grows
exponentially with respect to the number of units (neurons). We further show
that a composition of MASO layers (e.g., the entire DN) produces a progressively
subdivided power diagram and provide its analytical form. The subdivision process
constrains the affine maps on the potentially exponentially many power diagram
regions with respect to the number of neurons to greatly reduce their complexity.
For classification problems, we obtain a formula for the DN’s decision boundary in
the input space plus a measure of its curvature that depends on the DN’s architecture,
nonlinearities, and weights. Numerous numerical experiments support and extend
our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Today’s machine learning landscape is dominated by deep (neural) networks (DNs), which are
compositions of a large number of simple parameterized linear and nonlinear transformations. Deep
networks perform surprisingly well in a host of applications; however, surprisingly little is known
about why they work so well.
Recently, [BB18a, BB18b] connected a large class of DNs to a special kind of spline, which enables
one to view and analyze the inner workings of a DN using tools from approximation theory and
functional analysis. In particular, when the DN is constructed using convex and piecewise affine
nonlinearities (such as ReLU, Leaky- ReLU, max-pooling, etc.), then its layers can be written as
max-affine spline operators (MASOs). An important consequence for DNs is that each layer partitions
its input space into a set of regions and then processes inputs via a simple affine transformation
that changes continuously from region to region. Understanding the geometry of the layer partition
regions – and how the layer partition regions combine into the DN input partition – is thus key to
understanding the operation of DNs.
There has only been limited work in the geometry of deep networks. The originating MASO
work of [BB18a, BB18b] focused on the analytical form of the region-dependent affine maps and
empirical statistics of the partition without studying the structure of the partition or its construction
through depth. The work of [WBB19] empirically studied the partition highlighting the fact that
knowledge of the region in which each input lies is sufficient to reach high performance. Other
works have focused on the properties of the partition, such as upper bounding the number of regions
[MPCB14, RPK+ 17, HR19]. An explicit characterization of the input space partition of one hidden
layer DNs with ReLU activation has been developed in [ZBH+ 16] by means of tropical geometry.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

