Are sample means in multi-armed bandits
positively or negatively biased?

Jaehyeok Shin1 , Aaditya Ramdas1,2 and Alessandro Rinaldo1
Department of Statistics and Data Science1
Machine Learning Department2
Carnegie Mellon University
{shinjaehyeok, aramdas, arinaldo}@cmu.edu

Abstract
It is well known that in stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB), the sample mean of
an arm is typically not an unbiased estimator of its true mean. In this paper, we
decouple three different sources of this selection bias: adaptive sampling of arms,
adaptive stopping of the experiment, and adaptively choosing which arm to study.
Through a new notion called “optimism” that captures certain natural monotonic
behaviors of algorithms, we provide a clean and unified analysis of how optimistic
rules affect the sign of the bias. The main takeaway message is that optimistic
sampling induces a negative bias, but optimistic stopping and optimistic choosing
both induce a positive bias. These results are derived in a general stochastic MAB
setup that is entirely agnostic to the final aim of the experiment (regret minimization
or best-arm identification or anything else). We provide examples of optimistic
rules of each type, demonstrate that simulations confirm our theoretical predictions,
and pose some natural but hard open problems.

1

Introduction

Mean estimation is one of the most fundamental problems in statistics. In the classic nonadaptive
setting, we observe a fixed number of samples drawn i.i.d. from a fixed distribution with an unknown
mean µ. In this case, we know that the sample mean is an unbiased estimator of µ.
However, in many cases the data are collected and analyzed in an adaptive manner, a prototypical
example being the stochastic multi-armed bandits (MAB) framework [Robbins, 1952]. During the
data collection stage, in each round an analyst can draw a sample from one among a finite set of
available distributions (arms) based on the previously observed data (adaptive sampling). The data
collecting procedure can also be terminated based on a data-driven stopping rule rather than at a fixed
time (adaptive stopping). Further, the analyst can choose a specific target arm based on the collected
data (adaptive choosing), for example choosing to focus on the arm with the largest empirical mean
at the stopping time. In this setting, the sample mean is no longer unbiased, due to the selection bias
introduced by all three kinds of adaptivity. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive understanding
of the sign of the bias, decoupling the effects of these three sources of adaptivity.
In a general and unified MAB framework, we first define natural notions of monotonicity (a special
case of which we call “optimism”) of sampling, stopping and choosing rules. Under no assumptions
on the distributions beyond assuming that their means exist, we show that optimistic sampling
provably results in a negative bias, but optimistic stopping and optimistic choosing both provably
result in a positive bias. Thus, the net bias can be positive or negative in general. This message is in
contrast to a recent thought-provoking work by Nie et al. [2018] titled “Why adaptively collected
data has a negative bias...” that is unfortunately misleading for practitioners, since it only analyzed
the bias of adaptive sampling for a fixed arm at a fixed time.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

