Scalable Bayesian inference of dendritic voltage via
spatiotemporal recurrent state space models

Ruoxi Sun∗
Columbia University

Scott W. Linderman∗
Stanford University

Ian August Kinsella
Columbia University

Liam Paninski
Columbia University

Abstract
Recent advances in optical voltage sensors have brought us closer to a critical goal
in cellular neuroscience: imaging the full spatiotemporal voltage on a dendritic tree.
However, current sensors and imaging approaches still face significant limitations in
SNR and sampling frequency; therefore statistical denoising methods remain critical
for understanding single-trial spatiotemporal dendritic voltage dynamics. Previous
denoising approaches were either based on an inadequate linear voltage model or
scaled poorly to large trees. Here we introduce a scalable fully Bayesian approach.
We develop a generative nonlinear model that requires few parameters per dendritic
compartment but is nonetheless flexible enough to sample realistic spatiotemporal
data. The model captures potentially different dynamics in each compartment
and leverages biophysical knowledge to constrain intra- and inter-compartmental
dynamics. We obtain a full posterior distribution over spatiotemporal voltage via
an efficient augmented block-Gibbs sampling algorithm. The nonlinear smoother
model outperforms previously developed linear methods, and scales to much larger
systems than previous methods based on sequential Monte Carlo approaches.

1

Introduction

Recent progress in the development of voltage indicators [1–8] has brought us closer to a longstanding goal in cellular neuroscience: imaging the full spatiotemporal voltage on a dendritic tree.
These recordings have the potential (pun not intended) to resolve fundamental questions about
the computations performed by dendrites — questions that have remained open for more than a
century [9, 10]. Unfortunately, despite accelerating progress, currently available voltage indicators
and imaging technologies provide data that is noisy and sparse in time and space. Our goal in this work
is to take this noisy, sparse data and output Bayesian estimates, with uncertainty, of the spatiotemporal
voltage on the tree, at arbitrary resolution.
A number of generic denoisers are available. For example, one previous approach is to run an
independent spline smoother on the temporal trace from each pixel [1]. However, this approach
ignores two critical features of the data. First, the data is highly spatiotemporally structured; thus,
running a purely temporal smoother and ignoring spatial information (or vice versa) is suboptimal.
Second, the smoothness of voltage data is highly inhomogeneous; for example, action potentials are
much less smooth than are subthreshold voltage dynamics, and it is suboptimal to enforce the same
level of smoothness in these two very different regimes.
How can we exploit our strong priors, based on decades of biophysics research, about the highlystructured dynamics governing voltage on the dendritic tree? Our starting point is the cable equation [11], the partial differential equation that specifies the evolution of membrane potential in space
(n)
and time. If we divide up the tree into N discrete compartments, then letting Vt denote the voltage
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

