Efficient online learning with Kernels for adversarial
large scale problems

Rémi Jézéquel

Pierre Gaillard

Alessandro Rudi

INRIA - Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris, France
{remi.jezequel,pierre.gaillard,alessandro.rudi}@inria.fr

Abstract
We are interested in a framework of online learning with kernels for lowdimensional, but large-scale and potentially adversarial datasets. We study the
computational and theoretical performance of online variations of kernel Ridge
regression. Despite its simplicity, the algorithm we study is the first to achieve the
optimal regret for a wide range of kernels with a per-round complexity of order nα
with α < 2.
The algorithm we consider is based on approximating the kernel with the linear
span of basis functions. Our contributions are twofold: 1) For the Gaussian kernel,
we propose to build the basis beforehand (independently of the data) through
Taylor expansion. For d-dimensional inputs, we provide a (close to) optimal regret
of order O((log n)d+1 ) with per-round time complexity and space complexity
O((log n)2d ). This makes the algorithm a suitable choice as soon as n  ed which
is likely to happen in a scenario with small dimensional and large-scale dataset; 2)
For general kernels with low effective dimension, the basis functions are updated
sequentially, adapting to the data, by sampling Nyström points. In this case, our
algorithm improves the computational trade-off known for online kernel regression.

1

Introduction

Nowadays the volume and the velocity of data flows are deeply increasing. Consequently, many
applications need to switch from batch to online procedures that can treat and adapt to data on
the fly. Furthermore to take advantage of very large datasets, non-parametric methods are gaining
increasing momentum in practice. Yet the latter often suffer from slow rates of convergence and bad
computational complexities. At the same time, data is getting more complicated and simple stochastic
assumptions, such as i.i.d. data, are often not satisfied. In this paper, we try to combine these different
aspects due to large scale and arbitrary data. We build a non-parametric online procedure based on
kernels, which is efficient for large data sets and achieves close to optimal theoretical guarantees.
Online learning is a subfield of machine learning where a learner sequentially interacts with an
environment and tries to learn and adapt on the fly to the observed data as one goes along. We
consider the following sequential setting. At each iteration t ≥ 1, the learner receives some input
xt ∈ X ; makes a prediction ybt ∈ R and the environment reveals the output yt ∈ R. The inputs xt
and the outputs yt are sequentially chosen by the environment and can be arbitrary. Learner’s goal is
to minimize his cumulative regret
n
n
X
X
2
Rn (f ) :=
(yt − ybt )2 −
yt − f (xt )
(1)
t=1

t=1

uniformly over all functions f in a space of functions H. We will consider Reproducing Kernel
Hilbert Space (RKHS) H, [see next section or Aro50, for more details]. It is worth noting here that
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

