A New Defense Against Adversarial Images:
Turning a Weakness into a Strength

Tao Yu∗ †

Shengyuan Hu∗ †

Chuan Guo†

Wei-Lun Chao‡

Kilian Q. Weinberger†

Abstract
Natural images are virtually surrounded by low-density misclassified regions that
can be efficiently discovered by gradient-guided search — enabling the generation
of adversarial images. While many techniques for detecting these attacks have
been proposed, they are easily bypassed when the adversary has full knowledge
of the detection mechanism and adapts the attack strategy accordingly. In this
paper, we adopt a novel perspective and regard the omnipresence of adversarial
perturbations as a strength rather than a weakness. We postulate that if an image
has been tampered with, these adversarial directions either become harder to find
with gradient methods or have substantially higher density than for natural images.
We develop a practical test for this signature characteristic to successfully detect
adversarial attacks, achieving unprecedented accuracy under the white-box setting
where the adversary is given full knowledge of our detection mechanism.

1

Introduction

The advance of deep neural networks has led to natural questions regarding its robustness to both
natural and malicious change in the test input. For the latter scenario, the seminal work of Biggio et
al. [3] and Szegedy et al. [48] first suggested that neural networks may be prone to imperceptible
changes in the input — the so-called adversarial perturbations — that alter the model’s decision
entirely. This weakness not only applies to image classification models, but is prevalent in various
machine learning applications, including object detection and image segmentation [10, 54], speech
recognition [8], and deep policy networks [2, 21].
The threat of adversarial perturbations has prompted tremendous effort towards the development
of defense mechanisms. Common defenses either attempt to recover the true semantic labels of
the input [5, 12, 19, 38, 41, 45] or detect and reject adversarial examples [17, 28, 31, 33–35, 55].
Although many of the proposed defenses have been successful against passive attackers — ones that
are unaware of the presence of the defense mechanism — almost all fail against adversaries that have
full knowledge of the internal details of the defense and modify the attack algorithm accordingly
[1, 6]. To date, the success of existing defenses have been limited to simple datasets with relatively
low variety of classes [24, 29, 39, 44, 52].
Recent studies [13, 42] have shown that the existence of adversarial perturbations may be an inherent
property of natural data distributions in high dimensional spaces — painting a grim picture for
defenses. However, in this paper we propose a radically new approach to defenses against adversarial
attacks that turns this seemingly insurmountable obstacle from a weakness into a strength: We use
the inherent property of the existence of valid adversarial perturbations around a natural image as a
signature to attest that it is unperturbed.
∗
Equal Contribution. † Department of Computer Science, Cornell University. ‡ Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, The Ohio State University. Email: {ty367, sh797, cg563, kqw4}@cornell.edu,
chao.209@osu.edu.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

