Dynamic Local Regret for Non-convex Online
Forecasting

Sergul Aydore ∗
Department of ECE
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ USA
sergulaydore@gmail.com

Tianhao Zhu
Department of ECE
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ USA
romeo.zhuth@gmail.com

Dean Foster
Amazon
New York, NY USA
foster@amazon.com

Abstract
We consider online forecasting problems for non-convex machine learning models.
Forecasting introduces several challenges such as (i) frequent updates are necessary
to deal with concept drift issues since the dynamics of the environment change over
time, and (ii) the state of the art models are non-convex models. We address these
challenges with a novel regret framework. Standard regret measures commonly
do not consider both dynamic environment and non-convex models. We introduce
a local regret for non-convex models in a dynamic environment. We present an
update rule incurring a cost, according to our proposed local regret, which is
sublinear in time T . Our update uses time-smoothed gradients. Using a real-world
dataset we show that our time-smoothed approach yields several benefits when
compared with state-of-the-art competitors: results are more stable against new
data; training is more robust to hyperparameter selection; and our approach is more
computationally efficient than the alternatives.

1

Introduction

Our goal is to design efficient stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms for training non-convex
models for online time-series forecasting problems. A time series is a temporally ordered sequence of
real-valued data. Time series applications appear in a variety of domains such as speech processing,
financial market analysis, inventory planning, prediction of weather, earthquake forecasting; and
many other similar areas. Forecasting is the task of predicting future outcomes based on previous
observations. However, in some domains such as inventory planning or financial market analysis, the
underlying relationship between inputs and outputs change over time. This phenomenon is called
concept drift in machine learning (ML) [Žliobaitė et al., 2016]. Using a model that assumes a static
relationship can result in poor accuracy in forecasts. In order to address concept drift, the model
should either be periodically re-trained or updated as new data is observed.
Recently, the state of the art in forecasting has been dominated by models with many parameters such
as deep neural networks [Flunkert et al., 2017, Rangapuram et al., 2018, Toubeau et al., 2019]. In
large scale ML, re-training such complex models using the entire dataset will be time consuming.
Ideally, we should update our model using new data instead of re-training from scratch at every time
step. Offline (batch/mini-batch) learning refers to training an ML model over the entire training
dataset. Online learning, on the other hand, refers to updating an ML model on each new example as
it is observed. Using online learning approaches, we can make our ML models deal with concept
drift efficiently when re-training over the entire data set is infeasible.
∗

www.sergulaydore.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

