Globally optimal score-based learning of directed
acyclic graphs in high-dimensions
Bryon Aragam1 Arash A. Amini2 Qing Zhou2
University of Chicago bryon@chicagobooth.edu
2
University of California, Los Angeles {aaamini,zhou}@stat.ucla.edu
1

Abstract
We prove that ⌦(s log p) samples suffice to learn a sparse Gaussian directed acyclic
graph (DAG) from data, where s is the maximum Markov blanket size. This
improves upon recent results that require ⌦(s4 log p) samples in the equal variance
case. To prove this, we analyze a popular score-based estimator that has been
the subject of extensive empirical inquiry in recent years and is known to achieve
state-of-the-art results. Furthermore, the approach we study does not require strong
assumptions such as faithfulness that existing theory for score-based learning
crucially relies on. The resulting estimator is based around a difficult nonconvex
optimization problem, and its analysis may be of independent interest given recent
interest in nonconvex optimization in machine learning. Our analysis overcomes
the drawbacks of existing theoretical analyses, which either fail to guarantee
structure consistency in high-dimensions (i.e. learning the correct graph with
high probability), or rely on restrictive assumptions. In contrast, we give explicit
finite-sample bounds that are valid in the important p
n regime.

1

Introduction

With the growing importance of explainability and interpretability in modern machine learning
[11, 64, 65], graphical models continue to play an important role in applications including genomics
[72], health care [41], and finance [50] owing to their natural interpretability and simplicity. For this
reason, rigorous theoretical understanding of graphical models is an important challenge in modern
machine learning. Although estimating undirected graphical models can be formulated as a convex
program, DAG models cannot be [15], which has limited our understanding of their finite-sample
properties. Despite impressive progress in our understanding of nonconvex models across a spectrum
of problems including dictionary learning [58], tensor decomposition [16, 18], deep neural networks
[13, 14], and regression [36, 37], learning DAGs remains an important problem with many open
questions, particularly in the high-dimensional (p
n) setting.
Among the many strategies for learning DAGs from data, score-based learning is a classical approach
that is popular in practice. While much is known about greedy search algorithms [6, 40], much
less is known regarding the statistical properties of methods that find a global minimizer of a score
function. One of the advantages of the latter approach is a potential relaxation of assumptions such
as faithfulness [61]. In this paper, we prove that a score-based method requires only O(s log p)
samples, where s is the maximum Markov blanket size, at the cost of being difficult to compute since
it requires solving a nonconvex, NP-hard optimization problem. This is a well-known drawback
of score-based methods, although recent work has demonstrated that approximate methods can
outperform state-of-the-art methods [1, 25, 70], and even come close to finding the global minimum
in practice [77].
More specifically, we characterize the finite-sample, high-dimensional behaviour of the following
score-based DAG estimator, formulated as the solution of a constrained, nonsmooth, nonconvex
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

