Oracle-Efficient Algorithms for
Online Linear Optimization with Bandit Feedback∗

Shinji Ito†
NEC Corporation, The University of Tokyo
i-shinji@nec.com
Hanna Sumita
Tokyo Metropolitan University
sumita@tmu.ac.jp
Takuro Fukunaga‡
Chuo University, RIKEN AIP, JST PRESTO
fukunaga.07s@g.chuo-u.ac.jp

Daisuke Hatano
RIKEN AIP
daisuke.hatano@riken.jp
Kei Takemura
NEC Corporation
kei_takemura@nec.com
Naonori Kakimura§
Keio University
kakimura@math.keio.ac.jp

Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi§
National Institute of Informatics
k-keniti@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose computationally efficient algorithms for online linear optimization
with bandit feedback, in which a player chooses an action vector from a given
(possibly infinite) set A ⊆ Rd , and then suffers a loss that can be expressed
as a linear function in action
√ vectors. Although existing algorithms achieve an
optimal regret bound of Õ( T ) for T rounds (ignoring factors of poly(d, log T )),
computationally efficient ways of implementing them have not yet been specified,
in particular when |A| is not bounded by a polynomial size in d. A standard way to
pursue computational efficiency is to assume that we have an efficient algorithm
referred to as oracle that solves (offline) linear optimization problems over A.
Under this assumption, the computational efficiency of a bandit algorithm can then
be measured in terms of oracle complexity, i.e., the number of oracle calls. √
Our
contribution is to propose algorithms that offer optimal regret bounds of Õ( T )
as well as low oracle complexity for both non-stochastic settings and stochastic
settings. Our algorithm for non-stochastic settings has an oracle complexity
of
√
Õ(T ) and is the first algorithm that achieves both a regret bound of Õ( T ) and
an oracle complexity of Õ(poly(T )), given only linear optimization oracles. Our
algorithm for stochastic settings calls the oracle only O(poly(d, log T )) times,
which is smaller than the current best oracle complexity of O(T ) if T is sufficiently
large.

∗

This work was supported by JST, ERATO, Grant Number JPMJER1201, Japan.
This work was supported by JST, ACT-I, Grant Number JPMJPR18U5, Japan.
‡
This work was supported by JST, PRESTO, Grant Number JPMJPR1759, Japan.
§
This work was supported by JSPS, KAKENHI, Grant Number JP18H05291, Japan.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

