Visual Concept-Metaconcept Learning

Chi Han∗
MIT CSAIL and IIIS, Tsinghua University

Jiayuan Mao∗
MIT CSAIL

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Jiajun Wu
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Humans reason with concepts and metaconcepts: we recognize red and green
from visual input; we also understand that they describe the same property of
objects (i.e., the color). In this paper, we propose the visual concept-metaconcept
learner (VCML) for joint learning of concepts and metaconcepts from images
and associated question-answer pairs. The key is to exploit the bidirectional
connection between visual concepts and metaconcepts. Visual representations
provide grounding cues for predicting relations between unseen pairs of concepts.
Knowing that red and green describe the same property of objects, we generalize to
the fact that cube and sphere also describe the same property of objects, since they
both categorize the shape of objects. Meanwhile, knowledge about metaconcepts
empowers visual concept learning from limited, noisy, and even biased data. From
just a few examples of purple cubes we can understand a new color purple, which
resembles the hue of the cubes instead of the shape of them. Evaluation on both
synthetic and real-world datasets validates our claims.

1

Introduction

Learning to group objects into concepts is an essential human cognitive process, supporting compositional reasoning over scenes and sentences. To facilitate learning, we have developed metaconcepts
to describe the abstract relations between concepts [Speer et al., 2017, McRae et al., 2005]. Learning
both concepts and metaconcepts involves categorization at various levels, from concrete visual attributes such as red and cube, to abstract relations between concepts, such as synonym and hypernym.
In this paper, we focus on the problem of learning visual concepts and metaconcepts with a linguistic
interface, from looking at images and reading paired questions and answers.
Figure 1a gives examples of concept learning and metaconcept learning in the context of answering
visual reasoning questions and purely textual questions about metaconcepts. We learn to distinguish
red objects from green ones by their hues, by looking at visual reasoning (type I) examples. We also
learn metaconcepts, e.g., red and green describe the same property of objects, by reading metaconcept
(type II) questions and answers.
Concept learning and metaconcept learning help each other. Figure 1b illustrates the idea. First,
metaconcepts enable concept learning from limited, noisy, and even biased examples, with generalization to novel compositions of attributes at test time. Assuming only a few examples of red cubes
with the label red, the visual grounding of the word red is ambiguous: it may refer to the hue red
or cube-shaped objects. We can resolve such ambiguities knowing that red and green describe the
same property of objects. During test (Figure 1b-I), we can then generalize to red cylinders. Second,
concept learning provides visual cues for predicting relations between unseen pairs of concepts.
After learning that red and green describe the same property of objects, one may hypothesize a
First two authors contributed equally. Work was done when Chi Han was a visiting student at MIT CSAIL.
Project Page: http://vcml.csail.mit.edu.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

