Residual Flows for Invertible Generative Modeling

Ricky T. Q. Chen1,3 , Jens Behrmann2 , David Duvenaud1,3 , Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen1,3
University of Toronto1 , University of Bremen2 , Vector Institute3
rtqichen@cs.toronto.edu, jensb@uni-bremen.de
duvenaud@cs.toronto.edu, j.jacobsen@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Flow-based generative models parameterize probability distributions through an
invertible transformation and can be trained by maximum likelihood. Invertible
residual networks provide a flexible family of transformations where only Lipschitz
conditions rather than strict architectural constraints are needed for enforcing
invertibility. However, prior work trained invertible residual networks for density
estimation by relying on biased log-density estimates whose bias increased with
the network’s expressiveness. We give a tractable unbiased estimate of the log
density using a “Russian roulette” estimator, and reduce the memory required
during training by using an alternative infinite series for the gradient. Furthermore,
we improve invertible residual blocks by proposing the use of activation functions
that avoid derivative saturation and generalizing the Lipschitz condition to induced
mixed norms. The resulting approach, called Residual Flows, achieves state-of-theart performance on density estimation amongst flow-based models, and outperforms
networks that use coupling blocks at joint generative and discriminative modeling.

1

Introduction

Maximum likelihood is a core machine learning paradigm
that poses learning as a distribution alignment problem.
However, it is often unclear what family of distributions
should be used to fit high-dimensional continuous data.
In this regard, the change of variables theorem offers an
appealing way to construct flexible distributions that allow tractable exact sampling and efficient evaluation of
its density. This class of models is generally referred to
as invertible or flow-based generative models (Deco and
Brauer, 1995; Rezende and Mohamed, 2015).
With invertibility as its core design principle, flow-based
models (also referred to as normalizing flows) have shown
to be capable of generating realistic images (Kingma
and Dhariwal, 2018) and can achieve density estimation
performance on-par with competing state-of-the-art approaches (Ho et al., 2019). In applications, they have been
applied to study adversarial robustness (Jacobsen et al.,
2019) and are used to train hybrid models with both generative and classification capabilities (Nalisnick et al., 2019)
using a weighted maximum likelihood objective.

(a) Det. Identities
(Low Rank)

(b) Autoregressive
(Lower Triangular)

(c) Coupling
(Structured Sparsity)

(d) Unbiased Est.
(Free-form)

Figure 1: Pathways to designing scalable normalizing flows and their enforced Jacobian structure. Residual
Flows fall under unbiased estimation
with free-form Jacobian.

Existing flow-based models (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Kingma et al., 2016; Dinh et al., 2014;
Chen et al., 2018) make use of restricted transformations with sparse or structured Jacobians (Fig33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

