Unified Language Model Pre-training for
Natural Language Understanding and Generation

Li Dong∗ Nan Yang∗ Wenhui Wang∗ Furu Wei∗ † Xiaodong Liu
Jianfeng Gao Ming Zhou Hsiao-Wuen Hon
Microsoft Research
{lidong1,nanya,wenwan,fuwei}@microsoft.com
{xiaodl,yuwan,jfgao,mingzhou,hon}@microsoft.com

Yu Wang

Abstract
This paper presents a new U NIfied pre-trained Language Model (U NI LM) that
can be fine-tuned for both natural language understanding and generation tasks.
The model is pre-trained using three types of language modeling tasks: unidirectional, bidirectional, and sequence-to-sequence prediction. The unified modeling
is achieved by employing a shared Transformer network and utilizing specific
self-attention masks to control what context the prediction conditions on. U NI LM
compares favorably with BERT on the GLUE benchmark, and the SQuAD 2.0
and CoQA question answering tasks. Moreover, U NI LM achieves new state-ofthe-art results on five natural language generation datasets, including improving
the CNN/DailyMail abstractive summarization ROUGE-L to 40.51 (2.04 absolute
improvement), the Gigaword abstractive summarization ROUGE-L to 35.75 (0.86
absolute improvement), the CoQA generative question answering F1 score to 82.5
(37.1 absolute improvement), the SQuAD question generation BLEU-4 to 22.12
(3.75 absolute improvement), and the DSTC7 document-grounded dialog response
generation NIST-4 to 2.67 (human performance is 2.65). The code and pre-trained
models are available at https://github.com/microsoft/unilm.

1

Introduction

Language model (LM) pre-training has substantially advanced the state of the art across a variety
of natural language processing tasks [8, 29, 19, 31, 9, 1]. Pre-trained LMs learn contextualized text
representations by predicting words based on their context using large amounts of text data, and can
be fine-tuned to adapt to downstream tasks.
Different prediction tasks and training objectives have been used for pre-training LMs of different
types, as shown in Table 1. ELMo [29] learns two unidirectional LMs: a forward LM reads the
text from left to right, and a backward LM encodes the text from right to left. GPT [31] uses
a left-to-right Transformer [42] to predict a text sequence word-by-word. In contrast, BERT [9]
employs a bidirectional Transformer encoder to fuse both the left and right context to predict the
masked words. Although BERT significantly improves the performance of a wide range of natural
language understanding tasks [9], its bidirectionality nature makes it difficult to be applied to natural
language generation tasks [43].
In this work we propose a new U NIfied pre-trained Language Model (U NI LM) that can be applied to
both natural language understanding (NLU) and natural language generation (NLG) tasks. U NI LM is
a multi-layer Transformer network, jointly pre-trained on large amounts of text, optimized for three
types of unsupervised language modeling objectives as shown in Table 2. In particular, we design a
∗

Equal contribution. † Contact person.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

