Non-Cooperative Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Xiangyuan Zhang

Kaiqing Zhang

Erik Miehling

Tamer Başar

Coordinated Science Laboratory
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{xz7,kzhang66,miehling,basar1}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Making decisions in the presence of a strategic opponent requires one to take into
account the opponent’s ability to actively mask its intended objective. To describe
such strategic situations, we introduce the non-cooperative inverse reinforcement
learning (N-CIRL) formalism. The N-CIRL formalism consists of two agents
with completely misaligned objectives, where only one of the agents knows the
true objective function. Formally, we model the N-CIRL formalism as a zero-sum
Markov game with one-sided incomplete information. Through interacting with
the more informed player, the less informed player attempts to both infer, and act
according to, the true objective function. As a result of the one-sided incomplete
information, the multi-stage game can be decomposed into a sequence of singlestage games expressed by a recursive formula. Solving this recursive formula
yields the value of the N-CIRL game and the more informed player’s equilibrium
strategy. Another recursive formula, constructed by forming an auxiliary game,
termed the dual game, yields the less informed player’s strategy. Building upon
these two recursive formulas, we develop a computationally tractable algorithm
to approximately solve for the equilibrium strategies. Finally, we demonstrate the
benefits of our N-CIRL formalism over the existing multi-agent IRL formalism
via extensive numerical simulation in a novel cyber security setting.

1

Introduction

In any decision-making problem, the decision-maker’s goal is characterized by some underlying,
potentially unknown, objective function. In machine learning, ensuring that the learning agent does
what the human intends it to do requires specification of a correct objective function, a problem
known as value alignment [42, 37]. Solving this problem is nontrivial even in the simplest (singleagent) reinforcement learning (RL) settings [3] and becomes even more challenging in multi-agent
environments [19, 45, 44]. Failing to specify a correct objective function can lead to unexpected and
potentially dangerous behavior [38].
Instead of specifying the correct objective function, a growing body of research has taken an alternative perspective of letting the agent learn the intended task from observed behavior of other agents
and/or human experts, a concept known as inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [31]. IRL describes
a setting where one agent is attempting to learn the true reward function by observing trajectories of
sample behavior of another agent, termed demonstrations, under the assumption that the observed
agent is acting (optimally) according to the true reward function. More recently, the concept of cooperative inverse reinforcement learning (CIRL) was introduced in [9]. Instead of passively learning
from demonstrations (as is the case in IRL), CIRL allows for agents to interact during the learning
process, which results in improved performance over IRL. CIRL inherently assumes that the two
agents are on the same team, that is, the expert is actively trying to help the agent learn and achieve
some common goal. However, in many practical multi-agent decision-making problems, the objec33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

