Neural Multisensory Scene Inference
Jae Hyun Lim†§123 , Pedro O. Pinheiro1 , Negar Rostamzadeh1 ,
Christopher Pal1234 , Sungjin Ahn‡§5
1
Element AI, 2 Mila, 3 Université de Montréal, 4 Polytechnique Montréal, 5 Rutgers University

Abstract
For embodied agents to infer representations of the underlying 3D physical world
they inhabit, they should efficiently combine multisensory cues from numerous
trials, e.g., by looking at and touching objects. Despite its importance, multisensory 3D scene representation learning has received less attention compared to the
unimodal setting. In this paper, we propose the Generative Multisensory Network
(GMN) for learning latent representations of 3D scenes which are partially observable through multiple sensory modalities. We also introduce a novel method, called
the Amortized Product-of-Experts, to improve the computational efficiency and the
robustness to unseen combinations of modalities at test time. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed model can efficiently infer robust modality-invariant
3D-scene representations from arbitrary combinations of modalities and perform
accurate cross-modal generation. To perform this exploration, we also develop the
Multisensory Embodied 3D-Scene Environment (MESE).

1

Introduction

Learning a world model and its representation is an effective way of solving many challenging
problems in machine learning and robotics, e.g., via model-based reinforcement learning (Silver et al.,
2016). One characteristic aspect in learning the physical world is that it is inherently multifaceted
and that we can perceive its complete characteristics only through our multisensory modalities. Thus,
incorporating different physical aspects of the world via different modalities should help build a
richer model and representation. One approach to learn such multisensory representations is to learn
a modality-invariant representation as an abstract concept representation of the world. This is an
idea well supported in both psychology and neuroscience. According to the grounded cognition
perspective (Barsalou, 2008), such abstract concepts like objects and events can only be obtained
through perceptual signals. For example, what represents a cup in our brain is its visual appearance,
the sound it could make, the tactile sensation, etc. In neurosciences, the existence of concept
cells (Quiroga, 2012) that responds only to a specific concept regardless of the modality sourcing the
concept (e.g., by showing a picture of Jennifer Aniston or listening her name) can be considered as a
biological evidence of the metamodal brain perspective (Pascual-Leone & Hamilton, 2001; Yildirim,
2014) and the modality-invariant representation.
An unanswered question from the computational perspective (our particular interest in this paper) is
how to learn such modality-invariant representation of the complex physical world (e.g., 3D scenes
placed with objects). We argue that it is a particularly challenging problem because the following
requirements need to be satisfied for the learned world model. First, the learned representation should
reflect the 3D nature of the world. Although there have been some efforts in learning multimodal
representations (see Section 3), those works do not consider this fundamental 3D aspect of the physical
world. Second, the learned representation should also be able to model the intrinsic stochasticity
†
Work done during the internship of JHL at Element AI. ‡ Part of the work had done while SA was at
Element AI. § Correspondence to jae.hyun.lim@umontreal.ca and sungjin.ahn@cs.rutgers.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

