Rapid Convergence of the Unadjusted Langevin
Algorithm: Isoperimetry Suffices
Santosh S. Vempala
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
vempala@gatech.edu

Andre Wibisono
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
wibisono@gatech.edu

Abstract
We study the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) for sampling from a probability distribution ⌫ = e f on Rn . We prove a convergence guarantee in KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence assuming ⌫ satisfies log-Sobolev inequality and f has
bounded Hessian. Notably, we do not assume convexity or bounds on higher derivatives. We also prove convergence guarantees in Rényi divergence of order q > 1
assuming the limit of ULA satisfies either log-Sobolev or Poincaré inequality.

1

Introduction

Sampling is a fundamental algorithmic task. Many applications require sampling from probability
distributions in high-dimensional spaces, and in modern applications the probability distributions
are complicated and non-logconcave. While the setting of logconcave functions is well-studied, it
is important to have efficient sampling algorithms with good convergence guarantees beyond the
logconcavity assumption. There is a close interplay between sampling and optimization, either via
optimization as a limit of sampling (annealing) [34, 55], or via sampling as optimization in the space
of distributions [36, 62]. Motivated by the widespread use of non-convex optimization and sampling,
there is resurgent interest in understanding non-logconcave sampling.
In this paper we study a simple algorithm, the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA), for sampling
from a target probability distribution ⌫ = e f on Rn . ULA requires oracle access to the gradient rf
of the log density f = log ⌫. In particular, ULA does not require knowledge of f , which makes it
applicable in practice where we often only know ⌫ up to a normalizing constant.
As the step size ✏ ! 0, ULA recovers the Langevin dynamics, which is a continuous-time stochastic
process in Rn that converges to ⌫. We recall the optimization interpretation of the Langevin dynamics
for sampling as the gradient flow of the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence with respect to ⌫ in the
space of probability distributions with the Wasserstein metric [36]. When ⌫ is strongly logconcave,
the KL divergence is a strongly convex objective function, so the Langevin dynamics as gradient
flow converges exponentially fast [6, 60]. From the classical theory of Markov chains and diffusion
processes, there are several known conditions milder than logconcavity that are sufficient for rapid
convergence in continuous time. These include isoperimetric inequalities such as Poincaré inequality
or log-Sobolev inequality (LSI). Along the Langevin dynamics in continuous time, Poincaré inequality
implies an exponential convergence rate in 2 -divergence, while LSI—which is stronger—implies an
exponential convergence rate in KL divergence (as well as in Rényi divergence).
However, in discrete time, sampling under Poincaré inequality or LSI is a more challenging problem.
ULA is an inexact discretization of the Langevin dynamics, and it converges to a biased limit
⌫✏ 6= ⌫. When ⌫ is strongly logconcave and smooth, it is known how to control the bias and
prove a convergence guarantee on KL divergence along ULA [17, 21, 22, 24]. When ⌫ is strongly
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

