Paradoxes in Fair Machine Learning

Paul Gölz, Anson Kahng, and Ariel D. Procaccia
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
{pgoelz, akahng, arielpro}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Equalized odds is a statistical notion of fairness in machine learning that ensures
that classification algorithms do not discriminate against protected groups. We
extend equalized odds to the setting of cardinality-constrained fair classification,
where we have a bounded amount of a resource to distribute. This setting coincides
with classic fair division problems, which allows us to apply concepts from that
literature in parallel to equalized odds. In particular, we consider the axioms
of resource monotonicity, consistency, and population monotonicity, all three of
which relate different allocation instances to prevent paradoxes. Using a geometric
characterization of equalized odds, we examine the compatibility of equalized odds
with these axioms. We empirically evaluate the cost of allocation rules that satisfy
both equalized odds and axioms of fair division on a dataset of FICO credit scores.

1

Introduction

Throughout most of human history, the question “who deserves what?” could only be answered by
people. As such, questions of fairly allocating resources among groups of people were historically
dictated by common sense, enforced by law, or suggested by social conventions. In the age of big data,
however, machine learning algorithms increasingly dictate decisions about distributing resources in a
wide range of domains [15, 19]. Machine learning classifiers have been trained to determine which
applicants deserve bank loans [19], which students merit acceptance from a particular school [23], or
which prisoners should receive parole [15]. The prevalence of algorithmic intervention has led to
a widespread call for accountability in machine learning: in order to ensure that algorithms do not
disproportionately affect different constituent subpopulations, researchers must be able to provide
fairness guarantees of the resulting classification algorithms. This call, in turn, has led to much
prior work on measuring and ensuring statistical notions of fairness, notably through metrics like
demographic parity and equalized odds [8, 10, 11, 13, 16, 18, 24–26].
The statistical notion of fairness that we will consider throughout this paper is that of equalized
odds, which states that a classifier must have equal true positive and false positive rates for all
groups. While equalized odds has been extensively studied as a metric of fairness in machine
learning [10, 11, 13, 16, 18, 24], it has not been considered in settings where a desired number of
positive labels is given. This constraint is natural and ubiquitous whenever agents labeled as positive
obtain a limited resource. For instance, a school can only offer admission to a fixed number of
students, a police department’s staff dictates the number of suspects they can stop and frisk, and a
bank might only have a finite amount of available loans. In the unconstrained setting, the quality
of a classifier is computed by adding a given utility per true positive and subtracting a given cost
per false positive. In the cardinality-constrained setting, the efficiency that we seek to maximize is
simply the number of true positives (e.g., people who repay loans or students who will graduate from
school). Since we fix the number of overall positives, optimizing for any choice of (positive) utility
and (positive) cost coincides with maximizing our notion of efficiency.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

