Cross-Domain Transferability of Adversarial
Perturbations
Muzammal Naseer1,2 , Salman Khan2,1 , Muhammad Haris Khan2 ,
Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,3 , Fatih Porikli1
1
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
3
CVL, Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, Sweden
{muzammal.naseer,fatih.porikli}@anu.edu.au
{salman.khan,muhammad.haris,fahad.khan}@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Adversarial examples reveal the blind spots of deep neural networks (DNNs) and
represent a major concern for security-critical applications. The transferability
of adversarial examples makes real-world attacks possible in black-box settings,
where the attacker is forbidden to access the internal parameters of the model. The
underlying assumption in most adversary generation methods, whether learning
an instance-specific or an instance-agnostic perturbation, is the direct or indirect
reliance on the original domain-specific data distribution. In this work, for the first
time, we demonstrate the existence of domain-invariant adversaries, thereby showing common adversarial space among different datasets and models. To this end,
we propose a framework capable of launching highly transferable attacks that crafts
adversarial patterns to mislead networks trained on entirely different domains. For
instance, an adversarial function learned on Paintings, Cartoons or Medical images
can successfully perturb ImageNet samples to fool the classifier, with success rates
as high as ∼99% (`∞ ≤ 10). The core of our proposed adversarial function is a
generative network that is trained using a relativistic supervisory signal that enables
domain-invariant perturbations. Our approach sets the new state-of-the-art for fooling rates, both under the white-box and black-box scenarios. Furthermore, despite
being an instance-agnostic perturbation function, our attack outperforms the conventionally much stronger instance-specific attack methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/Muzammal-Naseer/Cross-domain-perturbations

1

Introduction

Albeit displaying remarkable performance across a range of tasks, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are carefully crafted examples generated by
adding a certain degree of noise (a.k.a. perturbations) to the corresponding original images, typically
appearing quasi-imperceptible to humans [1]. Importantly, these adversarial examples are transferable
from one network to another, even when the other network fashions a different architecture and
possibly trained on a different subset of training data [2, 3]. Transferability permits an adversarial
attack, without knowing the internals of the target network, posing serious security concerns on the
practical deployment of these models.
Adversarial perturbations are either instance-specific or instance-agnostic. The instance-specific
attacks iteratively optimize a perturbation pattern specific to an input sample (e.g., [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11]). In comparison, the instance-agnostic attacks learn a universal perturbation or a function
that finds adversarial patterns on a data distribution instead of a single sample. For example, [12]
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

