Power analysis of knockoff filters for correlated
designs

Jingbo Liu
Institute for Data, Systems, and Society
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
jingbo@mit.edu

Philippe Rigollet
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
rigollet@math.mit.edu

Abstract
The knockoff filter introduced by Barber and Candès 2016 is an elegant framework
for controlling the false discovery rate in variable selection. While empirical
results indicate that this methodology is not too conservative, there is no conclusive
theoretical result on its power. When the predictors are i.i.d. Gaussian, it is known
that as the signal to noise ratio tend to infinity, the knockoff filter is consistent in
the sense that one can make FDR go to 0 and power go to 1 simultaneously. In this
work we study the case where the predictors have a general covariance matrix Σ.
We introduce a simple functional called effective signal deficiency (ESD) of the
covariance matrix of the predictors that predicts consistency of various variable
selection methods. In particular, ESD reveals that the structure of the precision
matrix plays a central role in consistency and therefore, so does the conditional
independence structure of the predictors. To leverage this connection, we introduce
Conditional Independence knockoff, a simple procedure that is able to compete
with the more sophisticated knockoff filters and that is defined when the predictors
obey a Gaussian tree graphical models (or when the graph is sufficiently sparse).
Our theoretical results are supported by numerical evidence on synthetic data.

1

Introduction

Variable selection is a cornerstone of modern high-dimensional statistics and, more generally, of
data-driven scientific discovery. Examples include selecting a few genes correlated to the incidence
of a certain disease, or discovering a number of demographic attributes correlated to crime rates.
A fruitful theoretical framework to study this question is the linear regression model in which we
observe n independent copies of the pair (X, Y ) ∈ Rp × R such that
Y = X >θ + ξ ,
where θ ∈ Rp is an unknown vector of coefficients, and ξ ∼ N (0, nσ 2 ) is a noise random variable.
Throughout this work we assume that X ∼ N (0, Σ) for some known covariance
matrix Σ. Note
√
that for notational simplicity our linear regression model is multiplied by n compared to standard
scaling in high-dimensional linear regression [BRT09]. Clearly, this scaling, also employed in [JM14]
has no effect on our results. In this work, we consider asymptotics where n/p → δ is fixed.
In this model, a variable selection procedure is a sequence of test statistics ψ1 , . . . , ψp ∈ {0, 1} for
each of the hypothesis testing problem
(j)

H0

: θj = 0 ,

vs.

(j)

H1

: θj 6= 0 , j = 1 . . . , p

(1)

When p is large, a simultaneous control of all the type I errors leads to overly conservative procedures
that impedes statistical significant variables, and ultimately, scientific discovery. The False Discovery
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

