PowerSGD: Practical Low-Rank
Gradient Compression for Distributed Optimization

Thijs Vogels
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
thijs.vogels@epfl.ch

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
sai.karimrieddy@epfl.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
We study lossy gradient compression methods to alleviate the communication bottleneck in data-parallel distributed optimization. Despite the significant attention
received, current compression schemes either do not scale well, or fail to achieve
the target test accuracy. We propose a new low-rank gradient compressor based
on power iteration that can i) compress gradients rapidly, ii) efficiently aggregate
the compressed gradients using all-reduce, and iii) achieve test performance on par
with SGD. The proposed algorithm is the only method evaluated that achieves consistent wall-clock speedups when benchmarked against regular SGD using highly
optimized off-the-shelf tools for distributed communication. We demonstrate reduced training times for convolutional networks as well as LSTMs on common
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.com/epfml/powersgd.

1

Introduction

Synchronous data-parallel SGD is the most common method for accelerating training of deep learning
models (Dean et al., 2012; Iandola et al., 2015; Goyal et al., 2017). Because the gradient vectors
of such models can be large, the time required to share those gradients across workers limits the
scalability of deep learning training (Seide et al., 2014; Iandola et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2018).
Previous work proposes lossy gradient compression as a solution to this issue. Notable examples
include replacing the coordinates of the gradient with only their sign (Seide et al., 2014; Carlson et al.,
2015; Bernstein et al., 2018, 2019; Karimireddy et al., 2019), quantizing the individual coordinates
(Alistarh et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2017), and low-rank approximation of the gradient (Wang et al.,
2018). While these works demonstrate speedups over full-precision SGD in some settings, we find
that their speedups vanish with a fast network and highly optimized communication backend, even on
commodity hardware. Some prior work also suffers from degraded test accuracy compared to SGD.
We combine three observations to fix these issues: i) Linear compressor operators achieve scalability
by enabling aggregation using all-reduce. ii) Error feedback ensures convergence with general biased
compressors. iii) Low-rank updates enable aggressive compression without sacrificing quality.
First, we explore the properties of various gradient compression schemes for SGD and identify
which ones are crucial for high scalability. In particular, we note that currently proposed gradient
compressors are not linear. Their compressed messages cannot be added up hierarchically, unlike raw
gradients. This prevents current compressed SGD algorithms from aggregating gradients using an
efficient reduce operation and instead require a gather operation. Current deep learning frameworks
rely either solely or predominantly on all-reduce, which is key to why regular SGD scales well with
fast communication hardware (cf. Awan et al., 2018; Panda et al., 2019).
Secondly, it was recently shown that using error feedback (i.e. storing the difference between the
computed and compressed gradient, and reinserting it at the next iteration) improves both convergence
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

