Deep Structured Prediction for Facial Landmark
Detection
Lisha Chen1 , Hui Su1,2 , Qiang Ji1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research
chenl21@rpi.edu, huisuibmres@us.ibm.com, jiq@rpi.edu
1

Abstract
Existing deep learning based facial landmark detection methods have achieved
excellent performance. These methods, however, do not explicitly embed the
structural dependencies among landmark points. They hence cannot preserve the
geometric relationships between landmark points or generalize well to challenging
conditions or unseen data. This paper proposes a method for deep structured
facial landmark detection based on combining a deep Convolutional Network
with a Conditional Random Field. We demonstrate its superior performance to
existing state-of-the-art techniques in facial landmark detection, especially a better
generalization ability on challenging datasets that include large pose and occlusion.

1

Introduction

Facial landmark detection is to automatically localize the fiducial facial landmark points around facial
components and facial contour. It is essential for various facial analysis tasks such as facial expression
analysis, headpose estimation and face recognition. With the development of deep learning techniques,
traditional facial landmark detection approaches that rely on hand-crafted low-level features have
been outperformed by deep feature based approaches. The purely deep learning based methods,
however, cannot effectively capture the structural dependencies among landmark points. They hence
cannot perform well under challenging conditions, such as large head pose, occlusion, and large
expression variation. Probabilistic graphical models such as Conditional Random Fields (CRFs), have
been widely applied to various computer vision tasks. They can systematically capture the structural
relationships among random variables and perform structured prediction. Recently, there have been
works that combine deep models with CRF to simultaneously leverage convolutional neural networks’
(CNNs) representation power and CRF’s structure modeling power [10, 9, 51]. Their combination has
yielded significant performance improvement over methods that use either CNN or CRF alone. These
works so far are mainly applied to classification tasks such as semantic image segmentation. Besides
classification, some works apply the CNN and CRF model to human pose [41, 12, 11] and facial
landmark detection [2, 44] . To simplify computational complexity, the CRF models are typically
of special structure (e.g. tree structure), moreover, they employ approximate learning and inference
criteria. In this work, we propose to combine CNN with a fully-connected CRF to jointly perform
facial landmark detection in regression framework.
Compared to the existing works, the contributions of our work are summarized as follows:
1) We introduce the fully-connected CNN-CRF that produces structured probabilistic prediction of
facial landmark locations.
2) Our model explicitly captures the structure relationship variations caused by pose and deformation,
unlike some previous works that combine CNN with CRF using a fixed pairwise relationship.
3) We use an alternating method and derive closed-form solutions in the alternating steps for learning
and inference, unlike previous works that use approximate methods such as energy minimization
which ignores the partition function for learning and mean-field for inference. And instead of using
discriminative criterion or other approximate loss functions, we employ negative log likelihood (NLL)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

