Learning Bayesian Networks with Low Rank
Conditional Probability Tables

Adarsh Barik
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
abarik@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a method to learn the directed structure of a Bayesian
network using data. The data is accessed by making conditional probability queries
to a black-box model. We introduce a notion of simplicity of representation of
conditional probability tables for the nodes in the Bayesian network, that we call
“low rankness”. We connect this notion to the Fourier transformation of real valued
set functions and propose a method which learns the exact directed structure of
a ‘low rank‘ Bayesian network using very few queries. We formally prove that
our method correctly recovers the true directed structure, runs in polynomial time
and only needs polynomial samples with respect to the number of nodes. We also
provide further improvements in efficiency if we have access to some observational
data.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Real-world systems are made of large number of constituent variables. Understanding
the interactions and relationships of these variables is key to understand the behavior of such systems.
Scientists and researchers from many domains have been using graphs to model and learn relationships
amongst variables of real-world systems for a long time. Bayesian networks are one of the most
important classes of probabilistic graphical models which are used to model complex systems. They
provide a compact representation of joint probability distributions among a set of variables.
Related work. Learning the structure of a Bayesian network from observational data is a well
known but an incredibly difficult problem to solve in the machine learning community. Due to its
popularity and applications, a considerable amount of work has been done in this field. Most of
these work use observational data to learn the structure. We can broadly divide these methods in
two categories. The methods in the first category use score maximization techniques to learn the
DAG from observational data. In this category, there are some heuristics based approaches such as
Friedman et al. (1999); Tsamardinos et al. (2006); Margaritis and Thrun (2000); Moore and Wong
(2003) which run in polynomial-time without offering any convergence/consistency guarantee. There
are also some exact but exponential time score maximizing exact algorithms such as Koivisto and
Sood (2004); Silander and Myllymäki (2006); Cussens (2008); Jaakkola et al. (2010). The methods
in the second category are independence test based methods such as Spirtes et al. (2000); Cheng et al.
(2002); Yehezkel and Lerner (2005); Xie and Geng (2008).
There have also been some work to learn the structure of a Bayesian network using interventional
data (Murphy, 2001; Tong and Koller, 2001; Eaton and Murphy, 2007; Triantafillou and Tsamardinos,
2015). Most of these works first find a Markov equivalence class from observational data and then
direct the edges using interventions. Unfortunately, the first step of finding Markov equivalence class
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

