Space and Time Efficient Kernel Density Estimation
in High Dimensions

Arturs Backurs∗
TTIC
backurs@ttic.edu

Piotr Indyk
MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Tal Wagner
MIT
talw@mit.edu

Abstract
Recently, Charikar and Siminelakis (2017) presented a framework for kernel density
estimation in provably sublinear query time, for kernels that possess a certain
hashing-based property. However, their data structure requires a significantly
increased super-linear storage space, as well as super-linear preprocessing time.
These limitations inhibit the practical applicability of their approach on large
datasets.
In this work, we present an improvement to their framework that retains the same
query time, while requiring only linear space and linear preprocessing time. We
instantiate our framework with the Laplacian and Exponential kernels, two popular
kernels which possess the aforementioned property. Our experiments on various
datasets verify that our approach attains accuracy and query time similar to Charikar
and Siminelakis (2017), with significantly improved space and preprocessing time.

1

Introduction

Kernel density estimation is a fundamental problem with many applications in statistics, machine
learning and scientific computing. For a kernel function k : Rd × Rd → [0, 1], and a set of points
X ⊂ Rd , the kernel density function of X at a point y ∈ Rd is defined as:2
1 X
KDEX (y) =
k(x, y).
|X|
x∈X

Typically the density function is evaluated on a multiple queries y from an input set Y . Unfortunately,
a naïve exact algorithm for this problem runs in a rectangular O(|X||Y |) time, which makes it
inefficient for large datasets X and Y . Because of this, most of the practical algorithms for this
problem report approximate answers. Tree-based techniques [GS91, GM01, GB17] lead to highly
efficient approximate algorithms in low-dimensional spaces, but their running times are exponential
in d. In high-dimensional spaces, until recently, the best approximation/runtime tradeoff was provided
by simple uniform random sampling. Specifically, for parameters τ,  ∈ (0, 1), it can be seen that
if X 0 is a random sample of O τ1 12 points from X, then KDEX 0 (y) = (1 ± ) KDEX (y) with
constant probability3 as long as KDEX (y) ≥ τ .
This approximation/runtime tradeoff was recently improved in [CS17], who proposed a framework
based on Hashing-Based Estimators (HBE). The framework utilizes locality-sensitive hash (LSH)
∗

Authors ordered alphabetically.
We note that all algorithms discussed in this paper easily extend to the case where each term k(x, y) is
multiplied by a positive weight wx ≥ 0, see e.g., [CS17].
3
The probability of correct estimation can be reduced to 1 − δ for any δ > 0 at the cost of increasing the
sample size by a factor of log(1/δ). Since the same observation applies to all algorithms considered in this
paper, we will ignore the dependence on δ from now on.
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

