Approximating Interactive Human Evaluation with
Self-Play for Open-Domain Dialog Systems

Asma Ghandeharioun∗, Judy Hanwen Shen∗ , Natasha Jaques∗ ,
Craig Ferguson, Noah Jones, Agata Lapedriza, Rosalind Picard
Department of Media Arts and Science
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
{asma_gh,judyshen,jaquesn}@mit.edu
{fergusoc,ncjones,agata}@mit.edu, picard@media.mit.edu

Abstract
Building an open-domain conversational agent is a challenging problem. Current
evaluation methods, mostly post-hoc judgments of static conversation, do not
capture conversation quality in a realistic interactive context. In this paper, we
investigate interactive human evaluation and provide evidence for its necessity; we
then introduce a novel, model-agnostic, and dataset-agnostic method to approximate it. In particular, we propose a self-play scenario where the dialog system talks
to itself and we calculate a combination of proxies such as sentiment and semantic
coherence on the conversation trajectory. We show that this metric is capable of
capturing the human-rated quality of a dialog model better than any automated
metric known to-date, achieving a significant Pearson correlation (r > .7, p < .05).
To investigate the strengths of this novel metric and interactive evaluation in comparison to state-of-the-art metrics and human evaluation of static conversations, we
perform extended experiments with a set of models, including several that make
novel improvements to recent hierarchical dialog generation architectures through
sentiment and semantic knowledge distillation on the utterance level. Finally,
we open-source the interactive evaluation platform we built and the dataset we
collected to allow researchers to efficiently deploy and evaluate dialog models.

1

Introduction

The goal of an open-domain conversational agent is to carry out natural social interactions with
humans. Current state-of-the-art generative neural networks fail in producing key aspects of good
natural conversation, including staying on topic, not being repetitive, and generating emotionally
appropriate responses. One of the biggest challenges in training better dialog systems relates to
the difficulty of evaluating them. Automatic metrics such as BLEU score relate poorly to human
judgment of dialog quality [1], and while embedding-distance based metrics provide an alternative
[2], we will show that they also do not correlate well with human evaluation. Without a reliable
metric to optimize, training high quality dialog models remains difficult.
Since humans are the ultimate authority on what constitutes a good conversation, many authors rely
on human ratings to evaluate their methods [3–5]. The predominant procedure for obtaining human
ratings uses static evaluation: a context of several sentences, often originating from the dataset that
dialog model was trained on, is used as input to generate a response (either a single utterance or
multiple consecutive utterances). This particular generated response for this particular context is then
provided for a human to evaluate. However, such observational evaluation of a static text sample
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

