Break the Ceiling: Stronger Multi-scale Deep
Graph Convolutional Networks
Sitao Luan1,2,⇤ , Mingde Zhao1,2,⇤ , Xiao-Wen Chang1 , Doina Precup1,2,3
{sitao.luan@mail, mingde.zhao@mail, chang@cs, dprecup@cs}.mcgill.ca
1
McGill University; 2 Mila; 3 DeepMind
⇤
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Recently, neural network based approaches have achieved significant
progress for solving large, complex, graph-structured problems. Nevertheless, the advantages of multi-scale information and deep architectures
have not been sufficiently exploited. In this paper, we first analyze key
factors constraining the expressive power of existing Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs), including the activation function and shallow learning
mechanisms. Then, we generalize spectral graph convolution and deep
GCN in block Krylov subspace forms, upon which we devise two architectures, both scalable in depth however making use of multi-scale information
di↵erently. On several node classification tasks, the proposed architectures
achieve state-of-the-art performance.

1

Introduction & Motivation

Many real-world problems can be modeled as graphs [14, 18, 25, 12, 27, 7]. Inspired by
the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [20] in computer vision [22], graph
convolution defined on graph Fourier domain stands out as the key operator and one of
the most powerful tools for using machine learning to solve graph problems. In this paper,
we focus on spectrum-free Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [2, 29], which have
demonstrated state-of-the-art performance on many transductive and inductive learning
tasks [7, 18, 25, 3, 4].
One major problem of the existing GCNs is the low expressive power limited by their
shallow learning mechanisms [38, 36]. There are mainly two reasons why people have
not yet achieved an architecture that is scalable in depth. First, this problem is difficult:
considering graph convolution as a special form of Laplacian smoothing [21], networks with
multiple convolutional layers will su↵er from an over-smoothing problem that makes the
representation of even distant nodes indistinguishable [38]. Second, some people think it is
unnecessary: for example, [2] states that it is not necessary for the label information to totally
traverse the entire graph and one can operate on the multi-scale coarsened input graph
and obtain the same flow of information as GCNs with more layers. Acknowledging the
difficulty, we hold on to the objective of deepening GCNs since the desired compositionality1
will yield easy articulation and consistent performance for problems with di↵erent scales.
In this paper, we break the performance ceiling of the GCNs. First, we analyze the limits of
the existing GCNs brought by the shallow learning mechanisms and the activation functions.
Then, we show that any graph convolution with a well-defined analytic spectral filter can
1
The expressive power of a sound deep NN architecture should be expected to grow with the
increment of network depth [19, 16].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

