SHE: A Fast and Accurate Deep Neural Network for
Encrypted Data∗

Qian Lou
Indiana University Bloomington

Lei Jiang
Indiana University Bloomington

louqian@iu.edu

jiang60@iu.edu

Abstract
Homomorphic Encryption (HE) is one of the most promising security solutions to
emerging Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS). Leveled-HE (LHE)-enabled
Convolutional Neural Networks (LHECNNs) are proposed to implement MLaaS
to avoid large bootstrapping overhead. However, prior LHECNNs have to pay signiﬁcant computing overhead but achieve only low inference accuracy, due to their
polynomial approximation activations and poolings. Stacking many polynomial
approximation activation layers in a network greatly reduces inference accuracy,
since the polynomial approximation activation errors lead to a low distortion of
the output distribution of the next batch normalization layer. So the polynomial
approximation activations and poolings have become the obstacle to a fast and
accurate LHECNN model.
In this paper, we propose a Shift-accumulation-based LHE-enabled deep neural network (SHE) for fast and accurate inferences on encrypted data. We use the binaryoperation-friendly Leveled Fast Homomorphic Encryption over Torus (LTFHE)
encryption scheme to implement ReLU activations and max poolings. We also
adopt the logarithmic quantization to accelerate inferences by replacing expensive
LTFHE multiplications with cheap LTFHE shifts. We propose a mixed bitwidth
accumulator to accelerate accumulations. Since the LTFHE ReLU activations, max
poolings, shifts and accumulations have small multiplicative depth overhead, SHE
can implement much deeper network architectures with more convolutional and
activation layers. Our experimental results show SHE achieves the state-of-the-art
inference accuracy and reduces the inference latency by 76.21% ∼ 94.23% over
prior LHECNNs on MNIST and CIFAR-10. The source code of SHE is available
at https://github.com/qianlou/SHE.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS) is an effective way for clients to run their computationally
expensive Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) inferences [1] on powerful cloud servers. During
MLaaS, cloud servers can access clients’ raw data, and hence potentially introduce privacy risks. So
there is a strong and urgent need to ensure the conﬁdentiality of healthcare records, ﬁnancial data and
other sensitive information of clients uploaded to cloud servers. Recent works [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] employ
Leveled Homomorphic Encryption (LHE) to do CNN inferences over encrypted data. During the
LHE-enabled MLaaS, a client encrypts the sensitive data and sends the encrypted data to a server.
Since only the client has the private key, the server cannot decrypt the input nor the output. The server
produces an encrypted inference output and returns it to the client. The client privacy is preserved in
this pipeline for both inputs and outputs.
However, prior LHE-enabled CNNs (LHECNNs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] suffer from low inference accuracy
and long inference latency. TAPAS [5] and DiNN [1] adopt only 1-bit weights, inputs and sign
∗

This work was supported in part by NSF CCF-1908992 and CCF-1909509.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

