Comparison Against Task Driven Artificial Neural
Networks Reveals Functional Organization of Mouse
Visual Cortex
Jianghong Shi
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
jhshi@uw.edu

Eric Shea-Brown
Department of Applied Mathematics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
etsb@uw.edu

Michael A. Buice
Allen Institute for Brain Science
Seattle, WA 98109
michaelbu@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Partially inspired by features of computation in visual cortex, deep neural networks
compute hierarchical representations of their inputs. While these networks have
been highly successful in machine learning, it remains unclear to what extent they
can aid our understanding of cortical function. Several groups have developed metrics that provide a quantitative comparison between representations computed by
networks and representations measured in cortex. At the same time, neuroscience
is well into an unprecedented phase of large-scale data collection, as evidenced
by projects such as the Allen Brain Observatory. Despite the magnitude of these
efforts, in a given experiment only a fraction of units are recorded, limiting the
information available about the cortical representation. Moreover, only a finite
number of stimuli can be shown to an animal over the course of a realistic experiment. These limitations raise the question of how and whether metrics that
compare representations of deep networks are meaningful on these datasets. Here,
we empirically quantify the capabilities and limitations of these metrics due to
limited image presentations and neuron samples. We find that the comparison
procedure is robust to different choices of stimuli set and the level of subsampling
that one might expect in a large-scale brain survey with thousands of neurons.
Using these results, we compare the representations measured in the Allen Brain
Observatory in response to natural image presentations to deep neural network. We
show that the visual cortical areas are relatively high order representations (in that
they map to deeper layers of convolutional neural networks). Furthermore, we see
evidence of a broad, more parallel organization rather than a sequential hierarchy,
with the primary area VISp (V1) being lower order relative to the other areas.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks, originally inspired in part by observations of function in visual cortex, have
been highly successful in machine learning [14, 6, 21], but it is less clear to what extent they can
provide insight into cortical function. Using coarse-grained neural activity from fMRI and MEG, it has
been shown that comparing against task-driven DNNs provides insights for functional organization of
primates’ brain areas [7, 3]. At the single-neuron level, it has been shown that deep neural networks
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

