On the Convergence of Single-Call
Stochastic Extra-Gradient Methods
Yu-Guan Hsieh
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LJK and ENS Paris
38000 Grenoble, France.
yu-guan.hsieh@ens.fr

Franck Iutzeler
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France.
franck.iutzeler@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr

Jérôme Malick
CNRS, LJK
38000 Grenoble, France.
jerome.malick@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG
38000 Grenoble, France.
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
Variational inequalities have recently attracted considerable interest in machine
learning as a flexible paradigm for models that go beyond ordinary loss function
minimization (such as generative adversarial networks and related deep learning
systems). In this setting, the optimal O(1/t) convergence rate for solving smooth
monotone variational inequalities is achieved by the Extra-Gradient (EG) algorithm
and its variants. Aiming to alleviate the cost of an extra gradient step per iteration
(which can become quite substantial in deep learning applications), several algorithms have been proposed as surrogates to Extra-Gradient with a single oracle
call per iteration. In this paper, we develop a synthetic view of such algorithms,
and we complement the existing literature by showing that they retain a O(1/t)
ergodic convergence rate in smooth, deterministic problems. Subsequently, beyond
the monotone deterministic case, we also show that the last iterate of single-call,
stochastic extra-gradient methods still enjoys a O(1/t) local convergence rate
to solutions of non-monotone variational inequalities that satisfy a second-order
sufficient condition.

1

Introduction

Deep learning is arguably the fastest-growing field in artificial intelligence: its applications range from
image recognition and natural language processing to medical anomaly detection, drug discovery, and
most fields where computers are required to make sense of massive amounts of data. In turn, this has
spearheaded a prolific research thrust in optimization theory with the twofold aim of demystifying
the successes of deep learning models and of providing novel methods to overcome their failures.
Introduced by Goodfellow et al. [20], generative adversarial networks (GANs) have become the
youngest torchbearers of the deep learning revolution and have occupied the forefront of this drive
in more ways than one. First, the adversarial training of deep neural nets has given rise to new
challenges regarding the efficient allocation of parallelizable resources, the compatibility of the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

