Cross-sectional Learning of Extremal Dependence
among Financial Assets

Xing Yan
School of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
yanxing128@gmail.com

Qi Wu∗
School of Data Science
City University of Hong Kong
qiwu55@cityu.edu.hk

Wen Zhang
JD Digits
zhangwen.jd@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel probabilistic model to facilitate the learning of multivariate
tail dependence of multiple financial assets. Our method allows one to construct
from known random vectors, e.g., standard normal, sophisticated joint heavytailed random vectors featuring not only distinct marginal tail heaviness, but also
flexible tail dependence structure. The novelty lies in that pairwise tail dependence
between any two dimensions is modeled separately from their correlation, and
can vary respectively according to its own parameter rather than the correlation
parameter, which is an essential advantage over many commonly used methods
such as multivariate t or elliptical distribution. It is also intuitive to interpret, easy
to track, and simple to sample comparing to the copula approach. We show its
flexible tail dependence structure through simulation. Coupled with a GARCH
model to eliminate serial dependence of each individual asset return series, we use
this novel method to model and forecast multivariate conditional distribution of
stock returns, and obtain notable performance improvements in multi-dimensional
coverage tests. Besides, our empirical finding about the asymmetry of tails of the
idiosyncratic component as well as the market component is interesting and worth
to be well studied in the future.

1

Introduction

Extreme market movements and rare events, which we call tail risk, play a very important role in
portfolio investments, institutional risk management, and financial regulation. For a single asset, there
has been a large body of literature concluding that the asset return follows non-normal distribution
with significant heavy tails. A further complication is that the joint multiple asset return often exhibits
nonnegligible tail dependence, which implies a higher chance of extreme co-movements than in the
joint normal case or the independence case. Realizing that much effort has been made on univariate
heavy tail modeling, it is in great need of specially designed models for multivariate tail dependence.
To measure tail dependence, the most common definition of the down-tail dependence coefficient of
two random variables X and Y is defined as (see [Frahm et al., 2005]):
λD
X,Y = lim P{X < QX (τ ), Y < QY (τ )}/τ,
τ →0+

(1)

where QX (τ ) and QY (τ ) are τ -quantiles of marginal distributions of X and Y respectively. Similarly, the up-tail dependence coefficient is defined as: λU
X,Y = limτ →1− P{X > QX (τ ), Y >
QY (τ )}/(1 − τ ). The tail dependence coefficient measures the degree of extremal, not typical, comovements between two random variables. It is beyond the usual correlation which is a measure of
average dependence. The reason why we should need tail dependence modeling is that the correlation
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

