Policy Learning for Fairness in Ranking

Thorsten Joachims
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
tj@cs.cornell.edu

Ashudeep Singh
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ashudeep@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Conventional Learning-to-Rank (LTR) methods optimize the utility of the rankings
to the users, but they are oblivious to their impact on the ranked items. However,
there has been a growing understanding that the latter is important to consider for
a wide range of ranking applications (e.g. online marketplaces, job placement,
admissions). To address this need, we propose a general LTR framework that can
optimize a wide range of utility metrics (e.g. NDCG) while satisfying fairness
of exposure constraints with respect to the items. This framework expands the
class of learnable ranking functions to stochastic ranking policies, which provides
a language for rigorously expressing fairness specifications. Furthermore, we
provide a new LTR algorithm called FAIR -PG-R ANK for directly searching the
space of fair ranking policies via a policy-gradient approach. Beyond the theoretical
evidence in deriving the framework and the algorithm, we provide empirical results
on simulated and real-world datasets verifying the effectiveness of the approach in
individual and group-fairness settings.

1

Introduction

Interfaces based on rankings are ubiquitous in today’s multi-sided online economies (e.g., online
marketplaces, job search, property renting, media streaming). In these systems, the items to be
ranked are products, job candidates, or other entities that transfer economic benefit, and it is widely
recognized that the position of an item in the ranking has a crucial influence on its exposure and
economic success. Surprisingly, though, the algorithms used to learn these rankings are typically
oblivious to the effect they have on the items. Instead, the learning algorithms blindly maximize the
utility of the rankings to the users issuing queries to the systems [1], and there is evidence (e.g. [2, 3])
that this does not necessarily lead to rankings that would be considered fair or desirable.
In contrast to fairness in supervised learning for classification (e.g., [4–10]), fairness for rankings has
been a relatively under-explored domain despite the growing influence of online information systems
on our society and economy. In the work that does exist, some consider group fairness in rankings
along the lines of demographic parity [11, 12], proposing definitions and methods that minimize
the difference in the representation between groups in a prefix of the ranking [13–16]. Other recent
works have argued that fairness of ranking systems corresponds to how they allocate exposure to
individual items or group of items based on their merit [3, 17]. These works specify and enforce
fairness constraints that explicitly link relevance to exposure in expectation or amortized over a set of
queries. However, these works assume that the relevances of all items are known and they do not
address the learning problem.
In this paper, we develop a Learning-to-Rank (LTR) algorithm – named FAIR -PG-R ANK – that not
only maximizes utility to the users, but that also rigorously enforces merit-based exposure constraints
towards the items. Focusing on notions of fairness around the key scarce resource that search
engines arbitrate, namely the relative allocation of exposure based on the items’ merit, such fairness
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

