Correlated Uncertainty for Learning
Dense Correspondences from Noisy Labels

Natalia Neverova, David Novotny, Andrea Vedaldi
Facebook AI Research
{nneverova, dnovotny, vedaldi}@fb.com

Abstract
Many machine learning methods depend on human supervision to achieve optimal
performance. However, in tasks such as DensePose, where the goal is to establish
dense visual correspondences between images, the quality of manual annotations
is intrinsically limited. We address this issue by augmenting neural network
predictors with the ability to output a distribution over labels, thus explicitly and
introspectively capturing the aleatoric uncertainty in the annotations. Compared to
previous works, we show that correlated error fields arise naturally in applications
such as DensePose and these fields can be modelled by deep networks, leading
to a better understanding of the annotation errors. We show that these models,
by understanding uncertainty better, can solve the original DensePose task more
accurately, thus setting the new state-of-the-art accuracy in this benchmark. Finally,
we demonstrate the utility of the uncertainty estimates in fusing the predictions
produced by multiple models, resulting in a better and more principled approach to
model ensembling which can further improve accuracy.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance in many applications, but at the cost of
collecting large quantities of annotated training data. Manual annotations are time consuming and, in
some cases, of limited quality. This is particularly true for quantitative labels such as the 3D shape of
objects in images or dense correspondence fields between objects. In these cases, one should consider
manual labels as a form of weak supervision and design learning algorithm accordingly.
An emerging approach to handle annotation noise is to task the network with predicting the aleatoric
uncertainty in the labels. Consider a predictor ŷ = Φ(x) mapping a data point x to an estimate ŷ of
its label. Given the “ground-truth” label y, the standard approach is to minimize a loss of the type
`(y, ŷ) so that ŷ approaches y as much as possible. However, if the “ground-truth” value y is affected
by noise, then naively minimizing this quantity may be undesirable. An alternative approach is to
predict instead a distribution p(ŷ|x) = Φŷ (x) over possible values of the annotation y. This has
several advantages: (1) it can model the distribution of annotation errors specific to each data point x
(as not all data points are equally difficult to annotate), (2) it can model the prediction uncertainty
(as knowing x may not be sufficient to fully determine y), and (3) it allows the model to account
for its own limitations (by assessing the difficulty of the prediction task). Under such a model, the
point-wise loss is replaced by the negative log-likelihood `(y, Φ(x)) = − log p(y|x) = − log Φy (x).
Approaches using these ideas have demonstrated their power in a number of applications. However,
most methods have adopted simplistic uncertainty models. In particular, when the goal is to predict
n
a label
Pn vector y ∈ R , errors have been assumed to be uncorrelated, so that − log p(y|x) =
− i=1 log p(yi |x). However, this is very seldom the case. For example, if yi is a label associated to
a particular pixel i in an image x, we can expect annotation and prediction errors to be very strongly
correlated for pixels in the same neighborhood.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

