Joint Optimization of Tree-based Index and Deep
Model for Recommender Systems

Han Zhu1 , Daqing Chang1 , Ziru Xu1,2∗, Pengye Zhang1
1
Alibaba Group
2
School of Software, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
{zhuhan.zh, daqing.cdq, ziru.xzr, pengye.zpy}@alibaba-inc.com
Xiang Li, Jie He, Han Li, Jian Xu, Kun Gai
Alibaba Group
Beijing, China
{yushi.lx, jay.hj, lihan.lh, xiyu.xj, jingshi.gk}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Large-scale industrial recommender systems are usually confronted with computational problems due to the enormous corpus size. To retrieve and recommend
the most relevant items to users under response time limits, resorting to an efficient index structure is an effective and practical solution. The previous work
Tree-based Deep Model (TDM) [34] greatly improves recommendation accuracy
using tree index. By indexing items in a tree hierarchy and training a user-node
preference prediction model satisfying a max-heap like property in the tree, TDM
provides logarithmic computational complexity w.r.t. the corpus size, enabling the
use of arbitrary advanced models in candidate retrieval and recommendation.
In tree-based recommendation methods, the quality of both the tree index and the
user-node preference prediction model determines the recommendation accuracy
for the most part. We argue that the learning of tree index and preference model
has interdependence. Our purpose, in this paper, is to develop a method to jointly
learn the index structure and user preference prediction model. In our proposed
joint optimization framework, the learning of index and user preference prediction
model are carried out under a unified performance measure. Besides, we come
up with a novel hierarchical user preference representation utilizing the tree index hierarchy. Experimental evaluations with two large-scale real-world datasets
show that the proposed method improves recommendation accuracy significantly.
Online A/B test results at a display advertising platform also demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in production environments.

1

Introduction

Recommendation problem is basically to retrieve a set of most relevant or preferred items for each
user request from the entire corpus. In the practice of large-scale recommendation, the algorithm
design should strike a balance between accuracy and efficiency. In corpus with tens or hundreds of
millions of items, methods that need to linearly scan each item’s preference score for each single
user request are not computationally tractable. To solve the problem, index structure is commonly
used to accelerate the retrieval process. In early recommender systems, item-based collaborative
∗

The work is done when she was a student intern in Alibaba Group

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

