Robust Principal Component Analysis with Adaptive
Neighbors

Hanghang Tong∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, Illinois, U.S.A.
htong@illinois.edu

Rui Zhang
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, U.S.A.
ruizhang8633@gmail.com

Abstract
Suppose certain data points are overly contaminated, then the existing principal
component analysis (PCA) methods are frequently incapable of filtering out and
eliminating the excessively polluted ones, which potentially lead to the functional
degeneration of the corresponding models. To tackle the issue, we propose a general
framework namely robust weight learning with adaptive neighbors (RWL-AN), via
which adaptive weight vector is automatically obtained with both robustness and
sparse neighbors. More significantly, the degree of the sparsity is steerable such
that only exact k well-fitting samples with least reconstruction errors are activated
during the optimization, while the residual samples, i.e., the extreme noised ones
are eliminated for the global robustness. Additionally, the framework is further
applied to PCA problem to demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of the
proposed RWL-AN model.

1

Introduction

As for the high-quality data reconstruction, principal component analysis (PCA) [16, 4, 7] has been
widely investigated. To deal with high dimensional data, conventional PCA methods usually include
the data preprocessing, i.e., vectorization of each data point. Nonetheless, the vectorization of the
data points could easily incur the curse of dimensionality. Therefore, two-dimensional reconstruction
has been brought to the study in the field of image analysis. In sum, equipped with the PCA methods
[17, 18, 19], the statistical properties of input data can be retained under the obtained subspace.
In reality, the presence of outliers in data largely reduces the performance of PCA approaches. The
existing reconstruction methods usually promote the robustness by exploiting the robust norms as
their loss functions [10], e.g., L1 -norm and non-squared F -norm. More specifically, L1 -norm based
approaches [5, 14, 9] are developed to alleviate the negative effects of local ill-dimensions. For
instance, Li et al. [5] proposed the L1 -norm based 2DPCA (2DPCA-L1) by optimizing multiple
projection directions sequentially. The L1 -norm based methods approximate the related optimization
problem and therefore often lead to a greedy strategy, which is potentially stuck with heuristic
solutions and large computational cost. Luo et al. [6, 15] proposed a non-greedy algorithm for an
approximate solution to the L1 -norm based maximization problem. Moreover, non-squared F -norm
based methods [10] are developed, where the sum of non-squared F -norm reconstruction errors is
minimized. Zhang et al. [20] optimized the robust non-squared F -norm based objective by virtue of
a dual problem, where the transitional weight is assigned to each term of the objective.
However, aforementioned robust approaches have lots of limitations. Firstly, all of them depend
on different types of loss functions, which are potentially sensitive to outliers. For instance, L1 norm based methods are usually utilized to handle the occluded data with local outliers, while
∗

Hanghang Tong is the Corresponding Author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

