DINGO: Distributed Newton-Type Method for
Gradient-Norm Optimization

Rixon Crane
University of Queensland
r.crane@uq.edu.au

Fred Roosta
University of Queensland
fred.roosta@uq.edu.au

Abstract
For optimization of a large sum of functions in a distributed computing environment,
we present a novel communication efficient Newton-type algorithm that enjoys a
variety of advantages over similar existing methods. Our algorithm, DINGO, is
derived by optimization of the gradient’s norm as a surrogate function. DINGO does
not impose any specific form on the underlying functions and its application range
extends far beyond convexity and smoothness. The underlying sub-problems of
DINGO are simple linear least-squares, for which a plethora of efficient algorithms
exist. DINGO involves a few hyper-parameters that are easy to tune and we
theoretically show that a strict reduction in the surrogate objective is guaranteed,
regardless of the selected hyper-parameters.

1

Introduction

Consider the optimization problem

min

w∈Rd


m
1 X
f (w) ,
fi (w) ,
m i=1

(1)

in a centralized distributed computing environment involving one driver machine and m worker
machines, in which the ith worker can only locally access the ith component function, fi . Such
distributed computing settings arise increasingly more frequently as a result of technological and
communication advancements that have enabled the collection of and access to large scale datasets.
As a concrete example, take a data fitting application, in which given n data points, {xi }ni=1 , and
their corresponding
loss, `i (w; xi ), parameterized by w, the goal is to minimize the overall loss as
Pn
minw∈Rd
`
(w;
xi )/n. Such problems appear frequently in machine learning, e.g., [1, 2, 3]
i
i=1
and scientific computing, e.g., [4, 5, 6]. However, in “big data” regimes where n  1, lack of
adequate computational resources, in particular storage, can severely limit, or even prevent, any
attempts at solving such optimization problems in a traditional stand-alone way, e.g., using a single
machine. This can be remedied through distributed computing, in which resources across a network
of stand-alone computational nodes are “pooled” together so as to scale to the problem at hand [7].
In such a setting, where n data points are distributed across m workers, one can instead consider (1)
with
1 X
fi (w) ,
`j (w; xj ), i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
(2)
|Si |
j∈Si

where Si ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , n}, with cardinality denoted by |Si |, correspond to the distribution of data
across the nodes, i.e., the ith node has access to a portion of the data indexed by the set Si .
In distributed settings, the amount of communications, i.e., messages exchanged across the network,
are often considered a major bottleneck of computations (often more so than local computation
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

