Online Convex Matrix Factorization with
Representative Regions

Abhishek Agarwal ∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
abhiag@illinois.edu

Jianhao Peng ∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
jianhao2@illinois.edu

Olgica Milenkovic
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract
Matrix factorization (MF) is a versatile learning method that has found wide applications in various data-driven disciplines. Still, many MF algorithms do not
adequately scale with the size of available datasets and/or lack interpretability. To
improve the computational efficiency of the method, an online (streaming) MF
algorithm was proposed in [1]. To enable data interpretability, a constrained version of MF, termed convex MF, was introduced in [2]. In the latter work, the basis
vectors are required to lie in the convex hull of the data samples, thereby ensuring
that every basis can be interpreted as a weighted combination of data samples. No
current algorithmic solutions for online convex MF are known as it is challenging
to find adequate convex bases without having access to the complete dataset. We
address both problems by proposing the first online convex MF algorithm that
maintains a collection of constant-size sets of representative data samples needed
for interpreting each of the basis [2] and has the same almost sure convergence
guarantees as the online learning algorithm of [1]. Our proof techniques combine
random coordinate descent algorithms with specialized quasi-martingale convergence analysis. Experiments on synthetic and real world datasets show significant
computational savings of the proposed online convex MF method compared to
classical convex MF. Since the proposed method maintains small representative
sets of data samples needed for convex interpretations, it is related to a body of
work in theoretical computer science, pertaining to generating point sets [3], and in
computer vision, pertaining to archetypal analysis [4]. Nevertheless, it differs from
these lines of work both in terms of the objective and algorithmic implementations.

1

Introduction

Matrix Factorization (MF) is a widely used dimensionality reduction technique [5, 6] whose goal
is to find a basis that allows for a sparse representation of the underlying data [7, 8]. Compared to
other dimensionality reduction techniques based on eigendecompositions [9], MF enforces fewer
restrictions on the choice of the basis and hence ensures larger representation flexibility for complex
datasets. At the same time, it provides a natural, application-specific interpretation for the bases.
∗

Abhishek Agarwal and Jianhao Peng contribute equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

