D ETOX: A Redundancy-based Framework for Faster
and More Robust Gradient Aggregation
Shashank Rajput⇤
University of Wisconsin-Madison
rajput3@wisc.edu

Hongyi Wang⇤
University of Wisconsin-Madison
hongyiwang@cs.wisc.edu

Zachary Charles
University of Wisconsin-Madison
zcharles@math.wisc.edu

Dimitris Papailiopoulos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
dimitris@papail.io

Abstract
To improve the resilience of distributed training to worst-case, or Byzantine node
failures, several recent approaches have replaced gradient averaging with robust
aggregation methods. Such techniques can have high computational costs, often
quadratic in the number of compute nodes, and only have limited robustness
guarantees. Other methods have instead used redundancy to guarantee robustness,
but can only tolerate limited number of Byzantine failures. In this work, we
present D ETOX, a Byzantine-resilient distributed training framework that combines
algorithmic redundancy with robust aggregation. D ETOX operates in two steps,
a filtering step that uses limited redundancy to significantly reduce the effect of
Byzantine nodes, and a hierarchical aggregation step that can be used in tandem
with any state-of-the-art robust aggregation method. We show theoretically that
this leads to a substantial increase in robustness, and has a per iteration runtime
that can be nearly linear in the number of compute nodes. We provide extensive
experiments over real distributed setups across a variety of large-scale machine
learning tasks, showing that D ETOX leads to orders of magnitude accuracy and
speedup improvements over many state-of-the-art Byzantine-resilient approaches.

1

Introduction

To scale the training of machine learning models, gradient computations can often be distributed
across multiple compute nodes. After computing these local gradients, a parameter server (PS) then
averages them, and updates a global model. As the scale of data and available compute power grows,
so does the probability that some compute nodes output unreliable gradients. This can be due to
power outages, faulty hardware, or communication failures, or due to security issues, such as the
presence of an adversary governing the output of a compute node.
Due to the difficulty in quantifying these different types of errors separately, we often model them
as Byzantine failures. Such failures are assumed to be able to result in any output, adversarial or
otherwise. Unfortunately, the presence of a single Byzantine compute node can result in arbitrarily
bad global models when aggregating gradients via their average [1].
In distributed training, there have generally been two distinct approaches to improve Byzantine
robustness. The first replaces the gradient averaging step at the PS with a robust aggregation step,
such as the geometric median and variants thereof [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. The second approach instead
⇤

Authors contributed equally to this paper and are listed alphabetically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

