Learning from Bad Data via Generation

Tianyu Guo1,2,∗, Chang Xu2,∗ , Boxin Shi3,4,∗ , Chao Xu1 , Dacheng Tao2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC, School of EECS,
Peking University, 100871, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518040, China
{tianyuguo, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, chaoxu@cis.pku.edu.cn
{c.xu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Bad training data would challenge the learning model from understanding the
underlying data-generating scheme, which then increases the difficulty in achieving
satisfactory performance on unseen test data. We suppose the real data distribution
lies in a distribution set supported by the empirical distribution of bad data. A
worst-case formulation can be developed over this distribution set, and then be
interpreted as a generation task in an adversarial manner. The connections and
differences between GANs and our framework have been thoroughly discussed. We
further theoretically show the influence of this generation task on learning from bad
data and reveal its connection with a data-dependent regularization. Given different
distance measures (e.g., Wasserstein distance or JS divergence) of distributions, we
can derive different objective functions for the problem. Experimental results on
different kinds of bad training data demonstrate the necessity and effectiveness of
the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Machine learning techniques are applied to fit the data distribution induced by the training set and
then make predictions for new examples in various applications, such as image classification [18, 37,
39, 20], image generation [22, 40, 35, 14], and semantic segmentation [12, 36, 31, 17]. An important
assumption underlying the success of these methods is that the training set and the test set are subject
to the same distribution. It is therefore expected that the models well trained on the training set can
also achieve similar performance on the test data that have never been seen before in the training set.
The true underlying distribution of the data is unknown and many methods can be applied to
approximate it. For example, cross-entropy loss is often taken as the objective function of deep
neural networks in classification tasks, which is equivalent to a maximum likelihood estimation of
the unknown data distribution based on the training data [13]. However, many factors, such as the
size of training set [13], the way data is collected [11], and the balance between different categories
in the training [30], will affect the results of maximum likelihood estimation. If the data distribution
approximated by the well trained model on the training sample is far from true data distribution,
performance on the test set would then hardly be comparable with that on the training set.
In real-world applications, there usually exist "bad" data that are instantiated from the imbalanced,
noisy or reduced training set, resulting in settings where the observed training samples do not well
∗

Corresponding authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

