On The Classification-Distortion-Perception Tradeoff

Dong Liu, Haochen Zhang, Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Signal degradation is ubiquitous, and computational restoration of degraded signal
has been investigated for many years. Recently, it is reported that the capability of
signal restoration is fundamentally limited by the so-called perception-distortion
tradeoff, i.e. the distortion and the perceptual difference between the restored
signal and the ideal “original” signal cannot be made both minimal simultaneously.
Distortion corresponds to signal fidelity and perceptual difference corresponds to
perceptual naturalness, both of which are important metrics in practice. Besides,
there is another dimension worthy of consideration–the semantic quality of the
restored signal, i.e. the utility of the signal for recognition purpose. In this paper,
we extend the previous perception-distortion tradeoff to the case of classificationdistortion-perception (CDP) tradeoff, where we introduced the classification error
rate of the restored signal in addition to distortion and perceptual difference. In
particular, we consider the classification error rate achieved on the restored signal
using a predefined classifier as a representative metric for semantic quality. We
rigorously prove the existence of the CDP tradeoff, i.e. the distortion, perceptual
difference, and classification error rate cannot be made all minimal simultaneously.
We also provide both simulation and experimental results to showcase the CDP
tradeoff. Our findings can be useful especially for computer vision research where
some low-level vision tasks (signal restoration) serve for high-level vision tasks
(visual understanding). Our code and models have been published.

1

Introduction

Signal degradation refers to the corruption of the signal due to many different reasons such as
interference and the blend of interested signal and uninterested signal or noise, which is observed
ubiquitously in practical information systems. The cause of signal degradation may be physical
factors, such as the imperfectness of data acquisition devices and the noise in data transmission
medium; or may be artificial factors, such as the lossy data compression and the transmission of
multiple sources over the same medium at the same time. In addition, in cases where we want to
enhance signal, we may assume the signal to have been somehow “degraded.” For example, if we
want to enhance the resolution of an image, we assume the image is a degraded version of an ideal
“original” image that has high resolution [6].
To tackle signal degradation or to fulfill signal enhancement, computational restoration of degraded
signal has been investigated for many years. There are various signal restoration tasks corresponding
to different degradation reasons. Taken image as example, image denoising [23], image deblurring
[17], single image super-resolution [6], image contrast enhancement [7], image compression artifact
removal [5], image inpainting [22], . . . , all belong to image restoration tasks.
Different restoration tasks have various objectives. Some tasks may be keen to recover the “original”
signal as faithfully as possible, like image denoising is to recover the noise-free image, compression
artifact removal is to recover the uncompressed image. Some other tasks may concern more about
the perceptual quality of the restored signal, like image super-resolution is to produce image details
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

