Modeling Conceptual Understanding in Image
Reference Games
Rodolfo Corona∗ †
UC Berkeley
rcorona@berkeley.edu

Stephan Alaniz∗ †
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
salaniz@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Zeynep Akata†
University of Tübingen
zeynep.akata@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
An agent who interacts with a wide population of other agents needs to be aware
that there may be variations in their understanding of the world. Furthermore, the
machinery which they use to perceive may be inherently different, as is the case
between humans and machines. In this work, we present both an image reference
game between a speaker and a population of listeners where reasoning about the
concepts other agents can comprehend is necessary and a model formulation with
this capability. We focus on reasoning about the conceptual understanding of
others, as well as adapting to novel gameplay partners and dealing with differences
in perceptual machinery. Our experiments on three benchmark image/attribute
datasets suggest that our learner indeed encodes information directly pertaining to
the understanding of other agents, and that leveraging this information is crucial
for maximizing gameplay performance.

1

Introduction

For a machine learning system to gain user trust, either its reasoning should to be transparent [Rudin,
2019, Freitas, 2014, Lakkaraju et al., 2016, Letham et al., 2015], or it should be capable of justifying
its decisions in human-interpretable ways [Gilpin et al., 2018, Hendricks et al., 2016, Huk Park
et al., 2018, Wu and Mooney, 2019]. If a system is to interact with and justify its decisions to a
large population of users, it needs to be cognizant of the variance users may have in their conceptual
understanding over task-related concepts, i.e., an explanation could make sense to some users and
not to others. Although there has been work studying what affects users’ ability to understand the
decisions of machine learning models [Chandrasekaran et al., 2017], to the best of our knowledge
existing work in explainable AI (XAI) does not explicitly reason about user understanding when
generating explanations for model decisions.
As an additional complication, variations in understanding can only be inferred from observed
behavior, as the system typically has no access to the internal state of its users. Further, usually not
only the understanding among the population of users vary, but also how the system and its users
perceive information about the world significantly differs, as is the case between human eyes and
digital cameras artificial agents use for perception.
In this work, we focus on the ability of a machine learning system, i.e. an agent, to form a mental
model of the task-related, conceptual understanding other communication partners have over their
environment. Particularly, we are interested in an agent that can form an internal, human-interpretable
∗

Equal contribution † Majority of work done at the University of Amsterdam

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

