A Condition Number for Joint Optimization of
Cycle-Consistent Networks
Leonidas Guibas1 , Qixing Huang2 , and Zhenxiao Liang2
1

2

Stanford University
The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
A recent trend in optimizing maps such as dense correspondences between objects
or neural networks between pairs of domains is to optimize them jointly. In this
context, there is a natural cycle-consistency constraint, which regularizes composite
maps associated with cycles, i.e., they are forced to be identity maps. However,
as there is an exponential number of cycles in a graph, how to sample a subset
of cycles becomes critical for efficient and effective enforcement of the cycleconsistency constraint. This paper presents an algorithm that select a subset of
weighted cycles to minimize a condition number of the induced joint optimization
problem. Experimental results on benchmark datasets justify the effectiveness of
our approach for optimizing dense correspondences between 3D shapes and neural
networks for predicting dense image flows.

1

Introduction

Maps between sets are important mathematical quantities. Depending on the definition of sets, maps
can take different forms. Examples include dense correspondences between image pixels [28, 23],
sparse correspondences between feature points [27], vertex correspondences between social or
biological networks [13], and rigid transformations between archaeological pieces [16]. In the
deep learning era, the concept of maps naturally extends to neural networks between different
domains. A fundamental challenge in map computation is that there is only limited information
between pairs of objects/domains for map computation, and the resulting maps are often noisy and
incorrect, particularly between relevant but dissimilar objects. A recent trend in map computation
seeks to address this issue by performing map synchronization, which jointly optimizes maps among
a collection of related objects/domains to improve the maps between pairs of objects/domains in
isolation [29, 24, 15, 14, 39, 9, 17, 11, 19, 45, 34]. In this context, there is a natural constraint called
cycle-consistency, which states that composite maps along cycles should be the identity map. When
maps admit matrix representations, state-of-the-art techniques [14, 41, 9, 41, 36, 36, 5, 4] formulate
map synchronization as recovering a low-rank matrix, where the pairwise maps computed between
pairs of objects are noisy measurements of the blocks of this matrix. This paradigm enjoys tight exact
recovery conditions as well as empirical success (e.g.,[14, 41, 9, 41, 36, 36, 5, 4]).
In this paper, we focus on the case where maps between objects/domains do not admit matrix
representations (c.f. [45]), which is a popular setting for neural networks between domains. To jointly
optimize neural networks in this context, one has to enforce the original cycle-consistency constraint.
The technical challenge, though, is that the number of cycles in a graph may be exponential in the
number of vertices. In other words, we have to develop a strategy to effectively sample a subset
of cycles to enforce the cycle-consistency constraint. The goal for cycle selection is three-fold:
completeness, conciseness, and stability. Completeness stands for the fact that enforcing the cycleconsistency constraint on the selected cycles induces the cycle-consistency property among all cycles
in the graph. Conciseness means both the size of the cycle-set and the length of each cycle should
be small. Stability concerns the convergence behavior when solving the induce joint optimization
problem, e.g., joint learning of a network of neural networks. In particular, stability is crucial for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

