GOT: An Optimal Transport framework for Graph
comparison

Hermina Petric Maretic
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Signal Processing Laboratory (LTS4)
Lausanne, Switzerland
hermina.petricmaretic@epfl.ch

Mireille EL Gheche
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Signal Processing Laboratory (LTS4)
Lausanne, Switzerland
mireille.elgheche@epfl.ch

Giovanni Chierchia
Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR 8049)
CNRS, ENPC, ESIEE Paris, UPEM
F-93162, Noisy-le-Grand, France
giovanni.chierchia@esiee.fr

Pascal Frossard
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Signal Processing Laboratory (LTS4)
Lausanne, Switzerland
pascal.frossard@epfl.ch

Abstract
We present a novel framework based on optimal transport for the challenging
problem of comparing graphs. Specifically, we exploit the probabilistic distribution
of smooth graph signals defined with respect to the graph topology. This allows
us to derive an explicit expression of the Wasserstein distance between graph
signal distributions in terms of the graph Laplacian matrices. This leads to a
structurally meaningful measure for comparing graphs, which is able to take into
account the global structure of graphs, while most other measures merely observe
local changes independently. Our measure is then used for formulating a new
graph alignment problem, whose objective is to estimate the permutation that
minimizes the distance between two graphs. We further propose an efficient
stochastic algorithm based on Bayesian exploration to accommodate for the nonconvexity of the graph alignment problem. We finally demonstrate the performance
of our novel framework on different tasks like graph alignment, graph classification
and graph signal prediction, and we show that our method leads to significant
improvement with respect to the state-of-art algorithms.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of digitisation in various domains, the volume of data increases very
rapidly, with many of those taking the form of structured data. Such information is often represented
by graphs that capture potentially complex structures. It stays however pretty challenging to analyse,
classify or predict graph data, due to the lack of efficient measures for comparing graphs. In particular,
the mere comparison of graph matrices is not necessarily a meaningful distance, as different edges
can have a diverse importance in the graph. Spectral distances have also been proposed [1, 2], but
they usually do not take into account all the information provided by the graphs, focusing only on the
Laplacian matrix eigenvectors and ignoring a large portion of the structure encoded in eigenvectors.
In addition to the lack of effective distances, a major difficulty with graph representations is that their
nodes may not be aligned, which further complicates graph comparisons.
In this paper, we propose a new framework for graph comparison, which permits to compute both the
distance between two graphs under unknown permutations, and the transportation plan for data from
one graph to another, under the assumption that the graphs have the same number of vertices. Instead
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

