BehaveNet: nonlinear embedding and Bayesian neural
decoding of behavioral videos

Eleanor Batty*, Matthew R Whiteway*, Shreya Saxena, Dan Biderman, Taiga Abe
Columbia University
erb2180,m.whiteway,ss5513,db3236,ta2507 @columbia.edu
Simon Musall
Cold Spring Harbor
simon.musall@gmail.com
Jeffrey E Markowitz
Harvard Medical School
jeffrey_markowitz@hms.harvard.edu
Sandeep Robert Datta
Harvard Medical School
srdatta@hms.harvard.edu

Winthrop Gillis
Harvard Medical School
win.gillis@gmail.com
Anne Churchland
Cold Spring Harbor
churchland@cshl.edu

Scott W Linderman†
Stanford University
swl1@stanford.edu

John Cunningham
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Liam Paninski†
Columbia University
liam@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
A fundamental goal of systems neuroscience is to understand the relationship
between neural activity and behavior. Behavior has traditionally been characterized
by low-dimensional, task-related variables such as movement speed or response
times. More recently, there has been a growing interest in automated analysis of
high-dimensional video data collected during experiments. Here we introduce a
probabilistic framework for the analysis of behavioral video and neural activity.
This framework provides tools for compression, segmentation, generation, and
decoding of behavioral videos. Compression is performed using a convolutional
autoencoder (CAE), which yields a low-dimensional continuous representation
of behavior. We then use an autoregressive hidden Markov model (ARHMM) to
segment the CAE representation into discrete “behavioral syllables.” The resulting
generative model can be used to simulate behavioral video data. Finally, based on
this generative model, we develop a novel Bayesian decoding approach that takes in
neural activity and outputs probabilistic estimates of the full-resolution behavioral
video. We demonstrate this framework on two different experimental paradigms
using distinct behavioral and neural recording technologies.
Understanding the complex relationship between neural activity and behavior requires a thorough
characterization of behavior across multiple timescales. Behavior has traditionally been characterized
by low-dimensional, task-related variables such as reaction times, or the position of a joystick, or the
speed of a wheel turn. These require specialized sensors set up by the experimenter, necessitating
laborious testing and calibration.
Of course, behavior is in reality potentially very high-dimensional, and there is a growing appreciation
that to understand neural activity we need to monitor behavior in a less simplistic (and labor-intensive)
∗
†

Equal contributions
Joint senior authors

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

