SpiderBoost and Momentum: Faster Stochastic
Variance Reduction Algorithms
Zhe Wang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
wang.10982@osu.edu

Kaiyi Ji
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
ji.367@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Yi Zhou
Department of ECE
The University of Utah
yi.zhou@utah.edu

Vahid Tarokh
Department of ECE
Duke University
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
SARAH and SPIDER are two recently developed stochastic variance-reduced
algorithms, and SPIDER has been shown to achieve a near-optimal first-order
oracle complexity in smooth nonconvex optimization. However, SPIDER uses
an accuracy-dependent stepsize that slows down the convergence in practice, and
cannot handle objective functions that involve nonsmooth regularizers. In this paper,
we propose SpiderBoost as an improved scheme, which allows to use a much larger
constant-level stepsize while maintaining the same near-optimal oracle complexity,
and can be extended with proximal mapping to handle composite optimization
(which is nonsmooth and nonconvex) with provable convergence guarantee. In
particular, we show that proximal SpiderBoost achieves an oracle complexity of
O(min{n1/2 −2 , −3 }) in composite nonconvex optimization, improving the stateof-the-art result by a factor of O(min{n1/6 , −1/3 }). We further develop a novel
momentum scheme to accelerate SpiderBoost for composite optimization, which
achieves the near-optimal oracle complexity in theory and substantial improvement
in experiments.

1

Introduction

We consider the following finite-sum optimization problem
n

min Ψ(x) := f (x), where f (x) :=

x∈Rd

1X
fi (x)
n i=1

(P)

where the function f denotes the total loss on the training samples and in general is nonconvex. Since
large-scale machine learning problems can have very large sample size n, the full-batch gradient
descent algorithm has high computational complexity. Thus, various stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) algorithms have been proposed. For nonconvex optimization, the basic SGD algorithm, which
calculates the gradient of one data sample per iteration, has been shown to yield an overall stochastic
first-order oracle (SFO) complexity, i.e., gradient complexity, of O(−4 ) [9] to attain a first-order
stationary point x̄ that satisfies Ek∇f (x̄)k ≤ . SGD algorithms with diminishing step-size [9, 5]
or a sufficiently large batch size [37, 11] were also proposed to guarantee their convergence to a
stationary point rather than its neighborhood.
Furthermore, various variance reduction methods have been proposed, which construct more accurate
stochastic gradient estimators than that of SGD, e.g., SAG [31], SAGA [7] and SVRG [16]. In
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

