Interpreting and improving natural-language
processing (in machines) with natural
language-processing (in the brain)

Mariya Toneva
Neuroscience Institute
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
mariya@cmu.edu

Leila Wehbe
Neuroscience Institute
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
lwehbe@cmu.edu

Abstract
Neural networks models for NLP are typically implemented without the explicit
encoding of language rules and yet they are able to break one performance record
after another. This has generated a lot of research interest in interpreting the
representations learned by these networks. We propose here a novel interpretation
approach that relies on the only processing system we have that does understand
language: the human brain. We use brain imaging recordings of subjects reading
complex natural text to interpret word and sequence embeddings from 4 recent
NLP models - ELMo, USE, BERT and Transformer-XL. We study how their
representations differ across layer depth, context length, and attention type. Our
results reveal differences in the context-related representations across these models.
Further, in the transformer models, we find an interaction between layer depth and
context length, and between layer depth and attention type. We finally hypothesize
that altering BERT to better align with brain recordings would enable it to also
better understand language. Probing the altered BERT using syntactic NLP tasks
reveals that the model with increased brain-alignment outperforms the original
model. Cognitive neuroscientists have already begun using NLP networks to study
the brain, and this work closes the loop to allow the interaction between NLP and
cognitive neuroscience to be a true cross-pollination.

1

Introduction

The large success of deep neural networks in NLP is perplexing when considering that unlike most
other NLP approaches, neural networks are typically not informed by explicit language rules. Yet,
neural networks are constantly breaking records in various NLP tasks from machine translation to
sentiment analysis. Even more interestingly, it has been shown that word embeddings and language
models trained on a large generic corpus and then optimized for downstream NLP tasks produce
even better results than training the entire model only to solve this one task (Peters et al., 2018;
Howard and Ruder, 2018; Devlin et al., 2018). These models seem to capture something generic
about language. What representations do these models capture of their language input?
Different approaches have been proposed to probe the representations in the network layers through
NLP tasks designed to detect specific linguistic information (Conneau et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018;
Code available at https://github.com/mtoneva/brain_language_nlp
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

