Massively Scalable Sinkhorn Distances
via the Nyström Method

Jason Altschuler
MIT
jasonalt@mit.edu

Francis Bach
INRIA - ENS - PSL
francis.bach@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA - ENS - PSL
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Jonathan Niles-Weed
NYU
jnw@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
The Sinkhorn “distance,” a variant of the Wasserstein distance with entropic regularization, is an increasingly popular tool in machine learning and statistical inference.
However, the time and memory requirements of standard algorithms for computing
this distance grow quadratically with the size of the data, making them prohibitively
expensive on massive data sets. In this work, we show that this challenge is surprisingly easy to circumvent: combining two simple techniques—the Nyström
method and Sinkhorn scaling—provably yields an accurate approximation of the
Sinkhorn distance with significantly lower time and memory requirements than
other approaches. We prove our results via new, explicit analyses of the Nyström
method and of the stability properties of Sinkhorn scaling. We validate our claims
experimentally by showing that our approach easily computes Sinkhorn distances
on data sets hundreds of times larger than can be handled by other techniques.

1

Introduction

Optimal transport is a fundamental notion in probability theory and geometry [42], which has
recently attracted a great deal of interest in the machine learning community as a tool for image
recognition [26, 35], domain adaptation [11, 12], and generative modeling [5, 9, 20], among many
other applications [see, e.g., 25, 31].
The growth of this field has been fueled in part by computational advances, many of them stemming
from an influential proposal of Cuturi [13] to modify the definition of optimal transport to include
an entropic penalty. The resulting quantity, which Cuturi [13] called the Sinkhorn “distance”1
after Sinkhorn [38], is significantly faster to compute than its unregularized counterpart. Though
originally attractive purely for computational reasons, the Sinkhorn distance has since become an
object of study in its own right because it appears to possess better statistical properties than the
unregularized distance both in theory and in practice [21, 29, 31, 34, 36]. Computing this distance as
quickly as possible has therefore become an area of active study.
We briefly recall the setting. Let p and q be probability distributions supported on at most n points
in Rd . We denote by M(p, q) the set of all couplings between p and q, and for any P ∈ M(p, q),
we denote by H(P ) its Shannon entropy. (See Section 2.1 for full definitions.) The Sinkhorn distance
1

We use quotations since it is not technically a distance; see [13, Section 3.2] for details. The quotes are
dropped henceforth.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

