Unsupervised State Representation Learning in Atari
Ankesh Anand⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal
Microsoft Research

Evan Racah⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal

Sherjil Ozair⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal

Marc-Alexandre Côté
Microsoft Research

R Devon Hjelm
Microsoft Research
Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
State representation learning, or the ability to capture latent generative factors
of an environment, is crucial for building intelligent agents that can perform a
wide variety of tasks. Learning such representations without supervision from
rewards is a challenging open problem. We introduce a method that learns
state representations by maximizing mutual information across spatially and temporally distinct features of a neural encoder of the observations. We also introduce a new benchmark based on Atari 2600 games where we evaluate representations based on how well they capture the ground truth state variables.
We believe this new framework for evaluating representation learning models
will be crucial for future representation learning research. Finally, we compare our technique with other state-of-the-art generative and contrastive representation learning methods. The code associated with this work is available at
https://github.com/mila-iqia/atari-representation-learning

1

Introduction

The ability to perceive and represent visual sensory data into useful and concise descriptions is considered a fundamental cognitive capability in humans [1, 2], and thus crucial for building intelligent
agents [3]. Representations that concisely capture the true state of the environment should empower
agents to effectively transfer knowledge across different tasks in the environment, and enable learning
with fewer interactions [4].
Recently, deep representation learning has led to tremendous progress in a variety of machine learning
problems across numerous domains [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Typically, such representations are often learned
via end-to-end learning using the signal from labels or rewards, which makes such techniques often
very sample-inefficient. Human perception in the natural world, however, appears to require almost
no explicit supervision [10].
Unsupervised [11, 12, 13] and self-supervised representation learning [14, 15, 16] have emerged as
an alternative to supervised versions which can yield useful representations with reduced sample
complexity. In the context of learning state representations [17], current unsupervised methods rely
on generative decoding of the data using either VAEs [18, 19, 20, 21] or prediction in pixel-space
[22, 23]. Since these objectives are based on reconstruction error in the pixel space, they are not
incentivized to capture abstract latent factors and often default to capturing pixel level details.
In this work, we leverage recent advances in self-supervision that rely on scalable estimation of
mutual information [24, 25, 26, 27], and propose a new contrastive state representation learning
⇤

Equal contribution. {anandank, racaheva, ozairs}@mila.quebec

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

