Uniform convergence may be unable to explain
generalization in deep learning

Vaishnavh Nagarajan
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
vaishnavh@cs.cmu.edu

J. Zico Kolter
Department of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University &
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Pittsburgh, PA
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Aimed at explaining the surprisingly good generalization behavior of overparameterized deep networks, recent works have developed a variety of generalization
bounds for deep learning, all based on the fundamental learning-theoretic technique
of uniform convergence. While it is well-known that many of these existing bounds
are numerically large, through numerous experiments, we bring to light a more
concerning aspect of these bounds: in practice, these bounds can increase with
the training dataset size. Guided by our observations, we then present examples
of overparameterized linear classifiers and neural networks trained by gradient
descent (GD) where uniform convergence provably cannot “explain generalization”
– even if we take into account the implicit bias of GD to the fullest extent possible.
More precisely, even if we consider only the set of classifiers output by GD, which
have test errors less than some small  in our settings, we show that applying
(two-sided) uniform convergence on this set of classifiers will yield only a vacuous
generalization guarantee larger than 1 − . Through these findings, we cast doubt
on the power of uniform convergence-based generalization bounds to provide a
complete picture of why overparameterized deep networks generalize well.

1

Introduction

Explaining why overparameterized deep networks generalize well [28, 38] has become an important
open question in deep learning. How is it possible that a large network can be trained to perfectly fit
randomly labeled data (essentially by memorizing the labels), and yet, the same network when trained
to perfectly fit real training data, generalizes well to unseen data? This called for a “rethinking” of
conventional, algorithm-independent techniques to explain generalization. Specifically, it was argued
that learning-theoretic approaches must be reformed by identifying and incorporating the implicit
bias/regularization of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [6, 35, 30]. Subsequently, a huge variety of
novel and refined, algorithm-dependent generalization bounds for deep networks have been developed,
all based on uniform convergence, the most widely used tool in learning theory. The ultimate goal
of this ongoing endeavor is to derive bounds on the generalization error that (a) are small, ideally
non-vacuous (i.e., < 1), (b) reflect the same width/depth dependence as the generalization error (e.g.,
become smaller with increasing width, as has been surprisingly observed in practice), (c) apply to the
network learned by SGD (without any modification or explicit regularization) and (d) increase with
the proportion of randomly flipped training labels (i.e., increase with memorization).
While every bound meets some of these criteria (and sheds a valuable but partial insight into
generalization in deep learning), there is no known bound that meets all of them simultaneously.
While most bounds [29, 3, 11, 31, 27, 32] apply to the original network, they are neither numerically
small for realistic dataset sizes, nor exhibit the desired width/depth dependencies (in fact, these
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

