Thompson Sampling with Approximate Inference
My Phan
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA
myphan@cs.umass.edu

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
VinAI
Hanoi, Vietnam
yasin.abbasi@gmail.com

Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
We study the effects of approximate inference on the performance of Thompson
sampling in the k-armed bandit problems. Thompson sampling is a successful
algorithm for online decision-making but requires posterior inference, which often
must be approximated in practice. We show that even small constant inference
error (in ↵-divergence) can lead to poor performance (linear regret) due to underexploration (for ↵ < 1) or over-exploration (for ↵ > 0) by the approximation.
While for ↵ > 0 this is unavoidable, for ↵  0 the regret can be improved by
adding a small amount of forced exploration even when the inference error is a
large constant.

1

Introduction

The stochastic k-armed bandit problem is a sequential decision making problem where at each
time-step t, a learning agent chooses an action (arm) among k possible actions and observes a random
reward. Thompson sampling (Russo et al., 2018) is a popular approach in bandit problems based on
sampling from a posterior in each round. It has been shown to have good performance both in term
of frequentist regret and Bayesian regret for the k-armed bandit problem under certain conditions.
This paper investigates Thompson sampling when only an approximate posterior is available. This is
motivated by the fact that in complex models, approximate inference methods such as Markov Chain
Monte Carlo or Variational Inference must be used. Along this line, Lu & Van Roy (2017) propose a
novel inference method – Ensemble sampling – and analyze its regret for linear contextual bandits. To
the best of our knowledge this is the most closely related theoretical analysis of Thompson sampling
with approximate inference.
This paper analyzes the regret of Thompson sampling with approximate inference. Rather than
considering a particular inference algorithm, we parameterize the error using the ↵-divergence, a
typical measure of inference accuracy. Our contributions are as follows:
• Even small inference errors can lead to linear regret with naive Thompson sampling.
Given any error threshold ✏ > 0 and any ↵ we show that approximate posteriors with error at
most ✏ in ↵-divergence at all times can result in linear regret (both frequentist and Bayesian).
For ↵ > 0 and for any reasonable prior, we show linear regret due to over-exploration by
the approximation (Theorem 1, Corrolary 1). For ↵ < 1 and for priors satisfying certain
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

