Time Matters in Regularizing Deep Networks:
Weight Decay and Data Augmentation Affect Early Learning
Dynamics, Matter Little Near Convergence

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, Stefano Soatto
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
{aditya29,achille,soatto}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Regularization is typically understood as improving generalization by altering
the landscape of local extrema to which the model eventually converges. Deep
neural networks (DNNs), however, challenge this view: We show that removing
regularization after an initial transient period has little effect on generalization,
even if the final loss landscape is the same as if there had been no regularization.
In some cases, generalization even improves after interrupting regularization. Conversely, if regularization is applied only after the initial transient, it has no effect
on the final solution, whose generalization gap is as bad as if regularization never
happened. This suggests that what matters for training deep networks is not just
whether or how, but when to regularize. The phenomena we observe are manifest
in different datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, SVHN, ImageNet), different architectures (ResNet-18, All-CNN), different regularization methods (weight decay, data
augmentation, mixup), different learning rate schedules (exponential, piece-wise
constant). They collectively suggest that there is a “critical period” for regularizing
deep networks that is decisive of the final performance. More analysis should,
therefore, focus on the transient rather than asymptotic behavior of learning.

1

Introduction

There is no shortage of literature on what regularizers to use when training deep neural networks and
how they affect the loss landscape but, to the best of our knowledge, no work has addressed when
to apply regularization. We test the hypothesis that applying regularization at different epochs of
training can yield different outcomes. Our curiosity stems from recent observations suggesting that
the early epochs of training are decisive of the outcome of learning with a deep neural network [1].
We find that regularization via weight decay or data augmentation has the same effect on generalization
when applied only during the initial epochs of training. Conversely, if regularization is applied only in
the latter phase of convergence, it has little effect on the final solution, whose generalization is as bad
as if regularization never happened. This suggests that, contrary to classical models, the mechanism
by which regularization affects generalization in deep networks is not by changing the landscape of
critical points at convergence, but by influencing the early transient of learning. This is unlike convex
optimization (linear regression, support vector machines) where the transient is irrelevant.
In short, what matters for training deep networks is not just whether or how, but when to regularize.
In particular, the effect of temporary regularization on the final performance is maximal during an
initial “critical period.” This mimics other phenomena affecting the learning process which, albeit
temporary, can permanently affect the final outcome if applied at the right time, as observed in a
variety of learning systems, from artificial deep neural networks to biological ones. We use the
methodology of [1] to regress the most critical epochs for various architectures and datasets.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

