Two Generator Game: Learning to Sample via
Linear Goodness-of-Fit Test
Lizhong Ding1 Mengyang Yu1 Li Liu1 Fan Zhu1
Yong Liu2 Yu Li3 Ling Shao1
1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE.
2
Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, China.
3
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia.

Abstract
Learning the probability distribution of high-dimensional data is a challenging
problem. To solve this problem, we formulate a deep energy adversarial network
(DEAN), which casts the energy model learned from real data into an optimization
of a goodness-of-fit (GOF) test statistic. DEAN can be interpreted as a GOF game
between two generative networks, where one explicit generative network learns an
energy-based distribution that fits the real data, and the other implicit generative
network is trained by minimizing a GOF test statistic between the energy-based
distribution and the generated data, such that the underlying distribution of the
generated data is close to the energy-based distribution. We design a two-level
alternative optimization procedure to train the explicit and implicit generative
networks, such that the hyper-parameters can also be automatically learned. Experimental results show that DEAN achieves high quality generations compared to the
state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Learning the probability distribution of high-dimensional data, such as images and natural language
corpora, is a challenging problem in machine learning. Traditionally, we define a parametric family
of densities {p(x; θ), θ ∈ Θ} and find the one with the maximum likelihood using data {xi }m
i=1 in
Θ (known as maximum likelihood estimation, MLE) [KW56]. However, the normalization factor
introduces difficulties during the MLE training, because it is an integration over all configurations of
random variables. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [ADFDJ03, SEMFV17] could be used, but
the distributions of real-world data, such as images, have an intriguing property, that probability mass
is concentrated in sharp ridges that are separated by large low probability regions. This complexity of
the probability landscape is a road block and a challenge that MCMC methods have to meet[BCV13].
Inspired by the representation ability of the hierarchical models of deep learning [HS06, HOT06,
B+ 09, LBH15, GBCB16], and as an alternative to MLE approaches, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [GPAM+ 14] represent an important milestone on the path towards more effective generative
models [RMC16, CDH+ 16, NCT16, ACB17b, ZML17, LCC+ 17, BSAG18]. GANs are a type
of implicit generative models (IGMs), which generate images drawn from an unknown complex
high-dimensional distribution p(x), using an implicit distribution q(x; θg ) usually represented by
a deep network with parameter θg . No estimation of likelihoods or exact inference are required
in GAN-like models. This class of models has recently led to many impressive results [HLP+ 17,
JZL+ 17, KALL17, BDS18], and different variants have been proposed for specific tasks, such as
conditional GAN [MO14], Pix2Pix [IZZE17], CycleGAN [ZPIE17], starGAN [CCK+ 18] and etc.
In our opinion, the existing GAN models are fundamentally two-sample test problems. The goal
of the two-sample test is to determine whether two distributions p and q are different, based on
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

