Can Unconditional Language Models Recover
Arbitrary Sentences?

Nishant Subramani
New York University
nishant@nyu.edu

Samuel R. Bowman
New York University

Kyunghyun Cho
New York Univeristy
Facebook AI Research
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar

Abstract
Neural network-based generative language models like ELMo and BERT can work
effectively as general purpose sentence encoders in text classification without
further fine-tuning. Is it possible to adapt them in a similar way for use as generalpurpose decoders? For this to be possible, it would need to be the case that for
any target sentence of interest, there is some continuous representation that can be
passed to the language model to cause it to reproduce that sentence. We set aside
the difficult problem of designing an encoder that can produce such representations
and, instead, ask directly whether such representations exist at all. To do this, we
introduce a pair of effective, complementary methods for feeding representations
into pretrained unconditional language models and a corresponding set of methods
to map sentences into and out of this representation space, the reparametrized
sentence space. We then investigate the conditions under which a language model
can be made to generate a sentence through the identification of a point in such
a space and find that it is possible to recover arbitrary sentences nearly perfectly
with language models and representations of moderate size without modifying any
model parameters.

1

Introduction

We have recently seen great successes in using pretrained language models as encoders for a range
of difficult natural language processing tasks (Dai and Le, 2015; Peters et al., 2017, 2018; Radford
et al., 2018; Ruder and Howard, 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019), often
with little or no fine-tuning: Language models learn useful representations that allow them to serve
as general-purpose encoders. A hypothetical general-purpose decoder would offer similar benefits:
making it possible to both train models for text generation tasks with little annotated data and share
parameters extensively across applications in environments where memory is limited. Then, is it
possible to use a pretrained language model as a general-purpose decoder in a similar fashion?
For this to be possible, we would need both a way of feeding some form of continuous sentence
representation into a trained language model and a task-specific encoder that could convert some
task input into a sentence representation that would cause the language model to produce the
desired sentence. We are not aware of any work that has successfully produced an encoder that can
interoperate in this way with a pretrained language model, and in this paper, we ask whether it is
possible at all: Are typical, trained neural network language models capable of recovering arbitrary
sentences through conditioning of this kind?
We start by defining the sentence space of a recurrent language model and show how this model maps
a given sentence to a trajectory in this space. We reparametrize this sentence space into a new space,
the reparametrized sentence space, by mapping each trajectory in the original space to a point in the
new space. To accomplish the reparametrization, we introduce two complementary methods to add
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

