Learning Latent Process from High-Dimensional
Event Sequences via Efficient Sampling

Qitian Wu1,2 , Zixuan Zhang1,2 , Xiaofeng Gao1,2∗, Junchi Yan2,3 , Guihai Chen4
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Scalable Computing and Systems
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
State Key Labrotary of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{echo740, zzx_gongshi117}@sjtu.edu.cn, gao-xf@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn, gchen@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We target modeling latent dynamics in high-dimension marked event sequences
without any prior knowledge about marker relations. Such problem has been
rarely studied by previous works which would have fundamental difficulty to
handle the arisen challenges: 1) the high-dimensional markers and unknown
relation network among them pose intractable obstacles for modeling the latent
dynamic process; 2) one observed event sequence may concurrently contain several
different chains of interdependent events; 3) it is hard to well define the distance
between two high-dimension event sequences. To these ends, in this paper, we
propose a seminal adversarial imitation learning framework for high-dimension
event sequence generation which could be decomposed into: 1) a latent structural
intensity model that estimates the adjacent nodes without explicit networks and
learns to capture the temporal dynamics in the latent space of markers over observed
sequence; 2) an efficient random walk based generation model that aims at imitating
the generation process of high-dimension event sequences from a bottom-up view;
3) a discriminator specified as a seq2seq network optimizing the rewards to help
the generator output event sequences as real as possible. Experimental results on
both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed method could
effectively detect the hidden network among markers and make decent prediction
for future marked events, even when the number of markers scales to million level.

1

Introduction

Event sequence, consisting of a series of tuples (time, marker) that records at which time which type
of event takes place, could be a fine-grained representation [10] of temporal data that are pervasive
in real-life applications. For example, one tweet or topic in social networks could give rise to huge
number of forwarding behaviors, forming an information cascade. Such a cascade can be recorded by
an event sequence composed of what time each retweet happens and who (a user) forwards the tweet,
i.e., the marker. Another typical example is the POI route of a visitor in city, and the event sequence
records when the person visits which POI and the POI is the marker. Also, there are cases where
the markers contain compositional features, like job-hopping events in one period, where the event
sequence records at which time who from which department of which company transfers to which
department of which company. In this case, the marker contains five-dimension information. In the
above examples, the number of markers could easily scale to an astronomical value when: 1) there
are billions of users in one social network like Twitter; 2) there are a wealth of POIs in a big city; and
∗

Xiaofeng Gao is corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

