A Convex Relaxation Barrier to Tight Robustness
Verification of Neural Networks
Hadi Salman∗
Microsoft Research AI
hadi.salman@microsoft.com

Greg Yang
Microsoft Research AI
gregyang@microsoft.com

Cho-Jui Hsieh
UCLA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Huan Zhang
UCLA
huan@huan-zhang.com

Pengchuan Zhang
Microsoft Research AI
penzhan@microsoft.com

Abstract
Verification of neural networks enables us to gauge their robustness against adversarial attacks. Verification algorithms fall into two categories: exact verifiers
that run in exponential time and relaxed verifiers that are efficient but incomplete. In this paper, we unify all existing LP-relaxed verifiers, to the best of
our knowledge, under a general convex relaxation framework. This framework
works for neural networks with diverse architectures and nonlinearities and covers
both primal and dual views of neural network verification. Next, we perform
large-scale experiments, amounting to more than 22 CPU-years, to obtain exact
solution to the convex-relaxed problem that is optimal within our framework for
ReLU networks. We find the exact solution does not significantly improve upon
the gap between PGD and existing relaxed verifiers for various networks trained
normally or robustly on MNIST and CIFAR datasets. Our results suggest there
is an inherent barrier to tight verification for the large class of methods captured
by our framework. We discuss possible causes of this barrier and potential future directions for bypassing it. Our code and trained models are available at
http://github.com/Hadisalman/robust-verify-benchmark2 .

1

Introduction

A classification neural network f : Rn → RK (where fi (x) should be thought of as the ith logit) is
considered adversarially robust with respect to an input x and its neighborhood Sin (x) if
min

x0 ∈Sin (x),i6=i∗

fi∗ (x) − fi (x0 ) > 0,

where i∗ = arg max fj (x).

(1)

j

Many recent works have proposed robustness verification methods by lower-bounding eq. (1); the
positivity of this lower bound proves the robustness w.r.t. Sin (x). A dominant approach thus far has
tried to relax eq. (1) into a convex optimization problem, from either the primal view [Zhang et al.,
2018, Gehr et al., 2018, Singh et al., 2018, Weng et al., 2018] or the dual view [Wong and Kolter,
2018, Dvijotham et al., 2018b, Wang et al., 2018b]. In our first main contribution, we propose a
layer-wise convex relaxation framework that unifies these works and reveals the relationships between
them (Fig. 1). We further show that the performance of methods within this framework is subject to a
theoretical limit: the performance of the optimal layer-wise convex relaxation.
This then begs the question: is the road to fast and accurate robustness verification paved by just faster
and more accurate layer-wise convex relaxation that approaches the theoretical limit? In our second
main contribution, we answer this question in the negative. We perform extensive experiments
∗
2

Work done as part of the Microsoft AI Residency Program.
Please see http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.08722 for the full and most recent version of this paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

