Adversarial Self-Defense for Cycle-Consistent GANs
Dina Bashkirova 1 , Ben Usman1 , and Kate Saenko 1,2
1
Boston University
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{dbash,usmn,saenko}@bu.edu
2

Abstract
The goal of unsupervised image-to-image translation is to map images from one
domain to another without the ground truth correspondence between the two
domains. State-of-art methods learn the correspondence using large numbers of
unpaired examples from both domains and are based on generative adversarial
networks. In order to preserve the semantics of the input image, the adversarial
objective is usually combined with a cycle-consistency loss that penalizes incorrect
reconstruction of the input image from the translated one. However, if the target
mapping is many-to-one, e.g. aerial photos to maps, such a restriction forces the
generator to hide information in low-amplitude structured noise that is undetectable
by human eye or by the discriminator. In this paper, we show how such selfattacking behavior of unsupervised translation methods affects their performance
and provide two defense techniques. We perform a quantitative evaluation of the
proposed techniques and show that making the translation model more robust to the
self-adversarial attack increases its generation quality and reconstruction reliability
and makes the model less sensitive to low-amplitude perturbations. Our project
page can be found at ai.bu.edu/selfadv/.

1

Introduction

Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [7] have enabled many recent breakthroughs in image
generation, such as being able to change visual attributes like hair color or gender in an impressively
realistic way, and even generate highly realistic-looking faces of people that do not exist [13, 31, 14].
Conditional GANs designed for unsupervised image-to-image translation can map images from one
domain to another without pairwise correspondence and ground truth labels, and are widely used for
solving such tasks as semantic segmentation, colorization, style transfer, and quality enhancement of
images [34, 10, 19, 3, 11, 35, 4] and videos [2, 1]. These models learn the cross-domain mapping
by ensuring that the translated image both looks like a true representative of the target domain, and
also preserves the semantics of the input image, e.g. the shape and position of objects, overall layout
etc. Semantic preservation is usually achieved by enforcing cycle-consistency [34], i.e. a small error
between the source image and its reverse reconstruction from the translated target image.
Despite the success of cycle-consistent GANs, they have a major flaw. The reconstruction loss forces
the generator network to hide the information necessary to faithfully reconstruct the input image
inside tiny perturbations of the translated image [5]. The problem is particularly acute in many-to-one
mappings, such as photos to semantic labels, where the model must reconstruct textures and colors
lost during translation to the target domain. For example, Figure 1’s top row shows that even when
the car is mapped incorrectly to semantic labels of building (gray) and tree (green), CycleGAN is still
able to “cheat” and perfectly reconstruct the original car from hidden information. It also reconstructs
road textures lost in the semantic map. This behavior is essentially an adversarial attack that the
model is performing on itself, so we call it a self-adversarial attack.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

