Efficient Near-Optimal Testing of Community
Changes in Balanced Stochastic Block Models

Aditya Gangrade
Boston University
gangrade@bu.edu

Praveen Venkatesh
Carnegie Mellon University
vpraveen@cmu.edu

Bobak Nazer
Boston University
bobak@bu.edu

Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University
srv@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose and analyze the problems of community goodness-of-fit and twosample testing for stochastic block models (SBM), where changes arise due to
modification in community memberships of nodes. Motivated by practical applications, we consider the challenging sparse regime, where expected node degrees are
constant, and the inter-community mean degree (b) scales proportionally to intracommunity mean degree (a). Prior work has sharply characterized partial or full
community recovery in terms of a “signal-to-noise ratio” (SNR) based on a and
b. For both problems, we propose computationally-efficient tests that can succeed
far beyond the regime where recovery
√ of community membership is even possible.
Overall, for large changes, s ≫ n, we need only SNR = O(1) whereas a naïve
test based on community recovery with O(s) errors
requires SNR = Θ(log n).
√
Conversely, in the small change regime, s ≪ n, via an information theoretic
lower bound, we show that, surprisingly, no algorithm can do better than the naïve
algorithm that first estimates the community up to O(s) errors and then detects
changes. We validate these phenomena numerically on SBMs and on real-world
datasets as well as Markov Random Fields where we only observe node data rather
than the existence of links.
While community detection and recovery for the stochastic block model (SBM) [Abb18] and, more
generally, inference of community structures underlying large-scale network data [GN02; New06;
For10] has received significant interest across the machine learning, statistics and information theory
literatures, there has been limited work on the important problem of testing changes in community
structures. The general problem of testing changes in networks naturally arises in a number of
applications such as discovering statistically significant topological changes in gene regulatory networks [Zha+08] or differences in brain networks between healthy and diseased individuals [Bas+08].
Building upon this perspective, we propose testing of differences in the underlying community structure of a network, which can encompass scenarios such as detecting structural changes over time in
social networks [AG05; For10], determining whether a set of genes belong to different communities
in disease and normal states [JTZ04], and deciding whether there are changes in functional modules,
which represent communities, in protein-protein networks [CY06].
Testing structural changes in networks is statistically challenging due to the fact that we may have relatively few independent samples to evaluate combinatorially-many potential changes. In this paper,
we propose methods for goodness-of-fit (GoF) testing and two-sample testing (TST) for detecting
changes in community memberships under the SBM. The SBM naturally captures the community
structures commonly observed in large-scale networks, and serves as a baseline model for more complex networks. Specifically, there are n nodes partitioned into two equal-sized communities, and the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

