A neurally plausible model
for online recognition and postdiction

Li Kevin Wenliang
Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
{kevinli,maneesh}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Humans and other animals are frequently near-optimal in their ability to integrate
noisy and ambiguous sensory data to form robust percepts, which are informed
both by sensory evidence and by prior experience about the causal structure of the
environment. It is hypothesized that the brain establishes these structures using
an internal model of how the observed patterns can be generated from relevant
but unobserved causes. In dynamic environments, such integration often takes the
form of postdiction, wherein later sensory evidence affects inferences about earlier
percepts. As the brain must operate in current time, without the luxury of acausal
propagation of information, how does such postdictive inference come about? Here,
we propose a general framework for neural probabilistic inference in dynamic models based on the distributed distributional code (DDC) representation of uncertainty,
naturally extending the underlying encoding to incorporate implicit probabilistic
beliefs about both present and past. We show that, as in other uses of the DDC, an
inferential model can be learned efficiently using samples from an internal model
of the world. Applied to stimuli used in the context of psychophysics experiments,
the framework provides an online and plausible mechanism for inference, including
postdictive effects.

1

Introduction

The brain must process a constant stream of noisy and ambiguous sensory signals from the environment, making accurate and robust real-time perceptual inferences crucial for survival. Despite
the difficult and some times ill-posed nature of the problem, many behavioral experiments suggest
that humans and other animals achieve nearly Bayes-optimal performance across a range of contexts
involving noise and uncertainty: e.g., when combining noisy signals across sensory modalities [1, 14,
34], making sensory decisions with consequences of unequal value [48], or inferring causal structure
in the sensory environment [23].
Real-time perception in dynamical environments, referred to as filtering, is even more challenging.
Beliefs about dynamical quantities must be continuously and rapidly updated on the basis of new
sensory input, and very often informative sensory inputs will arrive after the time of the relevant state.
Thus, perception in dynamical environments requires a combination of prediction—to ensure actions
are not delayed relative to the external world—and postdiction—to ensure that perceptual beliefs
about the past are correctly updated by subsequent sensory evidence [6, 12, 17, 20, 32, 41].
Behavioral [3, 5, 24, 31, 50] and physiological [8, 9, 15] findings suggest that the brain acquires
an internal model of how relevant states of the world evolve in time, and how they give rise to the
stream of sensory evidence. Recognition is then formally a process of statistical inference to form
perceptual beliefs about the trajectory of latent causes given observations in time. While this type of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

