Intrinsic dimension of data representations in deep
neural networks
Alessio Ansuini
International School for Advanced Studies
alessioansuini@gmail.com
Jakob H. Macke
Technical University of Munich
macke@tum.de

Alessandro Laio
International School for Advanced Studies
laio@sissa.it
Davide Zoccolan
International School for Advanced Studies
zoccolan@sissa.it

Abstract
Deep neural networks progressively transform their inputs across multiple processing layers. What are the geometrical properties of the representations learned
by these networks? Here we study the intrinsic dimensionality (ID) of datarepresentations, i.e. the minimal number of parameters needed to describe a representation. We find that, in a trained network, the ID is orders of magnitude smaller
than the number of units in each layer. Across layers, the ID first increases and then
progressively decreases in the final layers. Remarkably, the ID of the last hidden
layer predicts classification accuracy on the test set. These results can neither be
found by linear dimensionality estimates (e.g., with principal component analysis),
nor in representations that had been artificially linearized. They are neither found
in untrained networks, nor in networks that are trained on randomized labels. This
suggests that neural networks that can generalize are those that transform the data
into low-dimensional, but not necessarily flat manifolds.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs), including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image data, are
among the most powerful tools for supervised data classification. In DNNs, inputs are sequentially
processed across multiple layers, each performing a nonlinear transformation from a high-dimensional
vector to another high-dimensional vector. Despite the empirical success and widespread use of
DNNs, we still have an incomplete understanding about why and when they work so well – in
particular, it is not clear yet why they are able to generalize well to unseen data, not withstanding
their massive overparametrization (1). While progress has been made recently [e.g. (2; 3)], guidelines
for selecting architectures and training procedures are still largely based on heuristics and domain
knowledge.
A fundamental geometric property of a data representation in a neural network is its intrinsic
dimension (ID), i.e., the minimal number of coordinates which are necessary to describe its points
without significant information loss. It is widely appreciated that deep neural networks are overparametrized, and that there is substantial redundancy amongst the weights and activations of deep
nets – e.g., several studies in network compression have shown that many weights in deep neural
networks can be pruned without significant loss in classification performance (4; 5). Linear estimates
of the ID in DNNs have been computed theoretically and numerically in simplified models (6), and
local estimates of the ID developed in (7) have been related to robustness properties of deep networks
to adversarial attacks (8; 9), showing that a low local intrinsic dimension correlates positively with
robustness. Local ID of object manifolds can also be estimated at several locations on the tangent
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

