Structured Graph Learning via Laplacian Spectral
Constraints
Sandeep Kumar?
sandeep0kr@gmail.com

Jiaxi Ying†
José Vinı́cius de M. Cardoso†
jx.ying@connect.ust.hk
jvdmc@connect.ust.hk
Daniel P. Palomar?,†
palomar@ust.hk

Department of Industrial Engineering and Data Analytics?
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering†
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong

Abstract
Learning a graph with a specific structure is essential for interpretability and
identification of the relationships among data. It is well known that structured
graph learning from observed samples is an NP-hard combinatorial problem. In
this paper, we first show that for a set of important graph families it is possible
to convert the structural constraints of structure into eigenvalue constraints of the
graph Laplacian matrix. Then we introduce a unified graph learning framework,
lying at the integration of the spectral properties of the Laplacian matrix with
Gaussian graphical modeling that is capable of learning structures of a large class
of graph families. The proposed algorithms are provably convergent and practically
amenable for large-scale semi-supervised and unsupervised graph based learning
tasks. Extensive numerical experiments with both synthetic and real data sets
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods. An R package containing
code for all the experimental results is available at https://cran.r-project.
org/package=spectralGraphTopology.

1

Introduction

Graph models constitute an effective representation of data available across numerous domains
in science and engineering [1]. Gaussian graphical modeling (GGM) encodes the conditional
dependence relationships among a set of p variables. In this framework, an undirected graph is
associated to the variables, where each vertex corresponds to one variable, and an edge is present
between two vertices if the corresponding random variables are conditionally dependent [2, 3]. GGM
is a tool of increasing importance in a number of fields including finance, biology, statistical learning,
and computer vision [4, 5].
For improved interpretability and precise identification of the structure in the data, it is desirable to
learn a graph with a specific structure. For example, gene pathways analysis are studied through
multi-component graph structures [6, 7], as genes can be grouped into pathways, and connections
within a pathway might be more likely than connections between pathway, forming a cluster; a
bipartite graph structure yields a more precise model for drug matching and topic modeling in
document analysis [8, 9]; a regular graph structure is suited for designing communication efficient
deep learning architectures [10, 11]; and a sparse yet connected graph structure is required for graph
signal processing applications [12].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

