Meta-Surrogate Benchmarking for Hyperparameter
Optimization

Aaron Klein1
Zhenwen Dai2
Frank Hutter1
Neil Lawrence3
Javier González2
1
2
3
University of Freiburg
Amazon Cambridge
University of Cambridge
{kleinaa,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de
{zhenwend, gojav}@amazon.com
ndl21@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite the recent progress in hyperparameter optimization (HPO), available benchmarks that resemble real-world scenarios consist of a few and very large problem
instances that are expensive to solve. This blocks researchers and practitioners not
only from systematically running large-scale comparisons that are needed to draw
statistically significant results but also from reproducing experiments that were
conducted before. This work proposes a method to alleviate these issues by means
of a meta-surrogate model for HPO tasks trained on off-line generated data. The
model combines a probabilistic encoder with a multi-task model such that it can
generate inexpensive and realistic tasks of the class of problems of interest. We
demonstrate that benchmarking HPO methods on samples of the generative model
allows us to draw more coherent and statistically significant conclusions that can
be reached orders of magnitude faster than using the original tasks. We provide
evidence of our findings for various HPO methods on a wide class of problems.

1

Introduction

Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) [19] is an emerging field that studies the progressive
automation of machine learning. A core part of an AutoML system is the hyperparameter optimization
(HPO) of a machine learning algorithm. It has already shown promising results by outperforming
human experts in finding better hyperparameters [34], an thereby, for example, substantially improved
AlphaGo [7].
Despite recent progress (see e. g. the review by Feurer and Hutter [11]), during the phases of
developing and evaluating new HPO methods one frequently faces the following problems:
• Evaluating the objective function is often expensive in terms of wall-clock time; e.g., the
evaluation of a single hyperparameter configuration may take several hours or days. This
renders extensive HPO or repeated runs of HPO methods computationally infeasible.
• Even though repositories of datasets, such as OpenML [41] provide thousands of datasets, a
large fraction cannot meaningfully be used for HPO since they are too small or too easy
(in the sense that even simple methods achieve top performance). Hence, useful available
datasets are scarce, making it hard to produce a comprehensive evaluation of how well a
HPO method will generalize across tasks.
Due to these two problems researchers can only carry out a limit number of comparisons within a
reasonable computational budget. This delays the progress of the field as statistically significant
conclusions about the performance of different HPO methods may not be possible to draw. See
Figure 1 for an illustrative experiment of the HPO of XGBoost [4]. It is well known that Bayesian
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

