Are Sixteen Heads Really Better than One?

Paul Michel
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
pmichel1@cs.cmu.edu

Omer Levy
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
Seattle, WA
omerlevy@fb.com

Graham Neubig
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA
gneubig@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Attention is a powerful and ubiquitous mechanism for allowing neural models to
focus on particular salient pieces of information by taking their weighted average
when making predictions. In particular, multi-headed attention is a driving force
behind many recent state-of-the-art natural language processing (NLP) models such
as Transformer-based MT models and BERT. These models apply multiple attention
mechanisms in parallel, with each attention “head” potentially focusing on different
parts of the input, which makes it possible to express sophisticated functions beyond
the simple weighted average. In this paper we make the surprising observation
that even if models have been trained using multiple heads, in practice, a large
percentage of attention heads can be removed at test time without significantly
impacting performance. In fact, some layers can even be reduced to a single
head. We further examine greedy algorithms for pruning down models, and
the potential speed, memory efficiency, and accuracy improvements obtainable
therefrom. Finally, we analyze the results with respect to which parts of the model
are more reliant on having multiple heads, and provide precursory evidence that
training dynamics play a role in the gains provided by multi-head attention1 .

1

Introduction

Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have shown state of the art performance across a variety of
NLP tasks, including, but not limited to, machine translation (Vaswani et al., 2017; Ott et al., 2018),
question answering (Devlin et al., 2018), text classification (Radford et al., 2018), and semantic role
labeling (Strubell et al., 2018). Central to its architectural improvements, the Transformer extends the
standard attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Cho et al., 2014) via multi-headed attention
(MHA), where attention is computed independently by Nh parallel attention mechanisms (heads). It
has been shown that beyond improving performance, MHA can help with subject-verb agreement
(Tang et al., 2018) and that some heads are predictive of dependency structures (Raganato and
Tiedemann, 2018). Since then, several extensions to the general methodology have been proposed
(Ahmed et al., 2017; Shen et al., 2018).
1

Code to replicate our experiments is provided at https://github.com/pmichel31415/
are-16-heads-really-better-than-1

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

