Is Deeper Better only when Shallow is Good?

Eran Malach
School of Computer Science
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel
eran.malach@mail.huji.ac.il

Shai Shalev-Shwartz
School of Computer Science
The Hebrew University
Jerusalem, Israel
shais@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Understanding the power of depth in feed-forward neural networks is an ongoing
challenge in the field of deep learning theory. While current works account for
the importance of depth for the expressive power of neural-networks, it remains
an open question whether these benefits are exploited during a gradient-based
optimization process. In this work we explore the relation between expressivity
properties of deep networks and the ability to train them efficiently using gradientbased algorithms. We give a depth separation argument for distributions with fractal
structure, showing that they can be expressed efficiently by deep networks, but not
with shallow ones. These distributions have a natural coarse-to-fine structure, and
we show that the balance between the coarse and fine details has a crucial effect
on whether the optimization process is likely to succeed. We prove that when the
distribution is concentrated on the fine details, gradient-based algorithms are likely
to fail. Using this result we prove that, at least in some distributions, the success of
learning deep networks depends on whether the distribution can be approximated
by shallower networks, and we conjecture that this property holds in general.

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in studying deep networks is understanding why and when “deeper is better”.
In recent years there has been a large number of works studying the expressive power of deep and
shallow networks. The main goal of this research direction is to show families of functions or
distributions that are realizable with deep networks of modest width, but require exponential number
of neurons to approximate by shallow networks. We refer to such results as depth separation results.
Many of these works consider various measures of “complexity” that can grow exponentially fast with
the depth of the network, but not with the width. Hence, such measures provide a clear separation
between deep and shallow networks. For example, the works of [11, 10, 9, 16] show that the number
of linear regions grows exponentially with the depth of the network, but only polynomially with the
width. The works of [13, 14, 20] give similar results for other complexity measures, such as the
curvature, the trajectory length or the number of oscillations of the output function.
While such works give general characteristics of function families, they take a seemingly worst-case
approach. Hence, it is not clear whether such analysis applies to the typical cases encountered in the
practice of neural-networks. To answer this concern, recent works show depth separation results for
narrower families of functions that appear simple or “natural”. For example, the work of [19] shows
a very simple construction of a function on the real line that exhibits depth separation. The works of
[6, 15] show a depth separation argument for very natural functions, like the indicator function of
the unit ball. The work of [3] gives similar results for a richer family of functions. Other works by
[8, 12] show that compositional functions, namely functions of functions, are well approximated by
deep networks. The works of [4, 2] show similar depth separation results for sum-product networks.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

