Structured and Deep Similarity Matching via
Structured and Deep Hebbian Networks

Dina Obeid

Hugo Ramambason

Cengiz Pehlevan

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
{dinaobeid@seas,hugo_ramambason@g,cpehlevan@seas}.harvard.edu

Abstract
Synaptic plasticity is widely accepted to be the mechanism behind learning in
the brain’s neural networks. A central question is how synapses, with access
to only local information about the network, can still organize collectively and
perform circuit-wide learning in an efficient manner. In single-layered and allto-all connected neural networks, local plasticity has been shown to implement
gradient-based learning on a class of cost functions that contain a term that aligns
the similarity of outputs to the similarity of inputs. Whether such cost functions
exist for networks with other architectures is not known. In this paper, we introduce
structured and deep similarity matching cost functions, and show how they can
be optimized in a gradient-based manner by neural networks with local learning
rules. These networks extend Földiak’s Hebbian/Anti-Hebbian network to deep
architectures and structured feedforward, lateral and feedback connections. Credit
assignment problem is solved elegantly by a factorization of the dual learning
objective to synapse specific local objectives. Simulations show that our networks
learn meaningful features.

1

Introduction

End-to-end training of neural networks by gradient-based minimization of a cost function has proved
to be a very powerful idea, prompting the question whether the brain is implementing the same
strategy. The problem with this proposal is that synapses, the sites of learning in the brain, have access
to only local information, i.e. states of the pre- and post-synaptic neurons, and neuromodulators,
which may represent, for example, global error signals [1]. How can synapses calculate from such
incomplete information the necessary partial derivatives, which depend on non-local information
about other neurons and synapses in the network? Researchers have been tackling this problem by
searching for a biologically-plausible implementation of the backpropagation algorithm [2]. While
significant progress has been made in this domain, see e.g. [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12], a fully
plausible implementation is not yet available.
Here we take another approach and focus on networks already operating with biologically-plausible
local learning rules. We ask whether one can formulate network-wide learning cost functions for
such networks and whether these networks achieve efficient “credit assignment” by performing
gradient-based learning. Previous work in this area showed that single-layered, all-to-all connected
Hebbian/anti-Hebbian networks minimize various versions of similarity matching cost functions
[13, 14, 15]. In this paper, we generalize these results to networks with structured connectivity and
deep architectures.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

