From voxels to pixels and back: Self-supervision in
natural-image reconstruction from fMRI

Roman Beliy∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
roman.beliy@weizmann.ac.il

Guy Gaziv∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
guy.gaziv@weizmann.ac.il

Assaf Hoogi
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
assaf.hoogi@weizmann.ac.il
Tal Golan
Zuckerman Institute
Columbia University
10027 New York, NY, USA
tal.golan@columbia.edu

Francesca Strappini
Dept. of Neurobiology
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
francescastrappini@gmail.com

Michal Irani
Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math
The Weizmann Institute of Science
76100 Rehovot, Israel
michal.irani@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Reconstructing observed images from fMRI brain recordings is challenging. Unfortunately, acquiring sufficient “labeled” pairs of {Image, fMRI} (i.e., images with
their corresponding fMRI responses) to span the huge space of natural images is
prohibitive for many reasons. We present a novel approach which, in addition to
the scarce labeled data (training pairs), allows to train fMRI-to-image reconstruction networks also on “unlabeled” data (i.e., images without fMRI recording, and
fMRI recording without images). The proposed model utilizes both an Encoder
network (image-to-fMRI) and a Decoder network (fMRI-to-image). Concatenating
these two networks back-to-back (Encoder-Decoder & Decoder-Encoder) allows
augmenting the training with both types of unlabeled data. Importantly, it allows
training on the unlabeled test-fMRI data. This self-supervision adapts the reconstruction network to the new input test-data, despite its deviation from the
statistics of the scarce training data.
Project Website: http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~vision/ssfmri2im/

1

Introduction

Developing a method for high-quality reconstruction of seen images from the corresponding brain
activity is an important milestone towards decoding the contents of dreams and mental imagery
(Fig 1a). In this task, one attempts to solve for the mapping between fMRI recordings and their
corresponding natural images, using many “labeled” {Image, fMRI} pairs (i.e., images and their
corresponding fMRI responses). A good fMRI-to-image decoder is one that will generalize well to
reconstruction of new never-before-seen images from new fMRI recordings (we refer to these as
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

