Adapting Neural Networks for the Estimation of
Treatment Effects
Claudia Shi1 , David M. Blei1,2 , and Victor Veitch2
1

Department of Computer Science, Columbia Unitversity
2
Department of Statistics, Columbia University

Abstract
This paper addresses the use of neural networks for the estimation of treatment
effects from observational data. Generally, estimation proceeds in two stages. First,
we fit models for the expected outcome and the probability of treatment (propensity
score) for each unit. Second, we plug these fitted models into a downstream
estimator of the effect. Neural networks are a natural choice for the models in the
first step. The question we address is: how can we adapt the design and training of
the neural networks used in the first step in order to improve the quality of the final
estimate of the treatment effect? We propose two adaptations based on insights
from the statistical literature on the estimation of treatment effects. The first is
a new architecture, the Dragonnet, that exploits the sufficiency of the propensity
score for estimation adjustment. The second is a regularization procedure, targeted
regularization, that induces a bias towards models that have non-parametrically
optimal asymptotic properties ‘out-of-the-box’. Studies on benchmark datasets
for causal inference show these adaptations outperform existing methods. Code is
available at github.com/claudiashi57/dragonnet.

1

Introduction

We consider the estimation of causal effects from observational data. Observational data is often
readily available in situations where randomized control trials (RCT) are expensive or impossible.
However, causal inference from observational data must address (possible) confounding factors that
affect both treatment and outcome. Failure to adjust for confounders can lead to incorrect conclusions.
To address this, a practitioner collects covariate information in addition to treatment and outcome
status. The causal effect can be identified if the covariates contain all confounding variables. We
will work in this ‘no hidden confounding’ setting throughout the paper. The task we consider is the
estimation of the effect of a treatment T (e.g., a patient receives a drug) on an outcome Y (whether
they recover) adjusting for covariates X (e.g., illness severity or socioeconomic status).
We consider how to use neural networks to estimate the treatment effect. The estimation of treatment
effects proceeds in two stages. First, we fit models for the conditional outcome Q(t, x) = E[Y | t, x]
and the propensity score g(x) = P (T = 1|x). Then, we plug these fitted models into a downstream
estimator. The strong predictive performance of neural networks motivates their use for effect
estimation [e.g. SJS16; JSS16; Lou+17; AS17; AWS17; SLK18; YJS18; FLM18]. We will use neural
networks as models for the conditional outcome and propensity score.
In principle, using neural networks for the conditional outcome and propensity score models is
straightforward. We can use a standard net to predict the outcome Y from the treatment and
covariates, and another to predict the treatment from the covariates. With a suitable choice of
training objective, the trained models will yield consistent estimates of the conditional outcomes and
propensity scores. However, neural network research has focused on predictive performance. What is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

