Non-normal Recurrent Neural Network (nnRNN):
learning long time dependencies while improving
expressivity with transient dynamics

Giancarlo Kerg1,2, ∗
Gauthier Gidel1,2

Kyle Goyette1,2,3,∗

Eugene Vorontsov1,5

Maximilian Puelma Touzel1,4

Yoshua Bengio1,2,6

Guillaume Lajoie1,7

Abstract
A recent strategy to circumvent the exploding and vanishing gradient problem in
RNNs, and to allow the stable propagation of signals over long time scales, is to
constrain recurrent connectivity matrices to be orthogonal or unitary. This ensures
eigenvalues with unit norm and thus stable dynamics and training. However this
comes at the cost of reduced expressivity due to the limited variety of orthogonal
transformations. We propose a novel connectivity structure based on the Schur
decomposition, though we avoid computing it explicitly, and a splitting of the
Schur form into normal and non-normal parts. This allows to parametrize matrices
with unit-norm eigenspectra without orthogonality constraints on eigenbases. The
resulting architecture ensures access to a larger space of spectrally constrained
matrices, of which orthogonal matrices are a subset. This crucial difference retains
the stability advantages and training speed of orthogonal RNNs while enhancing
expressivity, especially on tasks that require computations over ongoing input
sequences.

1

Introduction

Training recurrent neural networks (RNN) to process temporal inputs over long timescales is notoriously difficult. A central factor is the exploding and vanishing gradient problem (EVGP) [13, 4, 27],
which stems from the compounding effects of propagating signals over many iterates of recurrent
interactions. Several approaches have been developed to mitigate this issue, including the introduction
of gating mechanisms (e.g. [15, 13]), purposely using non-saturating activation functions [5], and
manipulating the propagation path of gradients [3]. Another way is to constrain connectivity matrices
to be orthogonal (and more generally, unitary) leading to a class of models we refer to as orthogonal RNNs [24, 21, 19, 33, 16, 32, 10, 2]. Orthogonal RNNs have eigen- and singular-spectra with
unit norm, therefore helping to prevent exponential growth or decay in long products of Jacobians
associated with EVGP. They perform exceptionally well on tasks requiring memorization of inputs
over long time-scales [11] (outperforming gated networks) but struggle on tasks involving continued
∗

Indicates first authors. Ordering determined by coin flip.
1: Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Canada
2: Université de Montréal, Département d’Informatique et Recherche Opérationelle, Montreal, Canada
3: Université de Montréal, CIRRELT, Montreal, Canada
4: IVADO post-doctoral fellow
5: Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal,Canada
6: CIFAR senior fellow
7: Université de Montréal, Département de Mathématiques et Statistiques, Montreal, Canada
Correspondence to: <lajoie@dms.umontreal.ca>
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

