Generalized Block-Diagonal Structure Pursuit:
Learning Soft Latent Task Assignment against
Negative Transfer

Zhiyong Yang1,2 Qianqian Xu3
Yangbangyan Jiang1,2
1,2,6
Xiaochun Cao
Qingming Huang3,4,5,6∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
yangzhiyong@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, jiangyangbangyan@iie.ac.cn
caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In multi-task learning, a major challenge springs from a notorious issue known as
negative transfer, which refers to the phenomenon that sharing the knowledge with
dissimilar and hard tasks often results in a worsened performance. To circumvent
this issue, we propose a novel multi-task learning method, which simultaneously
learns latent task representations and a block-diagonal Latent Task Assignment
Matrix (LTAM). Different from most of the previous work, pursuing the BlockDiagonal structure of LTAM (assigning latent tasks to output tasks) alleviates
negative transfer via punishing inter-group knowledge transfer and sharing. This
goal is challenging since our notion of Block-Diagonal Property extends the traditional notion for homogeneous and square matrices. In this paper, we propose a
spectral regularizer which is proven to leverage the expected structure. Practically,
we provide a relaxation scheme which improves the flexibility of the model. With
the objective function given, we then propose an alternating optimization method,
which reveals an interesting connection between our method and the optimal transport problem. Finally, the method is demonstrated on a simulation dataset, three
real-world benchmark datasets and further applied to two personalized attribute
learning datasets.

1

Introduction

Multi-Task Learning (MTL) is a learning paradigm whose aim is to leverage useful information
contained in multiple related tasks to help improve the generalization performance of all the tasks
[Caruana, 1997]. Nowadays, MTL has emerged as a fundamental building block for a wide range of
applications ranging from scene parsing [Xu et al., 2018], attribute learning [Cao et al., 2018, Yang
et al., 2019a, 2018], text classification [Liu et al., 2017], sequence labeling [Lin et al., 2018], to travel
time estimation [Li et al., 2018], etc.
The fundamental belief of MTL lies in that sharing knowledge among multiple tasks often results
in an improvement in generalization performance, which is especially of great significance in the
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

