Nonparametric Density Estimation and
Convergence of GANs under Besov IPM Losses

Shashank Singh∗ Barnabás Póczos
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
{sss1,bapoczos}@cs.cmu.edu

Ananya Uppal
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Carnegie Mellon University
auppal@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating a nonparametric probability density under a
large family of losses called Besov IPMs, which include, for example, Lp distances,
total variation distance, and generalizations of both Wasserstein and KolmogorovSmirnov distances. For a wide variety of settings, we provide both lower and upper
bounds, identifying precisely how the choice of loss function and assumptions
on the data interact to determine the minimax optimal convergence rate. We also
show that linear distribution estimates, such as the empirical distribution or kernel
density estimator, often fail to converge at the optimal rate. Our bounds generalize,
unify, or improve several recent and classical results. Moreover, IPMs can be used
to formalize a statistical model of generative adversarial networks (GANs). Thus,
we show how our results imply bounds on the statistical error of a GAN, showing,
for example, that GANs can strictly outperform the best linear estimator.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the problem of estimating a nonparametric probability density, using an integral
probability metric as a loss. That is, given a sample space X ⊆ RD , suppose we observe n IID
IID
samples X1 , ..., Xn ∼ p from a probability density p over X that is unknown but assumed to lie in
a regularity class P. We seek an estimator pb : X n → P of p, with the goal of minimizing a loss
dF (p, pb(X1 , ..., Xn )) := sup

E [f (X)] −

f ∈F X∼p

E

[f (X)] ,

(∗)

X∼b
p(X1 ,...,Xn )

where F, called the discriminator class, is some class of bounded, measurable functions on X .
Metrics of the form (∗) are called integral probability metrics (IPMs), or F-IPMs2 , and can capture a
wide variety of metrics on probability distributions by choosing F appropriately [38]. This paper
studies the case where both F and P belong to the family of Besov spaces, a large family of
nonparametric smoothness spaces that include, as examples, Lp , Lipschitz/Hölder, and HilbertSobolev spaces. The resulting IPMs include, as examples, Lp , total variation, Kolmogorov-Smirnov,
and Wasserstein distances. We have two main motivations for studying this problem:
1. This problem unifies nonparametric density estimation with the central problem of empirical
b
b
process theory,
Pn namely bounding quantities of the form dF (P, P ) when P is the empirical distribution
Pn = n1 i=1 δXi of the data [42]. Whereas empirical process theory typically avoids restricting
P and fixes the estimator Pb = Pn , focusing on the discriminator class F, nonparametric density
estimation typically fixes the loss to be an Lp distance, and seeks a good estimator Pb for a given
∗

Now at Google.
While the name IPM seems most widely used [38, 48, 6, 58], many other names have been used for these
quantities, including adversarial loss [46, 12], MMD [16], and F-distance or neural net distance [5].
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

