Computational Mirrors: Blind Inverse Light
Transport by Deep Matrix Factorization

Miika Aittala
MIT
miika@csail.mit.edu
Gregory W. Wornell
MIT
gww@mit.edu

Prafull Sharma
MIT
prafull@mit.edu

Lukas Murmann
MIT
lmurmann@mit.edu

William T. Freeman
MIT, Google Research
billf@mit.edu

Adam B. Yedidia
MIT
adamy@mit.edu

Frédo Durand
MIT
fredo@mit.edu

Abstract
We recover a video of the motion taking place in a hidden scene by observing
changes in indirect illumination in a nearby uncalibrated visible region. We solve
this problem by factoring the observed video into a matrix product between the
unknown hidden scene video and an unknown light transport matrix. This task is
extremely ill-posed as any non-negative factorization will satisfy the data. Inspired
by recent work on the Deep Image Prior, we parameterize the factor matrices using
randomly initialized convolutional neural networks trained in a one-off manner,
and show that this results in decompositions that reflect the true motion in the
hidden scene.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of recovering a video of activity taking place outside our field of view by
observing its indirect effect on shadows and shading in an observed region. This allows us to turn, for
example, the pile of clutter in Figure 1 into a “computational mirror” with a low-resolution view into
non-visible parts of the room.
The physics of light transport tells us that the image observed on the clutter is related to the hidden
image by a linear transformation. If we were to know this transformation, we could solve for the
hidden video by matrix inversion (we demonstrate this baseline approach in Section 3). Unfortunately,
obtaining the transport matrix by measurement requires an expensive pre-calibration step and access
to the scene setup. We instead tackle the hard problem of estimating both the hidden video and the
transport matrix simultaneously from a single input video of the visible scene. For this, we cast the
problem as matrix factorization of the observed clutter video into a product of an unknown transport
matrix and an unknown hidden video matrix.
Matrix factorization is known to be very ill-posed. Factorizations for any matrix are in principle
easy to find: we can simply choose one of the factors at will (as a full-rank matrix) and recover a
compatible factor by pseudoinversion. Unfortunately, the vast majority of these factorizations are
meaningless for a particular problem. The general strategy for finding meaningful factors is to impose
problem-dependent priors or constraints — for example, non-negativity or spatial smoothness. While
successful in many applications, meaningful image priors can be hard to express computationally.
In particular, we are not aware of any successful demonstrations of the inverse light transport
factorization problem in the literature. We find that classical factorization approaches produce
solutions that are scrambled beyond recognition.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

