Controllable Unsupervised Text Attribute Transfer
via Editing Entangled Latent Representation

Ke Wang
Hang Hua
Xiaojun Wan
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
The MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University
{wangke17, huahang, wanxiaojun}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised text attribute transfer automatically transforms a text to alter a specific attribute (e.g. sentiment) without using any parallel data, while simultaneously
preserving its attribute-independent content. The dominant approaches are trying
to model the content-independent attribute separately, e.g., learning different attributes’ representations or using multiple attribute-specific decoders. However, it
may lead to inflexibility from the perspective of controlling the degree of transfer
or transferring over multiple aspects at the same time. To address the above problems, we propose a more flexible unsupervised text attribute transfer framework
which replaces the process of modeling attribute with minimal editing of latent
representations based on an attribute classifier. Specifically, we first propose a
Transformer-based autoencoder to learn an entangled latent representation for a discrete text, then we transform the attribute transfer task to an optimization problem
and propose the Fast-Gradient-Iterative-Modification algorithm to edit the latent
representation until conforming to the target attribute. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that our model achieves very competitive performance on three
public data sets. Furthermore, we also show that our model can not only control
the degree of transfer freely but also allow transferring over multiple aspects at the
same time.1

1

Introduction

Text attribute transfer is a task of editing a text to alter specific attributes, such as sentiment, style
and tense [17]. It has drawn much attention in the natural language generation field and it is a
requirement of a controllable natural language generation system. Given a source text with an
attribute (e.g., positive sentiment), the goal of the task is to generate a new text with a different
attribute (e.g., negative sentiment). The generated text should meet the requirements: (i) maintaining
the attribute-independent content as the source text, (ii) conforming to the target attribute and (iii)
still maintaining the linguistic fluency. However, due to the lack of parallel corpora exemplifying the
desired transformations between source and target attributes, most approaches [5, 10, 28, 26, 29, 20,
40, 41, 38, 17, 16] are unsupervised and can only access non-parallel or monolingual data.
The dominant methods of unsupervised text attribute transfer are to separately model attribute and
content representations, such as using multiple attribute-specific decoders [5] or combining the
content representations with different attribute representations to decode texts with target attribute in
an adversarial [10, 28, 26, 29, 20, 40, 41, 38, 17] or non-adversarial [16] way. Nevertheless, such
practices have shortcomings. First, because they try to disentangle attribute and attribute-independent
content, this may undermine the integrity (i.e., naturality) and result in poor readability of the
1

Our codes are available at https://github.com/Nrgeup/controllable-text-attribute-transfer

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

