Interior-point Methods Strike Back: Solving the
Wasserstein Barycenter Problem

Dongdong Ge
Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
ge.dongdong@mail.shufe.edu.cn
Zikai Xiong∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Fudan University
zkxiong16@fudan.edu.cn

Haoyue Wang∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Fudan University
haoyuewang14@fudan.edu.cn

Yinyu Ye
Department of Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
yyye@stanford.edu

Abstract
Computing the Wasserstein barycenter of a set of probability measures under the
optimal transport metric can quickly become prohibitive for traditional secondorder algorithms, such as interior-point methods, as the support size of the measures
increases. In this paper, we overcome the difficulty by developing a new adapted
interior-point method that fully exploits the problem’s special matrix structure to
reduce the iteration complexity and speed up the Newton procedure. Different
from regularization approaches, our method achieves a well-balanced tradeoff
between accuracy and speed. A numerical comparison on various distributions
with existing algorithms exhibits the computational advantages of our approach.
Moreover, we demonstrate the practicality of our algorithm on image benchmark
problems including MNIST and Fashion-MNIST.

1

Introduction

To compare, summarize, and combine probability measures defined on a space is a fundamental task
in statistics and machine learning. Given support points of probability measures in a metric space and
a transportation cost function (e.g. the Euclidean distance), Wasserstein distance defines a distance
between two measures as the minimal transportation cost between them. This notion of distance
leads to a host of important applications, including text classification [30], clustering [25, 26, 15, 31],
unsupervised learning [23, 13], semi-supervised learning [47], supervised-learning[27, 19], statistics
[38, 39, 48, 21], and others [7, 41, 1, 44, 37]. Given a set of measures in the same space, the
2-Wasserstein barycenter is defined as the measure minimizing the sum of squared 2-Wasserstein
distances to all measures in the set. For example, if a set of images (with common structure but
varying noise) are modeled as probability measures, then the Wasserstein barycenter is a mixture
of the images that share this common structure. The Wasserstein barycenter better captures the
underlying geometric structure than the barycenter defined by the Euclidean or other distances. As a
result, the Wasserstein barycenter has applications in clustering [25, 26, 15], image retrieval [14] and
others [32, 43, 11, 34].
From the computation point of view, finding the barycenter of a set of discrete measures can be
formulated by linear programming[6, 8]. Nonetheless, state-of-the-art linear programming solvers
do not scale with the immense amount of data involved in barycenter calculations. Current research
∗

Haoyue Wang and Zikai Xiong are corresponding authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

