Efficient Graph Generation with
Graph Recurrent Attention Networks
Renjie Liao1,2,3 , Yujia Li4 , Yang Song5 , Shenlong Wang1,2,3 ,
William L. Hamilton6,7 , David Duvenaud1,3 , Raquel Urtasun1,2,3 , Richard Zemel1,3,8
University of Toronto1 , Uber ATG Toronto2 , Vector Institute3 ,
DeepMind4 , Stanford University5 , McGill University6 ,
Mila – Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute7 , Canadian Institute for Advanced Research8
{rjliao, slwang, duvenaud, urtasun, zemel}@cs.toronto.edu
{yujiali, charlienash}@google.com, yangsong@cs.stanford.edu, wlh@cs.mcgill.ca

Abstract
We propose a new family of efficient and expressive deep generative models
of graphs, called Graph Recurrent Attention Networks (GRANs). Our model
generates graphs one block of nodes and associated edges at a time. The block size
and sampling stride allow us to trade off sample quality for efficiency. Compared to
previous RNN-based graph generative models, our framework better captures the
auto-regressive conditioning between the already-generated and to-be-generated
parts of the graph using Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with attention. This not
only reduces the dependency on node ordering but also bypasses the long-term
bottleneck caused by the sequential nature of RNNs. Moreover, we parameterize
the output distribution per block using a mixture of Bernoulli, which captures
the correlations among generated edges within the block. Finally, we propose to
handle node orderings in generation by marginalizing over a family of canonical
orderings. On standard benchmarks, we achieve state-of-the-art time efficiency and
sample quality compared to previous models. Additionally, we show our model is
capable of generating large graphs of up to 5K nodes with good quality. Our code
is released at: https://github.com/lrjconan/GRAN.

1

Introduction

Graphs are the natural data structure to represent relational and structural information in many
domains, such as knowledge bases, social networks, molecule structures and even the structure of
probabilistic models. The ability to generate graphs therefore has many applications; for example, a
generative model of molecular graph structures can be employed for drug design [10, 21, 19, 36],
generative models for computation graph structures can be useful in model architecture search [35],
and graph generative models also play a significant role in network science [34, 1, 18].
The study of generative models for graphs dates back at least to the early work by Erdős and Rényi [8]
in the 1960s. These traditional approaches to graph generation focus on various families of random
graph models [38, 8, 13, 34, 2, 1], which typically formalize a simple stochastic generation process
(e.g., random, preferential attachment) and have well-understood mathematical properties. However,
due to their simplicity and hand-crafted nature, these random graph models generally have limited
capacity to model complex dependencies and are only capable of modeling a few statistical properties
of graphs. For example, Erdős–Rényi graphs do not have the heavy-tailed degree distribution that is
typical for many real-world networks.
More recently, building graph generative models using neural networks has attracted increasing attention [27, 10, 21]. Compared to traditional random graph models, these deep generative models have a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

