Large Scale Structure of Neural Network Loss
Landscapes

Stanislav Fort∗
Google Research
Zurich, Switzerland

Stanislaw Jastrzebski†
New York University
New York, United States

Abstract
There are many surprising and perhaps counter-intuitive properties of optimization
of deep neural networks. We propose and experimentally verify a unified phenomenological model of the loss landscape that incorporates many of them. High
dimensionality plays a key role in our model. Our core idea is to model the loss
landscape as a set of high dimensional wedges that together form a large-scale,
inter-connected structure and towards which optimization is drawn. We first show
that hyperparameter choices such as learning rate, network width and L2 regularization, affect the path optimizer takes through the landscape in similar ways,
influencing the large scale curvature of the regions the optimizer explores. Finally,
we predict and demonstrate new counter-intuitive properties of the loss-landscape.
We show an existence of low loss subspaces connecting a set (not only a pair)
of solutions, and verify it experimentally. Finally, we analyze recently popular
ensembling techniques for deep networks in the light of our model.

1

Introduction

The optimization of deep neural networks is still relatively poorly understood. One intriguing property
is that despite their massive over-parametrization, their optimization dynamics is surprisingly simple
in many respects. For instance, Li et al. [2018a] show that in spite of the typically very high number
of trainable parameters, constraining optimization to a small number of randomly chosen directions
often suffices to reach a comparable accuracy. Fort and Scherlis [2018] extend this observation and
analyze its geometrically implications for the landscape; Goodfellow et al. [2014] show that there is a
smooth path connecting initialization and the final minima. Another work shows how it is possible to
train only a small percentage of weights, while reaching a good final test performance [Frankle and
Carbin, 2019].
Inspired by these and some other investigations we propose a phenomenological model for the loss
surface of deep networks. We model the loss surface as a union of n-dimensional (lower dimension
than the full space, although still very high) manifolds that we call n-wedges, see Figure 1. Our
model is capable of giving predictions that match previous experiments (such as low-dimensionality
of optimization), as well as give new predictions.
First, we show how common regularizers (learning rate, batch size, L2 regularization, dropout, and
network width) all influence the optimization trajectory in a similar way. We find that increasing
their regularization strength leads, up to some point, to a similar effect: increasing width of the radial
tunnel (see Figure 2 and Section 3.3 for discussion) the optimization travels. This presents a next step
towards understanding the common role that different hyperparameters play in regularizing training
of deep networks [Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2017, Smith et al., 2018].
∗
†

This work was done as a part of the Google AI Residency program.
This work was partially done while the author was an intern at Google Zurich.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

