Learning Disentangled Representation for Robust
Person Re-identification
Chanho Eom
Bumsub Ham∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
cheom@yonsei.ac.kr
bumsub.ham@yonsei.ac.kr
∗
Corresponding author

Abstract
We address the problem of person re-identification (reID), that is, retrieving person
images from a large dataset, given a query image of the person of interest. A
key challenge is to learn person representations robust to intra-class variations, as
different persons can have the same attribute and the same person’s appearance
looks different with viewpoint changes. Recent reID methods focus on learning discriminative features but robust to only a particular factor of variations (e.g., human
pose), which requires corresponding supervisory signals (e.g., pose annotations).
To tackle this problem, we propose to disentangle identity-related and -unrelated
features from person images. Identity-related features contain information useful
for specifying a particular person (e.g., clothing), while identity-unrelated ones
hold other factors (e.g., human pose, scale changes). To this end, we introduce a
new generative adversarial network, dubbed identity shuffle GAN (IS-GAN), that
factorizes these features using identification labels without any auxiliary information. We also propose an identity-shuffling technique to regularize the disentangled
features. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of IS-GAN, significantly outperforming the state of the art on standard reID benchmarks including the
Market-1501, CUHK03 and DukeMTMC-reID. Our code and models are available
online: https://cvlab-yonsei.github.io/projects/ISGAN/.

1

Introduction

Person re-identification (reID) aims at retrieving person images of the same identity as a query from
a large dataset, which is particularly important for finding/tracking missing persons or criminals
in a surveillance system. This can be thought of as a fine-grained retrieval task in that 1) the data
set contains images of the same object class (i.e., person) but with different background clutter and
intra-class variations (e.g., pose, scale changes), and 2) they are typically captured with different
illumination conditions across multiple cameras possibly with different characteristics and viewpoints.
To tackle these problems, reID methods have focused on learning metric space [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] and
discriminative person representations [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], robust to intra-class variations
and distracting scene details.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have allowed significant advances in person reID in the
past few years. Recent methods using CNNs add few more layers for aggregating body parts [9,
10, 11, 12, 16, 17] and/or computing an attention map [13, 14, 15], on the top of e.g., a (cropped)
ResNet [18] trained for ImageNet classification [19]. They give state-of-the-art results, but finding
person representations robust to various factors is still very challenging. More recent methods exploit
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [20] to learn feature representations robust to a particular
factor. For example, conditioned on a target pose map and a person image, they generate a new
person image of the same identity but with the target pose [21, 22], and the generated image is then
used as an additional training data. This allows to learn pose-invariant features, and also has an effect
of data augmentation for regularization.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

