Stochastic Bandits with Context Distributions
Johannes Kirschner
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
jkirschner@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We introduce a stochastic contextual bandit model where at each time step the
environment chooses a distribution over a context set and samples the context
from this distribution. The learner observes only the context distribution while
the exact context realization remains hidden. This allows for a broad range of
applications where the context is stochastic or when the learner needs to predict the
context. We leverage the UCB algorithm to this setting and show that it achieves
an order-optimal high-probability bound on the cumulative regret for linear and
kernelized reward functions. Our results strictly generalize previous work in the
sense that both our model and the algorithm reduce to the standard setting when the
environment chooses only Dirac delta distributions and therefore provides the exact
context to the learner. We further analyze a variant where the learner observes the
realized context after choosing the action. Finally, we demonstrate the proposed
method on synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In the contextual bandit model a learner interacts with an environment in several rounds. At the
beginning of each round, the environment provides a context, and in turn, the learner chooses an action
which leads to an a priori unknown reward. The learner’s goal is to choose actions that maximize
the cumulative reward, and eventually compete with the best mapping from context observations
to actions. This model creates a dilemma of exploration and exploitation, as the learner needs to
balance exploratory actions to estimate the environment’s reward function, and exploitative actions
that maximize the total return. Contextual bandit algorithms have been successfully used in many
applications, including online advertisement, recommender systems and experimental design.
The contextual bandit model, as usually studied in the literature, assumes that the context is observed
exactly. This is not always the case in applications, for instance, when the context is itself a noisy
measurement or a forecasting mechanism. An example of such a context could be a weather or stock
market prediction. In other cases such as recommender systems, privacy constraints can restrict access
to certain user features, but instead we might be able to infer a distribution over those. To allow for
uncertainty in the context, we consider a setting where the environment provides a distribution over
the context set. The exact context is assumed to be a sample from this distribution, but remains hidden
from the learner. Such a model, to the best of our knowledge, has not been discussed in the literature
before. Not knowing the context realization makes the learning problem more difficult, because the
learner needs to estimate the reward function from noisy observations and without knowing the exact
context that generated the reward. Our setting recovers the classical contextual bandit setting when
the context distribution is a Dirac delta distribution. We also analyze a natural variant of the problem,
where the exact context is observed after the player has chosen the action. This allows for different
applications, where at the time of decision the context needs to be predicted (e.g. weather conditions),
but when the reward is obtained, the exact context can be measured.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

