Dying Experts: Efficient Algorithms
with Optimal Regret Bounds

Hamid Shayestehmanesh∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Victoria

Sajjad Azami∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Victoria

Nishant A. Mehta
Department of Computer Science
University of Victoria
{hamidshayestehmanesh, sajjadazami, nmehta}@uvic.ca

Abstract
We study a variant of decision-theoretic online learning in which the set of experts
that are available to Learner can shrink over time. This is a restricted version of the
well-studied sleeping experts problem, itself a generalization of the fundamental
game of prediction with expert advice. Similar to many works in this direction, our
benchmark is the ranking regret. Various results suggest that achieving optimal
regret in the fully adversarial sleeping experts problem is computationally hard.
This motivates our relaxation where any expert that goes to sleep will never again
wake up. We call this setting “dying experts” and study it in two different cases:
the case where the learner knows the order in which the experts will die and the
case where the learner does not. In both cases, we provide matching upper and
lower bounds on the ranking regret in the fully adversarial setting. Furthermore,
we present new, computationally efficient algorithms that obtain our optimal upper
bounds.

1

Introduction

Decision-theoretic online learning (DTOL) [13, 20, 21, 6] is a sequential game between a learning
agent (hereafter called Learner) and Nature. In each round, Learner plays a probability distribution
over a fixed set of experts and suffers loss accordingly. However, in wide range of applications,
this “fixed” set of actions shrinks as the game goes on. One way this can happen is because experts
either get disqualified or expire over time; a key scenario of contemporary relevance is in contexts
where experts that discriminate are prohibited from being used due to existing (or emerging) antidiscrimination laws. Two prime examples are college admissions and deciding whether incarcerated
individuals should be granted parole; here the agent may rely on predictions from a set of experts in
order to make decisions, and naturally experts detected to be discriminating against certain groups
should not be played anymore. However, the standard DTOL setting does not directly adapt to this
case, i.e., for a given round it does not make sense nor may it even be possible to compare Learner’s
performance to an expert or action that is no longer available.
Motivated by cases where the set of experts can change, a reasonable benchmark is the ranking regret
[12, 9], for which Learner competes with the best ordering of the actions (see (1) in Section 2 for
a formal definition). The situation where the set of available experts can change in each round is
known as the sleeping experts setting, and unfortunately, it appears to be computationally hard to
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

