Conditional Independence Testing using Generative
Adversarial Networks

1

Alexis Bellot1,2
Mihaela van der Schaar1,2,3
2
University of Cambridge, The Alan Turing Institute, 3 University of California Los Angeles
[abellot,mschaar]@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider the hypothesis testing problem of detecting conditional dependence,
with a focus on high-dimensional feature spaces. Our contribution is a new test
statistic based on samples from a generative adversarial network designed to
approximate directly a conditional distribution that encodes the null hypothesis, in
a manner that maximizes power (the rate of true negatives). We show that such an
approach requires only that density approximation be viable in order to ensure that
we control type I error (the rate of false positives); in particular, no assumptions
need to be made on the form of the distributions or feature dependencies. Using
synthetic simulations with high-dimensional data we demonstrate significant gains
in power over competing methods. In addition, we illustrate the use of our test to
discover causal markers of disease in genetic data.

1

Introduction

H0 : X

|=

Conditional independence tests are concerned with the question of whether two variables X and Y
behave independently of each other, after accounting for the effect of confounders Z. Such questions
can be written as a hypothesis testing problem:
Y |Z

versus H1 : X 6⊥⊥ Y |Z

Tests for this problem have recently become increasingly popular in the Machine Learning literature
[19, 24, 18, 17, 6] and find natural applications in causal discovery studies in all areas of science
[12, 14]. An area of research where such tests are important is genetics, where one problem is to find
genomic mutations directly linked to disease for the design of personalized therapies [26, 11]. In this
case, researchers have a limited number of data samples to test relationships even though they expect
complex dependencies between variables and often high-dimensional confounding variables Z. In
settings like this, existing tests may be ineffective because the accumulation of spurious correlations
from a large number of variables makes it difficult to discriminate between the hypotheses. As an
example the work in [16] shows empirically that kernel-based tests have rapidly decreasing power
with increasing data dimensionality.
In this paper, we present a test for conditional independence that relies on a different set of assumptions
that we show to be more robust for testing in high-dimensional samples (X, Y, Z). In particular, we
show that given only a viable approximation to a conditional distribution one can derive conditional
independence tests that are approximately valid in finite samples and that have non-trivial power. Our
test is based on a modification of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] that simulates from
a distribution under the assumption of conditional independence, while maintaining good power in
high dimensional data. In our procedure, after training, the first step involves simulating from our
network to generate data sets consistent with H0 . We then define a test statistic to capture the X − Y
dependency in each sample and compute an empirical distribution which approximates the behaviour
of the statistic under H0 and can be directly compared to the statistic observed on the real data to
make a decision.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

