Invariance and identifiability issues for word
embeddings

Rachel Carrington

Karthik Bharath

Simon Preston

School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nottingham
{rachel.carrington, karthik.bharath, simon.preston}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
Word embeddings are commonly obtained as optimizers of a criterion function f of
a text corpus, but assessed on word-task performance using a different evaluation
function g of the test data. We contend that a possible source of disparity in
performance on tasks is the incompatibility between classes of transformations that
leave f and g invariant. In particular, word embeddings defined by f are not unique;
they are defined only up to a class of transformations to which f is invariant, and
this class is larger than the class to which g is invariant. One implication of this is
that the apparent superiority of one word embedding over another, as measured by
word task performance, may largely be a consequence of the arbitrary elements
selected from the respective solution sets. We provide a formal treatment of the
above identifiability issue, present some numerical examples, and discuss possible
resolutions.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings map a text corpus, say X, to a collection of vectors V = (v1 , ..., vp ) where each
vj ∈ Rd , for a prescribed embedding dimension d, represents one of p words in the corpus. Different
word embedding models can be cast as the solution of an optimisation
arg min F (X, U, V ) = arg min f (X, U V ),
U,V

(1)

U,V

for particular corpus representation X and objective function f , where U = (u1 , . . . , un )T are
vectors in Rn representing contexts, typically not of main interest. The setup subsumes some popular
embedding techniques such as Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [Deerwester et al., 1990], word2vec
[Mikolov et al., 2013b,a], and GloVe [Pennington et al., 2014], wherein the matrices U and V appear
in a suitably chosen f only through their product U V .
Once a word embedding V is constructed by solving (1), the embedding is evaluated on its performance in tasks, including identifying word similarity (given word a, identify words with similar
meanings), and word analogy (for the statement "a is to b what c is to x", given a, b and c, identify
x). Similarities or analogies can be computed from V , then performance evaluated against a test data
set D containing human-assigned judgements as
g(D, V ),

(2)

for some function g. Constructing word embeddings is "unsupervised" with respect to the evaluation
task in the sense that V is determined from (1) independently of the choice of g and the data D in (2),
although f typically entails free parameters that may, consciously or not, be chosen to optimize (2)
[Levy et al., 2015].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

