Quantum Entropy Scoring for Fast Robust Mean
Estimation and Improved Outlier Detection

Yihe Dong
Microsoft Research
yihedong@gmail.com

Samuel B. Hopkins
University of California, Berkeley
hopkins@berkeley.edu

Jerry Li
Microsoft Research
jerrl@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study two problems in high-dimensional robust statistics: robust mean estimation and outlier detection. In robust mean estimation the goal is to estimate
the mean µ of a distribution on Rd given n independent samples, an ε-fraction
of which have been corrupted by a malicious adversary. In outlier detection the
goal is to assign an outlier score to each element of a data set such that elements
more likely to be outliers are assigned higher scores. Our algorithms for both
problems are based on a new outlier scoring method we call QUE-scoring based
on quantum entropy regularization. For robust mean estimation, this yields the
e
first algorithm with optimal error rates and nearly-linear running time O(nd)
in all
parameters, improving on the previous fastest running time e
O(min(nd/ε6 , nd2 )).
For outlier detection, we evaluate the performance of QUE-scoring via extensive
experiments on synthetic and real data, and demonstrate that it often performs
better than previously proposed algorithms. Code for these experiments is available
at https://github.com/twistedcubic/que-outlier-detection.

1

Introduction

We study outlier-robust statistics in high dimensions, focusing on the question: can theoretically
sound outlier robust algorithms have practical running times for large, high-dimensional data sets?
We address two related problems: robust mean estimation, which is primarily theoretical, and an
applied counterpart, outlier detection.
Robust mean estimation Our main theoretical contribution is the first nearly-linear time algorithm
for robust mean estimation with nearly-optimal error. Here the goal is to estimate the mean µ ∈ Rd
of a d-dimensional distribution D given ε-corrupted samples X1 , . . . , Xn – that is, i.i.d. samples, an
unknown ε-fraction of which have been maliciously corrupted. Under (for instance) the assumption
that the covariance of D is bounded by Id, √
it has been long known to be possible in exponential time
to estimate µ by µ̂ having kµ − µ̂k2 ≤ O( ε). In particular, this rate of error is independent of d.
Polynomial-time algorithms provably achieving such d-independent error became known only recently, starting with the works [8, 15]. Until our work, the running time of algorithms with provably
d-independent error remained suboptimal by polynomial factors in d or ε: the fastest running time
2
e
e notation hides logarithachieved before this work was O(min(nd
, nd/ε6 )) [6, 8, 15, 9]. (Here O(·)
mic factors in n and d). While these running times represent a dramatic improvement over previous
exponential-time algorithms, there are still many interesting regimes where the additional runtime
overheads these algorithms incur render them impractically slow. We give the first algorithm for
√
robust mean estimation with running time e
O(nd) which achieves error kµ − µ̂k2 ≤ O( ε). Note
that this running time is nearly-linear in the input size nd. Similar to prior works, our algorithm
has information-theoretically optimal sample complexity and nearly-optimal error rates in both the
bounded-covariance and sub-Gaussian regimes.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

