Discriminator optimal transport

Akinori Tanaka
Mathematical Science Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP)
1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-0027, Japan
Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences Program (iTHEMS), RIKEN
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University
3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kouhoku-ku, Yokohama 223-8522, Japan
akinori.tanaka@riken.jp

Abstract
Within a broad class of generative adversarial networks, we show that discriminator optimization process increases a lower bound of the dual cost function for
the Wasserstein distance between the target distribution p and the generator distribution pG . It implies that the trained discriminator can approximate optimal
transport (OT) from pG to p. Based on some experiments and a bit of OT theory,
we propose discriminator optimal transport (DOT) scheme to improve generated
images. We show that it improves inception score and FID calculated by unconditional GAN trained by CIFAR-10, STL-10 and a public pre-trained model of
conditional GAN trained by ImageNet.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [1] is one of recent promising generative models. In this
context, we prepare two networks, a generator G and a discriminator D. G generates fake samples
G(z) from noise z and tries to fool D. D classifies real sample x and fake samples y = G(z). In
the training phase, we update them alternatingly until it reaches to an equilibrium state. In general,
however, the training process is unstable and requires tuning of hyperparameters. Since from the first
successful implementation by convolutional neural nets [2], most literatures concentrate on how to
improve the unstable optimization procedures including changing objective functions [3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8], adding penalty terms [9, 10, 11], techniques on optimization precesses themselves [12, 13, 14,
15], inserting new layers to the network [16, 17], and others we cannot list here completely.
Even if one can make the optimization relatively stable and succeed in getting G around an equilibrium, it sometimes fails to generate meaningful images. Bad images may include some unwanted
structures like unnecessary shadows, strange symbols, and blurred edges of objects. For example,
see generated images surrounded by blue lines in Figure 1. These problems may be fixed by scaling
up the network structure and the optimization process. Generically speaking, however, it needs large
scale computational resources, and if one wants to apply GAN to individual tasks by making use of
more compact devices, the above problem looks inevitable and crucial.
There is another problem. In many cases, we discard the trained discriminator D after the training.
This situation is in contrast to other latent space generative models. For example, variational autoencoder (VAE) [18] is also composed of two distinct networks, an encoder network and a decoder
network. We can utilize both of them after the training: the encoder can be used as a data compressor,
and the decoder can be regarded as a generator. Compared to this situation, it sounds wasteful to use
only G after the GAN training.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

