Devign: Effective Vulnerability Identification by
Learning Comprehensive Program Semantics via
Graph Neural Networks
Yaqin Zhou1 , Shangqing Liu1, ∗ , Jingkai Siow1 , Xiaoning Du1, ∗ , and Yang Liu1
1

1
Nanyang Technological University
{yqzhou, shangqin001, jingkai001, xiaoning.du, yangliu}@ntu.edu.sg
*
Co-corresponding author

Abstract
Vulnerability identification is crucial to protect the software systems from attacks
for cyber security. It is especially important to localize the vulnerable functions
among the source code to facilitate the fix. However, it is a challenging and tedious
process, and also requires specialized security expertise. Inspired by the work
on manually-defined patterns of vulnerabilities from various code representation
graphs and the recent advance on graph neural networks, we propose Devign, a
general graph neural network based model for graph-level classification through
learning on a rich set of code semantic representations. It includes a novel Conv
module to efficiently extract useful features in the learned rich node representations
for graph-level classification. The model is trained over manually labeled datasets
built on 4 diversified large-scale open-source C projects that incorporate high
complexity and variety of real source code instead of synthesis code used in
previous works. The results of the extensive evaluation on the datasets demonstrate
that Devign outperforms the state of the arts significantly with an average of
10.51% higher accuracy and 8.68% F1 score, increases averagely 4.66% accuracy
and 6.37% F1 by the Conv module.

1

Introduction

The number of software vulnerabilities has been increasing rapidly recently, either reported publicly
through CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) or discovered internally in proprietary code.
In particular, the prevalence of open-source libraries not only accounts for the increment, but also
propagates impact. These vulnerabilities, mostly caused by insecure code, can be exploited to attack
software systems and cause substantial damages financially and socially.
Vulnerability identification is a crucial yet challenging problem in security. Besides the classic
approaches such as static analysis [1, 2], dynamic analysis [3–8] and symbolic execution, a number
of advances have been made in applying machine learning as a complementary approach. In these
early methods [9–11], features or patterns hand-crafted by human experts are taken as inputs by
machine learning algorithms to detect vulnerabilities. However, the root causes of vulnerabilities vary
by types of weaknesses [12] and libraries, making it impractical to characterize all vulnerabilities in
numerous libraries with the hand-crafted features.
To improve usability of the existing approaches and avoid the intense labor of human experts on
feature extraction, recent works investigate the potential of deep neural networks on a more automated
way of vulnerability identification [13–15]. However, all of these works have major limitations in
learning comprehensive program semantics to characterize vulnerabilities of high diversity and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

