Embedding Symbolic Knowledge into Deep Networks

Yaqi Xie∗, Ziwei Xu∗, Mohan S Kankanhalli, Kuldeep S. Meel, Harold Soh
School of Computing
National University of Singapore
{yaqixie, ziwei-xu, mohan, meel, harold}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this work, we aim to leverage prior symbolic knowledge to improve the performance of deep models. We propose a graph embedding network that projects
propositional formulae (and assignments) onto a manifold via an augmented Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN). To generate semantically-faithful embeddings, we
develop techniques to recognize node heterogeneity, and semantic regularization
that incorporate structural constraints into the embedding. Experiments show that
our approach improves the performance of models trained to perform entailment
checking and visual relation prediction. Interestingly, we observe a connection
between the tractability of the propositional theory representation and the ease of
embedding. Future exploration of this connection may elucidate the relationship
between knowledge compilation and vector representation learning.

1

Introduction

The recent advances in design and training methodology of deep neural networks [1] have led to widespread application of machine learning in diverse domains such as medical image classification [2] and
game-playing [3]. Although demonstrably effective on a variety of tasks, deep NNs have voracious
appetites; obtaining a good model typically requires large amounts of labelled data, even when the
learnt concepts could be described succinctly in symbolic representation. As a result, there has
been a surge of interest in techniques that combine symbolic and neural reasoning [4] including a
diverse set of approaches to inject existing prior domain knowledge into NNs, e.g., via knowledge
distillation [5], probabilistic priors [6], or auxiliary losses [7]. However, doing so in a scalable
and effective manner remains a challenging open problem. One particularly promising approach is
through learned embeddings, i.e., real-vector representations of prior knowledge, that can be easily
processed by NNs [8, 9, 10, 11, 12].
In this work, we focus on embedding symbolic knowledge expressed as logical rules. In sharp
contrast to connectionist NN structures, logical formulae are explainable, compositional, and can be
explicitly derived from human knowledge. Inspired by insights from the knowledge representation
community, this paper investigates embedding alternative representation languages to improve the
performance of deep networks. To this end, we focus on two languages: Conjunctive Normal Form
(CNF) and decision-Deterministic Decomposable Negation Normal Form (d-DNNF) [13, 14]. Every
Boolean formula can be succinctly represented in CNF, but CNF is intractable for most queries of
interest such as satisfiability. On the other hand, representation of Boolean formula in d-DNNF
may lead to exponential size blowup, but d-DNNF is tractable (polytime) for most queries such as
satisfiability, counting, enumeration and the like [14].
In comparison to prior work that treat logical formulae as symbol sequences, CNF and d-DNNF
formulae are naturally viewed as graphs structures. Thus, we utilize recent Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [15] (that are robust to relabelling of nodes) to embed logic graphs. We further employ
∗

Equal contribution and the rest of the authors are ordered alphabetically by last name.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

