Optimal Sparsity-Sensitive Bounds for Distributed
Mean Estimation
Zengfeng Huang
School of Data Science
Fudan University
huangzf@fudan.edu.cn

Ziyue Huang
Department of CSE
HKUST
zhuangbq@cse.ust.hk

Yilei Wang
Department of CSE
HKUST
ywanggq@cse.ust.hk

Ke Yi
Department of CSE
HKUST
yike@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating the mean of a set of vectors, which are
stored in a distributed system. This is a fundamental task with applications in
distributed SGD and many other distributed problems, where communication is a
main bottleneck for scaling up computations. We propose a new sparsity-aware
algorithm, which improves previous results both theoretically and empirically.
The communication cost of our algorithm is characterized by Hoyer’s measure of
sparseness. Moreover, we prove that the communication cost of our algorithm is
information-theoretic optimal up to a constant factor in all sparseness regime. We
have also conducted experimental studies, which demonstrate the advantages of
our method and confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Consider a distributed system with n nodes, called clients, each of which holds a d-dimensional
vector Xi ∈ Rd . The goal
Pn of distributed mean estimation (DME) is to estimate the mean of these
vectors, i.e., X := n1 i=1 Xi , subject to a constraint on the communication cost (i.e. the total
number of bits transmitted by all clients).
DME is a fundamental task in distributed machine learning and optimization problems [3, 10, 18,
14, 12]. For example, gradient aggregation in distributed stochastic gradient decent (SGD) is a form
of DME. In the standard synchronous implementation, in each round, clients evaluate their local
gradients with respect to local mini-batches and communicate them to a central server; the server then
computes the mean of all these gradients, which is used to update the model parameters. It is widely
observed that the communication cost of gradient exchange has become a significant bottleneck for
scaling up distributed training [5, 19, 24]. Therefore, communication-efficient gradient aggregation
has received lots of attention recently [1, 2, 15, 23, 26]. DME is also a critical subproblem in many
other applications such as the distributed implementation of Lloyd’s algorithm for K-means clustering
[16] and power iteration for computing eigenvectors [21].
However, the communication complexity of this fundamental problem has not been fully understood,
especially when the input is sparse or skew. In this paper, we provide a tight connection between
communication complexity and input sparsity. Specifically, we propose a new sparsity-aware lossy
compression scheme, which reduces the communication cost both theoretically and empirically.
We also prove that the communication cost of our method is information-theoretic optimal up to a
constant factor in all sparsity regime, under Hoyer’s measure of sparseness [9].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

