Distributionally Robust Optimization and
Generalization in Kernel Methods
Matthew Staib
MIT CSAIL
mstaib@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has attracted attention in machine
learning due to its connections to regularization, generalization, and robustness.
Existing work has considered uncertainty sets based on φ-divergences and Wasserstein distances, each of which have drawbacks. In this paper, we study DRO with
uncertainty sets measured via maximum mean discrepancy (MMD). We show that
MMD DRO is roughly equivalent to regularization by the Hilbert norm and, as a
byproduct, reveal deep connections to classic results in statistical learning. In particular, we obtain an alternative proof of a generalization bound for Gaussian kernel
ridge regression via a DRO lense. The proof also suggests a new regularizer. Our
results apply beyond kernel methods: we derive a generically applicable approximation of MMD DRO, and show that it generalizes recent work on variance-based
regularization.

1

Introduction

Distributionally robust optimization (DRO) is an attractive tool for improving machine
Plearning
models. Instead of choosing a model f to minimize empirical risk Ex∼P̂n [`f (x)] = n1 i `f (xi ),
an adversary is allowed to perturb the sample distribution within a set U centered around the
empirical distribution P̂n . DRO seeks a model that performs well regardless of the perturbation:
inf f supQ∈U Ex∼Q [`f (x)]. The induced robustness can directly imply generalization: if the data that
forms P̂n is drawn from a population distribution P, and U is large enough to contain P, then we
implicitly optimize for P too and the DRO objective value upper bounds out of sample performance.
More broadly, robustness has gained attention due to adversarial examples [17, 39, 26]; indeed, DRO
generalizes robustness to adversarial examples [35, 36].
In machine learning, the DRO uncertainty set U has so far always been defined as a φ-divergence
ball or Wasserstein ball around the empirical distribution P̂n . These choices are convenient, due
to a number of structural results. For example, DRO with χ2 -divergence is roughly equivalent to
regularizing by variance [18, 22, 31], and the worst case distribution Q ∈ U can be computed exactly
in O(n log n) [37]. Moreover, DRO with Wasserstein distance is asymptotically equivalent to certain
common norm penalties [15], and the worst case Q ∈ U can be computed approximately in several
cases [28, 14]. These structural results are key, because the most challenging part of DRO is solving
(or bounding) the DRO objective.
However, there are substantial drawbacks to these two types of uncertainty sets. Any φ-divergence
uncertainty set U around P̂n contains only distributions with the same (finite) support as P̂n . Hence,
the population P is typically not in U, and so the DRO objective value cannot directly certify out of
sample performance. Wasserstein uncertainty sets do not suffer from this problem. But, they are
more computationally expensive, and the above key results on equivalences and computation need
nontrivial assumptions on the loss function and the specific ground distance metric used.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

