Deep Multi-State Dynamic Recurrent Neural
Networks Operating on Wavelet Based Neural
Features for Robust Brain Machine Interfaces
Benyamin Haghi1,* , Spencer Kellis2 , Sahil Shah1 , Maitreyi Ashok1 , Luke Bashford2 , Daniel
Kramer3 , Brian Lee3 , Charles Liu3 , Richard A. Andersen2 , Azita Emami1
1 Electrical Engineering Department, Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA
2 Biology and Biological Engineering Department, Caltech, Pasadena, CA, USA
3 Neurorestoration Center and Neurosurgery, USC Keck School of Medicine, L.A., CA, USA
*benyamin.a.haghi@caltech.edu

Abstract
We present a new deep multi-state Dynamic Recurrent Neural Network (DRNN)
architecture for Brain Machine Interface (BMI) applications. Our DRNN is used to
predict Cartesian representation of a computer cursor movement kinematics from
open-loop neural data recorded from the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) of a human
subject in a BMI system. We design the algorithm to achieve a reasonable trade-off
between performance and robustness, and we constrain memory usage in favor of
future hardware implementation. We feed the predictions of the network back to
the input to improve prediction performance and robustness. We apply a scheduled
sampling approach to the model in order to solve a statistical distribution mismatch
between the ground truth and predictions. Additionally, we configure a small
DRNN to operate with a short history of input, reducing the required buffering of
input data and number of memory accesses. This configuration lowers the expected
power consumption in a neural network accelerator. Operating on wavelet-based
neural features, we show that the average performance of DRNN surpasses other
state-of-the-art methods in the literature on both single- and multi-day data recorded
over 43 days. Results show that multi-state DRNN has the potential to model the
nonlinear relationships between the neural data and kinematics for robust BMIs.

1

Introduction

Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) can help spinal cord injury (SCI) patients by decoding neural
activity into useful control signals for guiding robotic limbs, computer cursors, or other assistive
devices [1]. BMI in its most basic form maps neural signals into movement control signals and then
closes the loop to enable direct neural control of movements. Such systems have shown promise in
helping SCI patients. However, improving performance and robustness of these systems remains
challenging. Even for simple movements, such as moving a computer cursor to a target on a computer
screen, decoding performance can be highly variable over time. Furthermore, most BMI systems
currently run on high-power computer systems. Clinical translation of these systems will require
decoders that can adapt to changing neural conditions and which operate efficiently enough to run on
mobile, even implantable, platforms.
Conventionally, linear decoders have been used to find the relationship between kinematics and neural
signals of the motor cortex. For instance, Wu et al. [2] use a linear model to decode the neural activity
of two macaque monkeys. Orsborn et al. [3] apply a Kalman filter, updating the model on batches of
neural data of an adult monkey, to predict kinematics in a center-out task. Gilja et al. [4] propose
a Kalman Filter to predict hand movement velocities of a monkey in a center-out task. However,
all of these algorithms can only predict piecewise linear relationships between the neural data and
kinematics. Moreover, because of nonstationarity and low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the neural
data, linear decoders need to be regularly re-calibrated [2].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

