SGD on Neural Networks Learns
Functions of Increasing Complexity

Preetum Nakkiran
Harvard University

Gal Kaplun
Harvard University

Benjamin L. Edelman
Harvard University

Dimitris Kalimeris
Harvard University

Fred Zhang
Harvard University

Tristan Yang
Harvard University

Boaz Barak
Harvard University∗

Abstract
We perform an experimental study of the dynamics of Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) in learning deep neural networks for several real and synthetic classification
tasks. We show that in the initial epochs, almost all of the performance improvement of the classifier obtained by SGD can be explained by a linear classifier.
More generally, we give evidence for the hypothesis that, as iterations progress,
SGD learns functions of increasing complexity. This hypothesis can be helpful in
explaining why SGD-learned classifiers tend to generalize well even in the overparameterized regime. We also show that the linear classifier learned in the initial
stages is “retained” throughout the execution even if training is continued to the
point of zero training error, and complement this with a theoretical result in a
simplified model. Key to our work is a new measure of how well one classifier
explains the performance of another, based on conditional mutual information.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been extremely successful in modern machine learning, achieving the stateof-the-art in a wide range of domains, including image-recognition, speech-recognition, and gameplaying [14, 18, 23, 37]. Practitioners often train deep neural networks with hundreds of layers
and millions of parameters and manage to find networks with good out-of-sample performance.
However, this practical prowess is accompanied by feeble theoretical understanding. In particular,
we are far from understanding the generalization performance of neural networks—why can we
train large, complex models on relatively few training examples and still expect them to generalize
to unseen examples? It has been observed in the literature that the classical generalization bounds
that guarantee small generalization gap (i.e., the gap between train and test error) in terms of VC
dimension or Rademacher complexity do not yield meaningful guarantees in the context of real
neural networks. More concretely, for most if not all real-world settings, there exist neural networks
which fit the train set exactly, but have arbitrarily bad test error [41].
The existence of such “bad” empirical risk minimizers (ERMs) with large gaps between the train
and test error means that the generalization performance of deep neural networks depends on the
particular algorithm (and initialization) used in training, which is most often stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). It has been conjectured that SGD provides some form of “implicit regularization” by
outputting “low complexity” models, but it is safe to say that the precise notion of complexity and
the mechanism by which this happens are not yet understood (see related works below).
∗

preetum@cs.harvard.edu, galkaplun@g.harvard.edu, kalimeris@g.harvard.edu,
tristanyang@college.harvard.edu, bedelman@g.harvard.edu, hzhang@g.harvard.edu,
b@boazbarak.org
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

