Memory-Efficient Adaptive Optimization
Rohan Anil Vineet Gupta
Google Brain

Tomer Koren
Google Brain and Tel Aviv Univ.

Yoram Singer
Princeton Univ.

{rohananil,vineet}@google.com

tkoren@google.com

y.s@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Adaptive gradient-based optimizers such as Adagrad and Adam are crucial for
achieving state-of-the-art performance in machine translation and language modeling. However, these methods maintain second-order statistics for each parameter,
thus introducing significant memory overheads that restrict the size of the model
being used as well as the number of examples in a mini-batch. We describe an
effective and flexible adaptive optimization method with greatly reduced memory
overhead. Our method retains the benefits of per-parameter adaptivity while allowing significantly larger models and batch sizes. We give convergence guarantees
for our method, and demonstrate its effectiveness in training very large translation
and language models with up to 2-fold speedups compared to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Adaptive gradient-based optimizers such as Adagrad [11] and Adam [15] are among the de facto
methods of choice in modern machine learning. These methods adaptively tune the learning rate
for each parameter during the optimization process using cumulative second-order statistics. Often
offering superior convergence properties, these methods are very attractive in large scale applications
due to their moderate time and space requirements, which are linear in the number of parameters.
However, when training extremely large models even the modest memory overhead imposes grave
limitations on the quality of the trained model. For example, recent advances in natural language
processing [26, 17] show that models with hundreds of millions to billions of parameters, trained with
adaptive optimization methods, achieve state-of-the-art results. In such cases, the memory overhead
of the optimizer severely restricts the size of the model that can be used as well as the number of
examples in each mini-batch, both of which have a dramatic effect on the accuracy of the model.
Motivated by these challenges, we describe an adaptive optimization method that retains the benefits
of standard per-parameter adaptivity while significantly reducing memory overhead. Our construction
is general and flexible, and very simple to implement. We give convergence guarantees for our
method in the convex (online or stochastic) optimization setting, and demonstrate experimentally that
it is particularly effective when the gradients exhibit natural activation patterns; namely, when the
parameters can be subdivided into (not necessarily disjoint) sets where gradient entries within sets are
correlated and of a similar order of magnitude. For example, we often observe in deep networks that
the incoming (outgoing) edges into (from) a neuron are jointly activated and, loosely speaking, their
associated gradients exhibit similar statistical characteristics. That said, our analysis of the algorithm
makes no statistical assumptions on the gradients and is applicable for general stochastic convex
optimization. Further, we do not assume that the activation pattern is fully prescribed a-priori.
Large scale experiments show that our algorithm achieves comparable, and at times superior, rates of
convergence compared to standard linear-space adaptive methods. Focusing primarily on language
modeling tasks where state-of-the-art models are extremely large, we further demonstrate that the
reduction in memory footprint can be utilized for a substantial increase in the batch size, which
greatly speeds up convergence in a distributed environment. For a fixed budget of computational
resource our method is able to shorten the end-to-end walltime for convergence by up to 50%. Our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

