Multi-Agent Common Knowledge
Reinforcement Learning
Christian A. Schroeder de Witt⇤ †
Gregory Farquhar†

Philip H. S. Torr†

Jakob N. Foerster⇤†

Wendelin Böhmer†

Shimon Whiteson†

Abstract
Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning often requires decentralised policies, which severely limit the agents’ ability to coordinate their behaviour. In
this paper, we show that common knowledge between agents allows for complex
decentralised coordination. Common knowledge arises naturally in a large number
of decentralised cooperative multi-agent tasks, for example, when agents can reconstruct parts of each others’ observations. Since agents can independently agree
on their common knowledge, they can execute complex coordinated policies that
condition on this knowledge in a fully decentralised fashion. We propose multiagent common knowledge reinforcement learning (MACKRL), a novel stochastic
actor-critic algorithm that learns a hierarchical policy tree. Higher levels in the
hierarchy coordinate groups of agents by conditioning on their common knowledge,
or delegate to lower levels with smaller subgroups but potentially richer common
knowledge. The entire policy tree can be executed in a fully decentralised fashion.
As the lowest policy tree level consists of independent policies for each agent,
MACKRL reduces to independently learnt decentralised policies as a special case.
We demonstrate that our method can exploit common knowledge for superior
performance on complex decentralised coordination tasks, including a stochastic
matrix game and challenging problems in StarCraft II unit micromanagement.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent problems are ubiquitous, for example, in the coordination of autonomous
cars (Cao et al., 2013) or unmanned aerial vehicles (Pham et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018). However,
how to learn control policies for such systems remains a major open question.
Joint action learning (JAL, Claus & Boutilier, 1998) learns centralised policies that select joint
actions conditioned on the global state or joint observation. In order to execute such policies, the
agents need access to either the global state or an instantaneous communication channel with sufficient
bandwidth to enable them to aggregate their individual observations. These requirements often do
not hold in practice, but even when they do, learning a centralised policy can be infeasible as the
size of the joint action space grows exponentially in the number of agents. By contrast, independent
learning (IL, Tan, 1993) learns fully decentralisable policies but introduces nonstationarity as each
agent treats the other agents as part of its environment.
These difficulties motivate an alternative approach: centralised training of decentralised policies.
During learning the agents can share observations, parameters, gradients, etc. without restriction but
the result of learning is a set of decentralised policies such that each agent can select actions based
only on its individual observations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
⇤
†

Equal contribution. Correspondence to Christian Schroeder de Witt <cs@robots.ox.ac.uk>
University of Oxford, UK

