No Press Diplomacy: Modeling Multi-Agent
Gameplay

Philip Paquette 1
pcpaquette@gmail.com
Max O. Smith 3
max.olan.smith@gmail.com
Satinder Singh 3
baveja@umich.edu

Yuchen Lu 1
luyuchen.paul@gmail.com

Steven Bocco 1
stevenbocco@gmail.com

Satya Ortiz-Gagné 1
s.ortizgagne@gmail.com

Jonathan K. Kummerfeld 3
jkummerf@umich.edu

Joelle Pineau 2
jpineau@cs.mcgill.ca

Aaron Courville 1
aaron.courville@gmail.com

Abstract
Diplomacy is a seven-player non-stochastic, non-cooperative game, where agents
acquire resources through a mix of teamwork and betrayal. Reliance on trust and
coordination makes Diplomacy the first non-cooperative multi-agent benchmark
for complex sequential social dilemmas in a rich environment. In this work, we
focus on training an agent that learns to play the No Press version of Diplomacy
where there is no dedicated communication channel between players. We present
DipNet, a neural-network-based policy model for No Press Diplomacy. The model
was trained on a new dataset of more than 150,000 human games. Our model is
trained by supervised learning (SL) from expert trajectories, which is then used to
initialize a reinforcement learning (RL) agent trained through self-play. Both the
SL and RL agents demonstrate state-of-the-art No Press performance by beating
popular rule-based bots.

1

Introduction

Diplomacy is a seven-player game where players attempt to acquire a majority of supply centers
across Europe. To acquire supply centers, players can coordinate their units with other players
through dialogue or signaling. Coordination can be risky, because players can lie and even betray
each other. Reliance on trust and negotiation makes Diplomacy the first non-cooperative multi-agent
benchmark for complex sequential social dilemmas in a rich environment.
Sequential social dilemmas (SSD) are situations where one individual experiences conflict between
self- and collective-interest over repeated interactions [1]. In Diplomacy, players are faced with a
SSD in each phase of the game. Should I help another player? Do I betray them? Will I need their
help later? The actions they choose will be visible to the other players and influence how other
players interact with them later in the game. The outcomes of each interaction are non-stochastic.
This characteristic sets Diplomacy apart from previous benchmarks where players could additionally
1 Mila, University of Montreal
2 Mila, McGill University
3 University of Michigan
§ Dataset and code can be found at https://github.com/diplomacy/research
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

