Scalable Gromov-Wasserstein Learning for
Graph Partitioning and Matching
Hongteng Xu1,2
Dixin Luo2
Lawrence Carin2
1
2
Infinia ML Inc.
Duke University
{hongteng.xu, dixin.luo, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
We propose a scalable Gromov-Wasserstein learning (S-GWL) method and establish a novel and theoretically-supported paradigm for large-scale graph analysis.
The proposed method is based on the fact that Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy
is a pseudometric on graphs. Given two graphs, the optimal transport associated
with their Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy provides the correspondence between
their nodes and achieves graph matching. When one of the graphs has isolated
but self-connected nodes (i.e., a disconnected graph), the optimal transport indicates the clustering structure of the other graph and achieves graph partitioning.
Using this concept, we extend our method to multi-graph partitioning and matching by learning a Gromov-Wasserstein barycenter graph for multiple observed
graphs; the barycenter graph plays the role of the disconnected graph, and since
it is learned, so is the clustering. Our method combines a recursive K-partition
mechanism with a regularized proximal gradient algorithm, whose time complexity
is O(K(E + V ) logK V ) for graphs with V nodes and E edges. To our knowledge,
our method is the first attempt to make Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy applicable
to large-scale graph analysis and unify graph partitioning and matching into the
same framework. It outperforms state-of-the-art graph partitioning and matching
methods, achieving a trade-off between accuracy and efficiency.

1

Introduction

Gromov-Wasserstein distance [42, 29] was originally designed for metric-measure spaces, which can
measure distances between distributions in a relational way, deriving an optimal transport between
the samples in distinct spaces. Recently, the work in [11] proved that this distance can be extended to
Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy (GW discrepancy) [37], which defines a pseudometric for graphs.
Accordingly, the optimal transport between two graphs indicates the correspondence between their
nodes. This work theoretically supports the applications of GW discrepancy to structural data analysis,
e.g., 2D/3D object matching [30, 28, 8], molecule analysis [43, 44], network alignment [49], etc.
Unfortunately, although GW discrepancy-based methods are attractive theoretically, they are often
inapplicable to large-scale graphs, because of high computational complexity. Additionally, these
methods are designed for two-graph matching, ignoring the potential of GW discrepancy to other
tasks, like graph partitioning and multi-graph matching. As a result, the partitioning and the matching
of large-scale graphs still typically rely on heuristic methods [16, 12, 45, 27], whose performance is
often sub-optimal, especially in noisy cases.
Focusing on the issues above, we design a scalable Gromov-Wasserstein learning (S-GWL) method
and establish a new and unified paradigm for large-scale graph partitioning and matching. As
illustrated in Figure 1(a), given two graphs, the optimal transport associated with their GromovWasserstein discrepancy provides the correspondence between their nodes. Similarly, graph partitioning corresponds to calculating the Gromov-Wasserstein discrepancy between an observed graph and
a disconnected graph, as shown in Figure 1(b). The optimal transport connects each node of the ob33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

