Input Similarity from the Neural Network Perspective

Guillaume Charpiat1

Nicolas Girard2
Loris Felardos1
Yuliya Tarabalka2,3
TAU team, INRIA Saclay, LRI, Univ. Paris-Sud
2
TITANE team, INRIA Sophia-Antipolis, Univ. Côte d’Azur
3
LuxCarta Technology
1

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
Given a trained neural network, we aim at understanding how similar it considers
any two samples. For this, we express a proper definition of similarity from the
neural network perspective (i.e. we quantify how undissociable two inputs A and
B are), by taking a machine learning viewpoint: how much a parameter variation
designed to change the output for A would impact the output for B as well?
We study the mathematical properties of this similarity measure, and show how to
estimate sample density with it, in low complexity, enabling new types of statistical
analysis for neural networks. We also propose to use it during training, to enforce
that examples known to be similar should also be seen as similar by the network.
We then study the self-denoising phenomenon encountered in regression tasks when
training neural networks on datasets with noisy labels. We exhibit a multimodal
image registration task where almost perfect accuracy is reached, far beyond label
noise variance. Such an impressive self-denoising phenomenon can be explained
as a noise averaging effect over the labels of similar examples. We analyze data by
retrieving samples perceived as similar by the network, and are able to quantify the
denoising effect without requiring true labels.

1

Introduction

The notion of similarity between data points is an important topic in the machine learning literature,
obviously in domains such as image retrieval, where images similar to a query have to be found;
but not only. For instance when training auto-encoders, the quality of the reconstruction is usually
quantified as the L2 norm between the input and output images. Such a similarity measure is however
questionable, as color comparison, performed pixel per pixel, is a poor estimate of human perception:
the L2 norm can vary a lot with transformations barely noticeable to the human eye such as small
translations or rotations (for instance on textures), and does not carry semantic information, i.e.
whether the same kind of objects are present in the image. Therefore, so-called perceptual losses [10]
were introduced to quantify image similarity: each image is fed to a standard pre-trained network
such as VGG, and the activations in a particular intermediate layer are used as descriptors of the
image [4, 5]. The distance between two images is then set as the L2 norm between these activations.
Such a distance carries implicitly semantic information, as the VGG network was trained for image
classification. However, the choice of the layer to consider is arbitrary. In the ideal case, one would
wish to combine information from all layers, as some are more abstract and some more detail-specific.
Then, how to choose the weights to combine the different layers? Would it be possible to build a
canonical similarity measure, well posed theoretically?
More importantly, the previous literature does not consider the notion of input similarity from the
point of view of the neural network that is being used, but from the point of view of another one
(typically, VGG) which aims at imitating human perception. Yet, neural networks are black boxes
difficult to interpret, and showing which samples a network considers as similar would help to explain
its decisions. Also, the number of such similar examples would be a key element for confidence
estimation at test time. Moreover, to explain the self-denoising phenomenon, i.e. why predictions can
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

