Elliptical Perturbations for Differential Privacy

Jordan Awan †
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
awan@psu.edu

Matthew Reimherr ∗
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
mreimherr@psu.edu

Abstract
We study elliptical distributions in locally convex vector spaces, and determine
conditions when they can or cannot be used to satisfy differential privacy (DP).
A requisite condition for a sanitized statistical summary to satisfy DP is that the
corresponding privacy mechanism must induce equivalent probability measures
for all possible input databases. We show that elliptical distributions with the
same dispersion operator, C, are equivalent if the difference of their means lies
in the Cameron-Martin space of C. In the case of releasing finite-dimensional
summaries using elliptical perturbations, we show that the privacy parameter 
can be computed in terms of a one-dimensional maximization problem. We apply
this result to consider multivariate Laplace, t, Gaussian, and K-norm noise. Surprisingly, we show that the multivariate Laplace noise does not achieve -DP in
any dimension greater than one. Finally, we show that when the dimension of the
space is infinite, no elliptical distribution can be used to give -DP; only (, δ)-DP
is possible.

1

Introduction

Infinite dimensional objects and parameters arise commonly in nonparametric statistics, shape analysis, and functional data analysis. Several recent works have made strides towards extending tools
for differential privacy (DP) to handle such settings. Some of the first results in this area were given
in Hall et al. (2013), with a particular emphasis on Gaussian perturbations and point-wise releases of
statistical summaries represented as univariate functions. This work was extended to more general
Banach and Hilbert space based summaries by Mirshani et al. (2017), which included protections for
public releases based on path level summaries, nonlinear transformations of functional summaries,
and full function releases as well. However, Gaussian perturbations are not always satisfactory since
they cannot be used to achieve pure DP (-DP), which requires heavier tailed distributions. Rather,
for pure DP, the most popular distribution is the Laplace mechanism, whose tails are “just right" for
achieving DP in finite dimensional summaries (Dwork et al., 2006).
When one moves from univariate to multivariate settings, generalizing the Laplace mechanism is
not as simple as generalizing the Gaussian. Often, when the Laplace mechanism is used in multivariate settings, iid Laplace random variables are used. However, this approach fails to capture
the multivariate dependence structure of the data or parameter of interest. Furthermore, in infinite
dimensional settings, adding iid noise is usually not an option if one wishes to remain in a particular
function space. To address these issues, we study the use of elliptical distributions to satisfy DP,
which allow for a dispersion operator and are closely related to Gaussian distributions. Elliptical
∗
Research supported in part by NSF DMS 1712826, NSF SES 1853209, and the Simons Institute for the
Theory of Computing at UC Berkeley.
†
Research supported in part by NSF SES-153443 and NSF SES-1853209.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

