Budgeted Reinforcement Learning in Continuous
State Space

Nicolas Carrara∗
SequeL team, INRIA Lille – Nord Europe†
nicolas.carrara@inria.fr

Edouard Leurent∗
SequeL team, INRIA Lille – Nord Europe†
Renault Group, France
edouard.leurent@inria.fr

Romain Laroche
Microsoft Research, Montreal, Canada
romain.laroche@microsoft.com
Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
SequeL team, INRIA Lille – Nord Europe
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Tanguy Urvoy
Orange Labs, Lannion, France
tanguy.urvoy@orange.com
Olivier Pietquin
Google Research - Brain Team
SequeL team, INRIA Lille – Nord Europe†
pietquin@google.com

Abstract
A Budgeted Markov Decision Process (BMDP) is an extension of a Markov
Decision Process to critical applications requiring safety constraints. It relies on a
notion of risk implemented in the shape of a cost signal constrained to lie below
an – adjustable – threshold. So far, BMDPs could only be solved in the case of
finite state spaces with known dynamics. This work extends the state-of-the-art
to continuous spaces environments and unknown dynamics. We show that the
solution to a BMDP is a fixed point of a novel Budgeted Bellman Optimality
operator. This observation allows us to introduce natural extensions of Deep
Reinforcement Learning algorithms to address large-scale BMDPs. We validate
our approach on two simulated applications: spoken dialogue and autonomous
driving3 .

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a general framework for decision-making under uncertainty. It
frames the learning objective as the optimal control of a Markov Decision Process (S, A, P, Rr , γ)
with measurable state space S, discrete actions A, unknown rewards Rr ∈ RS×A , and unknown
dynamics P ∈ M(S)S×A , where M(X ) denotes the probability measures over a set X . Formally,
we seek
π ∈ M(A)S that maximises in expectation the γ-discounted return of rewards
Pa∞policy
π
t
Gr = t=0 γ Rr (st , at ).
However, this modelling assumption comes at a price: no control is given over the spread of the
performance distribution (Dann et al., 2019). In many critical real-world applications where failures
may turn out very costly, this is an issue as most decision-makers would rather give away some
amount of expected optimality to increase the performances in the lower-tail of the distribution. This
∗

Both authors contributed equally.
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, INRIA UMR 9189 - CRIStAL, Lille, France
3
Videos and code are available at https://budgeted-rl.github.io/.

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

