Network Pruning via
Transformable Architecture Search
Xuanyi Dong†‡∗, Yi Yang†
ReLER, CAI, University of Technology Sydney, ‡ Baidu Research
xuanyi.dong@student.uts.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au

†

Abstract
Network pruning reduces the computation costs of an over-parameterized network
without performance damage. Prevailing pruning algorithms pre-define the width
and depth of the pruned networks, and then transfer parameters from the unpruned
network to pruned networks. To break the structure limitation of the pruned networks, we propose to apply neural architecture search to search directly for a
network with flexible channel and layer sizes. The number of the channels/layers
is learned by minimizing the loss of the pruned networks. The feature map of the
pruned network is an aggregation of K feature map fragments (generated by K
networks of different sizes), which are sampled based on the probability distribution. The loss can be back-propagated not only to the network weights, but also
to the parameterized distribution to explicitly tune the size of the channels/layers.
Specifically, we apply channel-wise interpolation to keep the feature map with
different channel sizes aligned in the aggregation procedure. The maximum probability for the size in each distribution serves as the width and depth of the pruned
network, whose parameters are learned by knowledge transfer, e.g., knowledge
distillation, from the original networks. Experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100
and ImageNet demonstrate the effectiveness of our new perspective of network
pruning compared to traditional network pruning algorithms. Various searching
and knowledge transfer approaches are conducted to show the effectiveness of the
two components. Code is at: https://github.com/D-X-Y/NAS-Projects.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become wider and deeper to achieve high
performance on different applications [17, 22, 48]. Despite their great success, it is impractical to deploy them to resource constrained devices, such as mobile devices and drones.
A straightforward solution to address this problem is using network pruning [29, 12, 13, 20, Train
Prune filters,
Fine-tune
An efficient
18] to reduce the computation cost of over- a large
get a small
the CNN S
CNN S
parameterized CNNs. A typical pipeline for CNN T
CNN S
network pruning, as indicated in Fig. 1(a), is
(a) The Traditional Pruning Paradigm
achieved by removing the redundant filters and
Train a large CNN T
Transfer
then fine-tuning the slashed networks, based
An efficient
knowledge
CNN S
on the original networks. Different criteria for Search for the width
from
T
to
S
the importance of the filters are applied, such and depth of CNN S
(b) The Proposed Pruning Paradigm
as L2-norm of the filter [30], reconstruction
Figure
1:
A comparison between the typical prunerror [20], and learnable scaling factor [32].
Lastly, researchers apply various fine-tuning ing paradigm and the proposed paradigm.
∗

This work was done when Xuanyi Dong was a research intern at Baidu Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

