Censored Semi-Bandits: A Framework for Resource
Allocation with Censored Feedback
Arun Verma
Department of IEOR
IIT Bombay, India
v.arun@iitb.ac.in

Manjesh K. Hanawal
Department of IEOR
IIT Bombay, India
mhanwal@iitb.ac.in

Arun Rajkumar
Department of CSE
IIT Madras, India
arunr@cse.iitm.ac.in

Raman Sankaran
LinkedIn India
Bengaluru, India
rsankara@linkedin.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study Censored Semi-Bandits, a novel variant of the semi-bandits
problem. The learner is assumed to have a fixed amount of resources, which it
allocates to the arms at each time step. The loss observed from an arm is random
and depends on the amount of resources allocated to it. More specifically, the
loss equals zero if the allocation for the arm exceeds a constant (but unknown)
threshold that can be dependent on the arm. Our goal is to learn a feasible allocation
that minimizes the expected loss. The problem is challenging because the loss
distribution and threshold value of each arm are unknown. We study this novel
setting by establishing its ‘equivalence’ to Multiple-Play Multi-Armed Bandits
(MP-MAB) and Combinatorial Semi-Bandits. Exploiting these equivalences, we
derive optimal algorithms for our setting using the existing algorithms for MP-MAB
and Combinatorial Semi-Bandits. Experiments on synthetically generated data
validate performance guarantees of the proposed algorithms.

1

Introduction

Many real-life sequential resource allocation problems have a censored feedback structure. Consider,
for instance, the problem of optimally allocating patrol officers (resources) across various locations
in a city on a daily basis to combat opportunistic crimes. Here, a perpetrator picks a location (e.g., a
deserted street) and decides to commit a crime (e.g., mugging) but does not go ahead with it if a patrol
officer happens to be around in the vicinity. Though the true potential crime rate depends on the latent
decision of the perpetrator, one observes feedback only when the crime is committed. Thus crimes
that were planned but not committed get censored. This model of censoring is quite general and finds
applications in several resource allocation problems such as police patrolling (Curtin et al., 2010),
traffic regulations and enforcement (Adler et al., 2014; Rosenfeld and Kraus, 2017), poaching control
(Nguyen et al., 2016; Gholami et al., 2018), supplier selection (Abernethy et al., 2016), advertisement
budget allocation (Lattimore et al., 2014), among many others.
Existing approaches that deal with censored feedback in resource allocation problems fall into two
broad categories. Curtin et al. (2010); Adler et al. (2014); Rosenfeld and Kraus (2017) learn good
resource allocations from historical data. Nguyen et al. (2016); Gholami et al. (2018); Zhang et al.
(2016); Sinha et al. (2018) pose the problem in a game-theoretic framework (opportunistic security
games) and propose algorithms for optimal resource allocation strategies. While the first approach
fails to capture the sequential nature of the problem, the second approach is agnostic to the user
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

