Stochastic Shared Embeddings: Data-driven
Regularization of Embedding Layers
Liwei Wu
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
liwu@ucdavis.edu

Shuqing Li
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
qshli@ucdavis.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angles
Los Angles, CA 90095
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

James Sharpnack
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
jsharpna@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
In deep neural nets, lower level embedding layers account for a large portion of
the total number of parameters. Tikhonov regularization, graph-based regularization, and hard parameter sharing are approaches that introduce explicit biases
into training in a hope to reduce statistical complexity. Alternatively, we propose
stochastic shared embeddings (SSE), a data-driven approach to regularizing embedding layers, which stochastically transitions between embeddings during stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). Because SSE integrates seamlessly with existing SGD
algorithms, it can be used with only minor modifications when training large scale
neural networks. We develop two versions of SSE: SSE-Graph using knowledge
graphs of embeddings; SSE-SE using no prior information. We provide theoretical
guarantees for our method and show its empirical effectiveness on 6 distinct tasks,
from simple neural networks with one hidden layer in recommender systems, to
the transformer and BERT in natural languages. We find that when used along
with widely-used regularization methods such as weight decay and dropout, our
proposed SSE can further reduce overfitting, which often leads to more favorable
generalization results.

1

Introduction

Recently, embedding representations have been widely used in almost all AI-related fields, from
feature maps [13] in computer vision, to word embeddings [15, 20] in natural language processing,
to user/item embeddings [17, 10] in recommender systems. Usually, the embeddings are highdimensional vectors. Take language models for example, in GPT [22] and Bert-Base model [3],
768-dimensional vectors are used to represent words. Bert-Large model utilizes 1024-dimensional
vectors and GPT-2 [23] may have used even higher dimensions in their unreleased large models.
In recommender systems, things are slightly different: the dimension of user/item embeddings are
usually set to be reasonably small, 50 or 100, but the number of users and items is on a much bigger
scale. Contrast this with the fact that the size of word vocabulary that normally ranges from 50,000
to 150,000, the number of users and items can be millions or even billions in large-scale real-world
commercial recommender systems [1].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

