Learning Deep Bilinear Transformation for
Fine-grained Image Representation

Heliang Zheng1∗, Jianlong Fu2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 , Jiebo Luo3
1

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
3
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY
1
zhenghl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 2 jianf@microsoft.com, 1 zhazj@ustc.edu.cn, 3 jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Bilinear feature transformation has shown the state-of-the-art performance in
learning fine-grained image representations. However, the computational cost to
learn pairwise interactions between deep feature channels is prohibitively expensive,
which restricts this powerful transformation to be used in deep neural networks.
In this paper, we propose a deep bilinear transformation (DBT) block, which can
be deeply stacked in convolutional neural networks to learn fine-grained image
representations. The DBT block can uniformly divide input channels into several
semantic groups. As bilinear transformation can be represented by calculating
pairwise interactions within each group, the computational cost can be heavily
relieved. The output of each block is further obtained by aggregating intra-group
bilinear features, with residuals from the entire input features. We found that
the proposed network achieves new state-of-the-art in several fine-grained image
recognition benchmarks, including CUB-Bird, Stanford-Car, and FGVC-Aircraft.

1

Introduction

Fine-grained image recognition aims to distinguish subtle visual differences within a subcategory
(e.g., various bird species [1, 2], and car models [3, 4]). Predominant approaches are often divided
into two streams, as the following distinct characteristics existed in fine-grained recognition datasets:
1) well-structured, e.g., different birds share similar semantic parts like head, wings and tail [5–9]), 2)
rich details, e.g., sophisticated textures are supposed to be useful to distinguish two similar species
[10–13]. Part-based approaches were first proposed to focus on semantic attention, which particularly
decompose a fine-grained object into significant parts, and train several subsequent discriminative
part-nets for classification. Such architectures usually result in suboptimal performance, as the power
of end-to-end optimization has not been fully studied.
The state-of-the-art results have been achieved by bilinear feature transformation, which learns
fine-grained details over a global image by calculating pairwise interactions between feature channels
in fully-connected layers. However, the exponential growth over feature dimensions (e.g., N times
increase for input channels of N ) restricts this powerful transformation to be used in deep neural
networks. To solve the high-dimensionality issue, compact bilinear [14] and low-rank bilinear [15, 16]
pooling are proposed. However, their performance is far below the best part-based models [17],
which limits this light-weight approximation to be further used in challenging recognition tasks.
In this paper, we propose a deep bilinear transformation (DBT) block, which can be integrated into
a deep convolutional neural network (e.g., ResNet-50/101[18]), thus pairwise interactions can be
learned in multiple layers to enhance feature discrimination ability. We empirically show that the
proposed network is able to improve classification accuracy by calculating bilinear transformation over
the most discriminative feature channels for a region while maintaining computational complexity.
∗

This work was performed when Heliang Zheng was visiting Microsoft Research as a research intern.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

