RSN: Randomized Subspace Newton

Robert M. Gower
LTCI, Télécom Paristech, IPP, France
gowerrobert@gmail.com
Felix Lieder
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany
lieder@opt.uni-duesseldorf.de

Dmitry Kovalev
KAUST, Saudi Arabia
dmitry.kovalev@kaust.edu.sa
Peter Richtárik
KAUST, Saudi Arabia and MIPT, Russia
peter.richtarik@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
We develop a randomized Newton method capable of solving learning problems
with huge dimensional feature spaces, which is a common setting in applications
such as medical imaging, genomics and seismology. Our method leverages randomized sketching in a new way, by finding the Newton direction constrained to
the space spanned by a random sketch. We develop a simple global linear convergence theory that holds for practically all sketching techniques, which gives
the practitioners the freedom to design custom sketching approaches suitable for
particular applications. We perform numerical experiments which demonstrate
the efficiency of our method as compared to accelerated gradient descent and the
full Newton method. Our method can be seen as a refinement and randomized
extension of the results of Karimireddy, Stich, and Jaggi [18].

1

Introduction

In this paper we are interested in unconstrained optimization problems of the form
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a sufficiently well behaved function, in the large dimensional setting, i.e.,
when d is very large. Large dimensional optimization problems are becoming ever more common
in applications. Indeed, d often stands for the dimensionality of captured data, and due to fast-paced
advances in technology, this only keeps growing. One of key driving forces behind this is the rapid
increase in the resolution of sensors used in medicine [19], genomics [26, 8], seismology [2] and
weather forecasting [1]. To make predictions using such high dimensional data, typically one needs
to solve an optimization problem such as (1). The traditional off-the-shelf solvers for such problems
are based on Newton’s method, but in this large dimensional setting they cannot be applied due to
the high memory footprint and computational costs of solving the Newton system. We offer a new
solution to this, by iteratively performing Newton steps in random subspaces of sufficiently low dimensions. The resulting randomized Newton’s method need only solve small randomly compressed
Newton systems and can be applied to solving (1) no matter how big the dimension d.
1.1

Background and contributions

Newton’s method dates back to even before Newton, making an earlier appearance in the work of the
Persian astronomer and mathematician al-Kashi 1427 in his “Key to Arithmetic” [33]. In the 80’s
Newton’s method became the workhorse of nonlinear optimization methods such as trust region [9],
augmented Lagrangian [4] and interior point methods. The research into interior point methods
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

