Balancing Efficiency and Fairness in On-Demand
Ridesourcing

Nixie S. Lesmana∗
nixiesap001@e.ntu.edu.sg

Xuan Zhang†
xuan6@illinois.edu

Xiaohui Bei∗
xhbei@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We investigate the problem of assigning trip requests to available vehicles in ondemand ridesourcing. Much of the literature has focused on maximizing the total
value of served requests, achieving efficiency on the passengers’ side. However,
such solutions may result in some drivers being assigned to insufficient or undesired
trips, therefore losing fairness from the drivers’ perspective.
In this paper, we focus on both the system efficiency and the fairness among
drivers and quantitatively analyze the tradeoffs between these two objectives. In
particular, we give an explicit answer to the question of whether there always exists
an assignment that achieves any target efficiency and fairness. We also propose a
simple reassignment algorithm that can achieve any selected tradeoff. Finally, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithms through extensive experiments on
real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Ridesourcing refers to a mode of transportation that connects private car drivers with passengers
via mobile devices and applications. Recent advances in technology provide the opportunity for
ridesourcing platforms to dynamically match drivers and passengers in real time. This new generation
of ridesourcing has the potential to significantly increase the efficiency of urban transportation
systems, consequently reducing congestion and pollution [23]. In most on-demand ridesourcing
platforms, private-hire car drivers are not allowed to pick up passengers who hail them on the streets,
but can only take booking requests assigned by the platform. One key function of these platforms is
thus to automatically assign potential passengers to active drivers. The development of an efficient
real-time demand assignment algorithm is central to the concept and to the success of a ridesourcing
enterprise.
Research into real-time ridesourcing has often focused on developing algorithms for optimal assignment of sets of requests to drivers [1, 33, 24]. In these studies, the common objective is to minimize
the total waiting time for passengers and maximize the service rate, achieving efficiency on the
passengers’ side. Admittedly, customer satisfaction should be the main goal in any service industry.
However, in the ridesourcing domain, the role of drivers is as important as that of passengers in terms
of sustaining the business. Drivers have preferences that might not align with those of the passengers
that are optimized by the algorithm. A centralized algorithm that only focuses on system efficiency
will inevitably result in some drivers being assigned to insufficient or undesired trips. Leaving the
system as it is would affect the sustainability of the ridesourcing business model in the long run, as
unsatisfied drivers will not renew their memberships and new drivers will be deterred from signing
up. Therefore, fairness on the drivers’ side should be assessed more carefully and should receive
more attention.
∗

Department of Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371
Department of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Champaign, IL 61801-3080
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

