Co-Generation with GANs using AIS based HMC

Tiantian Fang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
tf6@illinois.edu

Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
aschwing@illinois.edu

Abstract
Inferring the most likely configuration for a subset of variables of a joint distribution
given the remaining ones – which we refer to as co-generation – is an important
challenge that is computationally demanding for all but the simplest settings. This
task has received a considerable amount of attention, particularly for classical
ways of modeling distributions like structured prediction. In contrast, almost
nothing is known about this task when considering recently proposed techniques
for modeling high-dimensional distributions, particularly generative adversarial
nets (GANs). Therefore, in this paper, we study the occurring challenges for
co-generation with GANs. To address those challenges we develop an annealed
importance sampling based Hamiltonian Monte Carlo co-generation algorithm.
The presented approach significantly outperforms classical gradient based methods
on a synthetic and on the CelebA and LSUN datasets. The code is available at
https://github.com/AilsaF/cogen_by_ais.

1

Introduction

Finding a likely configuration for part of the variables of a joint distribution given the remaining ones
is a computationally challenging problem with many applications in machine learning, computer
vision and natural language processing.
Classical structured prediction approaches [39, 72, 75] which explicitly capture correlations over an
output space of multiple discrete random variables permit to formulate an energy function restricted
to the unobserved variables when conditioned on partly observed data. However, in many cases,
it remains computationally demanding to find the most likely configuration or to sample from the
energy restricted to the unobserved variables [66, 78].
Alternatively, to model a joint probability distribution which implicitly captures the correlations,
generative adversarial nets (GANs) [25] and variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [36] evolved as compelling tools which exploit the underlying manifold assumption: a latent ‘perturbation’ is drawn
from a simple distribution which is subsequently transformed via a deep net (generator/encoder)
to the output space. Those methods have been used for a plethora of tasks, e.g., for domain transfer [3, 10], inpainting [61, 83], image-to-image translation [32, 42, 31, 51, 63, 84, 87, 88], machine
translation [11] and health care [67].
While GANs and VAEs permit easy sampling from the entire output space domain, it also remains an
open question of how to sample from part of the domain given the remainder? We refer to this task as
co-generation subsequently.
Co-generation has been addressed in numerous works. For instance, for image-to-image translation [32, 42, 31, 51, 63, 84, 87, 88], mappings between domains are learned directly via an
encoder-decoder structure. While such a formulation is convenient if we have two clearly separate
domains, this mechanism isn’t scaleable if the number of output space partitionings grows, e.g., for
image inpainting where missing regions are only specified at test time.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

