Approximate Feature Collisions in Neural Nets
Ke Li⇤
UC Berkeley
ke.li@eecs.berkeley.edu

Tianhao Zhang⇤
Nanjing University
bryanzhang@smail.nju.edu.cn

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley
malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Work on adversarial examples has shown that neural nets are surprisingly sensitive
to adversarially chosen changes of small magnitude. In this paper, we show the opposite: neural nets could be surprisingly insensitive to adversarially chosen changes
of large magnitude. We observe that this phenomenon can arise from the intrinsic
properties of the ReLU activation function. As a result, two very different examples could share the same feature activation and therefore the same classification
decision. We refer to this phenomenon as feature collision and the corresponding examples as colliding examples. We find that colliding examples are quite
abundant: we empirically demonstrate the existence of polytopes of approximately
colliding examples in the neighbourhood of practically any example.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved resounding success in recent years and is quickly becoming an integral
component of many real-world systems. As a result of its success, increasing attention has focused
on studying the robustness of neural nets, in particular to inputs that are deliberately chosen to yield
an unexpected prediction.
It is well-known that neural nets could be surprisingly sensitive to minute changes to the input that
are deliberately designed to result in a different classification decision. Such examples are known as
adversarial examples and have been extensively studied in the literature (Dalvi et al., 2004; Biggio
et al., 2013; Szegedy et al., 2013). In this paper, we demonstrate the existence of a phenomenon that
is in some sense the opposite: we show that neural nets could be surprisingly insensitive to large
changes to the input. We provide an explanation for how and why this could arise and propose a
method for systematically finding such kinds of inputs.
To find changes that a neural net is insensitive to, it suffices to find examples that share the same
feature activation at some layer, since the same activation at some layer implies the same activation at
all subsequent layers and therefore the same classification decision. We will refer to the phenomenon
of multiple examples sharing the same feature activations as feature collisions 2 and such examples
⇤

Equal contribution.
It should noted that the term “feature collision” was also used by (Shafahi et al., 2018) to refer to a different,
but related, concept. In their context, feature collisions refer to input examples that are close to both a target data
example in feature space and a different data example from a different class in input space. In our context, input
examples only need to be close to a target data example in feature space; they do not need to be close to any
particular data example in input space.
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

