Factor Group-Sparse Regularization for Efficient
Low-Rank Matrix Recovery

Jicong Fan
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
jf577@cornell.edu

Lijun Ding
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
ld446@cornell.edu

Yudong Chen
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
yudong.chen@cornell.edu

Madeleine Udell
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850
udell@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper develops a new class of nonconvex regularizers for low-rank matrix
recovery. Many regularizers are motivated as convex relaxations of the matrix rank
function. Our new factor group-sparse regularizers are motivated as a relaxation of
the number of nonzero columns in a factorization of the matrix. These nonconvex
regularizers are sharper than the nuclear norm; indeed, we show they are related
to Schatten-p norms with arbitrarily small 0 < p ≤ 1. Moreover, these factor
group-sparse regularizers can be written in a factored form that enables efficient
and effective nonconvex optimization; notably, the method does not use singular
value decomposition. We provide generalization error bounds for low-rank matrix
completion which show improved upper bounds for Schatten-p norm reglarization
as p decreases. Compared to the max norm and the factored formulation of the
nuclear norm, factor group-sparse regularizers are more efficient, accurate, and
robust to the initial guess of rank. Experiments show promising performance
of factor group-sparse regularization for low-rank matrix completion and robust
principal component analysis.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrices appear throughout the sciences and engineering, in fields as diverse as computer
science, biology, and economics [1]. One canonical low-rank matrix recovery problem is low-rank
matrix completion (LRMC) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10], which aims to recover a low-rank matrix
from a few entries. LRMC has been used to impute missing data, make recommendations, discover
latent structure, perform image inpainting, and classification [11, 12, 1]. Another important low-rank
recovery problem is robust principal components analysis (RPCA) [13, 14, 15, 16, 17], which aims
to recover a low-rank matrix from sparse but arbitrary corruptions. RPCA is often used for denoising
and image/video processing [18].
LRMC Take LRMC as an example. Suppose M ∈ Rm×n is a low-rank matrix with rank(M ) =
r  min(m, n). We wish to recover M from a few observed entries. Let Ω ⊂ [m] × [n] index the
observed entries. Suppose card(Ω), the number of observations, is sufficiently large. A natural idea
is to recover the missing entries by solving
minimize rank(X), subject to PΩ (X) = PΩ (M ),
X

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

