Catastrophic Forgetting Meets Negative Transfer:
Batch Spectral Shrinkage for Safe Transfer Learning

Xinyang Chen∗, Sinan Wang∗, Bo Fu, Mingsheng Long (B)†, and Jianmin Wang
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
{chenxiny17,wang-sn17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Before sufficient training data is available, fine-tuning neural networks pre-trained
on large-scale datasets substantially outperforms training from random initialization.
However, fine-tuning methods suffer from a dilemma across catastrophic forgetting
and negative transfer. While several methods with explicit attempts to overcome
catastrophic forgetting have been proposed, negative transfer is rarely delved into.
In this paper, we launch an in-depth empirical investigation into negative transfer
in fine-tuning and find that, for the weight parameters and feature representations,
transferability of their spectral components is diverse. For safe transfer learning,
we present Batch Spectral Shrinkage (BSS), a novel regularization approach
to penalizing smaller singular values so that untransferable spectral components
are suppressed. BSS is orthogonal to existing fine-tuning methods and is readily
pluggable into them. Experimental results show that BSS can significantly enhance
the performance of state-of-the-art methods, especially in few training data regime.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has made revolutionary changes to diverse machine learning problems and applications.
During the past few years, significant improvements on various tasks have been achieved by deep
neural networks [17, 33, 10, 35]. However, training deep neural networks from scratch is timeconsuming and laborious, and the excellent performance of such deep neural networks depends on
large-scale labeled datasets which we may have no access to in many practical scenarios.
Fortunately, deep feature representations learned on large-scale datasets are transferable across several
tasks and domains [25, 7, 45]. Thus, fine-tuning, a simple yet effective method that exploits this
nice property of deep representations, is widely adopted, especially before sufficient training data is
available [9]. Under this well-established paradigm, deep neural networks are firstly pre-trained on
large-scale datasets and then fine-tuned to target tasks, requiring relatively smaller training samples.
To a certain extent, fine-tuning alleviates deep neural networks’ hunger for data. However, adequate
amount of training data for target tasks is still a prerequisite for the effectiveness of vanilla fine-tuning
methods. When the requirement of training data cannot be satisfied, two hidden issues of fine-tuning
will become extremely severe, seriously hampering the generalization performance of deep models.
The first is catastrophic forgetting [14], which is the tendency of the model to lose previous learnt
knowledge abruptly while it may incorporate information relevant to target tasks, leading to overfitting.
The second is negative transfer [37]. Not all pre-trained knowledge is transferable across domains,
and an indiscriminate transfer of all knowledge is detrimental to the model.
∗
†

Authors contributed equally
Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

