Classification Accuracy Score for Conditional
Generative Models
Suman Ravuri & Oriol Vinyals∗
DeepMind
London, UK N1C 4AG
ravuris, vinyals@google.com

Abstract
Deep generative models (DGMs) of images are now sufficiently mature that they
produce nearly photorealistic samples and obtain scores similar to the data distribution on heuristics such as Frechet Inception Distance (FID). These results,
especially on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet, suggest that DGMs are learning the data distribution in a perceptually meaningful space and can be used in
downstream tasks. To test this latter hypothesis, we use class-conditional generative
models from a number of model classes—variational autoencoders, autoregressive
models, and generative adversarial networks (GANs)—to infer the class labels of
real data. We perform this inference by training an image classifier using only
synthetic data and using the classifier to predict labels on real data. The performance on this task, which we call Classification Accuracy Score (CAS), reveals
some surprising results not identified by traditional metrics and constitute our
contributions. First, when using a state-of-the-art GAN (BigGAN-deep), Top-1
and Top-5 accuracy decrease by 27.9% and 41.6%, respectively, compared to the
original data; and conditional generative models from other model classes, such
as Vector-Quantized Variational Autoencoder-2 (VQ-VAE-2) and Hierarchical
Autoregressive Models (HAMs), substantially outperform GANs on this benchmark. Second, CAS automatically surfaces particular classes for which generative
models failed to capture the data distribution, and were previously unknown in
the literature. Third, we find traditional GAN metrics such as Inception Score
(IS) and FID neither predictive of CAS nor useful when evaluating non-GAN
models. Furthermore, in order to facilitate better diagnoses of generative models,
we open-source the proposed metric.

1

Introduction

Evaluating generative models of high-dimensional data remains an open problem. Despite a number
of subtleties in generative model assessment [1], in a quest to improve generative models of images,
researchers, and particularly those who have focused on Generative Adversarial Networks [2], have
identified desirable properties such as “sample quality” and “diversity” and proposed automatic
metrics to measure these desiderata. As a result, recent years have witnessed a rapid improvement
in the quality of deep generative models. While ultimately the utility of these models is their
performance in downstream tasks, the focus on these metrics has led to models whose samplers
now generate nearly photorealistic images [3–5]. For one model in particular, BigGAN-deep [3],
results on standard GAN metrics such as Inception Score (IS) [6] and Frechet Inception Distance
(FID) [7] approach those of the data distribution. The results on FID, which purports to be the
Wasserstein-2 metric in a perceptual feature space, in particular suggest that BigGANs are capturing
the data distribution.
∗

Corresponding author: Suman Ravuri (ravuris@google.com).

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

