Learning by Abstraction: The Neural State Machine

Drew A. Hudson
Stanford University
353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
dorarad@cs.stanford.edu

Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305
manning@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce the Neural State Machine, seeking to bridge the gap between the
neural and symbolic views of AI and integrate their complementary strengths for
the task of visual reasoning. Given an image, we first predict a probabilistic graph
that represents its underlying semantics and serves as a structured world model.
Then, we perform sequential reasoning over the graph, iteratively traversing its
nodes to answer a given question or draw a new inference. In contrast to most
neural architectures that are designed to closely interact with the raw sensory
data, our model operates instead in an abstract latent space, by transforming both
the visual and linguistic modalities into semantic concept-based representations,
thereby achieving enhanced transparency and modularity. We evaluate our model
on VQA-CP and GQA, two recent VQA datasets that involve compositionality,
multi-step inference and diverse reasoning skills, achieving state-of-the-art results
in both cases. We provide further experiments that illustrate the model’s strong
generalization capacity across multiple dimensions, including novel compositions
of concepts, changes in the answer distribution, and unseen linguistic structures,
demonstrating the qualities and efficacy of our approach.

1

Introduction

Language is one of the most marvelous feats of the human mind. The emergence of a compositional
system of symbols that can distill and convey from rich sensory experiences to creative new ideas has
been a major turning point in the evolution of intelligence, and made a profound impact on the nature
of human cognition [19, 79, 13]. According to Jerry Fodor’s Language of Thought hypothesis [22, 73],
thinking itself posses a language-like compositional structure, where elementary concepts combine in
systematic ways to create compound new ideas or thoughts, allowing us to make “infinite use of finite
means” [18] and fostering human’s remarkable capacities of abstraction and generalization [51].
Indeed, humans are particularly adept at making abstractions of various kinds: We make analogies
and form concepts to generalize from given instances to unseen examples [71]; we see things in
context, and build compositional world models to represent objects and understand their interactions
and subtle relations, turning raw sensory signals into high-level semantic knowledge [65]; and we
deductively draw inferences via conceptual rules and statements to proceed from known facts to novel
conclusions [32, 40]. Not only are humans capable of learning, but we are also talented at reasoning.
Ideas about compositionality, abstraction and reasoning greatly inspired the classical views of
artificial intelligence [75, 66], but have lately been overshadowed by the astounding success of deep
learning over a wide spectrum of real-world tasks [33, 64, 83]. Yet, even though neural networks
are undoubtedly powerful, flexible and robust, recent work has repeatedly demonstrated their flaws,
showing how they struggle to generalize in a systematic manner [50], overly adhere to superficial and
potentially misleading statistical associations instead of learning true causal relations [1, 42], strongly
depend on large amounts of data and supervision [25, 51], and sometimes behave in surprising and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

