Maximum Expected Hitting Cost of a Markov
Decision Process and Informativeness of Rewards
Falcon Z. Dai
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA 60637
dai@ttic.edu

Matthew R. Walter
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
Chicago, IL, USA 60637
mwalter@ttic.edu

Abstract
We propose a new complexity measure for Markov decision processes (MDPs), the
maximum expected hitting cost (MEHC). This measure tightens the closely related
notion of diameter [JOA10] by accounting for the reward structure. We show that
this parameter replaces diameter in the upper bound on the optimal value span of an
extended MDP, thus refining the associated upper bounds on the regret of several
UCRL2-like algorithms. Furthermore, we show that potential-based reward shaping
[NHR99] can induce equivalent reward functions with varying informativeness,
as measured by MEHC. We further establish that shaping can reduce or increase
MEHC by at most a factor of two in a large class of MDPs with finite MEHC and
unsaturated optimal average rewards.

1

Introduction

In the average reward setting of reinforcement learning (RL) [Put94; SB98], an algorithm learns
to maximize its average rewards by interacting with an unknown Markov decision process (MDP).
Similar to analysis in multi-armed bandits and other online machine learning problems, (cumulative)
regret provides a natural model to evaluate the efficiency of a learning algorithm. With the
p UCRL2
algorithm, Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer [JOA10] show a problem-dependent bound of Õ(DS AT ) on
regret and an associated logarithmic bound on the expected regret, where D is the diameter of the
actual MDP (Definition 1), S the size of the state space, and A the size of the action space. Many
subsequent algorithms [FLP19] enjoy similar diameter-dependent bounds. This establishes diameter
as an important measure of complexity for an MDP. However, strikingly, this measure is independent
of rewards and is a function of only the transitions. This is obviously peculiar as two MDPs differing
only in their rewards would have the same regret bounds even if one gives the maximum reward for
all transitions. We review the related key observation by Jaksch, Ortner, and Auer [JOA10], and
refine it with a new lemma (Lemma 1), establishing a reward-sensitive complexity measure that we
refer to as the maximum expected hitting cost (MEHC, Definition 2), which tightens the regret bounds
of UCRL2 and similar algorithms by replacing diameter (Theorem 1).
Next, with respect to this new complexity measure, we describe a notion of reward informativeness
(Section 2.4). Intuitively speaking, in an environment, the same desired policies can be motivated by
different (immediate) rewards. These differing definitions of rewards can be more or less informative
of useful actions, i.e., yielding high long-term rewards. To formalize this intuition, we study a way
to reparametrize rewards via potential-based reward shaping (PBRS) [NHR99] that can produce
different rewards with the same near-optimal policies (Section 2.5). We show that the MEHC changes
under reparametrization by PBRS and, in turn, so do regret and sample complexity, substantiating
this notion of informativeness. Lastly, we study the extent of its impact. In particular, we show that
there is a factor-of-two limit on its impact on MEHC in a large class of MDPs (Theorem 2). This
result and the concept of reward informativeness may be useful for a task designer crafting a reward
function (Section 3). The detailed proofs are deffered to Appendix A.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

