Using Embeddings to Correct for Unobserved
Confounding in Networks
Victor Veitch1 , Yixin Wang1 , and David M. Blei1,2
2

1
Department of Statistics, Columbia University
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University

Abstract
We consider causal inference in the presence of unobserved confounding. We
study the case where a proxy is available for the unobserved confounding in the
form of a network connecting the units. For example, the link structure of a social
network carries information about its members. We show how to effectively use
the proxy to do causal inference. The main idea is to reduce the causal estimation
problem to a semi-supervised prediction of both the treatments and outcomes.
Networks admit high-quality embedding models that can be used for this semisupervised prediction. We show that the method yields valid inferences under
suitable (weak) conditions on the quality of the predictive model. We validate
the method with experiments on a semi-synthetic social network dataset. Code at
github.com/vveitch/causal-network-embeddings.

1

Introduction

We consider causal inference in the presence of unobserved confounding, i.e., where unobserved
variables may affect both the treatment and the outcome. We study the case where there is an observed
proxy for the unobserved confounders, but (i) the proxy has non-iid structure, and (ii) a well-specified
generative model for the data is not available.
Example 1.1. We want to infer the efficacy of a drug based on observed outcomes of people who are
connected in a social network. Each unit i is a person. The treatment variable ti indicates whether
they took the drug, a response variable yi indicates their health outcome, and latent confounders zi
might affect the treatment or response. For example, zi might be unobserved age or sex. We would
like to compute the average treatment effect, controlling for these confounds. We assume the social
network itself is associated with z, e.g., similar people are more likely to be friends. This means that
the network itself may implicitly contain confounding information that is not explicitly collected.
In this example, inference of the causal effect would be straightforward if the confounder z were
available. So, intuitively, we would like to infer substitutes for the latent zi from the underlying social
network structure. Once inferred, these estimates ẑi could be used as a substitute for zi and we could
estimate the causal effect [SM16].
For this strategy to work, however, we need a well-specified generative model (i.e., joint probability
distribution) for z and the full network structure. But typically no such model is available. For
example, generative models of networks with latent unit structure—such as stochastic block models
[WW87; Air+08] or latent space models [Hof+02]—miss properties of real-world networks [Dur06;
New09; OR15]. Causal estimates based on substitutes inferred from misspecified models are
inherently suspect.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

