Meta-Learning Representations for
Continual Learning

Khurram Javed, Martha White
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
T6G 1P8
kjaved@ualberta.ca, whitem@ualberta.ca

Abstract
A continual learning agent should be able to build on top of existing knowledge to
learn on new data quickly while minimizing forgetting. Current intelligent systems
based on neural network function approximators arguably do the opposite—they
are highly prone to forgetting and rarely trained to facilitate future learning. One
reason for this poor behavior is that they learn from a representation that is not
explicitly trained for these two goals. In this paper, we propose OML, an objective
that directly minimizes catastrophic interference by learning representations that
accelerate future learning and are robust to forgetting under online updates in continual learning. We show that it is possible to learn naturally sparse representations
that are more effective for online updating. Moreover, our algorithm is complementary to existing continual learning strategies, such as MER and GEM. Finally,
we demonstrate that a basic online updating strategy on representations learned by
OML is competitive with rehearsal based methods for continual learning. 1

1

Introduction

Continual learning—also called cumulative learning and lifelong learning—is the problem setting
where an agent faces a continual stream of data, and must continually make and learn new predictions.
The two main goals of continual learning are (1) to exploit existing knowledge of the world to quickly
learn predictions on new samples (accelerate future learning) and (2) reduce interference in updates,
particularly avoiding overwriting older knowledge. Humans, as intelligence agents, are capable
of doing both. For instance, an experienced programmer can learn a new programming language
significantly faster than someone who has never programmed before and does not need to forget
the old language to learn the new one. Current state-of-the-art learning systems, on the other hand,
struggle with both (French, 1999; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
Several methods have been proposed to address catastrophic interference. These can generally be
categorized into methods that (1) modify the online update to retain knowledge, (2) replay or generate
samples for more updates and (3) use semi-distributed representations. Knowledge retention methods
prevent important weights from changing too much, by introducing a regularization term for each
parameter weighted by its importance (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Zenke et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018). Rehearsal methods interleave online updates with updates
on samples from a model. Samples from a model can be obtained by replaying samples from older
data (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al., 2015; Chaudhry et al., 2019; Riemer et al., 2019; Rebuffi et al., 2017;
Lopez-Paz and Ranzato, 2017; Aljundi et al., 2019), by using a generative model learned on previous
data (Sutton, 1990; Shin et al., 2017), or using knowledge distillation which generates targets using
1

Code accompanying paper available at https://github.com/khurramjaved96/mrcl

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

