Order Optimal One-Shot Distributed Learning

Arsalan Sharifnassab, Saber Salehkaleybar, S. Jamaloddin Golestani
Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
a.sharifnassab@gmail.com, saleh@sharif.edu, golestani@sharif.edu

Abstract
We consider distributed statistical optimization in one-shot setting, where there
are m machines each observing n i.i.d. samples. Based on its observed samples,
each machine then sends an O(log(mn))-length message to a server, at which a
parameter minimizing an expected loss is to be estimated. We propose an algorithm
called Multi-Resolution Estimator (MRE) whose expected error is no larger than
Õ m−1/max(d,2) n−1/2 , where d is the dimension of the parameter space. This
error bound meets existing lower bounds up to poly-logarithmic factors, and is
thereby order optimal. The expected error of MRE, unlike existing algorithms,
tends to zero as the number of machines (m) goes to infinity, even when the number
of samples per machine (n) remains upper bounded by a constant. This property of
the MRE algorithm makes it applicable in new machine learning paradigms where
m is much larger than n.

1

Introduction

The rapid growth in the size of datasets has given rise to distributed models for statistical learning, in
which data is not stored on a single machine. In several recent learning applications, it is commonplace
to distribute data across multiple machines, each of which processes its own data and communicates
with other machines to carry out a learning task. The main bottleneck in such distributed settings is
often the communication between machines, and several recent works have focused on designing
communication-efficient algorithms for different machine learning applications [Duchi et al., 2012,
Braverman et al., 2016, Chang et al., 2017, Diakonikolas et al., 2017, Lee et al., 2017].
In this paper, we consider the problem of statistical optimization in a distributed setting as follows.
Consider an unknown distribution P over a collection, F, of differentiable convex functions with
Lipschitz first order derivatives, defined on a convex region in Rd . There are m machines, each
observing n i.i.d sample functions from P . Each machine processes its observed data, and transmits
a signal of certain length to a server. The server then collects all the signals
 and outputs an estimate
of the parameter θ∗ that minimizes the expected loss, i.e., minθ Ef ∼P f (θ) . See Fig. 1 for an
illustration of the system model.
We focus on the distributed aspect of the problem considering arbitrarily large number of machines
(m) and
a) present an order optimal algorithm with b = O(log mn) bits per transmission, whose
estimation error is no larger than Õ m−1/max(d,2) n−1/2 , meeting the lower bound in
[Salehkaleybar et al., 2019] up to a poly-logarithmic factor (cf. Theorem 1);
b) we present an algorithm
with a single bit per message with expected error no larger than

Õ m−1/2 + n−1/2 (cf. Proposition 1).

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

