Total Least Squares Regression in Input Sparsity
Time
Huaian Diao
Northeast Normal University & KLAS of MOE
hadiao@nenu.edu.cn
David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Zhao Song
University of Washington
zhaosong@uw.edu

Xin Yang
University of Washington
yx1992@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
In the total least squares problem, one is given an m × n matrix A, and an m × d
b and b
matrix B, and one seeks to “correct” both A and B, obtaining matrices A
B,
so that there exists an X satisfying the equation b
AX = b
B. Typically the problem
b B
b
is overconstrained, meaning that m  max(n, d). The cost of the solution A,
2
2
b
b
is given by kA − AkF + kB − BkF . We give an algorithm for finding a solution
b for which the cost kA − b
X to the linear system b
AX = B
Ak2F + kB − b
Bk2F is
at most a multiplicative (1 + ) factor times the optimal cost, up to an additive
error η that may be an arbitrarily small function of n. Importantly, our running
e
time is O(nnz(A)
+ nnz(B)) + poly(n/) · d, where for a matrix C, nnz(C)
denotes its number of non-zero entries. Importantly, our running time does not
directly depend on the large parameter m. As total least squares regression is
known to be solvable via low rank approximation, a natural approach is to invoke
b and
fast algorithms for approximate low rank approximation, obtaining matrices A
b
b
b
B from this low rank approximation, and then solving for X so that AX = B.
However, existing algorithms do not apply since in total least squares the rank
of the low rank approximation needs to be n, and so the running time of known
methods would be at least mn2 . In contrast, we are able to achieve a much faster
b = B,
b but
running time for finding X by never explicitly forming the equation AX
instead solving for an X which is a solution to an implicit such equation. Finally,
we generalize our algorithm to the total least squares problem with regularization.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

