Selecting the independent coordinates of manifolds
with large aspect ratios
Yu-Chia Chen
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
yuchaz@uw.edu

Marina Meilă
Department of Statistics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
mmp2@uw.edu

Abstract
Many manifold embedding algorithms fail apparently when the data manifold has
a large aspect ratio (such as a long, thin strip). Here, we formulate success and
failure in terms of finding a smooth embedding, showing also that the problem is
pervasive and more complex than previously recognized. Mathematically, success
is possible under very broad conditions, provided that embedding is done by carefully selected eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami operator M . Hence, we
propose a bicriterial Independent Eigencoordinate Selection (IES) algorithm that
selects smooth embeddings with few eigenvectors. The algorithm is grounded in
theory, has low computational overhead, and is successful on synthetic and large
real data.

1

Motivation

We study a well-documented deficiency of manifold learning algorithms. Namely, as shown in
[GZKR08], algorithms such as Laplacian Eigenmaps (LE), Local Tangent Space Alignment (LTSA),
Hessian Eigenmaps (HLLE), and Diffusion Maps (DM) fail spectacularly when the data has a large
aspect ratio, that is, it extends much more in one geodesic direction than in others. This problem,
illustrated by the strip in Figure 1, was studied in [GZKR08] from a linear algebraic perspective;
[GZKR08] show that, especially when noise is present, the problem is pervasive.
In the present paper, we revisit the problem from a differential geometric perspective. First, we define failure not as distortion, but as drop in the rank of the mapping represented by the embedding
algorithm. In other words, the algorithm fails when the map is not invertible, or, equivalently,
when the dimension dim (M) < dim M = d, where M represents the idealized data manifold,
and dim denotes the intrinsic dimension. Figure 1 demonstrates that the problem is fixed by choosing the eigenvectors with care. We call this problem the Independent Eigencoordinate Selection
(IES) problem, formulate it and explain its challenges in Section 3.
Our second main contribution (Section 4) is to design a bicriterial method that will select from a set
of coordinate functions 1 , . . . m , a subset S of small size that provides a smooth full-dimensional
embedding of the data. The IES problem requires searching over a combinatorial number of sets. We
show (Section 4) how to drastically reduce the computational burden per set for our algorithm. Third,
we analyze the proposed criterion under asymptotic limit (Section 5). Finally (Section 6), we show
examples of successful selection on real and synthetic data. The experiments also demonstrate that
users of manifold learning for other than toy data must be aware of the IES problem and have tools
for handling it. Notations table, proofs, a library of hard examples, extra experiments and analyses
are in Supplements A–H; Figure/Table/Equation references with prefix S are in the Supplement.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

