Adaptive Temporal-Difference Learning for Policy
Evaluation with Per-State Uncertainty Estimates
Hugo Penedones ⇤
DeepMind

Carlos Riquelme ⇤
Google Brain

Timothy Mann
DeepMind

André Barreto
DeepMind

Damien Vincent
Google Brain
Sylvain Gelly
Google Brain

Hartmut Maennel
Google Brain

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Abstract
We consider the core reinforcement-learning problem of on-policy value function
approximation from a batch of trajectory data, and focus on various issues of Temporal Difference (TD) learning and Monte Carlo (MC) policy evaluation. The two
methods are known to achieve complementary bias-variance trade-off properties,
with TD tending to achieve lower variance but potentially higher bias. In this paper,
we argue that the larger bias of TD can be a result of the amplification of local
approximation errors. We address this by proposing an algorithm that adaptively
switches between TD and MC in each state, thus mitigating the propagation of
errors. Our method is based on learned confidence intervals that detect biases of TD
estimates. We demonstrate in a variety of policy evaluation tasks that this simple
adaptive algorithm performs competitively with the best approach in hindsight,
suggesting that learned confidence intervals are a powerful technique for adapting
policy evaluation to use TD or MC returns in a data-driven way.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent must learn how to behave while interacting with an environment. This challenging problem is usually formalized as the search for a decision policy—i.e., a
mapping from states to actions—that maximizes the amount of reward received in the long run [24].
Clearly, in order to carry out such a search we must be able to assess the quality of a given policy.
This process, known as policy evaluation, is the focus of the current paper.
A common way to evaluate a policy is to resort to the concept of value function. Simply put, the value
function of a policy associates with each state the expected sum of rewards, possibly discounted over
time, that an agent following the policy from that state onwards would obtain. Thus, in this context
the policy evaluation problem comes down to computing a policy’s value function.
Perhaps the simplest way to estimate the value of a policy in a given state is to use Monte Carlo (MC)
returns: the policy is executed multiple times from the state of interest and the resulting outcomes are
averaged [23]. Despite their apparent naivety, MC estimates enjoy some nice properties and have
been advocated as an effective solution to the policy evaluation problem [1]. Another way to address
the policy evaluation problem is to resort to temporal-difference (TD) learning [22]. TD is based
on the insight that the value of a state can be recursively defined based on other states’ values [4].
Roughly speaking, this means that, when estimating the value of a state, instead of using an entire
trajectory one uses the immediate reward plus the value of the next state. This idea of updating an
estimate from another estimate allows the agent to learn online and incrementally.
⇤

These two authors contributed equally. Correspondence to rikel@google.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

