Likelihood Ratios for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Jie Ren⇤ †
Google Research
jjren@google.com

Peter J. Liu ‡
Google Research
peterjliu@google.com

Emily Fertig†
Google Research
emilyaf@google.com

Jasper Snoek
Google Research
jsnoek@google.com

Ryan Poplin
Google Research
rpoplin@google.com

Mark A. DePristo
Google Research
mdepristo@google.com

Joshua V. Dillon ‡
Google Research
jvdillon@google.com

Balaji Lakshminarayanan⇤ ‡
DeepMind
balajiln@google.com

Abstract
Discriminative neural networks offer little or no performance guarantees when
deployed on data not generated by the same process as the training distribution. On
such out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, the prediction may not only be erroneous,
but confidently so, limiting the safe deployment of classifiers in real-world applications. One such challenging application is bacteria identification based on genomic
sequences, which holds the promise of early detection of diseases, but requires a
model that can output low confidence predictions on OOD genomic sequences from
new bacteria that were not present in the training data. We introduce a genomics
dataset for OOD detection that allows other researchers to benchmark progress on
this important problem. We investigate deep generative model based approaches
for OOD detection and observe that the likelihood score is heavily affected by
population level background statistics. We propose a likelihood ratio method for
deep generative models which effectively corrects for these confounding background statistics. We benchmark the OOD detection performance of the proposed
method against existing approaches on the genomics dataset and show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance. We demonstrate the generality of
the proposed method by showing that it significantly improves OOD detection
when applied to deep generative models of images.

1

Introduction

For many machine learning systems, being able to detect data that is anomalous or significantly
different from that used in training can be critical to maintaining safe and reliable predictions. This
is particularly important for deep neural network classifiers which have been shown to incorrectly
classify such out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs into in-distribution classes with high confidence (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Nguyen et al., 2015). This behaviour can have serious consequences when the
predictions inform real-world decisions such as medical diagnosis, e.g. falsely classifying a healthy
sample as pathogenic or vice versa can have extremely high cost. The importance of dealing with
OOD inputs, also referred to as distributional shift, has been recognized as an important problem for
⇤

Corresponding authors
Google AI Resident
‡
Mentors
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

