First order expansion of convex regularized
estimators
Pierre C Bellec,
Department of Statistics,
Rutgers University,
501 Hill Center,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
pierre.bellec@rutgers.edu

Arun K Kuchibhotla,
Department of Statistics,
The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
arunku@upenn.edu

Abstract
We consider first order expansions of convex penalized estimators in highdimensional regression problems with random designs. Our setting includes linear
regression and logistic regression as special cases. For a given penalty function h
and the corresponding penalized estimator β̂, we construct a quantity η, the first order expansion of β̂, such that the distance between β̂ and η is an order of magnitude
smaller than the estimation error kβ̂ − β ∗ k. In this sense, the first order expansion η
can be thought of as a generalization of influence functions from the mathematical
statistics literature to regularized estimators in high-dimensions. Such first order
expansion implies that the risk of β̂ is asymptotically the same as the risk of η
which leads to a precise characterization of the MSE of β̂; this characterization
takes a particularly simple form for isotropic design. Such first order expansion
also leads to inference results based on β̂. We provide sufficient conditions for
the existence of such first order expansion for three regularizers: the Lasso in its
constrained form, the lasso in its penalized form, and the Group-Lasso. The results
apply to general loss functions under some conditions and those conditions are
satisfied for the squared loss in linear regression and for the logistic loss in the
logistic model.
Introduction. We consider learning problems where one observes observations
(X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn , Yn ) with responses Yi and feature vectors Xi ∈ Rp . The literature of the
past two decades has demonstrated the great success of regularized estimators that are commonly
defined as solutions to regularized optimization problems of the form
Pn
β̂ = argminβ∈Rp n−1 i=1 `(Yi , XiT β) + h(β),
(1)
where `(·, ·) is referred to as the loss (e.g. squared loss, logistic loss) and h : Rp → R is a
regularization penalty (e.g. the `1 -norm for the Lasso, the `2,1 norm for the Group-Lasso). All tuning
parameters are included in h(·). The performance of such regularized estimators is measured in terms
of prediction error or in terms estimation error kβ̂ − β ∗ k if the data comes from a model such as
Y = Xβ ∗ + ε for some noise random variable ε in linear regression or
P(Y = 1|X = x) = 1/(1 + exp(xT β ∗ )) = 1 − P(Y = 0|X = x)
in logistic regression, where β ∗ is the unknown coefficient vector. For instance, if s = kβ ∗ k0 is the
sparsity of β ∗ in the above model, and (Xi , Yi )i=1,...,n are iid observations with the same distribution
as (X, Y ), both the Lasso in linear regression and the logistic Lasso in logistic regression enjoy rate
optimality: kβ̂ − β ∗ k2 ≤ s log(ep/s)/n; see [35, 1] or the proof of Proposition 3.4 in Appendix F
for self-contained proofs. The latter estimation bound is optimal in a minimax sense and cannot
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

