Private Testing of Distributions via Sample
Permutations
Maryam Aliakbarpour
CSAIL, MIT
maryama@mit.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Wisconsin, Madison
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com

Daniel Kane
University of California, San Diego
dakane@ucsd.edu

Ronitt Rubinfeld
CSAIL, MIT, TAU
ronitt@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Statistical tests are at the heart of many scientific tasks. To validate their hypotheses, researchers in medical and social sciences use individuals’ data. The sensitivity of participants’ data requires the design of statistical tests that ensure the
privacy of the individuals in the most efficient way. In this paper, we use the
framework of property testing to design algorithms to test the properties of the distribution that the data is drawn from with respect to differential privacy. In particular, we investigate testing two fundamental properties of distributions: (1) testing
the equivalence of two distributions when we have unequal numbers of samples
from the two distributions. (2) Testing independence of two random variables. In
both cases, we show that our testers achieve near optimal sample complexity (up
to logarithmic factors). Moreover, our dependence on the privacy parameter is an
additive term, which indicates that differential privacy can be obtained in most
regimes of parameters for free.

1

Introduction

We study questions in statistical hypothesis testing, a field of statistics with fundamental importance
in scientific discovery. At a high level, given samples from an unknown statistical model, the goal of
a hypothesis test is to determine whether the model has a desired property. The first — and arguably
the most fundamental — objective in hypothesis testing is to make an accurate determination with
as few samples as possible. In this work, we focus on understanding the trade off between sample
size and an additional important criterion — preserving the privacy of the underlying data sets.
Early work in statistics [Pea00, NP33] studied the asymptotic regime, where the sample size goes to
infinity. In this paper, we are interested in obtaining finite sample bounds in the minimax setting that
has been extensively studied in the computer science and information theory communities during the
past couple of decades. More specifically, we will work with the formalism of distribution property
testing [BFR+ 00, BFR+ 13]: Given samples from a collection of unknown probability distributions
over discrete domains, do the underlying distributions satisfy a desired property P or are they “far”
from satisfying the property? (The definition of “far” is typically quantified via some global error
metric, e.g., the total variation distance. See Preliminaries section.) The goal is to develop testers
for various properties with information-theoretically optimal sample complexity, which is typically
sublinear in the domain sizes of the underlying distributions. We note that, in recent years, such
sample-optimal methods have been obtained for testing a range of properties, including identity
testing (“goodness-of-fit”), closeness testing (“equivalence testing” or “two-sample testing”), and
independence testing.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

