Tight Certificates of Adversarial Robustness
for Randomly Smoothed Classifiers

Guang-He Lee1 , Yang Yuan1,2 , Shiyu Chang3 , Tommi S. Jaakkola1
1
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{guanghe, yangyuan, tommi}@csail.mit.edu, shiyu.chang@ibm.com

Abstract
Strong theoretical guarantees of robustness can be given for ensembles of classifiers
generated by input randomization. Specifically, an `2 bounded adversary cannot
alter the ensemble prediction generated by an additive isotropic Gaussian noise,
where the radius for the adversary depends on both the variance of the distribution as
well as the ensemble margin at the point of interest. We build on and considerably
expand this work across broad classes of distributions. In particular, we offer
adversarial robustness guarantees and associated algorithms for the discrete case
where the adversary is `0 bounded. Moreover, we exemplify how the guarantees
can be tightened with specific assumptions about the function class of the classifier
such as a decision tree. We empirically illustrate these results with and without
functional restrictions across image and molecule datasets.1

1

Introduction

Many powerful classifiers lack robustness in the sense that a slight, potentially unnoticeable manipulation of the input features, e.g., by an adversary, can cause the classifier to change its prediction [15].
The effect is clearly undesirable in decision critical applications. Indeed, a lot of recent work has
gone into analyzing such failures together with providing certificates of robustness.
Robustness can be defined with respect to a variety of metrics that bound the magnitude or the
type of adversarial manipulation. The most common approach to searching for violations is by
finding an adversarial example within a small neighborhood of the example in question, e.g., using
gradient-based algorithms [13, 15, 26]. The downside of such approaches is that failure to discover
an adversarial example does not mean that another technique could not find one. For this reason, a
recent line of work has instead focused on certificates of robustness, i.e., guarantees that ensure, for
specific classes of methods, that no adversarial examples exist within a certified region. Unfortunately,
obtaining exact guarantees can be computationally intractable [20, 25, 36], and guarantees that scale
to realistic architectures have remained somewhat conservative [7, 27, 38, 39, 42].
Ensemble classifiers have recently been shown to yield strong guarantees of robustness [6]. The
ensembles, in this case, are simply induced from randomly perturbing the input to a base classifier.
The guarantees state that, given an additive isotropic Gaussian noise on the input example, an
adversary cannot alter the prediction of the corresponding ensemble within an `2 radius, where the
radius depends on the noise variance as well as the ensemble margin at the given point [6].
In this work, we substantially extend robustness certificates for such noise-induced ensembles. We
provide guarantees for alternative metrics and noise distributions (e.g., uniform), develop a stratified
1

Project page: http://people.csail.mit.edu/guanghe/randomized_smoothing.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

