First-order methods almost always avoid saddle
points: The case of vanishing step-sizes

Ioannis Panageas
SUTD
Singapore
ioannis@sutd.edu.sg

Georgios Piliouras
SUTD
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Xiao Wang
SUTD
Singapore
xiao_wang@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
In a series of papers [17, 22, 16], it was established that some of the most commonly
used first order methods almost surely (under random initializations) and with stepsize being small enough, avoid strict saddle points, as long as the objective function
f is C 2 and has Lipschitz gradient. The key observation was that first order methods
can be studied from a dynamical systems perspective, in which instantiations of
Center-Stable manifold theorem allow for a global analysis. The results of the
aforementioned papers were limited to the case where the step-size α is constant,
i.e., does not depend on time (and bounded from the inverse of the Lipschitz
constant of the gradient of f ). It remains an open question whether or not the
results still hold when the step-size is time dependent and vanishes with time.
In this paper, we resolve this question on the affirmative for gradient descent, mirror
descent, manifold descent and proximal point. The main technical challenge is
that the induced (from each first order method) dynamical system is time nonhomogeneous and the stable manifold theorem is not applicable in its classic form.
By exploiting the dynamical systems structure of the aforementioned first order
methods, we are able to prove a stable manifold theorem that is applicable to
time non-homogeneous dynamical systems and generalize the results in [16] for
vanishing step-sizes.

1

Introduction

Non-convex optimization has been studied extensively the last years and has been one of the main
focuses of Machine Learning community. The reason behind the interest of ML community is that in
many applications of interest, one has to deal with the optimization of a non-convex landscape. One
of the key obstacles of non-convex optimization is the existence of numerous saddle points (which
can outnumber the local minima [10, 24, 6]). Avoiding them is a fundamental challenge for ML [14].
Recent progress [11, 16] has shown that under mild regularity assumptions on the objective function,
first-order methods such as gradient descent can provably avoid the so-called strict saddle points1 .
1
These are saddle points where the Hessian of the objective admits at least one direction of negative curvature.
Such property has been shown to hold in a wide range of objective functions, see [11, 29, 28, 13, 12, 3] and
references therein.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

