Data-Dependence of Plateau Phenomenon in
Learning with Neural Network — Statistical
Mechanical Analysis

Yuki Yoshida
Masato Okada
Department of Complexity Science and Engineering, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences,
The University of Tokyo
5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8561, Japan
{yoshida@mns, okada@edu}.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The plateau phenomenon, wherein the loss value stops decreasing during the
process of learning, has been reported by various researchers. The phenomenon is
actively inspected in the 1990s and found to be due to the fundamental hierarchical
structure of neural network models. Then the phenomenon has been thought as
inevitable. However, the phenomenon seldom occurs in the context of recent
deep learning. There is a gap between theory and reality. In this paper, using
statistical mechanical formulation, we clarified the relationship between the plateau
phenomenon and the statistical property of the data learned. It is shown that the
data whose covariance has small and dispersed eigenvalues tend to make the plateau
phenomenon inconspicuous.

1

Introduction

1.1

Plateau Phenomenon

Deep learning, and neural network as its essential component, has come to be applied to various
fields. However, these still remain unclear in various points theoretically. The plateau phenomenon
is one of them. In the learning process of neural networks, their weight parameters are updated
iteratively so that the loss decreases. However, in some settings the loss does not decrease simply, but
its decreasing speed slows down significantly partway through learning, and then it speeds up again
after a long period of time. This is called as “plateau phenomenon”. Since 1990s, this phenomena
have been reported to occur in various practical learning situations (see Figure 1 (a) and Park et al.
[2000], Fukumizu and Amari [2000]) . As a fundamental cause of this phenomenon, it has been
pointed out by a number of researchers that the intrinsic symmetry of neural network models brings
singularity to the metric in the parameter space which then gives rise to special attractors whose
regions of attraction have nonzero measure, called as Milnor attractor (defined by Milnor [1985]; see
also Figure 5 in Fukumizu and Amari [2000] for a schematic diagram of the attractor).
1.2

Who moved the plateau phenomenon?

However, the plateau phenomenon seldom occurs in recent practical use of neural networks (see
Figure 1 (b) for example).
In this research, we rethink the plateau phenomenon, and discuss which situations are likely to cause
the phenomenon. First we introduce the student-teacher model of two-layered networks as an ideal
system. Next, we reduce the learning dynamics of the student-teacher model to a small-dimensional
order parameter system by using statistical mechanical formulation, under the assumption that the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

