Private Learning Implies Online Learning:
An Efficient Reduction
Alon Gonen
University of California San Diego
algonen@cs.ucsd.edu

Elad Hazan
Princeton University and Google AI Princeton
ehazan@princeton.edu

Shay Moran
Google AI Princeton
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the relationship between the notions of differentially private learning
and online learning in games. Several recent works have shown that differentially
private learning implies online learning, but an open problem of Neel, Roth, and
Wu [27] asks whether this implication is efficient. Specifically, does an efficient
differentially private learner imply an efficient online learner?
In this paper we resolve this open question in the context of pure differential privacy. We derive an efficient black-box reduction from differentially private learning to online learning from expert advice.

1

Introduction

Differential Private Learning and Online Learning are two well-studied areas in machine learning.
While at a first glance these two subjects may seem disparate, recent works gathered a growing
amount of evidence which suggests otherwise. For example, Adaptive Data Analysis [15, 14, 24,
19, 3] shares strong similarities with adversarial frameworks studied in online learning, and on the
other hand exploits ideas and tools from differential privacy. A more formal relation between private
and online learning is manifested by the following fact:
Every privately learnable class is online learnable.
This implication and variants of it were derived by several recent works [20, 9, 1] (see the related
work section for more details). One caveat of the latter results is that they are non-constructive:
they show that every privately learnable class has a finite Littlestone dimension. Then, since the
Littlestone dimension is known to capture online learnability [26, 5], it follows that privately learnable classes are indeed online learnable. Consequently, the implied online learner is not necessarily
efficient, even if the assumed private learner is. Thus, the following question emerges:
Does efficient differentially private learning imply efficient online learning?
This question was explicitly raised by Neel, Roth and Wu [27]. In this work we resolve this question
affirmatively under the assumption that the given private learner satisfies Pure Differential Privacy
(the case of Approximate Differential Privacy remains open: see Section 4 for a short discussion).
We give an efficient black-box reduction which transforms an efficient pure private learner to an
efficient online learner. Our reduction exploits a characterization of private learning due to [4],
together with tools from online boosting [6], and a lemma which converts oblivious online learning
to adaptive online learning. The latter lemma is novel and may be of independent interest.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

