On the Optimality of Perturbations in Stochastic and
Adversarial Multi-armed Bandit Problems
Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tewaria@umich.edu

Baekjin Kim
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
baekjin@umich.edu

Abstract
We investigate the optimality of perturbation based algorithms in the stochastic
and adversarial multi-armed bandit problems. For the stochastic case, we provide
a unified regret analysis for both sub-Weibull and bounded perturbations when
rewards are sub-Gaussian. Our bounds are instance optimal for sub-Weibull perturbations with parameter 2 that also have a matching lower tail bound, and all
bounded support perturbations where there is sufficient probability mass at the
extremes of the support. For the adversarial setting, we prove rigorous barriers
against two natural solution approaches using tools from discrete choice theory
and extreme value theory. Our results suggest that the optimal perturbation, if it
exists, will be of Fréchet-type.

1

Introduction

Beginning with the seminal work of Hannan [12], researchers have been interested in algorithms that
use random perturbations to generate a distribution over available actions. Kalai and Vempala [17]
showed that the perturbation idea leads to efficient algorithms for many online learning problems with
large action sets. Due to the Gumbel lemma [14], the well known exponential weights algorithm [11]
also has an interpretation as a perturbation based algorithm that uses Gumbel distributed perturbations.
There have been several attempts to analyze the regret of perturbation based algorithms with specific
distributions such as Uniform, Double-exponential, drop-out and random walk (see, e.g., [17, 18,
9, 28]). These works provided rigorous guarantees but the techniques they used did not generalize
to general perturbations. Recent work [1] provided a general framework to understand general
perturbations and clarified the relation between regularization and perturbation by understanding
them as different ways to smooth an underlying non-smooth potential function.
Abernethy et al. [2] extended the analysis of general perturbations to the partial information setting
of the adversarial multi-armed bandit problem. They isolated bounded hazard rate as an important
property of a perturbation
and gave several examples of perturbations that lead to the near optimal
√
regret bound√of O( KT log K). Since Tsallis entropy regularization can achieve the minimax
regret of O( KT ) [4, 5], the question of whether perturbations can match the power of regularizers
remained open for the adversarial multi-armed bandit problem.
In this paper, we build upon previous works [1, 2] in two distinct but related directions. First, we
provide the first general result for perturbation algorithms in the stochastic multi-armed bandit
problem. We present a unified regret analysis for both sub-Weibull and bounded perturbations when
rewards are sub-Gaussian. Our regrets are instance optimal for sub-Weibull perturbations with
parameter 2 (with a matching lower tail bound), and all bounded support perturbations where there
is sufficient probability mass at the extremes of the support. Since the Uniform and Rademacher
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

