On the Accuracy of Influence Functions
for Measuring Group Effects

Pang Wei Koh∗

Kai-Siang Ang∗
Hubert H. K. Teo∗
Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{pangwei@cs, kaiang@, hteo@, pliang@cs}.stanford.edu

Abstract
Influence functions estimate the effect of removing a training point on a model
without the need to retrain. They are based on a first-order Taylor approximation
that is guaranteed to be accurate for sufficiently small changes to the model, and
so are commonly used to study the effect of individual points in large datasets.
However, we often want to study the effects of large groups of training points,
e.g., to diagnose batch effects or apportion credit between different data sources.
Removing such large groups can result in significant changes to the model. Are
influence functions still accurate in this setting? In this paper, we find that across
many different types of groups and for a range of real-world datasets, the predicted
effect (using influence functions) of a group correlates surprisingly well with its
actual effect, even if the absolute and relative errors are large. Our theoretical analysis shows that such strong correlation arises only under certain settings and need
not hold in general, indicating that real-world datasets have particular properties
that allow the influence approximation to be accurate.

1

Introduction

Influence functions (Jaeckel, 1972; Hampel, 1974; Cook, 1977) estimate the effect of removing an
individual training point on a model’s predictions without the computationally-prohibitive cost of
retraining the model. Tracing a model’s output back to its training data can be useful: influence
functions have been recently applied to explain predictions (Koh and Liang, 2017), produce confidence
intervals (Schulam and Saria, 2019), investigate model bias (Brunet et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019),
improve human trust (Zhou et al., 2019), and even craft data poisoning attacks (Koh et al., 2019).
Influence functions are based on first-order Taylor approximations that are accurate for estimating
small perturbations to the model, which makes them suitable for predicting the effects of removing
individual training points on the model. However, we often want to study the effects of removing
groups of points, which represent large perturbations to the data. For example, we might wish
to analyze the effect of data collected from different experimental batches (Leek et al., 2010) or
demographic groups (Chen et al., 2018); apportion credit between crowdworkers, each of whom
generated part of the data (Arrieta-Ibarra et al., 2018); or, in a multi-party learning setting, ensure
that no individual user has too much influence on the joint model (Hayes and Ohrimenko, 2018). Are
influence functions still accurate when predicting the effects of (removing) these larger groups?
In this paper, we first show empirically that on real datasets and across a broad variety of groups of
data, the predicted and actual effects are strikingly correlated (Spearman ρ of 0.8 to 1.0), such that
the groups with the largest actual effect also tend to have the largest predicted effect. Moreover, the
predicted effect tends to underestimate the actual effect, suggesting that it could be an approximate
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

