This Looks Like That: Deep Learning for
Interpretable Image Recognition

Chaofan Chen∗
Duke University

Oscar Li∗
Duke University

Chaofan Tao
Duke University

cfchen@cs.duke.edu

oscarli@alumni.duke.edu

chaofan.tao@duke.edu

Alina Jade Barnett
Duke University

Jonathan Su
MIT Lincoln Laboratory†

Cynthia Rudin
Duke University

abarnett@cs.duke.edu

su@ll.mit.edu

cynthia@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
When we are faced with challenging image classification tasks, we often explain
our reasoning by dissecting the image, and pointing out prototypical aspects of
one class or another. The mounting evidence for each of the classes helps us
make our final decision. In this work, we introduce a deep network architecture –
prototypical part network (ProtoPNet), that reasons in a similar way: the network
dissects the image by finding prototypical parts, and combines evidence from the
prototypes to make a final classification. The model thus reasons in a way that is
qualitatively similar to the way ornithologists, physicians, and others would explain
to people on how to solve challenging image classification tasks. The network uses
only image-level labels for training without any annotations for parts of images.
We demonstrate our method on the CUB-200-2011 dataset and the Stanford Cars
dataset. Our experiments show that ProtoPNet can achieve comparable accuracy
with its analogous non-interpretable counterpart, and when several ProtoPNets
are combined into a larger network, it can achieve an accuracy that is on par with
some of the best-performing deep models. Moreover, ProtoPNet provides a level
of interpretability that is absent in other interpretable deep models.

1

Introduction

How would you describe why the image in Figure 1 looks like a clay colored sparrow? Perhaps
the bird’s head and wing bars look like those of a prototypical clay colored sparrow. When we
describe how we classify images, we might focus on parts of the image and compare them with
prototypical parts of images from a given class. This method of reasoning is commonly used
in difficult identification tasks: e.g., radiologists compare suspected tumors in X-ray scans with
prototypical tumor images for diagnosis of cancer [13]. The question is whether we can ask a
machine learning model to imitate this way of thinking, and to explain its reasoning process in a
human-understandable way.
The goal of this work is to define a form of interpretability in image processing (this looks like that)
that agrees with the way humans describe their own thinking in classification tasks. In this work,
∗

Contributed equally
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A. Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. This material is
based upon work supported by the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering under Air Force
Contract No. FA8702-15-D-0001. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Research and Engineering.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

