Discovering Neural Wirings

1

Mitchell Wortsman1,2 , Ali Farhadi1,2,3 , Mohammad Rastegari1,3
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, 2 University of Washington, 3 XNOR.AI
mitchnw@cs.washington.edu, {ali, mohammad}@xnor.ai

Abstract
The success of neural networks has driven a shift in focus from feature engineering
to architecture engineering. However, successful networks today are constructed
using a small and manually defined set of building blocks. Even in methods of
neural architecture search (NAS) the network connectivity patterns are largely
constrained. In this work we propose a method for discovering neural wirings. We
relax the typical notion of layers and instead enable channels to form connections
independent of each other. This allows for a much larger space of possible networks.
The wiring of our network is not fixed during training – as we learn the network
parameters we also learn the structure itself. Our experiments demonstrate that our
learned connectivity outperforms hand engineered and randomly wired networks.
By learning the connectivity of MobileNetV1 [12] we boost the ImageNet accuracy
by 10% at ⇠ 41M FLOPs. Moreover, we show that our method generalizes to
recurrent and continuous time networks. Our work may also be regarded as unifying
core aspects of the neural architecture search problem with sparse neural network
learning. As NAS becomes more fine grained, finding a good architecture is akin to
finding a sparse subnetwork of the complete graph. Accordingly, DNW provides an
effective mechanism for discovering sparse subnetworks of predefined architectures
in a single training run. Though we only ever use a small percentage of the weights
during the forward pass, we still play the so-called initialization lottery [8] with a
combinatorial number of subnetworks. Code and pretrained models are available
at https://github.com/allenai/dnw while additional visualizations may be
found at https://mitchellnw.github.io/blog/2019/dnw/.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shifted the prevailing paradigm from feature engineering to feature
learning. The architecture of deep neural networks, however, must still be hand designed in a
process known as architecture engineering. A myriad of recent efforts attempt to automate the
process of the architecture design by searching among a set of smaller well-known building blocks
[30, 34, 37, 19, 2, 20]. While methods of search range from reinforcement learning to gradient based
approaches [34, 20], the space of possible connectivity patterns is still largely constrained. NAS
methods explore wirings between predefined blocks, and [28] learns the recurrent structure of CNNs.
We believe that more efficient solutions may arrive from searching the space of wirings at a more fine
grained level, i.e. single channels.
In this work, we consider an unconstrained set of possible wirings by allowing channels to form
connections independent of each other. This enables us to discover a wide variety of operations (e.g.
depthwise separable convs [12], channel shuffle and split [36], and more). Formally, we treat the
network as a large neural graph where each each node processes a single channel.
One key challenge lies in searching the space of all possible wirings – the number of possible
sub-graphs is combinatorial in nature. When considering thousands of nodes, traditional search
methods are either prohibitive or offer approximate solutions. In this paper we introduce a simple
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

