Qsparse-local-SGD: Distributed SGD with
Quantization, Sparsification, and Local Computations
Debraj Basu ⇤
Adobe Inc.
dbasu@adobe.com

Deepesh Data
UCLA
deepeshdata@ucla.edu

Can Karakus ⇤
Amazon Inc.
cakarak@amazon.com

Suhas Diggavi
UCLA
suhasdiggavi@ucla.edu

Abstract
Communication bottleneck has been identified as a significant issue in distributed
optimization of large-scale learning models. Recently, several approaches to
mitigate this problem have been proposed, including different forms of gradient
compression or computing local models and mixing them iteratively. In this paper
we propose Qsparse-local-SGD algorithm, which combines aggressive sparsification with quantization and local computation along with error compensation,
by keeping track of the difference between the true and compressed gradients.
We propose both synchronous and asynchronous implementations of Qsparselocal-SGD. We analyze convergence for Qsparse-local-SGD in the distributed
case, for smooth non-convex and convex objective functions. We demonstrate that
Qsparse-local-SGD converges at the same rate as vanilla distributed SGD for many
important classes of sparsifiers and quantizers. We use Qsparse-local-SGD to train
ResNet-50 on ImageNet, and show that it results in significant savings over the
state-of-the-art, in the number of bits transmitted to reach target accuracy.

1

Introduction

Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) [14] and its many variants have become the workhorse for modern
large-scale optimization as applied to machine learning [5, 8]. We consider the setup where SGD is
applied to the distributed setting, where R different nodes compute local SGD on their own datasets
Dr . Co-ordination between them is done by aggregating these local computations to update the
PR
overall parameter xt as, xt+1 = xt ⌘Rt r=1 gtr , where {gtr }R
r=1 are the local stochastic gradients
(r)
at the R machines for a local loss function f (x) of the parameters, where f (r) : Rd ! R.

It is well understood by now that sending full-precision gradients, causes communication to be
the bottleneck for many large scale models [4, 7, 33, 39]. The communication bottleneck could be
significant in emerging edge computation architectures suggested by federated learning [1, 17, 22].
To address this, many methods have been proposed recently, and these methods are broadly based
on three major approaches: (i) Quantization of gradients, where nodes locally quantize the gradient
(perhaps with randomization) to a small number of bits [3,7,33,39,40]. (ii) Sparsification of gradients,
e.g., where nodes locally select Topk values of the gradient in absolute value and transmit these at
full precision [2, 4, 20, 30, 32, 40], while maintaining errors in local nodes for later compensation.
(iii) Skipping communication rounds whereby nodes average their models after locally updating their
models for several steps [9, 10, 31, 34, 37, 43, 45].
⇤

Work done while Debraj Basu and Can Karakus were at UCLA.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

