Learning and Generalization in Overparameterized
Neural Networks, Going Beyond Two Layers∗

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Microsoft Research AI
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Yingyu Liang
University of Wisconsin-Madison
yliang@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
The fundamental learning theory behind neural networks remains largely open.
What classes of functions can neural networks actually learn? Why doesn’t the
trained network overfit when it is overparameterized?
In this work, we prove that overparameterized neural networks can learn some
notable concept classes, including two and three-layer networks with fewer parameters and smooth activations. Moreover, the learning can be simply done by
SGD (stochastic gradient descent) or its variants in polynomial time using polynomially many samples. The sample complexity can also be almost independent
of the number of parameters in the network.
On the technique side, our analysis goes beyond the so-called NTK (neural tangent kernel) linearization of neural networks in prior works. We establish a new
notion of quadratic approximation of the neural network, and connect it to the
SGD theory of escaping saddle points.

1

Introduction

Neural network learning has become a key machine learning approach and has achieved remarkable
success in a wide range of real-world domains, such as computer vision, speech recognition, and
game playing [25, 26, 30, 41]. In contrast to the widely accepted empirical success, much less
theory is known. Despite a recent boost of theoretical studies, many questions remain largely open,
including fundamental ones about the optimization and generalization in learning neural networks.
One key challenge in analyzing neural networks is that the corresponding optimization is non-convex
and is theoretically hard in the general case [40, 55]. This is in sharp contrast to the fact that simple
optimization algorithms like stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants usually produce good
solutions in practice even on both training and test data. Therefore,
what functions can neural networks provably learn?
Another key challenge is that, in practice, neural networks are heavily overparameterized (e.g., [53]):
the number of learnable parameters is much larger than the number of the training samples. It
is observed that overparameterization empirically improves both optimization and generalization,
appearing to contradict traditional learning theory.2 Therefore,
why do overparameterized networks (found by those training algorithms) generalize?
∗

Full version and future updates can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.04918.
For example, Livni et al. [36] observed that on synthetic data generated from a target network, SGD converges faster when the learned network has more parameters than the target. Perhaps more interestingly, Arora
et al. [6] found that overparameterized networks learned in practice can often be compressed to simpler ones
with much fewer parameters, without hurting their ability to generalize; however, directly learning such simpler
networks runs into worse results due to the optimization difficulty. We also have experiments in Figure 1(a).
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

