Domes to Drones: Self-Supervised Active
Triangulation for 3D Human Pose Reconstruction

1

Aleksis Pirinen,1∗ Erik Gärtner1∗ and Cristian Sminchisescu1,2
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Google Research

{aleksis.pirinen, erik.gartner, cristian.sminchisescu}@math.lth.se

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art estimation systems can detect 2d poses of multiple people
in images quite reliably. In contrast, 3d pose estimation from a single image is
ill-posed due to occlusion and depth ambiguities. Assuming access to multiple
cameras, or given an active system able to position itself to observe the scene
from multiple viewpoints, reconstructing 3d pose from 2d measurements becomes
well-posed within the framework of standard multi-view geometry. Less clear is
what is an informative set of viewpoints for accurate 3d reconstruction, particularly
in complex scenes, where people are occluded by others or by scene objects. In
order to address the view selection problem in a principled way, we here introduce
ACTOR, an active triangulation agent for 3d human pose reconstruction. Our
fully trainable agent consists of a 2d pose estimation network (any of which
would work) and a deep reinforcement learning-based policy for camera viewpoint
selection. The policy predicts observation viewpoints, the number of which varies
adaptively depending on scene content, and the associated images are fed to an
underlying pose estimator. Importantly, training the view selection policy requires
no annotations – given a pre-trained 2d pose estimator, ACTOR is trained in a
self-supervised manner. In extensive evaluations on complex multi-people scenes
filmed in a Panoptic dome, under multiple viewpoints, we compare our active
triangulation agent to strong multi-view baselines, and show that ACTOR produces
significantly more accurate 3d pose reconstructions. We also provide a proof-ofconcept experiment indicating the potential of connecting our view selection policy
to a physical drone observer.

1

Introduction

Estimating 2d and 3d human pose from given images or video is an active research area, with deep
learning playing a prominent role in most of today’s state-of-the-art pose and shape estimation
models [2, 4, 21–23, 27, 34]. Monocular 3d pose estimation is however ill-posed [26] due to depth
ambiguities, and these cannot always be resolved by priors or by increasing a feed-forward model’s
predictive power. Given access to multiple cameras, or given an active observer which can capture
images from multiple viewpoints, reconstructing 3d pose from 2d estimates however becomes
tractable within the framework of standard multi-view geometry. An active setup for triangulating 2d
estimates also addresses many common practical issues, such as partial observability due to occlusion,
either self-induced or due to other people or objects.
Given sufficiently many viewpoints, 3d pose reconstructions from 2d estimates can be made robust
and accurate, and such results have even been used as (pseudo)ground-truth [17, 33]. While inferring
∗

Denotes equal contribution, order determined by coin flip.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

