Convergence Guarantees
for Adaptive Bayesian Quadrature Methods

Motonobu Kanagawa†,#∗ and Philipp Hennig#
†
EURECOM, Sophia Antipolis, France
#
University of Tübingen and Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
motonobu.kanagawa@eurecom.fr & philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Adaptive Bayesian quadrature (ABQ) is a powerful approach to numerical integration that empirically compares favorably with Monte Carlo integration on problems
of medium dimensionality (where non-adaptive quadrature is not competitive). Its
key ingredient is an acquisition function that changes as a function of previously
collected values of the integrand. While this adaptivity appears to be empirically
powerful, it complicates analysis. Consequently, there are no theoretical guarantees
so far for this class of methods. In this work, for a broad class of adaptive Bayesian
quadrature methods, we prove consistency, deriving non-tight but informative convergence rates. To do so we introduce a new concept we call weak adaptivity. Our
results identify a large and flexible class of adaptive Bayesian quadrature rules as
consistent, within which practitioners can develop empirically efficient methods.

1

Introduction

Numerical integration, or quadrature/cubature, is a fundamental task in many areas of science and engineering. This includes machine learning and statistics, where such problems arise when computing
marginals and conditionals in probabilistic inference problems. In particular in hierarchical Bayesian
inference, quadrature is generally required for the computation of the marginal likelihood, the key
quantity for model selection, and for prediction, for which latent variables are to be marginalized out.
To describe the problem, let Ω be a compact metric space, µ be a finite positive Borel measure on
Ω (such as the Lebesgue measure on compact Ω ⊂ Rd ) that playes the role of reference measure,
π : Ω → R be a known density function, and f : Ω → R be an integrand, a known function such that
the function value f (x) ∈ R can be obtained for any given query x ∈ Ω. The task of quadrature is to
numerically compute the integral (assumed to be intractable analytically)
Z
f (x)π(x)dµ(x).
This is done by evaluating the function values f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn ) at design points x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Ω
and using them to approximate f and the integral. The points x1 , . . . , xn should be “good” in the
sense that f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn ) provide useful information for computing the the integral.
Monte Carlo methods are the classic alternative, where x1P
, . . . , xn are randomly generated from
n
a proposal distribution and the integral is approximated as i=1 wi f (xi ), with w1 , . . . , wn being
importance weights. Such Monte Carlo estimators achieve the convergence rate of order n−1/2 for
n the number of design points, under a mild condition that f is a bounded function. This dimensionindependent rate, and the mild condition about f , would be one of the reasons for the wide popularity
and successes of Monte Carlo methods. However, as has been empirically known for practitioners
∗

Most of this work was done when MK was affiliated with University of Tübingen and MPI IS, Germany

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

