Fisher Efficient Inference of Intractable Models
Song Liu
University of Bristol
The Alan Turing Institute, UK
song.liu@bristol.ac.uk

Takafumi Kanamori
Tokyo Institute of Technology,
RIKEN, Japan
kanamori@c.titech.ac.jp

Wittawat Jitkrittum
Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems, Germany
wittawat@tuebingen.mpg.de

Yu Chen
University of Bristol, UK
yc14600@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Maximum Likelihood Estimators (MLE) has many good properties. For example,
the asymptotic variance of MLE solution attains equality of the asymptotic CramérRao lower bound (efficiency bound), which is the minimum possible variance for
an unbiased estimator. However, obtaining such MLE solution requires calculating
the likelihood function which may not be tractable due to the normalization term of
the density model. In this paper, we derive a Discriminative Likelihood Estimator
(DLE) from the Kullback-Leibler divergence minimization criterion implemented
via density ratio estimation and a Stein operator. We study the problem of model
inference using DLE. We prove its consistency and show that the asymptotic
variance of its solution can attain the equality of the efficiency bound under mild
regularity conditions. We also propose a dual formulation of DLE which can be
easily optimized. Numerical studies validate our asymptotic theorems and we give
an example where DLE successfully estimates an intractable model constructed
using a pre-trained deep neural network.

1

Introduction

Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) has been a classic choice of density parameter estimator. It
can be derived from the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence minimization criterion and the resulting
algorithm simply maximizes the likelihood function (log-density function) over a set of observations.
The solution of MLE has many attractive asymptotic properties: the asymptotic variance of MLE
solutions reach an asymptotic lower bound of all unbiased estimators [5, 24].
However, learning via MLE requires evaluating the normalization term of the density function; it
may be challenging to apply MLE to learn a complex model that has a computationally intractable
normalization term. A partial solution to this problem is approximating the normalization term or
the gradient of the likelihood function numerically. Many methods along this line of research have
been actively studied: importance-sampling MLE [25], contrastive divergence [12] and more recently
amortized MLE [33]. While the computation of the normalization term is mitigated, these samplingbased approximate methods come at the expense of extra computational burden and estimation
errors.
The issue of intractable normalization terms has led to the develoment of other approaches other
than the KL divergence minimization. For example, Score Matching (SM) [13] minimizes the Fisher
divergence [26] between the data distribution and a model distribution which is specified by the
gradient (with respect to the input variable) of its log density function. Its computation does not
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

