Adaptive Auxiliary Task Weighting for Reinforcement
Learning

Xingyu Lin∗

Harjatin Singh Baweja∗
George Kantor
Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
{xlin3, harjatis, kantor, dheld}@andrew.cmu.edu

David Held

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is known to be sample inefficient, preventing its application
to many real-world problems, especially with high dimensional observations like
images. Transferring knowledge from other auxiliary tasks is a powerful tool for
improving the learning efficiency. However, the usage of auxiliary tasks has been
limited so far due to the difficulty in selecting and combining different auxiliary
tasks. In this work, we propose a principled online learning algorithm that dynamically combines different auxiliary tasks to speed up training for reinforcement
learning. Our method is based on the idea that auxiliary tasks should provide
gradient directions that, in the long term, help to decrease the loss of the main task.
We show in various environments that our algorithm can effectively combine a
variety of different auxiliary tasks and achieves significant speedup compared to
previous heuristic approaches of adapting auxiliary task weights.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has enjoyed recent success in domains like games [1, 2], robotic
manipulation, and locomotion tasks [3, 4]. However, most of these applications are either limited to
simulation or require a large number of samples collected from real-world experiences. For complex
tasks, the reinforcement learning algorithm often requires a prohibitively large number of samples to
learn the policy [5, 6]. The sample complexity is even worse when learning from image observations,
in which more samples are needed to learn a good feature representation.
Transferring knowledge from other tasks can be a powerful tool for learning efficiently. Two types of
transferring are often used: representational and functional transfer [7]. In representational transfer,
a representation previously learned from other tasks is used for the task at hand. For example,
visual features can be taken from pre-trained features of other tasks, such as image classification or
depth estimation [8]. However, visual features learned from these static tasks might not be useful
features for decision-making tasks studied in reinforcement learning. Further, the visual environment
encountered by the reinforcement learning agent might have a different appearance from which these
visual features were trained, thus limiting the benefit of such transfer.
In functional transfer, multiple tasks sharing the representation are trained jointly. In the context of
reinforcement learning, auxiliary tasks are trained jointly with the reinforcement learning task [9, 10,
11], as illustrated in Figure 1. This approach has the advantage that the learned representation will be
relevant to the environment in which the agent is operating. Many self-supervised tasks proposed in
previous works can be used [9, 11, 12, 13, 14].
The challenge for using auxiliary tasks is to select what set of auxiliary tasks to use and to determine
the weighting of different auxiliary tasks; some auxiliary tasks may be more or less relevant to the
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

