Statistical Analysis of Nearest Neighbor Methods for
Anomaly Detection
Xiaoyi Gu1 , Leman Akoglu2 , Alessandro Rinaldo1
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University
{xgu1,lakoglu}@andrew.cmu.edu, arinaldo@cmu.edu
1

Abstract
Nearest-neighbor (NN) procedures are well studied and widely used in both supervised and unsupervised learning problems. In this paper we are concerned with
investigating the performance of NN-based methods for anomaly detection. We
first show through extensive simulations that NN methods compare favorably to
some of the other state-of-the-art algorithms for anomaly detection based on a
set of benchmark synthetic datasets. We further consider the performance of NN
methods on real datasets, and relate it to the dimensionality of the problem. Next,
we analyze the theoretical properties of NN-methods for anomaly detection by
studying a more general quantity called distance-to-measure (DTM), originally
developed in the literature on robust geometric and topological inference. We
provide finite-sample uniform guarantees for the empirical DTM and use them to
derive misclassification rates for anomalous observations under various settings. In
our analysis we rely on Huber’s contamination model and formulate mild geometric
regularity assumptions on the underlying distribution of the data.

1

Introduction

Anomaly detection is the process of detecting instances that deviate significantly from the other
sample members. The problem of detecting anomalies can arise in many different applications, such
as fraud detection in financial transactions, intrusion detection for security systems, and various
medical examinations.
Depending on the availability of data labels, there are multiple setups for anomaly detection. The
first is the supervised setup, where labels are available for both normal and anomalous instances
during the training stage. Because of its similarity to the standard classification setup, numerous
classification methods with good empirical performance and well-studied theoretical properties can
be adopted. The second setup is the semi-supervised setup, where training data only comprise
normal instances and no anomalies. This setup is widely used in the intrusion detection literature.
Well-known methods with theoretical guarantees include kNNG [1], BP-kNNG [2] and BCOPS [3],
with the first two methods developed based on the geometric entropy minimization (GEM) principle
proposed in [1], and the third on conformal prediction. Methods under this setups are essentially
targeting the estimation of high density regions, and treating low density points as anomalies. The
third setup is the unsupervised setup, which is the most flexible yet challenging setup. For the rest of
the paper, we will only focus on this setup and do not assume any prior knowledge on data labels.
Many empirical methods have been developed in the unsupervised setup, which can be roughly
classified into four categories: density based methods such as the Robust KDE (RKDE) [4], Local
Outlier Factor (LOF) [5], and mixture models (EGMM); distance based methods such as kNN
[6] and Angle-based Outlier Detection (ABOD) [7]; model based methods such as the one-class
SVM (OCSVM) [8], SVDD [9], and autoencoders [10]; ensemble methods such as Isolation Forest
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

