Anti-efficient encoding in emergent communication

Rahma Chaabouni1,2 , Eugene Kharitonov1 , Emmanuel Dupoux1,2 and Marco Baroni1,3
1

2

Facebook AI Research
Cognitive Machine Learning (ENS - EHESS - PSL Research University - CNRS - INRIA)
3
ICREA
{rchaabouni,kharitonov,dpx,mbaroni}@fb.com

Abstract
Despite renewed interest in emergent language simulations with neural networks,
little is known about the basic properties of the induced code, and how they
compare to human language. One fundamental characteristic of the latter, known
as Zipf’s Law of Abbreviation (ZLA), is that more frequent words are efficiently
associated to shorter strings. We study whether the same pattern emerges when two
neural networks, a “speaker” and a “listener”, are trained to play a signaling game.
Surprisingly, we find that networks develop an anti-efficient encoding scheme,
in which the most frequent inputs are associated to the longest messages, and
messages in general are skewed towards the maximum length threshold. This antiefficient code appears easier to discriminate for the listener, and, unlike in human
communication, the speaker does not impose a contrasting least-effort pressure
towards brevity. Indeed, when the cost function includes a penalty for longer
messages, the resulting message distribution starts respecting ZLA. Our analysis
stresses the importance of studying the basic features of emergent communication
in a highly controlled setup, to ensure the latter will not depart too far from human
language. Moreover, we present a concrete illustration of how different functional
pressures can lead to successful communication codes that lack basic properties of
human language, thus highlighting the role such pressures play in the latter.

1

Introduction

There is renewed interest in simulating language emergence among neural networks that interact
to solve a task, motivated by the desire to develop automated agents that can communicate with
humans [e.g., Havrylov and Titov, 2017, Lazaridou et al., 2017, 2018, Lee et al., 2018]. As part
of this trend, several recent studies analyze the properties of the emergent codes [e.g., Kottur et al.,
2017, Bouchacourt and Baroni, 2018, Evtimova et al., 2018, Lowe et al., 2019, Graesser et al., 2019].
However, these analyses generally consider relatively complex setups, when very basic characteristics
of the emergent codes have yet to be understood. We focus here on one such characteristic, namely
the length distribution of the messages that two neural networks playing a simple signaling game
come to associate to their inputs, in function of input frequency.
In his pioneering studies of lexical statistics, George Kingsley Zipf noticed a robust trend in human
language that came to be known as Zipf’s Law of Abbreviation (ZLA): There is an inverse (nonlinear) correlation between word frequency and length [Zipf, 1949, Teahan et al., 2000, Sigurd et al.,
2004, Strauss et al., 2007]. Assuming that shorter words are easier to produce, this is an efficient
encoding strategy, particularly effective given Zipf’s other important discovery that word distributions
are highly skewed, following a power-law distribution. Indeed, in this way language approaches
an optimal code in information-theoretic terms [Cover and Thomas, 2006]. Zipf, and many after
him, have thus used ZLA as evidence that language is shaped by functional pressures toward effort
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

