Optimizing Generalized Rate Metrics with
Three Players
Harikrishna Narasimhan, Andrew Cotter, Maya Gupta
Google Research
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043
{hnarasimhan, acotter, mayagupta}@google.com

Abstract
We present a general framework for solving a large class of learning problems
with non-linear functions of classification rates. This includes problems where
one wishes to optimize a non-decomposable performance metric such as the Fmeasure or G-mean, and constrained training problems where the classifier needs
to satisfy non-linear rate constraints such as predictive parity fairness, distribution
divergences or churn ratios. We extend previous two-player game approaches
for constrained optimization to an approach with three players to decouple the
classifier rates from the non-linear objective, and seek to find an equilibrium of the
game. Our approach generalizes many existing algorithms, and makes possible new
algorithms with more flexibility and tighter handling of non-linear rate constraints.
We provide convergence guarantees for convex functions of rates, and show how
our methodology can be extended to handle sums-of-ratios of rates. Experiments
on different fairness tasks confirm the efficacy of our approach.

1

Introduction

In many real-world machine learning problems, the performance measures used to evaluate a classification model are non-linear functions of the classifier’s prediction rates. Examples include the
F-measure and G-mean used in class-imbalanced classification tasks [1–5], metrics such as predictive
parity used to impose fairness goals [6], the win-loss-ratio used to measure classifier churn [7],
KL-divergence based metrics used in quantification tasks [8, 9] and score-based metrics such as the
PR-AUC [10]. Because these goals are non-linear and are non-continuous in the model parameters, it
becomes very challenging to optimize with them, especially when they are used in constraints [11].
Prior work on optimizing generalized rate metrics has largely focused on unconstrained learning
problems. These approaches fall under two broad categories: surrogate-based methods that replace
the classifier rates with convex relaxations [12–17], and oracle-based methods that formulate multiple
cost-sensitive learning tasks, and solve them using an oracle [18–22, 11]. Both these approaches
have notable deficiencies. The first category of methods rely crucially on the surrogates being close
approximations to the rate metric, and perform poorly when this is not the case (see e.g. experiments
in [20]). The use of surrogates becomes particularly problematic with constrained training problems,
as relaxing the constraints with convex upper bounds can result in solutions that are over-constrained
or infeasible [23]. The second category of methods assume access to a near-optimal cost-sensitive
oracle, which is usually unrealistic in practice.
In this paper, we present a three-player approach for learning problems where both the objective
and constraints can be defined by general functions of rates. The three players optimize over model
parameters, Lagrange multipliers and slack variables to produce a game equilibrium. Our approach
generalizes many existing algorithms (see Table 2), and makes possible new algorithms with more
flexibility and tighter handling of non-linear rate constraints. Specifically, we give a new method
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

