Minimum Stein Discrepancy Estimators

Alessandro Barp
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
a.barp16@imperial.ac.uk
Andrew B. Duncan
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London
a.duncan@imperial.ac.uk

François-Xavier Briol
Department of Statistical Science
University College London
f.briol@ucl.ac.uk

Mark Girolami
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mag92@eng.cam.ac.uk

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, MA, USA
lmackey@microsoft.com

Abstract
When maximum likelihood estimation is infeasible, one often turns to score matching, contrastive divergence, or minimum probability flow to obtain tractable parameter estimates. We provide a unifying perspective of these techniques as minimum
Stein discrepancy estimators, and use this lens to design new diffusion kernel
Stein discrepancy (DKSD) and diffusion score matching (DSM) estimators with
complementary strengths. We establish the consistency, asymptotic normality, and
robustness of DKSD and DSM estimators, then derive stochastic Riemannian gradient descent algorithms for their efficient optimisation. The main strength of our
methodology is its flexibility, which allows us to design estimators with desirable
properties for specific models at hand by carefully selecting a Stein discrepancy.
We illustrate this advantage for several challenging problems for score matching,
such as non-smooth, heavy-tailed or light-tailed densities.

1

Introduction

Maximum likelihood estimation [9] is a de facto standard for estimating the unknown parameters in a
statistical model {Pθ : θ ∈ Θ}. However, the computation and optimization of a likelihood typically
requires access to the normalizing constants of the model distributions. This poses difficulties for
complex statistical models for which direct computation of the normalisation constant would entail
prohibitive multidimensional integration of an unnormalised density. Examples of such models
arise naturally in modelling images [27, 39], natural language [54], Markov random fields [61]
and nonparametric density estimation [63, 69]. To by-pass this issue, various approaches have
been proposed to address parametric inference for unnormalised models, including Monte Carlo
maximum likelihood [22], contrastive divergence [28], minimum probability flow learning [62],
noise-contrastive estimation [10, 26, 27] and score matching (SM) [34, 35].
The SM estimator is a minimum score estimator [16] based on the Hyvärinen scoring rule that avoids
normalizing constants by depending on Pθ only through the gradient of its log density ∇x log pθ . SM
estimators have proven to be a widely applicable method for estimation for models with unnormalised
smooth positive densities, with generalisations to bounded domains [35] and compact Riemannian
manifolds [51]. Despite the flexibility of this approach, SM has three important and distinct limitations.
Firstly, as the Hyvärinen score depends on the Laplacian of the log-density, SM estimation will be
expensive in high dimension and will break down for non-smooth models or for models in which
the second derivative grows very rapidly. Secondly, as we shall demonstrate, SM estimators can
behave poorly for models with heavy tailed distributions. Thirdly, the SM estimator is not robust to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

