Exploring Algorithmic Fairness in
Robust Graph Covering Problems
Aida Rahmattalabi ⇤
rahmatta@usc.edu
Anthony Fulginiti †
anthony.fulginiti@du.edu
Amulya Yadav §
amulya@psu.edu

Phebe Vayanos ⇤
phebe.vayanos@usc.edu
Eric Rice ⇤
ericr@usc.edu

Bryan Wilder ‡
bwilder@g.harvard.edu

Milind Tambe ‡
milind_tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
Fueled by algorithmic advances, AI algorithms are increasingly being deployed in
settings subject to unanticipated challenges with complex social effects. Motivated
by real-world deployment of AI driven, social-network based suicide prevention
and landslide risk management interventions, this paper focuses on robust graph
covering problems subject to group fairness constraints. We show that, in the
absence of fairness constraints, state-of-the-art algorithms for the robust graph covering problem result in biased node coverage: they tend to discriminate individuals
(nodes) based on membership in traditionally marginalized groups. To mitigate
this issue, we propose a novel formulation of the robust graph covering problem
with group fairness constraints and a tractable approximation scheme applicable to
real-world instances. We provide a formal analysis of the price of group fairness
(PoF) for this problem, where we show that uncertainty can lead to greater PoF. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on several real-world social networks.
Our method yields competitive node coverage while significantly improving group
fairness relative to state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Motivation. This paper considers the problem of selecting a subset of nodes (which we refer
to as ‘monitors’) in a graph that can ‘cover’ their adjacent nodes. We are mainly motivated by
settings where monitors are subject to failure and we seek to maximize worst-case node coverage.
We refer to this problem as the robust graph covering. This problem finds applications in several
critical real-world domains, especially in the context of optimizing social interventions on vulnerable
populations. Consider for example the problem of designing Gatekeeper training interventions for
suicide prevention, wherein a small number of individuals can be trained to identify warning signs of
suicide among their peers [32]. A similar problem arises in the context of disaster risk management in
remote communities wherein a moderate number of individuals are recruited in advance and trained to
watch out for others in case of natural hazards (e.g., in the event of a landslide [40]). Previous research
has shown that social intervention programs of this sort hold great promise [32, 40]. Unfortunately,
⇤

University of Southern California
University of Denver
‡
Harvard University
§
Pennsylvania State University
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

