Multiway clustering via tensor block models

Miaoyan Wang
University of Wisconsin – Madison
miaoyan.wang@wisc.edu

Yuchen Zeng
University of Wisconsin – Madison
yzeng58@wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of identifying multiway block structure from a large
noisy tensor. Such problems arise frequently in applications such as genomics,
recommendation system, topic modeling, and sensor network localization. We
propose a tensor block model, develop a unified least-square estimation, and
obtain the theoretical accuracy guarantees for multiway clustering. The statistical
convergence of the estimator is established, and we show that the associated
clustering procedure achieves partition consistency. A sparse regularization is
further developed for identifying important blocks with elevated means. The
proposal handles a broad range of data types, including binary, continuous, and
hybrid observations. Through simulation and application to two real datasets, we
demonstrate the outperformance of our approach over previous methods.

1

Introduction

Higher-order tensors have recently attracted increased attention in data-intensive fields such as
neuroscience [1], social networks [2], computer vision [3], and genomics [4, 5]. In many applications,
the data tensors are often expected to have underlying block structure. One example is multi-tissue
expression data [4], in which genome-wide expression profiles are collected from different tissues
in a number of individuals. There may be groups of genes similarly expressed in subsets of tissues
and individuals; mathematically, this implies an underlying three-way block structure in the data
tensor. In a different context, block structure may emerge in a binary-valued tensor. Examples include
multilayer network data [2], with the nodes representing the individuals and the layers representing
the multiple types of relations. Here a planted block represents a community of individuals that are
highly connected within a class of relationships.

Input

Output

Input

Output

Figure 1: Examples of tensor block model (TBM). (a) Our TBM method is used for multiway clustering and
for revealing the underlying checkerbox structure in a noisy tensor. (b) The sparse TBM method is used for
detecting sub-tensors of elevated means.

This paper presents a new method and the associated theory for tensors with block structure. We
develop a unified least-square estimation procedure for identifying multiway block structure. The
proposal applies to a broad range of data types, including binary, continuous, and hybrid observations.
We establish a high-probability error bound for the resulting estimator, and show that the procedure
enjoys consistency guarantees on the block structure recovery as the dimension of the data tensor
grows. Furthermore, we develop a sparse extension of the tensor block model for block selections.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

