Unlocking Fairness: a Trade-off Revisited
Michael Wick, Swetasudha Panda, Jean-Baptiste Tristan
{michael.wick,swetasudha.panda,jean.baptiste.tristan}@oracle.com
Oracle Labs, Burlington, MA.

Abstract
The prevailing wisdom is that a model’s fairness and its accuracy are in tension
with one another. However, there is a pernicious modeling-evaluating dualism
bedeviling fair machine learning in which phenomena such as label bias are appropriately acknowledged as a source of unfairness when designing fair models,
only to be tacitly abandoned when evaluating them. We investigate fairness and
accuracy, but this time under a variety of controlled conditions in which we vary the
amount and type of bias. We find, under reasonable assumptions, that the tension
between fairness and accuracy is illusive, and vanishes as soon as we account for
these phenomena during evaluation. Moreover, our results are consistent with an
opposing conclusion: fairness and accuracy are sometimes in accord. This raises
the question, might there be a way to harness fairness to improve accuracy after
all? Since many notions of fairness are with respect to the model’s predictions
and not the ground truth labels, this provides an opportunity to see if we can improve accuracy by harnessing appropriate notions of fairness over large quantities
of unlabeled data with techniques like posterior regularization and generalized
expectation. We find that semi-supervision improves both accuracy and fairness
while imparting beneficial properties of the unlabeled data on the classifier.

1

Introduction

Torrents of ink have been spilled characterizing the relationship between a classifier’s “fairness”
and its accuracy [11, 7, 3, 8, 20, 4, 14, 2, 13, 17], where fairness refers to a concrete mathematical
embodiment of some rule provided by an external party such as a government and which must be
imposed on a learning algorithm. The consensus, countenanced by both empirical and analytical
studies, is that the relationship is a trade-off: satisfying the supplied fairness constraints is achieved
only at the expense of accuracy. On the one hand, these findings are intuitive: if we think of fairness
as constraints limiting the set of possible classification assignments to those that are collectively fair,
then clearly accuracy suffers because in general, optimization over the subset always lower bounds
optimization over the original set. As put in another paper “demanding fairness of models always
come at a cost of reduced accuracy” [2].1
On the other hand, the belief in a simple assumption immediately calls these findings into question.
In particular, it requires no stretch of credulity to imagine that various personal attributes (e.g., race,
gender, religion; sometimes termed “protected attributes”) have no bearing on a person’s intelligence,
capability, potential, qualifications, etc., and consequently no bearing on ground truth classification
labels — such as job qualification status — that might be functions of these qualities.2 It then follows
that enforcing fairness across these attributes should on average increase accuracy. The reason is clear.
If our classifier produces different label distributions depending on the values of these dimensions,
then we know, under the foregoing assumption, that at least one of these distributions must be wrong,
and thus there is an opportunity to improve accuracy. An opportunity to which we later return.
1
2

Our emphasis.
This assumption is consistent with the “we’re all equal” worldview [9]

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

