Full-Gradient Representation for
Neural Network Visualization
Suraj Srinivas
Idiap Research Institute & EPFL
suraj.srinivas@idiap.ch

François Fleuret
Idiap Research Institute & EPFL
francois.fleuret@idiap.ch

Abstract
We introduce a new tool for interpreting neural net responses, namely full-gradients,
which decomposes the neural net response into input sensitivity and per-neuron
sensitivity components. This is the first proposed representation which satisfies
two key properties: completeness and weak dependence, which provably cannot
be satisfied by any saliency map-based interpretability method. For convolutional
nets, we also propose an approximate saliency map representation, called FullGrad,
obtained by aggregating the full-gradient components.
We experimentally evaluate the usefulness of FullGrad in explaining model behaviour with two quantitative tests: pixel perturbation and remove-and-retrain.
Our experiments reveal that our method explains model behavior correctly, and
more comprehensively, than other methods in the literature. Visual inspection
also reveals that our saliency maps are sharper and more tightly confined to object
regions than other methods.

1

Introduction

This paper studies saliency map representations for the interpretation of neural network functions.
Saliency maps assign to each input feature an importance score, which is a measure of the usefulness
of that feature for the task performed by the neural network. However, the presence of internal
structure among features sometimes makes it difficult to assign a single importance score per feature.
For example, input spaces such as that of natural images are compositional in nature. This means that
while any single individual pixel in an image may be unimportant on its own, a collection of pixels
may be critical if they form an important image region such as an object part.
For example, a bicycle in an image can still be identified if any single pixel is missing, but if the
entire collection of pixels corresponding to a key element, such as a wheel or the drive chain, are
missing, then it becomes much more difficult. Here the importance of a part cannot be deduced from
the individual importance of its constituent pixels, as each such individual pixel is unimportant on
its own. An ideal interpretability method would not just provide importance for each pixel, but also
capture that of groups of pixels which have an underlying structure.
This tension also reveals itself in the formal study of saliency maps. While there is no single formal
definition of saliency, there are several intuitive characteristics that the community has deemed
important [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. One such characteristic is that an input feature must be considered
important if changes to that feature greatly affect the neural network output [5, 7]. Another desirable
characteristic is that the saliency map must completely explain the neural network output, i.e., the
individual feature importance scores must add up to the neural network output [1, 2, 3]. This is done
by a redistribution of the numerical output score to individual input features. In this view, a feature
is important if it makes a large numerical contribution to the output. Thus we have two distinct
notions of feature importance, both of which are intuitive. The first notion of importance assignment
is called local attribution and second, global attribution. It is almost always the case for practical
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

