Learning Perceptual Inference by Contrasting

Chi Zhang?,1,4 , Baoxiong Jia?,1 , Feng Gao3,4 , Yixin Zhu3,4 , Hongjing Lu2 , Song-Chun Zhu1,3,4
1
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
2
Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles
3
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles
4
International Center for AI and Robot Autonomy (CARA)
{chi.zhang,baoxiongjia,f.gao,yixin.zhu,hongjing,sczhu}@ucla.edu

Abstract
“Thinking in pictures,” [1] i.e., spatial-temporal reasoning, effortless and instantaneous for humans, is believed to be a significant ability to perform logical induction
and a crucial factor in the intellectual history of technology development. Modern
Artificial Intelligence (AI), fueled by massive datasets, deeper models, and mighty
computation, has come to a stage where (super-)human-level performances are
observed in certain specific tasks. However, current AI’s ability in “thinking in
pictures” is still far lacking behind. In this work, we study how to improve machines’ reasoning ability on one challenging task of this kind: Raven’s Progressive
Matrices (RPM). Specifically, we borrow the very idea of “contrast effects” from
the field of psychology, cognition, and education to design and train a permutationinvariant model. Inspired by cognitive studies, we equip our model with a simple
inference module that is jointly trained with the perception backbone. Combining all the elements, we propose the Contrastive Perceptual Inference network
(CoPINet) and empirically demonstrate that CoPINet sets the new state-of-the-art
for permutation-invariant models on two major datasets. We conclude that spatialtemporal reasoning depends on envisaging the possibilities consistent with the
relations between objects and can be solved from pixel-level inputs.

1

Introduction

Among the broad spectrum of computer vision tasks are ones where dramatic progress has been
witnessed, especially those involving visual information retrieval [2–5]. Significant improvement
has also manifested itself in tasks associating visual and linguistic understanding [6–9]. However, it
was only until recently that the research community started to re-investigate tasks relying heavily
on the ability of “thinking in pictures” with modern AI approaches [1, 10, 11], particularly spatialtemporal inductive reasoning [12–14]; this line of work primarily focuses on Raven’s Progressive
Matrices (RPM) [15, 16]. It is believed that RPM is closely related to real intelligence [17], diagnostic
of abstract and structural reasoning ability [18], and characterizes fluid intelligence [19–22]. In such
a test, subjects are provided with two rows of figures following certain unknown rules and asked
to pick the correct answer from the choices that would best complete the third row with a missing
entry; see Figure 1(a) for an example. As shown in early works [12, 14], despite the fact that visual
elements are relatively straightforward, there is still a notable performance gap between human and
machine visual reasoning in this challenging task.
One missing ingredient that may result in this performance gap is a proper form of contrasting
mechanism. Originated from perceptual learning [23, 24], it is well established in the field of
psychology and education [25–29] that teaching new concepts by comparing with noisy examples is
?

indicates equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

