Locally Private Gaussian Estimation

Matthew Joseph ∗
University of Pennsylvania
majos@cis.upenn.edu

Janardhan Kulkarni
Microsoft Research Redmond
jakul@microsoft.com

Jieming Mao †
Google Research New York
maojm@google.com

Zhiwei Steven Wu ‡
University of Minnesota
zsw@umn.edu

Abstract
We study a basic private estimation problem: each of n users draws a single
i.i.d. sample from an unknown Gaussian distribution N (µ, σ 2 ), and the goal
is to estimate µ while guaranteeing local differential privacy for each user. As
minimizing the number of rounds of interaction is important in the local setting,
we provide adaptive two-round solutions and nonadaptive one-round solutions to
this problem. We match these upper bounds with an information-theoretic lower
bound showing that our accuracy guarantees are tight up to logarithmic factors for
all sequentially interactive locally private protocols.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy is a formal algorithmic guarantee that no single input has a large effect on
the output of a computation. Since its introduction [11], a rich line of work has made differential
privacy a compelling privacy guarantee (see Dwork et al. [12] and Vadhan [24] for surveys), and
deployments of differential privacy now exist at many organizations, including Apple [2], Google [5,
13], Microsoft [8], Mozilla [3], and the US Census Bureau [1, 20].
Much recent attention, including almost all industrial deployments, has focused on a variant called
local differential privacy [4, 11, 19]. In the local model private data is distributed across many
users, and each user privatizes their data before the data is collected by an analyst. Thus, as any
locally differentially private computation runs on already-privatized data, data contributors need not
worry about compromised data analysts or insecure communication channels. In contrast, (global)
differential privacy assumes that the data analyst has secure, trusted access to the unprivatized data.
However, the stronger privacy guarantees of the local model come at a price. For many problems,
a locally private solution requires far more samples than a globally private solution [7, 10, 19, 23].
Here, we study the basic problem of locally private Gaussian estimation: given n users each holding
an i.i.d. draw from an unknown Gaussian distribution N (µ, σ 2 ), can an analyst accurately estimate
the mean µ while guaranteeing local differential privacy for each user?
On the technical front, locally private Gaussian estimation captures two general challenges in locally
private learning. First, since data is drawn from a Gaussian, there is no a priori (worst-case) bound
on the scale of the observations. Naive applications of standard privatization methods like Laplace
and Gaussian mechanisms must add noise proportional to the worst-case scale of the data and are
thus infeasible. Second, protocols requiring many rounds of user-analyst interaction are difficult to
∗

A portion of this work was done while at Microsoft Research Redmond.
This work done while at the Warren Center, University of Pennsylvania.
‡
A portion of this work was done while at Microsoft Research New York.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

