SIC - MMAB: Synchronisation Involves
Communication in Multiplayer Multi-Armed Bandits

Etienne Boursier
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay
etienne.boursier@ens-paris-saclay.fr

Vianney Perchet
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay
Criteo AI Lab, Paris
vianney.perchet@normalesup.org

Abstract
Motivated by cognitive radio networks, we consider the stochastic multiplayer
multi-armed bandit problem, where several players pull arms simultaneously and
collisions occur if one of them is pulled by several players at the same stage.
We present a decentralized algorithm that achieves the same performance as a
centralized one, contradicting the existing lower bounds for that problem. This
is possible by “hacking” the standard model by constructing a communication
protocol between players that deliberately enforces collisions, allowing them to
share their information at a negligible cost. This motivates the introduction of a
more appropriate dynamic setting without sensing, where similar communication
protocols are no longer possible. However, we show that the logarithmic growth of
the regret is still achievable for this model with a new algorithm.

1

Introduction

In the stochastic Multi Armed Bandit problem (MAB), a single player sequentially takes a decision
(or “pulls an arm”) amongst a finite set of possibilities [K] := {1, . . . , K}. After pulling arm k ∈ [K]
at stage t ∈ N∗ , the player receives a random reward Xk (t) ∈ [0, 1], drawn i.i.d. according to some
unknown distribution νk of expectation µk := E[Xk (t)]. Her objective is to maximize her cumulative
reward up to stage T ∈ N∗ . This sequential decision problem, first introduced for clinical trials
[27, 25], involves an “exploration/exploitation dilemma” where the player must trade-off acquiring
vs. using information. The performance of an algorithm is controlled in term of regret, the difference
of the cumulated reward of an optimal algorithm knowing the distributions (νk )k∈[K] beforehand and
the cumulated reward of the player. It is known that any “reasonable” algorithm must incur at least a
logarithmic regret [19], which is attained by some existing algorithms such as UCB [1, 4].
MAB has been recently popularized thanks to its applications to online recommendation systems.
Many different variants of MAB and classes of algorithms have thus emerged in the recent years [see
11]. In particular, they have been considered for cognitive radios [16], where the problem gets more
intricate as multiple users are involved and they collide if they pull the same arm k at the same time
t, i.e., they transmit on the same channel. If this happens, they all receive 0 as a reward instead of
Xk (t), meaning that no message is transmitted.
If a central agent controls simultaneously all players’ behavior then a tight lower bound is known
[3, 18]. Yet this centralized problem is not adapted to cognitive radios, as it allows communication
between players at each time step; in practice, this induces significant costs in both energy and
time. As a consequence, most of the current interest lies in the decentralized case [20, 2, 5], which
presents another complication due to the feedback. Besides the received reward, an additional piece of
information may be observed at each time step. When this extra observation is the collision indicator,
Rosenski et al. [26] provided two algorithms for both a fixed and a varying number of players. They
are based on a Musical Chairs procedure that quickly assigns players to different arms. Besson and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

