Communication trade-offs for Local-SGD with large
step size

Kumar Kshitij PATEL
Aymeric DIEULEVEUT
MLO, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
MLO, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
TTIC-Toyota Technological Institute Chicago CMAP, Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France
kkpatel@ttic.edu
aymeric.dieuleveut@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
Synchronous mini-batch SGD is state-of-the-art for large-scale distributed machine
learning. However, in practice, its convergence is bottlenecked by slow communication rounds between worker nodes. A natural solution to reduce communication
is to use the “local-SGD” model in which the workers train their model independently and synchronize every once in a while. This algorithm improves the
computation-communication trade-off but its convergence is not understood very
well. We propose a non-asymptotic error analysis, which enables comparison to
one-shot averaging i.e., a single communication round among independent workers, and mini-batch averaging i.e., communicating at every step. We also provide
adaptive lower bounds on the communication frequency for large step-sizes (t−α ,
α ∈ (1/2,
1)) and show that local-SGD reduces communication by a factor of
√ 
T
, with T the total number of gradients and P machines.
O P 3/2

1

Introduction

We consider the minimization of an objective function which is accessible through unbiased independent and identically distributed estimates of its gradients. This problem has received attention
from various communities over the last fifty years in optimization, stochastic approximation, and
machine learning [1–7]. The most widely used algorithms are stochastic gradient descent (SGD),
a.k.a. Robbins-Monro algorithm [8], and some of its modifications based on averaging of the iterates [1, 2, 9]. For a convex differentiable function F : Rd → R, SGD iteratively updates an estimator
(v t )t≥0 for any t ≥ 1
v t = v t−1 − ηt g t (v t−1 ),
(1)
where (ηt )t≥0 is a deterministic sequence of positive scalars, referred to as the learning rate and
g t (v t−1 ) is an oracle on the gradient of the function F at v t−1 . We focus on objective functions that
are both smooth and strongly convex [10]. While these assumptions might be restrictive in practice,
they enable to provide a tight analysis of the error of SGD. In such a setting, two types of proofs
have been used traditionally. On one hand, Lyapunov-type proofs rely on controlling the expected
squared distance to the optimal point [11]. Such analysis suggests using small decaying steps,
inversely proportional to the number of iterations (t−1 ). On the other hand, studying the recursion
as a stochastic process [1] enables to better capture the reduction of the noise through averaging. It
results in optimal convergence rates for larger steps, typically scaling as t−α , α ∈ (1/2, 1) [10].
Over the past decade, the amount of available data has steadily increased: to adapt SGD to such
situations, it has become necessary to distribute the workload between several machines, also referred
to as workers [12–14]. For SGD, two extreme approaches have received attention: 1) workers run
SGD independently and at the end aggregate their results, called one-shot averaging (OSA) [13, 15]
or parameter mixing, and 2) mini-batch averaging (MBA) [16–20], where workers communicate
after every iteration: all gradients are thus computed at the same support point (iterate) and the
algorithm is equivalent to using mini-batches of size P , with P the number of workers. While OSA
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

