Linear Stochastic Bandits Under Safety Constraints

Sanae Amani
University of California, Santa Barbara
samanigeshnigani@ucsb.edu

Mahnoosh Alizadeh
University of California, Santa Barbara
alizadeh@ucsb.edu

Christos Thrampoulidis
University of California, Santa Barbara
cthrampo@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Bandit algorithms have various application in safety-critical systems, where it
is important to respect the system constraints that rely on the bandit’s unknown
parameters at every round. In this paper, we formulate a linear stochastic multiarmed bandit problem with safety constraints that depend (linearly) on an unknown
parameter vector. As such, the learner is unable to identify all safe actions and
must act conservatively in ensuring that her actions satisfy the safety constraint
at all rounds (at least with high probability). For these bandits, we propose a new
UCB-based algorithm called Safe-LUCB, which includes necessary modifications
to respect safety constraints. The algorithm has two phases. During the pure
exploration phase the learner chooses her actions at random from a restricted set of
safe actions with the goal of learning a good approximation of the entire unknown
safe set. Once this goal is achieved, the algorithm begins a safe explorationexploitation phase where the learner gradually expands their estimate of the set of
safe actions while controlling the growth of regret. We provide a general regret
bound for the algorithm, as well as a problem dependent bound that is connected to
the location of the optimal action within the safe set. We then propose a modified
heuristic that exploits our problem dependent analysis to improve the regret.

1

Introduction

The stochastic multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a sequential decision-making problem where,
at each step of a T -period run, a learner plays one of k arms and observes a corresponding loss that is
sampled independently from an underlying distribution with unknown parameters. The learner’s goal
is to minimize the pseudo-regret, i.e., the difference between the expected T -period loss incurred
by the decision making algorithm and the optimal loss if the unknown parameters were given. The
linear stochastic bandit problem generalizes MAB to the setting where each arm is associated with a
feature vector x and the expected loss of each arm is equal to the inner product of its feature vector
x and an unknown parameter vector µ. There are several variants of linear stochastic bandits that
consider finite or infinite number of arms, as well as the case where the set of feature vectors changes
over time. A detailed account of previous work in this area will be provided in Section 1.2.
Bandit algorithms have found many applications in systems that repeatedly deal with unknown
stochastic environments (such as humans) and seek to optimize a long-term reward by simultaneously
learning and exploiting the unknown environment (e.g., ad display optimization algorithms with
unknown user preferences, path routing, ranking in search engines). They are also naturally relevant
for many cyber-physical systems with humans in the loop (e.g., pricing end-use demand in societalscale infrastructure systems such as power grids or transportation networks to minimize system costs
given the limited number of user interactions possible). However, existing bandit heuristics might not
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

