Retrosynthesis Prediction with
Conditional Graph Logic Network
Hanjun Dai‡†⇤, Chengtao Li2 , Connor W. Coley⇧ , Bo Dai‡ , Le Song†
‡
Google Research, Brain Team, {hadai, bodai}@google.com
2
Galixir Inc., chengtao.li@galixir.com
⇧
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, ccoley@mit.edu
†
Georgia Institute of Technology, Ant Financial, lsong@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
Retrosynthesis is one of the fundamental problems in organic chemistry. The task
is to identify reactants that can be used to synthesize a specified product molecule.
Recently, computer-aided retrosynthesis is finding renewed interest from both
chemistry and computer science communities. Most existing approaches rely on
template-based models that define subgraph matching rules, but whether or not a
chemical reaction can proceed is not defined by hard decision rules. In this work,
we propose a new approach to this task using the Conditional Graph Logic Network,
a conditional graphical model built upon graph neural networks that learns when
rules from reaction templates should be applied, implicitly considering whether
the resulting reaction would be both chemically feasible and strategic. We also
propose an efficient hierarchical sampling to alleviate the computation cost. While
achieving a significant improvement of 8.1% over current state-of-the-art methods
on the benchmark dataset, our model also offers interpretations for the prediction.

1

Introduction

Retrosynthesis planning is the procedure of identifying a series of reactions that lead to the synthesis
of target product. It is first formalized by E. J. Corey [1] and now becomes one of the fundamental
problems in organic chemistry. Such problem of “working backwards from the target” is challenging,
due to the size of the search space–the vast numbers of theoretically-possible transformations–and thus
requires the skill and creativity from experienced chemists. Recently, various computer algorithms [2]
work in assistance to experienced chemists and save them tremendous time and effort.
The simplest formulation of retrosynthesis is to take the target product as input and predict possible
reactants 1 . It is essentially the “reverse problem” of reaction prediction. In reaction prediction, the
reactants (sometimes reagents as well) are given as the input and the desired outputs are possible
products. In this case, atoms of desired products are the subset of reactants atoms, since the side
products are often ignored (see Fig 1). Thus models are essentially designed to identify this subset in
reactant atoms and reassemble them to be the product. This can be treated as a deductive reasoning
process. In sharp contrast, retrosynthesis is to identify the superset of atoms in target products, and
thus is an abductive reasoning process and requires “creativity” to be solved, making it a harder
problem. Although recent advances in graph neural networks have led to superior performance in
reaction prediction [3, 4, 5], such advances do not transfer to retrosynthesis.
Computer-aided retrosynthesis designs have been deployed over the past years since [6]. Some of
them are completely rule-based systems [7] and do not scale well due to high computation cost and
⇤

1

Work done while Hanjun was at Georgia Institute of Technology
We will focus on this “single step” version of retrosynthesis in our paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

