Image Synthesis with a Single (Robust) Classifier

Shibani Santurkar∗
MIT
shibani@mit.edu

Dimitris Tsipras∗
MIT
tsipras@mit.edu

Brandon Tran∗
MIT
btran115@mit.edu

Andrew Ilyas∗
MIT
ailyas@mit.edu

Logan Engstrom∗
MIT
engstrom@mit.edu

Aleksander M ˛
adry
MIT
madry@mit.edu

Abstract
We show that the basic classification framework alone can be used to tackle some
of the most challenging tasks in image synthesis. In contrast to other state-of-theart approaches, the toolkit we develop is rather minimal: it uses a single, off-theshelf classifier for all these tasks. The crux of our approach is that we train this
classifier to be adversarially robust. It turns out that adversarial robustness is precisely what we need to directly manipulate salient features of the input. Overall,
our findings demonstrate the utility of robustness in the broader machine learning
context.2

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized the way we tackle computer vision problems. This revolution
started with progress on image classification [KSH12; He+15; He+16], which then triggered the
expansion of the deep learning paradigm to encompass more sophisticated tasks such as image generation [Kar+18; BDS19] and image-to-image translation [Iso+17; Zhu+17]. Much of this expansion was predicated on developing complex, task-specific techniques, often rooted in the generative
adversarial network (GAN) framework [Goo+14]. However, is there a simpler toolkit for solving
these tasks?
In this work, we demonstrate that basic classification tools alone suffice to tackle various image synthesis tasks. These tasks include (cf. Figure 1): generation (Section 3.1), inpainting (Section 3.2),
image-to-image translation (Section 3.3), super-resolution (Section 3.4), and interactive image manipulation (Section 3.5).
Our entire toolkit is based on a single classifier (per dataset) and involves performing a simple input manipulation: maximizing predicted class scores with gradient descent. Our approach is thus
general purpose and simple to implement and train, while also requiring minimal tuning. To highlight the potential of the core methodology itself, we intentionally employ a generic classification
setup (ResNet-50 [He+16] with default hyperparameters) without any additional optimizations (e.g.,
domain-specific priors or regularizers). Moreover, to emphasize the consistency of our approach,
throughout this work we demonstrate performance on randomly selected examples from the test set.
The key ingredient of our method is adversarially robust classifiers. Previously, Tsipras et
al. [Tsi+19] observed that maximizing the loss of robust models over the input leads to realistic
instances of other classes. Here we are able to fully leverage this connection to build a versatile
toolkit for image synthesis. Our findings thus establish robust classifiers as a powerful primitive for
semantic image manipulation, despite them being trained solely to perform image classification.
∗
2

Equal contribution
Code and models for our experiments can be found at https://git.io/robust-apps.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

