DeepUSPS: Deep Robust Unsupervised Saliency
Prediction With Self-Supervision

Duc Tam Nguyen ∗†‡, Maximilian Dax ∗ ‡, Chaithanya Kumar Mummadi †§
Thi Phuong Nhung Ngo §, Thi Hoai Phuong Nguyen ¶, Zhongyu Lou ‡, Thomas Brox †

Abstract
Deep neural network (DNN) based salient object detection in images based on highquality labels is expensive. Alternative unsupervised approaches rely on careful
selection of multiple handcrafted saliency methods to generate noisy pseudoground-truth labels. In this work, we propose a two-stage mechanism for robust
unsupervised object saliency prediction, where the first stage involves refinement
of the noisy pseudo-labels generated from different handcrafted methods. Each
handcrafted method is substituted by a deep network that learns to generate the
pseudo-labels. These labels are refined incrementally in multiple iterations via
our proposed self-supervision technique. In the second stage, the refined labels
produced from multiple networks representing multiple saliency methods are
used to train the actual saliency detection network. We show that this self-learning
procedure outperforms all the existing unsupervised methods over different datasets.
Results are even comparable to those of fully-supervised state-of-the-art approaches.
The code is available at https://tinyurl.com/wtlhgo3 .

(a) Input and GT

(b) Traditional methods

(c) Deep unsupervised methods

Figure 1: Unsupervised object saliency detection based on a given (a) input image. Note that the
ground-truth (GT) label is depicted only for illustration purposes and not exploited by any traditional
or deep unsupervised methods. (b) Traditional methods use handcrafted priors to predict saliencies
and (c) deep unsupervised methods SBF, USD and ours (DeepUSPS) employ the outputs of the
handcrafted methods as pseudo-labels in the process of training saliency prediction network. It can be
seen that while SBF results in noisy saliency predictions and USD produces smooth saliency maps,
our method yields more fine-grained saliency predictions and closely resembles the ground-truth.
∗

Equal contribution, [fixed-term.Maximilian.Dax, Ductam.Nguyen]@de.bosch.com
Computer Vision Group, University of Freiburg, Germany
‡
Bosch Research, Bosch GmbH, Germany
§
Bosch Center for AI, Bosch GmbH, Germany
¶
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

