Topology-Preserving Deep Image Segmentation
∗

Xiaoling Hu1 , Li Fuxin2 , Dimitris Samaras1 and Chao Chen1
1
2

Stony Brook University
Oregon State University

Abstract
Segmentation algorithms are prone to topological errors on fine-scale structures,
e.g., broken connections. We propose a novel method that learns to segment
with correct topology. In particular, we design a continuous-valued loss function
that enforces a segmentation to have the same topology as the ground truth, i.e.,
having the same Betti number. The proposed topology-preserving loss function
is differentiable and we incorporate it into end-to-end training of a deep neural
network. Our method achieves much better performance on the Betti number error,
which directly accounts for the topological correctness. It also performs superiorly
on other topology-relevant metrics, e.g., the Adjusted Rand Index and the Variation
of Information. We illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method on a broad
spectrum of natural and biomedical datasets.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation, i.e., assigning labels to all pixels of an input image, is crucial in many computer
vision tasks. State-of-the-art deep segmentation methods [27, 22, 10, 11, 12] learn high quality
feature representations through an end-to-end trained deep network and achieve satisfactory perpixel accuracy. However, these segmentation algorithms are still prone to make errors on fine-scale
structures, such as small object instances, instances with multiple connected components, and thin
connections. These fine-scale structures may be crucial in analyzing the functionality of the objects.
For example, accurate extraction of thin parts such as ropes and handles is crucial in planning robot
actions, e.g., dragging or grasping. In biomedical images, correct delineation of thin objects such
as neuron membranes and vessels is crucial in providing accurate morphological and structural
quantification of the underlying system. A broken connection or a missing component may only
induce marginal per-pixel error, but can cause catastrophic functional mistakes. See Fig. 1 for an
example.
We propose a novel deep segmentation method that learns to segment with correct topology. In
particular, we propose a topological loss that enforces the segmentation results to have the same
topology as the ground truth, i.e., having the same Betti number (number of connected components
and handles). A neural network trained with such loss will achieve high topological fidelity without
sacrificing per-pixel accuracy. The main challenge in designing such loss is that topological information, namely, Betti numbers, are discrete values. We need a continuous-valued measurement of the
topological similarity between a prediction and the ground truth; and such measurement needs to be
differentiable in order to backpropagate through the network.
To this end, we propose to use theory from computational topology [15], which summarizes the
topological information from a continuous-valued function (in our case, the likelihood function f is
predicted by a neural network). Instead of acquiring the segmentation by thresholding f at 0.5 and
inspecting its topology, persistent homology [15, 16, 47] captures topological information carried
∗

Correspondence to: Xiaoling Hu <xiaolhu@cs.stonybrook.edu>.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

