Deep Signature Transforms
Patric Bonnier1,∗

Patrick Kidger1,2,∗

Cristopher Salvi1,2,∗

Imanol Perez Arribas1,2,∗
Terry Lyons1,2

Mathematical Institute, University of Oxford
The Alan Turing Institute, British Library
{bonnier, kidger, perez, salvi, tlyons}@maths.ox.ac.uk
1

2

Abstract
The signature is an infinite graded sequence of statistics known to characterise
a stream of data up to a negligible equivalence class. It is a transform which
has previously been treated as a fixed feature transformation, on top of which a
model may be built. We propose a novel approach which combines the advantages
of the signature transform with modern deep learning frameworks. By learning
an augmentation of the stream prior to the signature transform, the terms of the
signature may be selected in a data-dependent way. More generally, we describe
how the signature transform may be used as a layer anywhere within a neural
network. In this context it may be interpreted as a pooling operation. We present
the results of empirical experiments to back up the theoretical justification. Code
available at github.com/patrick-kidger/Deep-Signature-Transforms.

1

Introduction

1.1

What is the signature transform?

When data is ordered sequentially then it comes with a natural path-like structure: the data may be
thought of as a discretisation of a path X : [0, 1] → V , where V is some Banach space. In practice
we shall always take V = Rd for some d ∈ N. For example the changing air pressure at a particular
location may be thought of as a path in R; the motion of a pen on paper may be thought of as a path
in R2 ; the changes within financial markets may be thought of as a path in Rd , with d potentially
very large.
Given a path, we may define its signature, which is a collection of statistics of the path. The map
from a path to its signature is called the signature transform.
Definition 1.1. Let x = (x1 , . . . , xn ), where xi ∈ Rd . Let f = (f1 , . . . , fd ) : [0, 1] → Rd be
i−1
continuous, such that f ( n−1
) = xi , and linear on the intervals in between. Then the signature of x
is defined as the collection of iterated integrals2



Z
Z
k
Y
df
ij


Sig(x) = 
···
(tj )dt1 · · · dtk 
 .
dt
j=1
0<t1 <···<tk <1

1≤i1 ,...,ik ≤d k≥0

∗

Equal contribution.
For clarity here we have used more widely-understood notation. The definition of the signature transform
is usually written in an equivalent but alternate manner using the notation of stochastic calculus; see Definition
A.1 in Appendix A.
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

