MintNet: Building Invertible Neural Networks with
Masked Convolutions
Yang Song∗
Stanford University
yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Chenlin Meng∗
Stanford University
chenlin@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a new way of constructing invertible neural networks by combining
simple building blocks with a novel set of composition rules. This leads to a
rich set of invertible architectures, including those similar to ResNets. Inversion
is achieved with a locally convergent iterative procedure that is parallelizable
and very fast in practice. Additionally, the determinant of the Jacobian can be
computed analytically and efficiently, enabling their generative use as flow models.
To demonstrate their flexibility, we show that our invertible neural networks are
competitive with ResNets on MNIST and CIFAR-10 classification. When trained
as generative models, our invertible networks achieve competitive likelihoods on
MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 32×32, with bits per dimension of 0.98, 3.32
and 4.06 respectively.

1

Introduction

Invertible neural networks have many applications in machine learning. They have been employed to
investigate representations of deep classifiers [15], understand the cause of adversarial examples [14],
learn transition operators for MCMC [28, 18], create generative models that are directly trainable by
maximum likelihood [6, 5, 24, 16, 9, 1], and perform approximate inference [27, 17].
Many applications of invertible neural networks require that both inverting the network and computing
the Jacobian determinant be efficient. While typical neural networks are not invertible, achieving these
properties often imposes restrictive constraints to the architecture. For example, planar flows [27]
and Sylvester flow [2] constrain the number of hidden units to be smaller than the input dimension.
NICE [5] and Real NVP [6] rely on dimension partitioning heuristics and specific architectures
such as coupling layers, which could make training more difficult [1]. Methods like FFJORD [9],
i-ResNets [1] have fewer architectural constraints. However, their Jacobian determinants have to be
approximated, which is problematic if repeatedly performed at training time as in flow models.
In this paper, we propose a new method of constructing invertible neural networks which are flexible,
efficient to invert, and whose Jacobian can be computed exactly and efficiently. We use triangular
matrices as our basic module. Then, we provide a set of composition rules to recursively build
more complex non-linear modules from the basic module, and show that the composed modules are
invertible as long as their Jacobians are non-singular. As in previous work [6, 24], the Jacobians
of our modules are triangular, allowing efficient determinant computation. The inverse of these
modules can be obtained by an efficiently parallelizable fixed-point iteration method, making the cost
of inversion comparable to that of an i-ResNet [1] block.
Using our composition rules and masked convolutions as the basic triangular building block, we
construct a rich set of invertible modules to form a deep invertible neural network. The architecture of
our proposed invertible network closely follows that of ResNet [10]—the state-of-the-art architecture
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

