Cross-lingual Language Model Pretraining

Guillaume Lample∗
Facebook AI Research
Sorbonne Universités
glample@fb.com

Alexis Conneau∗
Facebook AI Research
Université Le Mans
aconneau@fb.com

Abstract
Recent studies have demonstrated the efficiency of generative pretraining for English natural language understanding. In this work, we extend this approach to
multiple languages and show the effectiveness of cross-lingual pretraining. We
propose two methods to learn cross-lingual language models (XLMs): one unsupervised that only relies on monolingual data, and one supervised that leverages
parallel data with a new cross-lingual language model objective. We obtain state-ofthe-art results on cross-lingual classification, unsupervised and supervised machine
translation. On XNLI, our approach pushes the state of the art by an absolute gain
of 4.9% accuracy. On unsupervised machine translation, we obtain 34.3 BLEU on
WMT’16 German-English, improving the previous state of the art by more than 9
BLEU. On supervised machine translation, we obtain a new state of the art of 38.5
BLEU on WMT’16 Romanian-English, outperforming the previous best approach
by more than 4 BLEU. Our code and pretrained models are publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

Generative pretraining of sentence encoders [30, 20, 14] has led to strong improvements on numerous
natural language understanding benchmarks [40]. In this context, a Transformer [38] language model
is learned on a large unsupervised text corpus, and then fine-tuned on natural language understanding
(NLU) tasks such as classification [35] or natural language inference [7, 42]. Although there has
been a surge of interest in learning general-purpose sentence representations, research in that area
has been essentially monolingual, and largely focused around English benchmarks [10, 40]. Recent
developments in learning and evaluating cross-lingual sentence representations in many languages
[12] aim at mitigating the English-centric bias and suggest that it is possible to build universal
cross-lingual encoders that can encode any sentence into a shared embedding space.
In this work, we demonstrate the effectiveness of cross-lingual language model pretraining on multiple
cross-lingual understanding (XLU) benchmarks. Precisely, we make the following contributions:
1. We introduce a new unsupervised method for learning cross-lingual representations using
cross-lingual language modeling and investigate two monolingual pretraining objectives.
2. We introduce a new supervised learning objective that improves cross-lingual pretraining
when parallel data is available.
3. We significantly outperform the previous state of the art on cross-lingual classification,
unsupervised machine translation and supervised machine translation.
4. We show that cross-lingual language models can provide significant improvements on the
perplexity of low-resource languages.
5. We make our code and pretrained models publicly available1 .
∗
1

Equal contribution.
https://github.com/facebookresearch/XLM

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

