Understanding the Role of Momentum in
Stochastic Gradient Methods
Igor Gitman

Hunter Lang
Pengchuan Zhang
Lin Xiao
Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{igor.gitman, hunter.lang, penzhan, lin.xiao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The use of momentum in stochastic gradient methods has become a widespread
practice in machine learning. Different variants of momentum, including heavyball momentum, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient (NAG), and quasi-hyperbolic
momentum (QHM), have demonstrated success on various tasks. Despite these
empirical successes, there is a lack of clear understanding of how the momentum
parameters affect convergence and various performance measures of different
algorithms. In this paper, we use the general formulation of QHM to give a unified
analysis of several popular algorithms, covering their asymptotic convergence
conditions, stability regions, and properties of their stationary distributions. In
addition, by combining the results on convergence rates and stationary distributions,
we obtain sometimes counter-intuitive practical guidelines for setting the learning
rate and momentum parameters.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient methods have become extremely popular in machine learning for solving stochastic
optimization problems of the form


minimize
F(x) , Eζ f (x, ζ) ,
(1)
n
x ∈R

where ζ is a random variable representing data sampled from some (unknown) probability distribution,
x ∈ Rn represents the parameters of a machine learning model (e.g., the weight matrices in a neural
network), and f is a loss function associated with the model parameters and any sample ζ. Many
variants of the stochastic gradient methods can be written in the form of
x k+1 = x k − αk d k ,

(2)

where d k is a (stochastic) search direction and αk > 0 is the step size or learning rate. The classical
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [31] method uses d k = ∇x f (x k , ζ k ), where ζ k is a random sample
collected at step k. For the ease of notation, we use g k to denote ∇x f (x k , ζ k ) throughout this paper.
There is a vast literature on modifications of SGD that aim to improve its theoretical and empirical
performance. The most common such modification is the addition of a momentum term, which
sets the search direction d k as the combination of the current stochastic gradient g k and past search
directions. For example, the stochastic variant of Polyak’s heavy ball method [26] uses
d k = g k + βk d k−1,

(3)

where βk ∈ [0, 1). We call the combination of (2) and (3) the Stochastic Heavy Ball (SHB) method.
Gupal and Bazhenov [9] studied a “normalized” version of SHB, where
d k = (1 − βk )g k + βk d k−1 .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(4)

