A Flexible Generative Framework for Graph-based
Semi-supervised Learning

Jiaqi Ma∗†
jiaqima@umich.edu

Weijing Tang∗‡
weijtang@umich.edu

Ji Zhu‡
jizhu@umich.edu

Qiaozhu Mei†§
qmei@umich.edu

Abstract
We consider a family of problems that are concerned about making predictions
for the majority of unlabeled, graph-structured data samples based on a small
proportion of labeled samples. Relational information among the data samples,
often encoded in the graph/network structure, is shown to be helpful for these
semi-supervised learning tasks. However, conventional graph-based regularization
methods and recent graph neural networks do not fully leverage the interrelations
between the features, the graph, and the labels. In this work, we propose a flexible
generative framework for graph-based semi-supervised learning, which approaches
the joint distribution of the node features, labels, and the graph structure. Borrowing insights from random graph models in network science literature, this joint
distribution can be instantiated using various distribution families. For the inference
of missing labels, we exploit recent advances of scalable variational inference techniques to approximate the Bayesian posterior. We conduct thorough experiments
on benchmark datasets for graph-based semi-supervised learning. Results show
that the proposed methods outperform the state-of-the-art models in most settings.

1

Introduction

Traditional machine learning methods typically treat data samples as independent and approximate a
mapping function from the features to the outcome of each individual sample. However, many realworld data, such as social media or scientific articles, often come with richer relational information
among the individual samples. We consider a family of such scenarios where the relational information
is stored in a graph structure with the data samples as nodes, and the learning task is to predict the
outcomes of unlabeled nodes based on the node features, the graph structure, as well as the labels
of a subset of nodes. In these scenarios, breaking the independence assumption and utilizing such
relational information in the prediction models have been shown to be helpful [26, 25, 1, 10, 5, 14, 12].
However, there lacks a principled way to best synergize and utilize the relational information stored
in the graph together with the information stored in individual nodes. In this paper, we consider the
problem of graph-based semi-supervised learning and try to approach this problem by presenting a
flexible generative framework that explicitly models the joint relationship among the three key types
of information in this context: features, outcomes (or labels), and the graph.
There are two major classes of existing methods for graph-based semi-supervised learning. The
first class includes the graph-based regularization methods [26, 25, 1, 14, 12], where explicit regularizations are posed to smooth the predictions or feature representations over local neighborhoods.
This class of methods share an assumption that some kind of smoothness (e.g., the outcomes of
adjacent nodes are likely to be the same) should present in the local and global graph structure. The
∗

The two authors contribute equally to this paper.
School of Information, University of Michigan
‡
Department of Statistics, University of Michigan
§
Department of EECS, University of Michigan
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

