The Functional Neural Process
Christos Louizos
University of Amsterdam
TNO Intelligent Imaging
c.louizos@uva.nl

Xiahan Shi
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
xiahan.shi@de.bosch.com

Klamer Schutte
TNO Intelligent Imaging
klamer.schutter@tno.nl

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam
Qualcomm
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
We present a new family of exchangeable stochastic processes, the Functional
Neural Processes (FNPs). FNPs model distributions over functions by learning a
graph of dependencies on top of latent representations of the points in the given
dataset. In doing so, they define a Bayesian model without explicitly positing a
prior distribution over latent global parameters; they instead adopt priors over the
relational structure of the given dataset, a task that is much simpler. We show how
we can learn such models from data, demonstrate that they are scalable to large
datasets through mini-batch optimization and describe how we can make predictions for new points via their posterior predictive distribution. We experimentally
evaluate FNPs on the tasks of toy regression and image classification and show
that, when compared to baselines that employ global latent parameters, they offer
both competitive predictions as well as more robust uncertainty estimates.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are a prevalent paradigm for approximating functions of almost any kind. Their
highly flexible parametric form coupled with large amounts of data allows for accurate modelling
of the underlying task, a fact that usually leads to state of the art prediction performance. While
predictive performance is definitely an important aspect, in a lot of safety critical applications, such
as self-driving cars, we also require accurate uncertainty estimates about the predictions.
Bayesian neural networks [33, 37, 15, 5] have been an attempt at imbuing neural networks with
the ability to model uncertainty; they posit a prior distribution over the weights of the network and
through inference they can represent their uncertainty in the posterior distribution. Nevertheless, for
such complex models, the choice of the prior is quite difficult since understanding the interactions
of the parameters with the data is a non-trivial task. As a result, priors are usually employed for
computational convenience and tractability. Furthermore, inference over the weights of a neural
network can be a daunting task due to the high dimensionality and posterior complexity [31, 44].
An alternative way that can “bypass” the aforementioned issues is that of adopting a stochastic
process [25]. They posit distributions over functions, e.g. neural networks, directly, without the
necessity of adopting prior distributions over global parameters, such as the neural network weights.
Gaussian processes [41] (GPs) is a prime example of a stochastic process; they can encode any
inductive bias in the form of a covariance structure among the datapoints in the given dataset, a more
intuitive modelling task than positing priors over weights. Furthermore, for vanilla GPs, posterior
inference is much simpler. Despite these advantages, they also have two main limitations: 1) the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

