Generalization in multitask deep neural classifiers: a
statistical physics approach
Tyler Lee
Intel AI Lab
tyler.p.lee@intel.com

Anthony Ndirango
Intel AI Lab
anthony.ndirango@intel.com

Abstract
A proper understanding of the striking generalization abilities of deep neural networks presents an enduring puzzle. Recently, there has been a growing body of
numerically-grounded theoretical work that has contributed important insights to
the theory of learning in deep neural nets. There has also been a recent interest
in extending these analyses to understanding how multitask learning can further
improve the generalization capacity of deep neural nets. These studies deal almost
exclusively with regression tasks which are amenable to existing analytical techniques. We develop an analytic theory of the nonlinear dynamics of generalization
of deep neural networks trained to solve classification tasks using softmax outputs
and cross-entropy loss, addressing both single task and multitask settings. We do
so by adapting techniques from the statistical physics of disordered systems, accounting for both finite size datasets and correlated outputs induced by the training
dynamics. We discuss the validity of our theoretical results in comparison to a
comprehensive suite of numerical experiments. Our analysis provides theoretical
support for the intuition that the performance of multitask learning is determined
by the noisiness of the tasks and how well their input features align with each other.
Highly related, clean tasks benefit each other, whereas unrelated, clean tasks can
be detrimental to individual task performance.

1

Introduction

Despite the remarkable string of successful results demonstrated by deep learning practitioners, we
still do not have a clear understanding of how these models manage to generalize so well, effectively
evading many of the intuitions expected from statistical learning theory. The enigma is further
heightened when one considers multitask learning, especially in regimes where labeled data is scarce.
In order to make specific assertions about the effective transfer of knowledge across tasks, one
needs a predictive framework to address generalization in a multitask setting. There has been a
noticeable uptick in recent efforts to build a rigorous theoretical foundation for deep learning (see,
e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10] for a sampling of this trend). To the best of our knowledge (with one
exception, described below), none of the existing analytical work deals with multitask learning.
Multitask learning holds promise for training more generalized and intelligent learning systems
[11]. It comprises a broad set of strategies loosely defined by the presence of multiple objective
functions and a set of shared parameters optimized for those objective functions. The most prevalent
formulation of multitask learning in the literature is the addition of supervised auxiliary task(s) to
assist in training a network to better perform a target task of interest (main task)[12, 13, 14, 15].
In this framework the only purpose of the auxiliary task(s) is to produce improved generalization
performance on the main task. This benefit is thought to arise from an inductive bias placed on the
learning of the main task towards learning more general features [11]. Since the features learned
through multitask learning blend the optimal features for all of the optimized tasks, there is an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

