CPM-Nets: Cross Partial Multi-View Networks
Changqing Zhang1,2 , Zongbo Han1 , Yajie Cui1 , Huazhu Fu3 , Joey Tianyi Zhou4∗, Qinghua Hu1,2
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Tianjin Key Lab of Machine Learning, Tianjin, China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore

Abstract
Despite multi-view learning progressed fast in past decades, it is still challenging
due to the difficulty in modeling complex correlation among different views, especially under the context of view missing. To address the challenge, we propose a
novel framework termed Cross Partial Multi-View Networks (CPM-Nets). In this
framework, we first give a formal definition of completeness and versatility for
multi-view representation and then theoretically prove the versatility of the latent
representation learned from our algorithm. To achieve the completeness, the task
of learning latent multi-view representation is specifically translated to degradation
process through mimicking data transmitting, such that the optimal tradeoff between consistence and complementarity across different views could be achieved.
In contrast with methods that either complete missing views or group samples according to view-missing patterns, our model fully exploits all samples and all views
to produce structured representation for interpretability. Extensive experimental
results validate the effectiveness of our algorithm over existing state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

In the real-word applications, data is usually represented in different views, including multiple modalities or multiple types of features. A lot of existing methods [1, 2, 3] empirically demonstrate that
different views could complete each other, leading ultimate performance improvement. Unfortunately,
the unknown and complex correlation among different views often disrupts the integration of different
modalities in the model. Moreover, data with missing views further aggravates the modeling difficulty.
Conventional multi-view learning usually holds the assumption that each sample is associated with the
unified observed views and all views are available for each sample. However, in practical applications,
there are usually incomplete cases for multi-view data [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. For example, in medical data,
different types of examinations are usually conducted for different subjects, and in web analysis,
some webs may contain texts, pictures and videos, but others may only contain one or two types,
which produce data with missing views. The view-missing patterns (i.e., combinations of available
views) become even more complex for the data with more views.
Projecting different views into a common space (e.g., CCA: Canonical Correlation Analysis and its
variants [9, 10, 11]) is impeded by view-missing issue. Several methods are proposed to keep on
exploiting the correlation of different views. One straightforward way is completing the missing
views, and then the on-shelf multi-view learning algorithms could be adopted. The missing views
are basically blockwise and thus low-rank based completion [12, 13] is not applicable which has
been widely recognized [5, 14]. Missing modality imputation methods [15, 5] usually require
samples with two paired modalities to train the networks which can predict the missing modality
from the observed one. To explore the complementarity among multiple views, another natural way
∗

Corresponding author: J. T. Zhou <joey.tianyi.zhou@gmail.com>.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

