Efficient and Thrifty Voting by Any Means Necessary

Debmalya Mandal
Columbia University
dm3557@columbia.edu

Ariel D. Procaccia
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

Nisarg Shah
University of Toronto
nisarg@cs.toronto.edu

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We take an unorthodox view of voting by expanding the design space to include
both the elicitation rule, whereby voters map their (cardinal) preferences to votes,
and the aggregation rule, which transforms the reported votes into collective
decisions. Intuitively, there is a tradeoff between the communication requirements
of the elicitation rule (i.e., the number of bits of information that voters need to
provide about their preferences) and the efficiency of the outcome of the aggregation
rule, which we measure through distortion (i.e., how well the utilitarian social
welfare of the outcome approximates the maximum social welfare in the worst case).
Our results chart the Pareto frontier of the communication-distortion tradeoff.

1

Introduction

AI systems are increasingly being used to make decisions that have an impact on people and society.
There is much discussion of ways to ensure that such systems reflect appropriate societal values, but
it is often unclear what the right choices are [1]. A promising direction is to design systems that
incorporate and aggregate people’s opinions, by building on work in social choice theory [2, 3, 4].
While the origins of the field can be traced back to the contributions of Condorcet [5] and others in the
18th Century, it was founded in its modern form in the 20th Century. With his famous impossibility
result, Arrow [6] pioneered the axiomatic approach to voting, in which voting rules that aggregate
ranked preferences of individuals are compared qualitatively based on the axiomatic desiderata they
satisfy or violate. This approach underlies most of the work on voting in social choice theory [see,
e.g., 7, 8].
By contrast, research in computational social choice [9] has put more emphasis on quantitative
evaluation of voting rules. In particular, Procaccia and Rosenschein [10] introduced the implicit
utilitarian voting framework, in which it is assumed that individuals (a.k.a. voters) have underlying
cardinal utilities for the different alternatives, and express ranked preferences that are consistent with
their utilities. The goal is to choose an alternative that maximizes (utilitarian) social welfare — the sum
of utilities — by relying on the reported rankings as a proxy for the latent utilities. Specifically, voting
rules are compared by their distortion, which is the worst-case ratio of the maximum social welfare to
the social welfare of the alternative they choose. The implicit utilitarian voting approach has received
significant attention in the past decade [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25], and
voting rules based on it have been deployed on the online voting platform robovote.org.
Benadè et al. [13] observe that implicit utilitarian voting has another advantage: it allows comparing
not only voting rules that aggregate ranked preferences, but also voting rules that aggregate other
types of ballots, which they refer to as input formats. They further argue that we can associate each
input format with the best rule for aggregating votes in that format, and ultimately compare the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

