Generalized Off-Policy Actor-Critic

Shangtong Zhang, Wendelin Boehmer, Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{shangtong.zhang, wendelin.boehmer, shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a new objective, the counterfactual objective, unifying existing objectives for off-policy policy gradient algorithms in the continuing reinforcement
learning (RL) setting. Compared to the commonly used excursion objective, which
can be misleading about the performance of the target policy when deployed,
our new objective better predicts such performance. We prove the Generalized
Off-Policy Policy Gradient Theorem to compute the policy gradient of the counterfactual objective and use an emphatic approach to get an unbiased sample from
this policy gradient, yielding the Generalized Off-Policy Actor-Critic (Geoff-PAC)
algorithm. We demonstrate the merits of Geoff-PAC over existing algorithms in
Mujoco robot simulation tasks, the first empirical success of emphatic algorithms
in prevailing deep RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms based on the policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 2000;
Marbach and Tsitsiklis, 2001) have recently enjoyed great success in various domains, e.g., achieving
human-level performance on Atari games (Mnih et al., 2016). The original policy gradient theorem is
on-policy and used to optimize the on-policy objective. However, in many cases, we would prefer to
learn off-policy to improve data efficiency (Lin, 1992) and exploration (Osband et al., 2018). To this
end, the Off-Policy Policy Gradient (OPPG) Theorem (Degris et al., 2012; Maei, 2018; Imani et al.,
2018) was developed and has been widely used (Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2015; Wang et al.,
2016; Gu et al., 2017; Ciosek and Whiteson, 2017; Espeholt et al., 2018).
Ideally, an off-policy algorithm should optimize the off-policy analogue of the on-policy objective. In
the continuing RL setting, this analogue would be the performance of the target policy in expectation
w.r.t. the stationary distribution of the target policy, which is referred to as the alternative life objective
(Ghiassian et al., 2018). This objective corresponds to the performance of the target policy when
deployed. Previously, OPPG optimizes a different objective, the performance of the target policy in
expectation w.r.t. the stationary distribution of the behavior policy. This objective is referred to as the
excursion objective (Ghiassian et al., 2018), as it corresponds to the excursion setting (Sutton et al.,
2016). Unfortunately, the excursion objective can be misleading about the performance of the target
policy when deployed, as we illustrate in Section 3.
It is infeasible to optimize the alternative life objective directly in the off-policy continuing setting.
Instead, we propose to optimize the counterfactual objective, which approximates the alternative
life objective. In the excursion setting, an agent in the stationary distribution of the behavior policy
considers a hypothetical excursion that follows the target policy. The return from this hypothetical
excursion is an indicator of the performance of the target policy. The excursion objective measures this
return w.r.t. the stationary distribution of the behavior policy, using samples generated by executing
the behavior policy. By contrast, evaluating the alternative life objective requires samples from
the stationary distribution of the target policy, to which the agent does not have access. In the
counterfactual objective, we use a new parameter γ̂ to control how counterfactual the objective is,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

