Online Continual Learning with Maximally
Interfered Retrieval
Rahaf Aljundi∗
KU Leuven
rahaf.aljundi@gmail.com

Lucas Caccia∗
Mila
lucas.page-caccia@mail.mcgill.ca

Eugene Belilovsky∗
Mila
eugene.belilovsky@umontreal.ca
Min Lin
Mila
mavenlin@gmail.com

Massimo Caccia∗
Mila
massimo.p.caccia@gmail.com
Laurent Charlin
Mila
lcharlin@gmail.com

Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven
tinne.tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Continual learning, the setting where a learning agent is faced with a never ending
stream of data, continues to be a great challenge for modern machine learning
systems. In particular the online or "single-pass through the data" setting has
gained attention recently as a natural setting that is difficult to tackle. Methods
based on replay, either generative or from a stored memory, have been shown to
be effective approaches for continual learning, matching or exceeding the state
of the art in a number of standard benchmarks. These approaches typically rely
on randomly selecting samples from the replay memory or from a generative
model, which is suboptimal. In this work we consider a controlled sampling
of memories for replay. We retrieve the samples which are most interfered, i.e.
whose prediction will be most negatively impacted by the foreseen parameters
update. We show a formulation for this sampling criterion in both the generative
replay and the experience replay setting, producing consistent gains in performance
and greatly reduced forgetting. We release an implementation of our method at
https://github.com/optimass/Maximally_Interfered_Retrieval.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks have exceeded human-level performance in accomplishing individual
narrow tasks [19]. However, such success remains limited compared to human intelligence that
can continually learn and perform an unlimited number of tasks. Humans’ ability of learning and
accumulating knowledge over their lifetime has been challenging for modern machine learning
algorithms and particularly neural networks. In that perspective, continual learning aims for a higher
level of machine intelligence by providing the artificial agents with the ability to learn online from a
non-stationary and never-ending stream of data. A key component for such never-ending learning
∗

Authors contributed equally

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

