Exact Rate-Distortion in Autoencoders via Echo Noise
Rob Brekelmans, Daniel Moyer, Aram Galstyan, Greg Ver Steeg
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
brekelma, moyerd@usc.edu; galstyan, gregv@isi.edu

Abstract
Compression is at the heart of effective representation learning. However, lossy
compression is typically achieved through simple parametric models like Gaussian
noise to preserve analytic tractability, and the limitations this imposes on learning
are largely unexplored. Further, the Gaussian prior assumptions in models such as
variational autoencoders (VAEs) provide only an upper bound on the compression
rate in general. We introduce a new noise channel, Echo noise, that admits a simple,
exact expression for mutual information for arbitrary input distributions. The noise
is constructed in a data-driven fashion that does not require restrictive distributional
assumptions. With its complex encoding mechanism and exact rate regularization,
Echo leads to improved bounds on log-likelihood and dominates -VAEs across the
achievable range of rate-distortion trade-offs. Further, we show that Echo noise can
outperform flow-based methods without the need to train additional distributional
transformations.

1

Introduction

Rate-distortion theory provides an organizing principle for representation learning that is enshrined
in machine learning as the Information Bottleneck principle [39]. The goal is to compress input
random variables X into a representation Z with mutual information rate I(X; Z), while minimizing
a distortion measure that captures our ability to use the representation for a task. For the rate to be
restricted, some information must be lost through noise. Despite the use of increasingly complex
encoding functions via neural networks, simple noise models like Gaussians still dominate the
literature because of their analytic tractability. Unfortunately, the effect of these assumptions on the
quality of learned representations is not well understood.
The Variational Autoencoding (VAE) framework [21, 36] has provided the basis for a number of
recent developments in representation learning [1, 10, 11, 18, 20, 41]. While VAEs were originally
motivated as performing posterior inference under a generative model, several recent works have
viewed the Evidence Lower Bound objective as corresponding to an unsupervised rate-distortion
problem [1, 3, 35]. From this perspective, reconstruction of the input provides the distortion measure,
while the KL divergence between encoder and prior gives an upper bound on the information rate
that depends heavily on the choice of prior [3, 37, 40].
In this work, we deconstruct this interpretation of VAEs and their extensions. Do the restrictive
assumptions of the Gaussian noise model limit the quality of VAE representations? Does forcing
the latent space to be independent and Gaussian constrain the expressivity of our models? We find
evidence to support both claims, showing that a powerful noise model can achieve more efficient
lossy compression and that relaxing prior or marginal assumptions can lead to better bounds on both
the information rate and log-likelihood.
The main contribution of this paper is the introduction of the Echo noise channel, a powerful, datadriven improvement over Gaussian channels whose compression rate can be precisely expressed for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

