Connective Cognition Network for Directional Visual
Commonsense Reasoning

1

Aming Wu1∗ Linchao Zhu2 Yahong Han1† Yi Yang2
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
{tjwam,yahong}@tju.edu.cn, {Linchao.Zhu, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Visual commonsense reasoning (VCR) has been introduced to boost research of
cognition-level visual understanding, i.e., a thorough understanding of correlated
details of the scene plus an inference with related commonsense knowledge. Recent
studies on neuroscience have suggested that brain function or cognition can be
described as a global and dynamic integration of local neuronal connectivity, which
is context-sensitive to specific cognition tasks. Inspired by this idea, towards VCR,
we propose a connective cognition network (CCN) to dynamically reorganize the
visual neuron connectivity that is contextualized by the meaning of questions and
answers. Concretely, we first develop visual neuron connectivity to fully model
correlations of visual content. Then, a contextualization process is introduced to
fuse the sentence representation with that of visual neurons. Finally, based on the
output of contextualized connectivity, we propose directional connectivity to infer
answers or rationales. Experimental results on the VCR dataset demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Particularly, in Q → AR mode, our method is around
4% higher than the state-of-the-art method.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in visual understanding mainly make progress on the recognition-level perception
of visual content, e.g., object detection [13, 23] and segmentation [9, 5], or even on the recognitionlevel grounding of visual concepts with image regions, e.g., image captioning [40, 24] and visual
question answering [1, 6]. Towards complete visual understanding, a model must move forward
from perception to reasoning, which includes cognitive inferences with correlated details of the scene
and related commonsense knowledge. As a key step towards complete visual understanding, the
task of Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) [42] is proposed along with a well-devised new
dataset. In VCR, given an image, a machine is required to not only answer a question about the
thorough understanding of the correlated details of the visual content, but also provide a rationale, e.g.,
contextualized with related visual details and background knowledge, to justify why the answer is true.
As a first attempt to narrow the gap between recognition- and cognition-level visual understanding,
Recognition-to-Cognition Networks (R2C) [42] conducts visual commonsense reasoning step by step,
i.e., grounding the meaning of natural language with respect to the referred objects, contextualizing
the meaning of an answer with respect to the question and related global objects, and finally reasoning
over the shared representation to obtain a decision of an answer. Due to the large discrepancy between
the reasoning scheme of VCR and cognition function of human brain, R2C’s performance is not in
competition with humans score, e.g., 65% vs. 91% in Q → A mode.
∗
†

This work was done when Aming Wu visited ReLER Lab, UTS.
Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

