What the Vec?
Towards Probabilistically Grounded Embeddings

Carl Allen1
Ivana Balažević1
Timothy Hospedales1,2
1
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
2
Samsung AI Centre, Cambridge, UK
{carl.allen, ivana.balazevic, t.hospedales}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Word2Vec (W2V) and GloVe are popular, fast and efficient word embedding algorithms. Their embeddings are widely used and perform well on a variety of
natural language processing tasks. Moreover, W2V has recently been adopted in
the field of graph embedding, where it underpins several leading algorithms. However, despite their ubiquity and relatively simple model architecture, a theoretical
understanding of what the embedding parameters of W2V and GloVe learn and
why that is useful in downstream tasks has been lacking. We show that different
interactions between PMI vectors reflect semantic word relationships, such as
similarity and paraphrasing, that are encoded in low dimensional word embeddings
under a suitable projection, theoretically explaining why embeddings of W2V
and GloVe work. As a consequence, we also reveal an interesting mathematical
interconnection between the considered semantic relationships themselves.

1

Introduction

Word2Vec1 (W2V) [25] and GloVe [29] are fast, straightforward algorithms for generating word
embeddings, or vector representations of words, often considered points in a semantic space. Their
embeddings perform well on downstream tasks, such as identifying word similarity by vector
comparison (e.g. cosine similarity) and solving analogies, such as the well known “man is to king as
woman is to queen”, by the addition and subtraction of respective embeddings [26, 27, 19].
In addition, the W2V algorithm has recently been adopted within the growing field of graph embedding, where the typical aim is to represent graph nodes in a common latent space such that their
relative positioning can be used to predict edge relationships. Several state-of-the-art models for
graph representation incorporate the W2V algorithm to learn node embeddings based on random
walks over the graph [13, 30, 31]. Furthermore, word embeddings often underpin embeddings of
word sequences, e.g. sentences. Although sentence embedding models can be complex [8, 17], as
shown recently [38] they sometimes learn little beyond the information available in word embeddings.
Despite their relative ubiquity, much remains unknown of the W2V and GloVe algorithms, perhaps
most fundamentally we lack a theoretical understanding of (i) what is learned in the embedding
parameters; and (ii) why that is useful in downstream tasks. Answering such core questions is of
interest in itself, particularly since the algorithms are unsupervised, but may also lead to improved
embedding algorithms, or enable better use to be made of the embeddings we have. For example,
both algorithms generate two embedding matrices, but little is known of how they relate or should
interact. Typically one is simply discarded, whereas empirically their mean can perform well [29] and
elsewhere they are assumed identical [14, 4]. As for embedding interactions, a variety of heuristics
are in common use, e.g. cosine similarity [26] and 3CosMult [19].
1

We refer exclusively, throughout, to the more common implementation Skipgram with negative sampling.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

