The Impact of Regularization on High-dimensional
Logistic Regression

Fariborz Salehi, Ehsan Abbasi, and Babak Hassibi∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA.

Abstract
Logistic regression is commonly used for modeling dichotomous outcomes. In
the classical setting, where the number of observations is much larger than the
number of parameters, properties of the maximum likelihood estimator in logistic
regression are well understood. Recently, Sur and Candes [26] have studied logistic
regression in the high-dimensional regime, where the number of observations and
parameters are comparable, and show, among other things, that the maximum
likelihood estimator is biased. In the high-dimensional regime the underlying
parameter vector is often structured (sparse, block-sparse, finite-alphabet, etc.) and
so in this paper we study regularized logistic regression (RLR), where a convex
regularizer that encourages the desired structure is added to the negative of the
log-likelihood function. An advantage of RLR is that it allows parameter recovery
even for instances where the (unconstrained) maximum likelihood estimate does
not exist. We provide a precise analysis of the performance of RLR via the solution
of a system of six nonlinear equations, through which any performance metric
of interest (mean, mean-squared error, probability of support recovery, etc.) can
be explicitly computed. Our results generalize those of Sur and Candes and we
provide a detailed study for the cases of `22 -RLR and sparse (`1 -regularized) logistic
regression. In both cases, we obtain explicit expressions for various performance
metrics and can find the values of the regularizer parameter that optimizes the
desired performance. The theory is validated by extensive numerical simulations
across a range of parameter values and problem instances.

1

Introduction

Logistic regression is the most commonly used statistical model for predicting dichotomous outcomes [11]. It has been extensively employed in many areas of engineering and applied sciences,
such as in the medical [3, 32] and social sciences [14]. As an example, in medical studies logistic
regression can be used to predict the risk of developing a certain disease (e.g. diabetes) based on a set
of observed characteristics from the patient (age, gender, weight, etc.)
Linear regression is a very useful tool for predicting a quantitive response. However, in many
situations the response variable is qualitative (or categorical) and linear regression is no longer appropriate [12]. This is mainly due to the fact that least-squares often succeeds under the assumption that
the error components are independent with normal distribution. In categorical predictions, however,
the error components are neither inependent nor normally distributed [19].
In logistic regression we model the probability that the label, Y , belongs to a certain category. When
no prior knowledge is available regarding the structure of the parameters, maximum likelihood is
often used for fitting the model. Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is a special case of maximum
∗
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0932428, CCF1018927, CCF-1423663 and CCF-1409204, by a grant from Qualcomm Inc., by a grant from Futurewei Inc., by
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory through the President and Director’s Fund, and by King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

