Implicit Regularization of Discrete Gradient
Dynamics in Linear Neural Networks

Gauthier Gidel
Mila & DIRO
Université de Montréal

Francis Bach
INRIA & École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University, Paris

Simon Lacoste-Julien∗
Mila & DIRO
Université de Montréal

Abstract
When optimizing over-parameterized models, such as deep neural networks, a
large set of parameters can achieve zero training error. In such cases, the choice of
the optimization algorithm and its respective hyper-parameters introduces biases
that will lead to convergence to specific minimizers of the objective. Consequently,
this choice can be considered as an implicit regularization for the training of
over-parametrized models. In this work, we push this idea further by studying
the discrete gradient dynamics of the training of a two-layer linear network with
the least-squares loss. Using a time rescaling, we show that, with a vanishing
initialization and a small enough step size, this dynamics sequentially learns the
solutions of a reduced-rank regression with a gradually increasing rank.

1

Introduction

When optimizing over-parameterized models, such as deep neural networks, a large set of parameters
leads to a zero training error. However they lead to different values for the test error and thus have
distinct generalization properties. More specifically, Neyshabur [2017, Part II] argues that the choice
of the optimization algorithm (and its respective hyperparameters) provides an implicit regularization
with respect to its geometry: it biases the training, finding a particular minimizer of the objective.
In this work, we use the same setting as Saxe et al. [2018]: a regression problem with least-squares
loss on a multi-dimensional output. Our prediction is made either by a linear model or by a two-layer
linear neural network [Saxe et al., 2018]. We extend their work which covered the continuous gradient
dynamics, to weaker assumptions as well as analyze the behavior of the discrete gradient updates
We show that with a vanishing initialization and a small enough step-size, the gradient dynamics of a
two-layer linear neural network sequentially learns components that can be ranked according to a
hierarchical structure whereas the gradient dynamics induced by the same regression problem but
with a linear prediction model instead learns these components simultaneously, missing this notion of
hierarchy between components. The path followed by the two-layer formulation actually corresponds
to successively solving the initial regression problem with a growing low rank constraint which is
also know as reduced-rank regression [Izenman, 1975]. Note that this notion of path followed by
the dynamics of a whole network is different from the notion of path introduced by Neyshabur et al.
[2015a] which corresponds to a path followed inside a fixed network, i.e., one corresponds to training
dynamics whereas the other corresponds to the propagation of information inside a network.
To sum-up, in our framework, the path followed by the gradient dynamics of a two-layer linear network
provides an implicit regularization that may lead to potentially better generalization properties. Our
contributions are the following:
∗
CIFAR fellow, Canada CIFAR AI chair
Correspondance to the first author: <firstname>.<lastname>@umontreal.ca

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

