Bayesian Optimization with Unknown Search Space

Huong Ha, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Thanh Nguyen, Hung Tran-The, Svetha Venkatesh
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2 I2 )
Deakin University, Geelong, Australia
{huong.ha, santu.rana, sunil.gupta, thanhnt, hung.tranthe, svetha.venkatesh}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
Applying Bayesian optimization in problems wherein the search space is unknown
is challenging. To address this problem, we propose a systematic volume expansion
strategy for the Bayesian optimization. We devise a strategy to guarantee that in
iterative expansions of the search space, our method can find a point whose function
value within  of the objective function maximum. Without the need to specify
any parameters, our algorithm automatically triggers a minimal expansion required
iteratively. We derive analytic expressions for when to trigger the expansion and by
how much to expand. We also provide theoretical analysis to show that our method
achieves -accuracy after a finite number of iterations. We demonstrate our method
on both benchmark test functions and machine learning hyper-parameter tuning
tasks and demonstrate that our method outperforms baselines.

1

Introduction

Choosing where to search matters. A time-tested path in the quest for new products or processes
is through experimental optimization. Bayesian optimization offers a sample efficient strategy for
experimental design by optimizing expensive black-box functions [9–11]. But one problem is that
users need to specify a bounded region to restrict the search of the objective function extrema. When
tackling a completely new problem, users do not have prior knowledge, hence there is no guarantee
that an arbitrarily defined search space contains the global optimum. Thus application of the Bayesian
optimization framework when the search region is unknown remains an open challenge [16].
One approach is to use a regularized acquisition function such that its maximum can never be at
infinity - hence no search space needs to be declared and an unconstrained optimizer can be used [16].
Other approaches use volume expansion, i.e. starting from the user-defined region, the search space
is expanded during the optimization. The simplest strategy is to repeatedly double the volume of the
search space every several iterations [16]. Nguyen et al suggest a volume expansion strategy based on
the evaluation budget [12]. All these methods require users to specify critical parameters - as example,
regularization parameters [16], or growth rate, expansion frequency (volume doubling) [16] or budget
[12]. These parameters are difficult to specify in practice. Additionally, [12] is computationally
expensive and the user-defined search space needs to be close to the global optimum.
In this paper, we propose a systematic volume expansion strategy for the Bayesian optimization
framework wherein the search space is unknown. Without any prior knowledge about the objective
function argmax or strict assumptions on the behavior of the objective function, it is impossible to
guarantee the global convergence when the search space is continuously expanded. To circumvent
this problem, we consider the setting where we achieve the global -accuracy condition, that is, we
aim to find a point whose function value is within  of the objective function global maximum.
Our volume expansion strategy is based on two guiding principles: 1) The algorithm can reach a
point whose function value is within  of the objective function maximum in one expansion, and, 2)
the search space should be minimally expanded so that the algorithm does not spend unnecessary
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

