Privacy-preserving Q-Learning with Functional Noise
in Continuous Spaces

Baoxiang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Borealis AI, Edmonton
bxwang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Nidhi Hegde
Borealis AI, Edmonton
nidhi.hegde@borealisai.com

Abstract
We consider differentially private algorithms for reinforcement learning in continuous spaces, such that neighboring reward functions are indistinguishable. This
protects the reward information from being exploited by methods such as inverse
reinforcement learning. Existing studies that guarantee differential privacy are
not extendable to infinite state spaces, as the noise level to ensure privacy will
scale accordingly to infinity. Our aim is to protect the value function approximator,
without regard to the number of states queried to the function. It is achieved by
adding functional noise to the value function iteratively in the training. We show
rigorous privacy guarantees by a series of analyses on the kernel of the noise
space, the probabilistic bound of such noise samples, and the composition over
the iterations. We gain insight into the utility analysis by proving the algorithm’s
approximate optimality when the state space is discrete. Experiments corroborate
our theoretical findings and show improvement over existing approaches.

1

Introduction

Increasing interest in reinforcement learning (RL) and deep reinforcement learning has led to recent
advances in a wide range of algorithms [SB18]. While a large part of the advancement has been in
the space of games, the applicability of RL extends to other practical cases such as recommendation
systems [ZZZ+ 18, LSTS15] and search engines [RJG+ 18, HDZ+ 18]. With the popularity of the
RL algorithms increasing, so have concerns about their privacy. Namely, the released value (or
policy) function are trained based on the reward signal and other inputs, which commonly rely on
sensitive data. For example, an RL recommendation system may use the reward signals simulated by
users’ historical records. This historical information can thus be inferred by recursively querying
the released functions. We consider differentially privacy [DMNS06, DR14], a natural and standard
privacy notion, to protect such information in the RL methods.
RL methods learn by carrying out actions, receiving rewards observed for that action in a given state,
and transitioning to the next states. Observation of the learned value function can reveal sensitive
information: the reward function is a succinct description of the task. It is also connected to the users’
preferences and the criteria of their decision-making; the visited states carry important contextual
information on the users, such as age, gender, occupation, and etc.; the transition function includes
the dynamics of the system and the impact of the actions on the environment. Among those, the
reward function is the most vulnerable and valuable component, and studies have been conducted
to infer this information [AN04, NR00]. In this paper, our aim is to design differentially private
algorithms for RL, such that neighboring reward functions are indistinguishable.
There is a recent line of research on privacy-preserving algorithms by protecting the reward function.
Balle et al. [BGP16] train the private value function using a fixed set of trajectories. However when
a new state is queried this privacy guarantee will not hold. Similar results are also considered in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

