Dimension-Free Bounds for Low-Precision Training

Zheng Li
IIIS, Tsinghua University
lzlz19971997@gmail.com

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Low-precision training is a promising way of decreasing the time and energy cost
of training machine learning models. Previous work has analyzed low-precision
training algorithms, such as low-precision stochastic gradient descent, and derived
theoretical bounds on their convergence rates. These bounds tend to depend on the
dimension of the model d in that the number of bits needed to achieve a particular
error bound increases as d increases. In this paper, we derive new bounds for
low-precision training algorithms that do not contain the dimension d , which lets
us better understand what affects the convergence of these algorithms as parameters
scale. Our methods also generalize naturally to let us prove new convergence
bounds on low-precision training with other quantization schemes, such as lowprecision floating-point computation and logarithmic quantization.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models continue to scale to target larger problems on bigger data, the task
of training these models quickly and efficiently becomes an ever-more-important problem. One
promising technique for doing this is low-precision computation, which replaces the 32-bit or 64-bit
floating point numbers that are usually used in ML computations with smaller numbers, often 8-bit or
16-bit fixed point numbers. Low-precision computation is a broadly applicable technique that has
received a lot of attention, especially for deep learning, and specialized hardware accelerators have
been developed to support it [2, 3, 14].
A major application for low-precision computation is the training of ML models using empirical
risk minimization. This training is usually done using stochastic gradient descent (SGD), and most
research in low-precision training has focused on low-precision versions of SGD. While most of this
work is empirical [4–7, 11, 12, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23], significant research has also been done in the
theoretical analysis of low-precision training. This theoretical work has succeeded in proving bounds
on the convergence rate of low-precision SGD and related low-precision methods in various settings,
including for convex [8, 21] and non-convex objectives [1, 9, 17]. One common characteristic of these
results is that the bounds tend to depend on the dimension d of the model being learned (equivalently,
d is the number of parameters). For example, [17] gives the convergence bound
√
2
(1 + log(T + 1))σmax
σmax δ d
∗
E [f (w̄T ) − f (w )] ≤
+
,
(1)
2µT
2
where the objective f is strongly convex with parameter µ, low-precision SGD outputs w̄T after T
2
iterations, w∗ is the true global minimizer of the objective, σmax
is an upper bound on the second
moment of the stochastic gradient samples E

∇f˜(w)

2
2

2
≤ σmax
, and δ is the quantization step,

the difference between adjacent numbers in the low-precision format. Notice that, as T → ∞, this
bound shows convergence down to a level of error that increases with the dimension d. Equivalently,
in order to achieve the same level of error as d increases, we would need to use more bits of
quantization to make δ smaller. Similar dimension-dependent results, where either the error or the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

