Momentum-Based Variance Reduction in
Non-Convex SGD
Francesco Orabona
Boston University
Boston, MA, USA
francesco@orabona.com

Ashok Cutkosky
Google Research
Mountain View, CA, USA
ashok@cutkosky.com

Abstract
Variance reduction has emerged in recent years as a strong competitor to stochastic
gradient descent in non-convex problems, providing the first algorithms to improve
upon the converge rate of stochastic gradient descent for finding first-order critical
points. However, variance reduction techniques typically require carefully tuned
learning rates and willingness to use excessively large “mega-batches” in order to
achieve their improved results. We present a new algorithm, S TORM, that does
not require any batches and makes use of adaptive learning rates, enabling simpler
implementation and less hyperparameter tuning. Our technique for removing the
batches uses a variant of momentum to achieve variance reduction in non-convex
optimization.
On smooth losses F , S TORM finds a point x with E[k∇F (x)k] ≤
√
O(1/ T + σ 1/3 /T 1/3 ) in T iterations with σ 2 variance in the gradients, matching
the optimal rate and without requiring knowledge of σ.

1

Introduction

This paper addresses the classic stochastic optimization problem, in which we are given a function
F : Rd → R, and wish to find x ∈ Rd such that F (x) is as small as possible. Unfortunately, our
access to F is limited to a stochastic function oracle: we can obtain sample functions f (·, ξ) where
ξ represents some sample variable (e.g. a minibatch index) such that E[f (·, ξ)] = F (·). Stochastic
optimization problems are found throughout machine learning. For example, in supervised learning,
x represents the parameters of a model (say the weights of a neural network), ξ represents an example,
f (x, ξ) represents the loss on an example, and F represents the training loss of the model.
We do not assume convexity, so in general the problem of finding a true minimum of F may be
NP-hard. Hence, we relax the problem to finding a critical point of F – that is a point such that
∇F (x) = 0. Also, we assume access only to stochastic gradients evaluated on arbitrary points,
rather than Hessians or other information. In this setting, the standard algorithm is stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). SGD produces a sequence of iterates x1 , . . . , xT using the recursion
xt+1 = xt − ηt g t ,

(1)

where g t = ∇f (xt , ξt ), f (·, ξ1 ), . . . , f (·, ξT ) are i.i.d. samples from a distribution D, and
η1 , . . . ηT ∈ R are a sequence of learning rates that must be carefully tuned to ensure good performance. Assuming the ηt are selected properly, SGD guarantees that a randomly selected iterate xt
satisfies E[k∇F (xt )k] ≤ O(1/T 1/4 ) [9].
Recently, variance reduction has emerged as an improved technique for finding critical points in nonconvex optimization problems. Stochastic variance-reduced gradient (SVRG) algorithms also produce
iterates x1 , . . . , xT according to the update formula (1), but now g t is a variance reduced estimate of
∇F (xt ). Over the last few years, SVRG algorithms have improved the convergence rate to critical
points of non-convex SGD from O(1/T 1/4 ) to O(1/T 3/10 ) [2, 21] to O(1/T 1/3 ) [8, 31]. Despite
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

