Efficient Probabilistic Inference in the Quest for
Physics Beyond the Standard Model

Atılım Güneş Baydin,1 Lukas Heinrich,2 Wahid Bhimji,3 Lei Shao,4
Saeid Naderiparizi,5 Andreas Munk,5 Jialin Liu,3 Bradley Gram-Hansen,1 Gilles Louppe6
Lawrence Meadows,4 Philip Torr,1 Victor Lee,4 Prabhat,3 Kyle Cranmer,7 Frank Wood5
1

University of Oxford, 2 CERN, 3 Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, 4 Intel Corporation
5
University of British Columbia, 6 University of Liege, 7 New York University

Abstract
We present a novel probabilistic programming framework that couples directly to
existing large-scale simulators through a cross-platform probabilistic execution
protocol, which allows general-purpose inference engines to record and control random number draws within simulators in a language-agnostic way. The execution of
existing simulators as probabilistic programs enables highly interpretable posterior
inference in the structured model defined by the simulator code base. We demonstrate the technique in particle physics, on a scientifically accurate simulation of
the τ (tau) lepton decay, which is a key ingredient in establishing the properties of
the Higgs boson. Inference efficiency is achieved via inference compilation where
a deep recurrent neural network is trained to parameterize proposal distributions
and control the stochastic simulator in a sequential importance sampling scheme,
at a fraction of the computational cost of a Markov chain Monte Carlo baseline.

1

Introduction

Complex simulators are used to express causal generative models of data across a wide segment of the
scientific community, with applications as diverse as hazard analysis in seismology [49], supernova
shock waves in astrophysics [36], market movements in economics [73], and blood flow in biology
[72]. In these generative models, complex simulators are composed from low-level mechanistic
components. These models are typically non-differentiable and lead to intractable likelihoods, which
renders many traditional statistical inference algorithms irrelevant and motivates a new class of
so-called likelihood-free inference algorithms [48].
There are two broad strategies for this type of likelihood-free inference problem. In the first, one uses a
simulator indirectly to train a surrogate model endowed with a likelihood that can be used in traditional
inference algorithms, for example approaches based on conditional density estimation [56, 70, 77, 85]
and density ratio estimation [30, 35]. Alternatively, approximate Bayesian computation (ABC)
[81, 87] refers to a large class of approaches for sampling from the posterior distribution of these
likelihood-free models, where the original simulator is used directly as part of the inference engine.
While variational inference [22] algorithms are often used when the posterior is intractable, they are
not directly applicable when the likelihood of the data generating process is unknown [84].
The class of inference strategies that directly use a simulator avoids the necessity of approximating
the generative model. Moreover, using a domain-specific simulator offers a natural pathway for
inference algorithms to provide interpretable posterior samples. In this work, we take this approach,
extend previous work in universal probabilistic programming [44, 86] and inference compilation
[63, 65] to large-scale complex simulators, and demonstrate the ability to execute existing simulator
codes under the control of general-purpose inference engines. This is achieved by creating a cross33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

