The Convergence Rate of Neural Networks for
Learned Functions of Different Frequencies

Ronen Basri1
1

David Jacobs2

Yoni Kasten1

Shira Kritchman1

Department of Computer Science, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD

Abstract
We study the relationship between the frequency of a function and the speed at
which a neural network learns it. We build on recent results that show that the
dynamics of overparameterized neural networks trained with gradient descent
can be well approximated by a linear system. When normalized training data is
uniformly distributed on a hypersphere, the eigenfunctions of this linear system
are spherical harmonic functions. We derive the corresponding eigenvalues for
each frequency after introducing a bias term in the model. This bias term had been
omitted from the linear network model without significantly affecting previous
theoretical results. However, we show theoretically and experimentally that a
shallow neural network without bias cannot represent or learn simple, low frequency
functions with odd frequencies. Our results lead to specific predictions of the time
it will take a network to learn functions of varying frequency. These predictions
match the empirical behavior of both shallow and deep networks.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have proven effective even though they often contain a large number of trainable
parameters that far exceeds the training data size. This defies conventional wisdom that such
overparameterization would lead to overfitting and poor generalization. The dynamics of neural
networks trained with gradient descent can help explain this phenomenon. If networks explore
simpler solutions before complex ones, this would explain why even overparameterized networks
settle on simple solutions that do not overfit. It will also imply that early stopping can select simpler
solutions that generalize well, [13]. This is demonstrated in Figure 1-left.
We analyze the dynamics of neural networks using a frequency analysis (see also [21, 27, 26, 9],
discussed in Section 2). Building on [25, 7, 2] (and under the same assumptions) we show that
when a network is trained with a regression loss to learn a function over data drawn from a uniform
distribution, it learns the low frequency components of the function significantly more rapidly than
the high frequency components (see Figure 2).
Specifically, [7, 2] show that the time needed to learn a function, f , is determined by the projection
of f onto the eigenvectors of a matrix H ∞ , and their corresponding eigenvalues. [25] had previously
noted that for uniformly distributed training data, the eigenvectors of this matrix are spherical
harmonic functions (analogs to the Fourier basis on hyperspheres). This work makes a number of
strong assumptions. They analyze shallow, massively overparameterized networks with no bias. Data
is assumed to be normalized.
Building on these results, we compute the eigenvalues of this linear system. Our computation allows
us to make specific predictions about how quickly each frequency of the target function will be
learned. For example, for the case of 1D functions, we show that a function of frequency k can be
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

