Efficient Symmetric Norm Regression via Linear
Sketching⇤
Zhao Song
University of Washington
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Lin F. Yang
University of California, Los Angeles
linyang@ee.ucla.edu

Hongyang Zhang
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
hongyanz@ttic.edu

Peilin Zhong
Columbia University
pz2225@columbia.edu

Abstract
We provide efficient algorithms for overconstrained linear regression problems
with size n ⇥ d when the loss function is a symmetric norm (a norm invariant under
sign-flips and coordinate-permutations). An important class of symmetric norms
n
are Orlicz norms, where for a function G and a vector y 2 RP
, the corresponding
n
Orlicz norm kykG is defined as the unique value ↵ such that i=1 G(|yi |/↵) = 1.
When the loss function is an Orlicz norm, our algorithm produces a (1 + ")approximate solution for an arbitrarily small constant " > 0 in input-sparsity
time, improving over the previously best-known algorithm which produces a
d · polylog n-approximate solution.
p When the loss function is a general symmetric
norm, our algorithm produces a d · polylog n · mmc(`)-approximate solution
in input-sparsity time, where mmc(`) is a quantity related to the symmetric norm
under consideration. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first input-sparsity
time algorithm with provable guarantees for the general class of symmetric norm
regression problem. Our results shed light on resolving the universal sketching
problem for linear regression, and the techniques might be of independent interest
to numerical linear algebra problems more broadly.

1

Introduction

Linear regression is a fundamental problem in machine learning. For a data matrix A 2 Rn⇥d and a
response vector b 2 Rn with n
d, the overconstrained linear regression problem can be formulated
as solving the following optimization problem:
min L(Ax

x2Rd

b),

(1)

where L : Rn ! R is a loss function. Via the technique of linear sketching, we have witnessed many
remarkable speedups for linear regression for a wide range of loss functions. Such technique involves
designing a sketching matrix S 2 Rr⇥n , and showing that by solving a linear regression instance on
the data matrix SA and the response vector Sb, which is usually much smaller in size, one can obtain
⇤

All authors contribute equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

