Understanding Sparse JL for Feature Hashing

Meena Jagadeesan∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
mjagadeesan@college.harvard.edu

Abstract
Feature hashing and other random projection schemes are commonly used to
reduce the dimensionality of feature vectors. The goal is to efficiently project
a high-dimensional feature vector living in Rn into a much lower-dimensional
space Rm , while approximately preserving Euclidean norm. These schemes can be
constructed using sparse random projections, for example using a sparse JohnsonLindenstrauss (JL) transform. A line of work introduced by Weinberger et. al
(ICML ’09) analyzes the accuracy of sparse JL with sparsity 1 on feature vectors
with small `∞ -to-`2 norm ratio. Recently, Freksen, Kamma, and Larsen (NeurIPS
’18) closed this line of work by proving a tight tradeoff between `∞ -to-`2 norm
ratio and accuracy for sparse JL with sparsity 1.
In this paper, we demonstrate the benefits of using sparsity s greater than 1 in
sparse JL on feature vectors. Our main result is a tight tradeoff between `∞ -to-`2
norm ratio and accuracy for a general sparsity s, that significantly generalizes the
result of Freksen et. al. Our result theoretically demonstrates that sparse JL with
s > 1 can have significantly better norm-preservation properties on feature vectors
than sparse JL with s = 1; we also empirically demonstrate this finding.

1

Introduction

Feature hashing and other random projection schemes are influential in helping manage large data
[11]. The goal is to reduce the dimensionality of feature vectors: more specifically, to project
high-dimensional feature vectors living in Rn into a lower dimensional space Rm (where m  n),
while approximately preserving Euclidean distances (i.e. `2 distances) with high probability. This
dimensionality reduction enables a classifier to process vectors in Rm , instead of vectors in Rn .
In this context, feature hashing was first introduced by Weinberger et. al [29] for document-based
classification tasks such as email spam filtering. For such tasks, feature hashing yields a lower
dimensional embedding of a high-dimensional feature vector derived from a bag-of-words model.
Since then, feature hashing has become a mainstream approach [28], applied to numerous domains
including ranking text documents [4], compressing neural networks [7], and protein sequence
classification [5].
Random Projections
Dimensionality reduction schemes for feature vectors fit nicely into the random projection literature.
In fact, the feature hashing scheme proposed by Weinberger et al. [29] boils down to uniformly
drawing a random m × n matrix where each column contains one nonzero entry, equal to −1 or 1.
The `2 -norm-preserving objective can be expressed mathematically as follows: for error  > 0 and
failure probability δ, the goal is to construct a probability distribution A over m × n real matrices
∗

I would like to thank Prof. Jelani Nelson for advising this project.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

