Scalable inference of topic evolution via models for
latent geometric structures

Mikhail Yurochkin
IBM Research
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Zhiwei Fan
University of Wisconsin-Madison
zhiwei@cs.wisc.edu

Aritra Guha
University of Michigan
aritra@umich.edu
Paraschos Koutris
University of Wisconsin-Madison
paris@cs.wisc.edu

XuanLong Nguyen
University of Michigan
xuanlong@umich.edu

Abstract
We develop new models and algorithms for learning the temporal dynamics of
the topic polytopes and related geometric objects that arise in topic model based
inference. Our model is nonparametric Bayesian and the corresponding inference
algorithm is able to discover new topics as the time progresses. By exploiting
the connection between the modeling of topic polytope evolution, Beta-Bernoulli
process and the Hungarian matching algorithm, our method is shown to be several
orders of magnitude faster than existing topic modeling approaches, as demonstrated by experiments working with several million documents in under two dozens
of minutes.1

1

Introduction

The topic or population polytope is a fundamental geometric object that underlies the presence of latent
topic variables in topic and admixture models [4, 19, 21]. The geometry of topic models provides the
theoretical basis for posterior contraction analysis of latent topics, in addition to helping to develop
fast and quite accurate inference algorithms in parametric and nonparametric settings [18, 28, 29, 32].
When data and the associated topics are indexed by time dimension, it is of interest to study the
temporal dynamics of such latent geometric structures. In this paper, we will study the modeling
and algorithms for learning temporal dynamics of topic polytope that arises in the analysis of text
corpora.
Several authors have extended the basic topic modeling framework to analyze how topics evolve
over time. The Dynamic Topic Models (DTM) [3] demonstrated the importance of accounting for
non-exchangeability between document groups, particularly when time index is provided. Another
approach is to keep topics fixed and consider only evolving topic popularity [26]. Hong et al. [13]
extended such an approach to multiple corpora. Ahmed and Xing [1] proposed a nonparametric
construction extending DTM where topics can appear or eventually die out. Although the evolution
of the latent geometric structure (i.e., the topic polytope) is implicitly present in these works, it was
not explicitly addressed nor is the geometry exploited. A related limitation shared by these modeling
1

Code: https://github.com/moonfolk/SDDM

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

