Learning from Trajectories via Subgoal Discovery

Sujoy Paul1
supaul@ece.ucr.edu
1

Jeroen van Baar2
jeroen@merl.com

University of California-Riverside

2

Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1
amitrc@ece.ucr.edu

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)

Abstract
Learning to solve complex goal-oriented tasks with sparse terminal-only rewards
often requires an enormous number of samples. In such cases, using a set of
expert trajectories could help to learn faster. However, Imitation Learning (IL)
via supervised pre-training with these trajectories may not perform as well and
generally requires additional finetuning with expert-in-the-loop. In this paper, we
propose an approach which uses the expert trajectories and learns to decompose
the complex main task into smaller sub-goals. We learn a function which partitions
the state-space into sub-goals, which can then be used to design an extrinsic reward
function. We follow a strategy where the agent first learns from the trajectories
using IL and then switches to Reinforcement Learning (RL) using the identified
sub-goals, to alleviate the errors in the IL step. To deal with states which are underrepresented by the trajectory set, we also learn a function to modulate the sub-goal
predictions. We show that our method is able to solve complex goal-oriented tasks,
which other RL, IL or their combinations in literature are not able to solve.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to take sequential actions so as to maximize, by interacting with
an environment, a certain pre-specified reward function, designed for the purpose of solving a task.
RL using Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has shown tremendous success in several tasks such as
playing games [1, 2], solving complex robotics tasks [3, 4], etc. However, with sparse rewards,
these algorithms often require a huge number of interactions with the environment, which is costly
in real-world applications such as self-driving cars [5], and manipulations using real robots [3].
Manually designed dense reward functions could mitigate such issues, however, in general, it is
difficult to design detailed reward functions for complex real-world tasks.
Imitation Learning (IL) using trajectories generated by an expert can potentially be used to learn the
policies faster [6]. But, the performance of IL algorithms [7] are not only dependent on the performance of the expert providing the trajectories, but also on the state-space distribution represented by
the trajectories, especially in case of high dimensional states. In order to avoid such dependencies
on the expert, some methods proposed in the literature [8, 9] take the path of combining RL and IL.
However, these methods assume access to the expert value function, which may become impractical
in real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we follow a strategy which starts with IL and then switches to RL. In the IL step, our
framework performs supervised pre-training which aims at learning a policy which best describes the
expert trajectories. However, due to limited availability of expert trajectories, the policy trained with
IL will have errors, which can then be alleviated using RL. Similar approaches are taken in [9] and
[10], where the authors show that supervised pre-training does help to speed-up learning. However,
note that the reward function in RL is still sparse, making it difficult to learn. With this in mind, we
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

