Gradient-based Adaptive Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Michalis K. Titsias
DeepMind
London, UK
mtitsias@google.com

Petros Dellaportas
Department of Statistical Science
University College of London, UK
Department of Statistics, Athens
Univ. of Econ. and Business, Greece
and The Alan Turing Institute, UK

Abstract
We introduce a gradient-based learning method to automatically adapt Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) proposal distributions to intractable targets. We define
a maximum entropy regularised objective function, referred to as generalised speed
measure, which can be robustly optimised over the parameters of the proposal distribution by applying stochastic gradient optimisation. An advantage of our method
compared to traditional adaptive MCMC methods is that the adaptation occurs
even when candidate state values are rejected. This is a highly desirable property
of any adaptation strategy because the adaptation starts in early iterations even if
the initial proposal distribution is far from optimum. We apply the framework for
learning multivariate random walk Metropolis and Metropolis-adjusted Langevin
proposals with full covariance matrices, and provide empirical evidence that our
method can outperform other MCMC algorithms, including Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo schemes.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a family of algorithms that provide a mechanism for generating dependent draws from arbitrarily complex distributions. The basic set up of an MCMC
algorithm in any probabilistic (e.g. Bayesian) inference problem, with an intractable target density
π(x), is as follows. A discrete time Markov chain {Xt }∞
t=0 with transition kernel Pθ , appropriately
chosen from a collection of π-invariant kernels {Pθ (·, ·)}θ∈Θ , is generated and the ergodic averages
Pt−1
µt (F ) = t−1 i=0 F (Xi ) are used as approximations to Eπ (F ) for any real-valued function F . Although in principle this sampling setup is simple, the actual implementation of any MCMC algorithm
requires careful choice of Pθ because the properties of µt depend on θ. In common kernels that
lead to random walk Metropolis (RWM), Metropolis-adjusted Langevin (MALA) or Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo (HMC) algorithms the kernels Pθ are specified through an accept-reject mechanism in
which the chain moves from time t to time t + 1 by first proposing candidate values y from a density
qθ (y|x) and accepting them with some probability α(xt , y) and setting xt+1 = y, or rejecting them
and setting xt+1 = xt . Since θ directly affects this acceptance probability, it is clear that one should
choose θ so that the chain does not move too slowly or rejects too many proposed values y because in
both these cases convergence to the stationary distribution will be slow. This has been recognised as
early as in [22] and has initiated exciting research that has produced optimum average acceptance
probabilities for a series of algorithms; see [30, 31, 32, 15, 6, 8, 34, 7, 35, 9]. Such optimal average
acceptance probabilities provide basic guidelines for adapting single step size parameters to achieve
certain average acceptance rates.
More sophisticated adaptive MCMC algorithms that can learn a full set of parameters θ, such as
a covariance matrix, borrow information from the history of the chain to optimise some criterion
reflecting the performance of the Markov chain [14, 5, 33, 13, 2, 1, 4]. Such methods are typically
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

