Trust Region-Guided Proximal Policy Optimization

Yuhui Wang , Hao He , Xiaoyang Tan , Yaozhong Gan
College of Computer Science and Technology,Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
Collaborative Innovation Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization
{y.wang, hugo, x.tan, yzgancn}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Proximal policy optimization (PPO) is one of the most popular deep reinforcement
learning (RL) methods, achieving state-of-the-art performance across a wide range
of challenging tasks. However, as a model-free RL method, the success of PPO
relies heavily on the effectiveness of its exploratory policy search. In this paper, we
give an in-depth analysis on the exploration behavior of PPO, and show that PPO
is prone to suffer from the risk of lack of exploration especially under the case of
bad initialization, which may lead to the failure of training or being trapped in bad
local optima. To address these issues, we proposed a novel policy optimization
method, named Trust Region-Guided PPO (TRGPPO), which adaptively adjusts
the clipping range within the trust region. We formally show that this method not
only improves the exploration ability within the trust region but enjoys a better
performance bound compared to the original PPO as well. Extensive experiments
verify the advantage of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Deep model-free reinforcement learning has achieved great successes in recent years, notably in
video games [11], board games [19], robotics [10], and challenging control tasks [17, 5]. Among
others, policy gradient (PG) methods are commonly used model-free policy search algorithms [14].
However, the first-order optimizer is not very accurate for curved areas. One can get overconfidence
and make bad moves that ruin the progress of the training. Trust region policy optimization (TRPO)
[16] and proximal policy optimization (PPO) [18] are two representative methods to address this
issue. To ensure stable learning, both methods impose a constraint on the difference between the new
policy and the old one, but with different policy metrics.
In particular, TRPO uses a divergence between the policy distributions (total variation divergence or
KL divergence), whereas PPO uses a probability ratio between the two policies1 . The divergence
metric is proven to be theoretically-justified as optimizing the policy within the divergence constraint
(named trust region) leads to guaranteed monotonic performance improvement. Nevertheless, the
complicated second-order optimization involved in TRPO makes it computationally inefficient and
difficult to scale up for large scale problems. PPO significantly reduces the complexity by adopting
a clipping mechanism which allows it to use a first-order optimization. PPO is proven to be very
effective in dealing with a wide range of challenging tasks while being simple to implement and tune.
However, how the underlying metric adopted for policy constraints influence the behavior of the
algorithm is not well understood. It is normal to expect that the different metrics will yield RL
algorithms with different exploration behaviors. In this paper, we give an in-depth analysis on the
1
There is also a variant of PPO which uses KL divergence penalty. In this paper we refer to the one clipping
probability ratio as PPO by default, which performs better in practice.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

