ODE2VAE: Deep generative second order ODEs
with Bayesian neural networks

Çağatay Yıldız1 , Markus Heinonen1,2 , Harri Lähdesmäki1
Department of Computer Science
Aalto University, Finland, FI-00076
{cagatay.yildiz, markus.o.heinonen, harri.lahdesmaki}@aalto.fi

Abstract
We present Ordinary Differential Equation Variational Auto-Encoder (ODE2 VAE),
a latent second order ODE model for high-dimensional sequential data. Leveraging the advances in deep generative models, ODE2 VAE can simultaneously
learn the embedding of high dimensional trajectories and infer arbitrarily complex
continuous-time latent dynamics. Our model explicitly decomposes the latent
space into momentum and position components and solves a second order ODE
system, which is in contrast to recurrent neural network (RNN) based time series
models and recently proposed black-box ODE techniques. In order to account for
uncertainty, we propose probabilistic latent ODE dynamics parameterized by deep
Bayesian neural networks. We demonstrate our approach on motion capture, image
rotation and bouncing balls datasets. We achieve state-of-the-art performance in
long term motion prediction and imputation tasks.

1

Introduction

Representation learning has always been one of the most prominent problems in machine learning.
Leveraging the advances in deep learning, variational auto-encoders (VAEs) have recently been
applied to several challenging datasets to extract meaningful representations. Various extensions to
vanilla VAE have achieved state-of-the-art performance in hierarchical organization of latent spaces,
disentanglement and semi-supervised learning (Tschannen et al., 2018).
VAE based techniques usually assume a static data, in which each data item is associated with a
single latent code. Hence, auto-encoder models for sequential data have been overlooked. More
recently, there have been attempts to use recurrent neural network (RNN) encoders and decoders for
tasks such as representation learning, classification and forecasting (Srivastava et al., 2015; Lotter
et al., 2016; Hsu et al., 2017; Li and Mandt, 2018). Other than neural ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) (Chen et al., 2018b) and Gaussian process prior VAEs (GPPVAE) (Casale et al., 2018),
aforementioned methods operate in discrete-time, which is in contrast to most of the real-world
datasets, and fail to produce plausible long-term forecasts (Karl et al., 2016).
In this paper, we propose ODE2 VAEs that extend VAEs for sequential data with a latent space
governed by a continuous-time probabilistic ODE. We propose a powerful second order ODE that
allows modelling the latent dynamic ODE state decomposed as position and momentum. To handle
uncertainty in dynamics and avoid overfitting, we parameterise our latent continuous-time dynamics
with deep Bayesian neural networks and optimize the model using variational inference. We show
state-of-the-art performance in learning, reproducing and forecasting high-dimensional sequential
systems, such as image sequences. An implementation of our experiments and generated video
sequences are provided at https://github.com/cagatayyildiz/ODE2VAE.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

