Explicit Planning for Efficient Exploration in
Reinforcement Learning

Liangpeng Zhang1 , Ke Tang2 , and Xin Yao2,1∗
CERCIA, School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, U.K.
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence,
University Key Laboratory of Evolving Intelligent Systems of Guangdong Province,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
L.Zhang.7@pgr.bham.ac.uk, tangk3@sustc.edu.cn, xiny@sustc.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Efficient exploration is crucial to achieving good performance in reinforcement
learning. Existing systematic exploration strategies (R-MAX, MBIE, UCRL, etc.),
despite being promising theoretically, are essentially greedy strategies that follow
some predefined heuristics. When the heuristics do not match the dynamics of
Markov decision processes (MDPs) well, an excessive amount of time can be
wasted in travelling through already-explored states, lowering the overall efficiency.
We argue that explicit planning for exploration can help alleviate such a problem,
and propose a Value Iteration for Exploration Cost (VIEC) algorithm which computes the optimal exploration scheme by solving an augmented MDP. We then
present a detailed analysis of the exploration behaviour of some popular strategies,
showing how these strategies can fail and spend O(n2 md) or O(n2 m + nmd)
steps to collect sufficient data in some tower-shaped MDPs, while the optimal
exploration scheme, which can be obtained by VIEC, only needs O(nmd), where
n, m are the numbers of states and actions and d is the data demand. The analysis
not only points out the weakness of existing heuristic-based strategies, but also
suggests a remarkable potential in explicit planning for exploration.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), exploration plays a key role in deciding the quality of data and thus
has a direct impact to the overall performance. Simple exploration strategies such as ε-greedy may
need exponentially many steps to find a (near-)optimal policy [1]. On the other hand, more systematic
exploration strategies (R-MAX, UCRL, MBIE and their variants) have far promising theoretical
performance guarantees (see e.g. [2, 3, 4, 5]). Recently, some of these systematic strategies have been
successfully generalised and applied to deep reinforcement learning, achieving good performance in
domains that are known to be hard to explore, such as Montezuma’s Revenge [6, 7].
Systematic exploration strategies are carefully designed to ensure that sufficient data is collected for
every unknown states, so that the chance of converging to undesirable policies due to ignorance is
controlled. Unfortunately, the actual data collection process is less carefully executed, in the sense
that these strategies choose actions simply by maximising some predefined heuristics. When the
design of such heuristics does not match the properties of the learning problem well, an excessive
amount of less useful data will be collected due to revisiting well-explored states/actions.
∗

The corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

