A Composable Specification Language for
Reinforcement Learning Tasks

Kishor Jothimurugan, Rajeev Alur, Osbert Bastani
University of Pennsylvania
{kishor,alur,obastani}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is a promising approach for learning control policies for
robot tasks. However, specifying complex tasks (e.g., with multiple objectives
and safety constraints) can be challenging, since the user must design a reward
function that encodes the entire task. Furthermore, the user often needs to manually
shape the reward to ensure convergence of the learning algorithm. We propose
a language for specifying complex control tasks, along with an algorithm that
compiles specifications in our language into a reward function and automatically
performs reward shaping. We implement our approach in a tool called S PECTRL,
and show that it outperforms several state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach to learning control policies for robotics
tasks [5, 21, 16, 15]. A key shortcoming of RL is that the user must manually encode the task as a
real-valued reward function, which can be challenging for several reasons. First, for complex tasks
with multiple objectives and constraints, the user must manually devise a single reward function
that balances different parts of the task. Second, the state space must often be extended to encode
the reward—e.g., adding indicators that keep track of which subtasks have been completed. Third,
oftentimes, different reward functions can encode the same task, and the choice of reward function
can have a large impact on the convergence of the RL algorithm. Thus, users must manually design
rewards that assign “partial credit” for achieving intermediate goals, known as reward shaping [17].
For example, consider the task in Figure 1, where the state is the robot position and its remaining
fuel, the action is a (bounded) robot velocity, and the task is
“Reach target q, then reach target p, while maintaining positive fuel and avoiding
obstacle O”.
To encode this task, we would have to combine rewards for (i) reaching q, and then reaching p (where
“reach x” denotes the task of reaching an  box around x—the regions corresponding to p and q are
denoted by P and Q respectively), (ii) avoiding region O, and (iii) maintaining positive fuel, into
a single reward function. Furthermore, we would have to extend the state space to keep track of
whether q has been reached—otherwise, the control policy would not know whether the current goal
is to move towards q or p. Finally, we might need to shape the reward to assign partial credit for
getting closer to q, or for reaching q without reaching p.
We propose a language for users to specify control tasks. Our language allows the user to specify
objectives and safety constraints as logical predicates over states, and then compose these primitives
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

