Learning Macroscopic Brain Connectomes via
Group-Sparse Factorization
Farzane Aminmansour1 , Andrew Patterson1 , Lei Le2 , Yisu Peng3 , Daniel Mitchell1 , Franco Pestilli4 ,
Cesar Caiafa5,6 , Russell Greiner1 and Martha White1
1

Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
2
Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
4
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA
5
Instituto Argentino de Radioastronomía- CCT La Plata, CONICET / CIC-PBA, V. Elisa, Argentina
6
Tensor Learning Unit- Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
{aminmans, ap3, daniel7, rgreiner whitem}@ualberta.ca, {leile}@iu.edu,
{peng.yis}@husky.neu.edu, {franpest}@indiana.edu, {ccaiafa}@gmail.com

Abstract
Mapping structural brain connectomes for living human brains typically requires
expert analysis and rule-based models on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging. A data-driven approach, however, could overcome limitations in such rulebased approaches and improve precision mappings for individuals. In this work, we
explore a framework that facilitates applying learning algorithms to automatically
extract brain connectomes. Using a tensor encoding, we design an objective with a
group-regularizer that prefers biologically plausible fascicle structure. We show that
the objective is convex and has a unique solution, ensuring identifiable connectomes
for an individual. We develop an efficient optimization strategy for this extremely
high-dimensional sparse problem, by reducing the number of parameters using a
greedy algorithm designed specifically for the problem. We show that this greedy
algorithm significantly improves on a standard greedy algorithm, called Orthogonal
Matching Pursuit. We conclude with an analysis of the solutions found by our
method, showing we can accurately reconstruct the diffusion information while
maintaining contiguous fascicles with smooth direction changes.

1

Introduction

A fundamental challenge in neuroscience is to estimate the structure of white matter connectivity
in the human brain or connectomes [14, 29]. Connectomes are made up of neuronal axon bundles
wrapped with myelin sheaths, called fascicles, and connect different areas of the brain. Acquiring
information about brain tissue is possible by measuring the diffusion of water molecules at different
spatial directions. Fascicles can be inferred by employing tractography algorithms, which calculate
mathematical models from the diffusion-weighted signal. Currently, diffusion-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (dMRI) combined with fiber tractography is the only method available to map
structural brain connectomes in living human brains [3, 30, 23]. This method has revolutionized our
understanding of the network structure of the human brain and the role of white matter in health and
disease.
Standard practice in mapping connectomes is comprised of several steps:a dMRI is acquired (Fig
1A), a model is fit to the signal in each brain voxel (Fig. 1B) and a tractography algorithm is used to
estimate long range brain connections (Fig. 1C). Multiple models can be used at each one of these
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

