Towards modular and programmable architecture
search
Renato Negrinho1 ∗
Darshan Patil1
Nghia Le1
Daniel Ferreira2
1
1,3
Matthew R. Gormley
Geoffrey Gordon
Carnegie Mellon University1 , TU Wien2 , Microsoft Research Montreal3

Abstract
Neural architecture search methods are able to find high performance deep learning
architectures with minimal effort from an expert [1]. However, current systems
focus on specific use-cases (e.g. convolutional image classifiers and recurrent
language models), making them unsuitable for general use-cases that an expert
might wish to write. Hyperparameter optimization systems [2, 3, 4] are generalpurpose but lack the constructs needed for easy application to architecture search.
In this work, we propose a formal language for encoding search spaces over
general computational graphs. The language constructs allow us to write modular,
composable, and reusable search space encodings and to reason about search space
design. We use our language to encode search spaces from the architecture search
literature. The language allows us to decouple the implementations of the search
space and the search algorithm, allowing us to expose search spaces to search
algorithms through a consistent interface. Our experiments show the ease with
which we can experiment with different combinations of search spaces and search
algorithms without having to implement each combination from scratch. We release
an implementation of our language with this paper2 .

1

Introduction

Architecture search has the potential to transform machine learning workflows. High performance
deep learning architectures are often manually designed through a trial-and-error process that amounts
to trying slight variations of known high performance architectures. Recently, architecture search
techniques have shown tremendous potential by improving on handcrafted architectures, both by
improving state-of-the-art performance and by finding better tradeoffs between computation and
performance. Unfortunately, current systems fall short of providing strong support for general
architecture search use-cases.
Hyperparameter optimization systems [2, 3, 4, 5] are not designed specifically for architecture
search use-cases and therefore do not introduce constructs that allow experts to implement these
use-cases efficiently, e.g., easily writing new search spaces over architectures. Using hyperparameter
optimization systems for an architecture search use-case requires the expert to write the encoding for
the search space over architectures as a conditional hyperparameter space and to write the mapping
from hyperparameter values to the architecture to be evaluated. Hyperparameter optimization systems
are completely agnostic that their hyperparameter spaces encode search spaces over architectures.
By contrast, architecture search systems [1] are in their infancy, being tied to specific use-cases
(e.g., either reproducing results reported in a paper or concrete systems, e.g., for searching over
Scikit-Learn pipelines [6]) and therefore lack support for general architecture search workflows. For
∗
2

Part of this work was done while the first author was a research scientist at Petuum.
Visit https://github.com/negrinho/deep_architect for code and documentation.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

