Deep ReLU Networks Have
Surprisingly Few Activation Patterns
Boris Hanin
Facebook AI Research
Texas A&M University
bhanin@math.tamu.edu

David Rolnick
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA USA
drolnick@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
The success of deep networks has been attributed in part to their expressivity: per
parameter, deep networks can approximate a richer class of functions than shallow
networks. In ReLU networks, the number of activation patterns is one measure of
expressivity; and the maximum number of patterns grows exponentially with the
depth. However, recent work has showed that the practical expressivity of deep
networks – the functions they can learn rather than express – is often far from the
theoretical maximum. In this paper, we show that the average number of activation
patterns for ReLU networks at initialization is bounded by the total number of
neurons raised to the input dimension. We show empirically that this bound, which
is independent of the depth, is tight both at initialization and during training, even
on memorization tasks that should maximize the number of activation patterns.
Our work suggests that realizing the full expressivity of deep networks may not be
possible in practice, at least with current methods.

1

Introduction

A fundamental question in the theory of deep learning is why deeper networks often work better in
practice than shallow ones. One proposed explanation is that, while even shallow neural networks
are universal approximators [3, 7, 9, 16, 21], there are functions for which increased depth allows
exponentially more efficient representations. This phenomenon has been quantified for various
complexity measures [4, 5, 6, 10, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25]. However, authors such as Ba and Caruana
have called into question this point of view [2], observing that shallow networks can often be trained
to imitate deep networks and thus that functions learned in practice by deep networks may not achieve
the full expressive power of depth.
In this article, we attempt to capture the difference between the maximum complexity of deep
networks and the complexity of functions that are actually learned (see Figure 1). We provide
theoretical and empirical analyses of the typical complexity of the function computed by a ReLU
network N . Given a vector ✓ of its trainable parameters, N computes a continuous and piecewise
linear function x 7! N (x; ✓). Each ✓ thus is associated with a partition of input space Rnin into
activation regions, polytopes on which N (x; ✓) computes a single linear function corresponding to a
fixed activation pattern in the neurons of N .

We aim to count the number of such activation regions. This number has been the subject of previous
work (see §1.1), with the majority concerning large lower bounds on the maximum over all ✓ of
the number of regions for a given network architecture. In contrast, we are interested in the typical
behavior of ReLU nets as they are used in practice. We therefore focus on small upper bounds for the
average number of activation regions present for a typical value of ✓. Our main contributions are:
• We give precise definitions and prove several fundamental properties of both linear and
activation regions, two concepts that are often conflated in the literature (see §2).
• We prove in Theorem 5 an upper bound for the expected number of activation regions in a
ReLU net N . Roughly, we show that if nin is the input dimension and C is a cube in input
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

