Symmetry-Based Disentangled Representation
Learning requires Interaction with Environments
Hugo Caselles-Dupré1,2 , Michael Garcia-Ortiz2 , David Filliat1
1

Flowers Laboratory (ENSTA Paris & INRIA), 2 AI Lab (Softbank Robotics Europe)
caselles@ensta.fr, mgarciaortiz@softbankrobotics.com, david.filliat@ensta.fr

Abstract
Finding a generally accepted formal definition of a disentangled representation
in the context of an agent behaving in an environment is an important challenge
towards the construction of data-efficient autonomous agents. Higgins et al. (2018)
recently proposed Symmetry-Based Disentangled Representation Learning, a definition based on a characterization of symmetries in the environment using group
theory. We build on their work and make observations, theoretical and empirical,
that lead us to argue that Symmetry-Based Disentangled Representation Learning
cannot only be based on static observations: agents should interact with the environment to discover its symmetries. Our experiments can be reproduced in Colab 1
and the code is available on GitHub 2 .

1

Introduction

Disentangled Representation Learning aims at finding a low-dimensional vector representation
of the world for which the underlying structure of the world is separated into disjoint parts (i.e.,
disentangled) reflecting the compositional nature of the said world. Previous work (Higgins et al.,
2017; Raffin et al., 2019) has shown that agents capable of learning disentangled representations can
perform data-efficient policy learning. However, there is no generally accepted formal definition of
disentanglement in Representation Learning, which prevents significant progress in this emerging
field.
Recent efforts have been made towards finding a proper definition (Locatello et al., 2019b). In
particular, Higgins et al. (2018) defines Symmetry-Based Disentangled Representation Learning
(SBDRL), by taking inspiration from the successful study of symmetry transformations in Physics.
Their definition focuses on the transformation properties of the world. They argue that transformations
that change only some properties of the underlying world state, while leaving all other properties
invariant, are what gives exploitable structure to any kind of data. They distinguish between linear
and non-linear disentangled representations, which models whether the transformation affects the representation in a linear or non-linear way. Supposedly, linearity should be more useful for downstream
tasks such as Reinforcement Learning or auxiliary prediction tasks. Their definition is intuitive and
provides principled resolutions to several points of contention regarding what disentanglement is. For
clarity, we refer to a representation as SB-disentangled if it is disentangled in the sense of SBDRL,
and as LSB-disentangled if linear disentangled.
We build on the work of Higgins et al. (2018) and make observations, theoretical and empirical,
that lead us to argue that SBDRL requires interaction with environments. The necessity of having
interaction has been suggested before (Thomas et al., 2017). We propose a proof for SBDRL.
1
2

https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1KVlSV24c687N_4TLJWwGTkjt3sh9ufWW
https://github.com/Caselles/NeurIPS19-SBDRL

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

