Algorithmic Analysis and Statistical Estimation of
SLOPE via Approximate Message Passing

Zhiqi Bu∗

Jason M. Klusowski†

Cynthia Rush‡

Weijie Su§

Abstract
SLOPE is a relatively new convex optimization procedure for high-dimensional
linear regression via the sorted `1 penalty: the larger the rank of the fitted coefficient,
the larger the penalty. This non-separable penalty renders many existing techniques
invalid or inconclusive in analyzing the SLOPE solution. In this paper, we develop
an asymptotically exact characterization of the SLOPE solution under Gaussian
random designs through solving the SLOPE problem using approximate message
passing (AMP). This algorithmic approach allows us to approximate the SLOPE
solution via the much more amenable AMP iterates. Explicitly, we characterize
the asymptotic dynamics of the AMP iterates relying on a recently developed state
evolution analysis for non-separable penalties, thereby overcoming the difficulty
caused by the sorted `1 penalty. Moreover, we prove that the AMP iterates converge
to the SLOPE solution in an asymptotic sense, and numerical simulations show
that the convergence is surprisingly fast. Our proof rests on a novel technique that
specifically leverages the SLOPE problem. In contrast to prior literature, our work
not only yields an asymptotically sharp analysis but also offers an algorithmic,
flexible, and constructive approach to understanding the SLOPE problem.

1

Introduction

Consider observing linear measurements y ∈ Rn that are modeled by the equation
y = Xβ + w,

(1.1)

where X ∈ Rn×p is a known measurement matrix, β ∈ Rp is an unknown signal, and w ∈ Rn is the
measurement noise. Among numerous methods that seek to recover the signal β from the observed
data, especially in the setting where β is sparse and p is larger than n, SLOPE has recently emerged
as a useful procedure that allows for estimation and model selection [9]. This method reconstructs
the signal by solving the minimization problem
p
X
1
2
b
β := arg min ky − Xbk +
λi |b|(i) ,
b
2
i=1

(1.2)

where k · k denotes the `2 norm, λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λp ≥ 0 (with at least one strict inequality) is a
sequence of thresholds, and |b|(1) ≥ · · · ≥ |b|(p) are the order statistics of the fitted coefficients
∗

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA. Email: zbu@sas.upenn.edu
†
Department of Statistics, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ 08854, USA. Email:
jason.klusowski@rutgers.edu Supported in part by NSF DMS #1915932.
‡
Department of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. Email:
cynthia.rush@columbia.edu Supported in part by NSF CCF #1849883.
§
Department of Statistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Email:
suw@wharton.upenn.edu Supported in part by NSF DMS CAREER #1847415 and NSF CCF #1763314.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

