Compiler Auto-Vectorization with Imitation Learning

Charith Mendis
MIT CSAIL
charithm@mit.edu

Cambridge Yang
MIT CSAIL
camyang@csail.mit.edu

Saman Amarasinghe
MIT CSAIL
saman@csail.mit.edu

Yewen Pu
MIT CSAIL
yewenpu@mit.edu

Michael Carbin
MIT CSAIL
mcarbin@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Modern microprocessors are equipped with single instruction multiple data (SIMD)
or vector instruction sets which allow compilers to exploit fine-grained data level
parallelism. To exploit this parallelism, compilers employ auto-vectorization
techniques to automatically convert scalar code into vector code. Larsen & Amarasinghe (2000) first introduced superword level parallelism (SLP) based vectorization,
which is a form of vectorization popularly used by compilers. Current compilers
employ hand-crafted heuristics and typically only follow one SLP vectorization
strategy which can be suboptimal. Recently, Mendis & Amarasinghe (2018) formulated the instruction packing problem of SLP vectorization by leveraging an
integer linear programming (ILP) solver, achieving superior runtime performance.
In this work, we explore whether it is feasible to imitate optimal decisions made by
their ILP solution by fitting a graph neural network policy. We show that the learnt
policy, Vemal, produces a vectorization scheme that is better than the well-tuned
heuristics used by the LLVM compiler. More specifically, the learnt agent produces
a vectorization strategy that has a 22.6% higher average reduction in cost compared
to the LLVM compiler when measured using its own cost model, and matches the
runtime performance of the ILP based solution in 5 out of 7 applications in the
NAS benchmark suite.

1

Introduction

Modern microprocessors have introduced single instruction multiple data (SIMD) or vector units (e.g.
Intel x86 AVX extensions1 ) to accelerate execution of performance critical applications by performing
computations on multiple data items in parallel. In order to use these vector units, programmers
must either code using platform specific vector assembly instructions (Figure 1(c)), which is tedious,
error-prone and results in non-portable code or use existing compiler auto-vectorization techniques
to automatically discover data parallel portions of programs and to transform scalar instructions
(Figure 1(a)) in such regions into vector instructions (Figure 1(b),(c)).
Larsen & Amarasinghe (2000) first showed how to perform compiler auto-vectorization using fine
grained parallelism available in programs at the instruction level (superword level parallelism)
targeting fixed-width vector instructions available in modern microprocessors. Superword level
parallelism (SLP) based vectorization provided a more general alternative to loop vectorization
techniques proposed earlier (Allen & Kennedy, 1987; Sreraman & Govindarajan, 2000).
In order to exploit SLP for vectorization, compilers need to select a set of scalar instructions which
can be executed in parallel and merge them into a single vector instruction. It is shown that this
process reduces to the optimal subset selection problem, which is known to be NP-hard. Therefore,
many existing SLP vectorization schemes are driven by hand-crafted heuristics (Liu et al., 2012;
1
https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/introduction-to-intel-advanced-vector-extensions
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

