A neurally plausible model learns successor
representations in partially observable environments

Eszter Vértes Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London W1T 4JG, UK.
{eszter,maneesh}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Animals need to devise strategies to maximize returns while interacting with their
environment based on incoming noisy sensory observations. Task-relevant states,
such as the agent’s location within an environment or the presence of a predator,
are often not directly observable but must be inferred using available sensory information. Successor representations (SR) have been proposed as a middle-ground
between model-based and model-free reinforcement learning strategies, allowing
for fast value computation and rapid adaptation to changes in the reward function
or goal locations. Indeed, recent studies suggest that features of neural responses
are consistent with the SR framework. However, it is not clear how such representations might be learned and computed in partially observed, noisy environments.
Here, we introduce a neurally plausible model using distributional successor features, which builds on the distributed distributional code for the representation and
computation of uncertainty, and which allows for efficient value function computation in partially observed environments via the successor representation. We show
that distributional successor features can support reinforcement learning in noisy
environments in which direct learning of successful policies is infeasible.

1

Introduction

Humans and other animals are able to evaluate long-term consequences of their actions and adapt
their behaviour to maximize reward across different environments. This behavioural flexibility is
often thought to result from the interaction of two adaptive systems implementing model-based and
model-free reinforcement learning (RL).
Model-based learning allows for flexible goal-directed behaviour, acquiring an internal model of the
environment which is used to evaluate the consequences of actions. As a result, an agent can rapidly
adjust its policy to localized changes in the environment or in reward function. But this flexibility
comes at a high computational cost, as optimal actions and value functions depend on expensive
simulations in the model. Model-free methods, on the other hand, learn cached values for states
and actions, enabling rapid action selection. However, this approach is particularly slow to adapt to
changes in the task, as adjusting behaviour even to localized changes, e.g. in the placement of the
reward, requires updating cached values at all states in the environment. It has been suggested that the
brain makes use both of these complementary approaches, and that they may compete for behavioural
control (Daw et al., 2005); indeed, several behavioural studies suggest that subjects implement a
hybrid of model-free and model-based strategies (Daw et al., 2011; Gläscher et al., 2010).
Successor representations (SR; Dayan, 1993) augment the internal state used by model-free systems by
the expected future occupancy of each world state. SRs can be viewed as a precompiled representation
of the model under a given policy. Thus, learning based on SRs falls between model-free and model33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

