Generalization Error Analysis of Quantized
Compressive Learning

Xiaoyun Li
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
xiaoyun.li@rutgers.edu

Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
liping11@baidu.com

Abstract
1

Compressive learning is an effective method to deal with very high dimensional
datasets by applying learning algorithms in a randomly projected lower dimensional
space. In this paper, we consider the learning problem where the projected data
is further compressed by scalar quantization, which is called quantized compressive learning. Generalization error bounds are derived for three models: nearest
neighbor (NN) classifier, linear classifier and least squares regression. Besides
studying finite sample setting, our asymptotic analysis shows that the inner product
estimators have deep connection with NN and linear classification problem through
the variance of their debiased counterparts. By analyzing the extra error term
brought by quantization, our results provide useful implications to the choice of
quantizers in applications involving different learning tasks. Empirical study is
also conducted to validate our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Random projection (RP) method [36] has become a popular tool for dimensionality reduction in
many machine learning and database applications, e.g., [14, 2, 11, 4, 38, 9], including classification,
matrix sketching, compressive sensing, regression, bioinformatics, matrix factorization, etc. The
great success of random projection lies in the favorable distance preserving property with fairly
elegant statement given by the famous Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma [19, 10]. In short, under some
conditions we can always project a set of n points X ∈ Rn×d in a high-dimensional space onto a lower
k-dimensional space such that pair-wise distances are approximately preserved, with high probability.
Here k  d is the number of random projections. This nice theoretical guarantee has originated
the study of generalization performance of learning in the reduced dimensional space instead of the
original space. This line of work is called compressive learning [16, 3, 30, 13, 20, 34, 35, 21].
In many cases, it is useful to further condense the projected data, due to storage saving, privacy consideration, etc. Consequently, research on quantized random projections (QRP) has been conducted
for a while, i.e., [24, 25]. QRP itself has been developed into many promising fields in computer
science, such as 1-bit compressive sensing, simhash and so on [32, 1, 6, 23]. More recently, it is
shown that quantized random projection is also very convenient for cosine estimation and similarity
search [27, 26, 28]. However, to the best of our knowledge, theoretical analysis of QRP in learning
mechanisms is still missing in literature. In this paper, we investigate the generalization error bounds
of applying QRP in three models: nearest neighbor classifier, linear classifier and least squares
regression. Apart from finite k analysis, we also consider the case where k is asymptotically large.
Contributions. An important implication of our analysis is to answer the following question—The
generalization performance using quantized random projections is determined by what factors of a
quantizer? Our theoretical analysis illustrates that for nearest neighbor and linear classification, the
1

The work of Xiaoyun Li was conducted during the internship at Baidu Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

