Why Can’t I Dance in the Mall?
Learning to Mitigate Scene Bias
in Action Recognition

Jinwoo Choi
Virginia Tech
jinchoi@vt.edu

Chen Gao
Virginia Tech
chengao@vt.edu

Joseph C. E. Messou
Virginia Tech
mejc2014@vt.edu

Jia-Bin Huang
Virginia Tech
jbhuang@vt.edu

Figure 1: Quiz time! Can you guess what action the (blocked) person is doing in the four videos?
Even though we cannot see a human actor, we can easily predict the action by considering where the
scene is. Training a CNN model from these examples may lead to a strong bias toward recognizing
the scene or the objects present in the video as opposed to paying attention to the actual action the
person is doing. In this work, we show that learning video representation with debiasing leads to
improved generalization to novel classes and tasks.

Abstract
Human activities often occur in specific scene contexts, e.g., playing basketball on
a basketball court. Training a model using existing video datasets thus inevitably
captures and leverages such bias (instead of using the actual discriminative cues).
The learned representation may not generalize well to new action classes or different tasks. In this paper, we propose to mitigate scene bias for video representation
learning. Specifically, we augment the standard cross-entropy loss for action classification with 1) an adversarial loss for scene types and 2) a human mask confusion
loss for videos where the human actors are masked out. These two losses encourage
learning representations that are unable to predict the scene types and the correct
actions when there is no evidence. We validate the effectiveness of our method
by transferring our pre-trained model to three different tasks, including action
classification, temporal localization, and spatio-temporal action detection. Our
results show consistent improvement over the baseline model without debiasing.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [8, 64, 52, 60] have demonstrated impressive performance
on action recognition datasets such as the Kinetics [31], UCF-101 [50], HMDB-51 [34], and others.
These CNN models, however, may sometimes make correct predictions for wrong reasons, such as
leveraging scene context or object information instead of focusing on actual human actions in videos.
For example, CNN models may recognize a classroom or a whiteboard in an input video and predict
the action in the video as giving a lecture, as opposed to paying attention to the actual activity in
the scene, which could be, for example, eating, jumping or even dancing. Such biases are known
as representation bias [38]. In this paper, we focus on mitigating the effect of scene representation
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

