Variational Denoising Network: Toward Blind Noise
Modeling and Removal
Zongsheng Yue1,2 , Hongwei Yong2 , Qian Zhao1 , Lei Zhang2,3 , Deyu Meng4,1,*
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi, China
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, Shenzhen, China
4
Faculty of Information Technology, The Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
*
Corresponding author: dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
2

Abstract
Blind image denoising is an important yet very challenging problem in computer
vision due to the complicated acquisition process of real images. In this work we
propose a new variational inference method, which integrates both noise estimation
and image denoising into a unique Bayesian framework, for blind image denoising.
Specifically, an approximate posterior, parameterized by deep neural networks, is
presented by taking the intrinsic clean image and noise variances as latent variables
conditioned on the input noisy image. This posterior provides explicit parametric
forms for all its involved hyper-parameters, and thus can be easily implemented
for blind image denoising with automatic noise estimation for the test noisy image.
On one hand, as other data-driven deep learning methods, our method, namely
variational denoising network (VDN), can perform denoising efficiently due to
its explicit form of posterior expression. On the other hand, VDN inherits the
advantages of traditional model-driven approaches, especially the good generalization capability of generative models. VDN has good interpretability and can
be flexibly utilized to estimate and remove complicated non-i.i.d. noise collected
in real scenarios. Comprehensive experiments are performed to substantiate the
superiority of our method in blind image denoising.

1

Introduction

Image denoising is an important research topic in computer vision, aiming at recovering the underlying
clean image from an observed noisy one. The noise contained in a real noisy image is generally
accumulated from multiple different sources, e.g., capturing instruments, data transmission media,
image quantization, etc. [40]. Such complicated generation process makes it fairly difficult to access
the noise information accurately and recover the underlying clean image from the noisy one. This
constitutes the main aim of blind image denoising.
There are two main categories of image denoising methods. Most classical methods belong to the first
category, mainly focusing on constructing a rational maximum a posteriori (MAP) model, involving
the fidelity (loss) and regularization terms, from a Bayesian perspective [6]. An understanding for data
generation mechanism is required for designing a rational MAP objective, especially better image
priors like sparsity [3], low-rankness [16, 50, 42], and non-local similarity [9, 27]. These methods
are superior mainly in their interpretability naturally led by the Bayesian framework. They, however,
still exist critical limitations due to their assumptions on both image prior and noise (generally i.i.d.
Gaussian), possibly deviating from real spatially variant (i.e.,non-i.i.d.) noise, and their relatively low
implementation speed since the algorithm needs to be re-implemented for any new coming image.
Recently, deep learning approaches represent a new trend along this research line. The main idea is to
firstly collect large amount of noisy-clean image pairs and then train a deep neural network denoiser
on these training data in an end-to-end learning manner. This approach is especially superior in its
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

