Semantic-Guided Multi-Attention Localization for
Zero-Shot Learning
Yizhe Zhu∗
Rutgers University
yizhe.zhu@rutgers.edu,

Jianwen Xie
Hikvision Research Institute
jianwen@ucla.edu

Xi Peng
University of Delaware
xipeng@udel.edu

Zhiqiang Tang
Rutgers University
zhiqiang.tang@rutgers.edu,

Ahmed Elgammal
Rutgers University
elgammal@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Zero-shot learning extends the conventional object classification to the unseen class
recognition by introducing semantic representations of classes. Existing approaches
predominantly focus on learning the proper mapping function for visual-semantic
embedding, while neglecting the effect of learning discriminative visual features. In
this paper, we study the significance of the discriminative region localization. We
propose a semantic-guided multi-attention localization model, which automatically
discovers the most discriminative parts of objects for zero-shot learning without any
human annotations. Our model jointly learns cooperative global and local features
from the whole object as well as the detected parts to categorize objects based on
semantic descriptions. Moreover, with the joint supervision of embedding softmax
loss and class-center triplet loss, the model is encouraged to learn features with
high inter-class dispersion and intra-class compactness. Through comprehensive
experiments on three widely used zero-shot learning benchmarks, we show the
efficacy of the multi-attention localization and our proposed approach improves
the state-of-the-art results by a considerable margin.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved significant advances in object recognition. The
main shortcoming of deep learning methods is the inevitable requirement of large-scale labeled
training data that needs to be collected and annotated by costly human labor [1, 2, 3, 4]. In spite that
images of ordinary objects can be readily found, there remains a tremendous number of objects with
insufficient and scarce visual data [5]. This attracts many researchers’ interest in how to recognize
objects with few or even no training samples, which are known as few-shot learning [6, 7] and
zero-shot learning [8, 9, 5, 10, 11, 12], respectively.
Zero-shot learning mimics the human ability to recognize objects only from a description in terms of
concepts in some semantic vocabulary [13]. The underlying key is to learn the association between
visual representations and semantic concepts and use it to extend the possibility to unseen object
recognition. In a general sense, the typical scheme of the state-of-the-art approaches of zero-shot
learning is (1) to extract the feature representation of visual data from CNN models pretrained on
the large-scale dataset(e.g., ImageNet), (2) to learn mapping functions to project the visual features
and semantic representations to shared space. The mapping functions are optimized by either ridge
regression loss [14, 15] or ranking loss on compatibility scores of two mapped features [8, 9]. Taking
∗

Work was done while Yizhe Zhu was an intern at Hikvision Research Institute.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

