Outlier Detection and Robust PCA Using a Convex
Measure of Innovation
Mostafa Rahmani and Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{mostafarahmani,liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
This paper presents a provable and strong algorithm, termed Innovation Search
(iSearch), to robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and outlier detection.
An outlier by definition is a data point which does not participate in forming a
low dimensional structure with a large number of data points in the data. In other
words, an outlier carries some innovation with respect to most of the other data
points. iSearch ranks the data points based on their values of innovation. A convex
optimization problem is proposed whose optimal value is used as our measure of
innovation. We derive analytical performance guarantees for the proposed robust
PCA method under different models for the distribution of the outliers including
randomly distributed outliers, clustered outliers, and linearly dependent outliers.
Moreover, it is shown that iSearch provably recovers the span of the inliers when
the inliers lie in a union of subspaces. In the challenging scenarios in which the
outliers are close to each other or they are close to the span of the inliers, iSearch
is shown to outperform most of the existing methods.

1

Introduction

Outlier detection is an important research problem in unsupervised machine learning. Outliers are
associated with important rare events such as malignant tissues [14], the failures of a system [10,
12, 31], web attacks [16], and misclassified data points [9, 27]. In this paper, the proposed outlier
detection method is introduced as a robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA) algorithm, i.e.,
the inliers lie in a low dimensional subspace. In the literature of robust PCA, two main models for
the data corruption are considered: the element-wise model and the column-wise model. These
two models are corresponding to two different robust PCA problems. In the element-wise model,
it is assumed that a small subset of the elements of the data matrix are corrupted and the support
of the corrupted elements is random. This problem is known as the low rank plus sparse matrix
decomposition problem [1, 3, 4, 23, 24]. In the column-wise model, a subset of the columns of the
data are affected by the data corruption [5, 7, 8, 11, 17, 20, 25, 26, 36–39]. Section 2 provides a review
of the robust (to column-wise corruption) PCA methods. This paper focuses on the column-wise
model, i.e., we assume that the given data follows Data Model 1.
Data Model 1. The data matrix D ∈ RM1 ×M2 can be expressed as D = [B (A + N)] T , where
A ∈ Rm×ni , B ∈ Rm×no , T is an arbitrary permutation matrix, and [B (A + N)] represents
the concatenation of B and (A + N). The columns of A lie in an r-dimensional subspace U. The
columns of B do not lie entirely in U, i.e., the ni columns of A are the inliers and the no columns of
B are the outliers. The matrix N represents additive noise. The orthonormal matrix U ∈ RM1 ×r is
a basis for U. Evidently, M2 = ni + no .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

