A Graph Theoretic Framework of Recomputation
Algorithms for Memory-Efficient Backpropagation

Mitsuru Kusumoto ∗
Preferred Networks, Inc.
mkusumoto@preferred.jp
Gentaro Watanabe
Preferred Networks, Inc.
g.wtnb@preferred.jp

Takuya Inoue ∗
The University of Tokyo
inoue-takuya57@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Takuya Akiba
Preferred Networks, Inc.
akiba@preferred.jp

Masanori Koyama
Preferred Networks, Inc.
masomatics@preferred.jp

Abstract
Recomputation algorithms collectively refer to a family of methods that aims to
reduce the memory consumption of the backpropagation by selectively discarding
the intermediate results of the forward propagation and recomputing the discarded
results as needed. In this paper, we will propose a novel and efficient recomputation
method that can be applied to a wider range of neural nets than previous methods.
We use the language of graph theory to formalize the general recomputation
problem of minimizing the computational overhead under a fixed memory budget
constraint, and provide a dynamic programming solution to the problem. Our
method can reduce the peak memory consumption on various benchmark networks
by 36% ∼ 81%, which outperforms the reduction achieved by other methods.

1

Introduction

The efficiency of memory usage is always one of the most important issues in the application of deep
neural nets. Modern deep neural networks used in commercial applications tend to be large, and they
require massive memory for the forward and backward computations. The inputs to the networks
can be large as well; this is particularly true for the tasks related to computer vision such as object
detection and semantic segmentation, where higher resolution images are generally more useful to
detect small objects accurately. Ample free memory is also important for the training process itself;
when the memory is insufficient, the user has no choice but to choose a small batch size. This is
problematic, especially when using batch normalization [7] as the quality of batch statistics degrades.
Indeed, its impact on the resulting model quality is crucial. Recent studies enabled themselves to use
large batch sizes by reducing the memory consumption or introducing distributed computation, and
succeeded in achieving the state-of-the-art results for computer vision tasks [12, 20].
Recomputation algorithms collectively refer to a family of methods of smart memory manipulation
that can reduce the memory consumption without altering the outcome of the computation or
compromising the accuracy of the output. In theory, backward computation requires the result of
the forward computation, and naive approach requires the user to cache all the forward computation
results for the backward computation. However, we can reduce the peak memory consumption
by deliberately discarding some parts of the intermediate results in the forward computation, and
recompute these intermediate results gradually on a need basis during the backpropagation. Naturally,
the efficacy of any recomputation method depends on its rules of what to forget and what to cache in
what order.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

