Grid Saliency for
Context Explanations of Semantic Segmentation

Lukas Hoyer

Mauricio Munoz
Anna Khoreva

Prateek Katiyar

Volker Fischer

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
lukas.hoyer@outlook.com
{firstname.lastname}@bosch.com

Abstract
Recently, there has been a growing interest in developing saliency methods that
provide visual explanations of network predictions. Still, the usability of existing
methods is limited to image classification models. To overcome this limitation,
we extend the existing approaches to generate grid saliencies, which provide
spatially coherent visual explanations for (pixel-level) dense prediction networks.
As the proposed grid saliency allows to spatially disentangle the object and its
context, we specifically explore its potential to produce context explanations for
semantic segmentation networks, discovering which context most influences the
class predictions inside a target object area. We investigate the effectiveness of grid
saliency on a synthetic dataset with an artificially induced bias between objects and
their context as well as on the real-world Cityscapes dataset using state-of-the-art
segmentation networks. Our results show that grid saliency can be successfully
used to provide easily interpretable context explanations and, moreover, can be
employed for detecting and localizing contextual biases present in the data.

1

Introduction

In many real-world scenarios, the presence of an object, its location and appearance are highly
correlated with the contextual information surrounding this object, such as the presence of other
nearby objects or more global scene semantics. For example, in the case of an urban street scene,
a cyclist is more likely to co-occur on a bicycle and a car to appear on the road below sky and
buildings (cf. objects and their context explanations in Fig. 1). These semantic correlations are
inherently present in real-world data. A data-driven model, such as a deep neural network, is prone
to exploit these statistical biases during training in order to improve its prediction performance.
These biases picked up by the network during training can lead to erroneous predictions and impair
network generalization (cf. the effect of context on misclassification in Fig. 2). An effective and safe
utilization of deep learning models for real-world applications, e.g. autonomous driving, requires a
good understanding of these contextual biases inherent in the data and the extent to which a learned
model incorporated them into its decision making process.
Saliency methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] have become a popular tool to explain predictions of a trained
model by highlighting parts of the input that presumably have a high relevance for its predictions.
However, to the best of our knowledge the existing saliency methods are mostly focused on image
classification networks and thus are not able to spatially differentiate between prediction explanations.
In this work, we propose a way to extend existing saliency methods designed for image classification
towards (pixel-level) dense prediction tasks, which allows to generate spatially coherent explanations
by exploiting spatial information in dense predictions. We call our approach grid saliency, which
is a perturbation-based saliency method, formulated as an optimization problem of identifying the
minimum unperturbed area of the image needed to retain the network predictions inside a target object
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

