Wasserstein Dependency Measure
for Representation Learning

Sherjil Ozair
Mila, Université de Montréal
Aäron van den Oord
Deepmind

Corey Lynch
Google Brain
Sergey Levine
Google Brain

Yoshua Bengio
Mila, Université de Montréal
Pierre Sermanet
Google Brain

Abstract
Mutual information maximization has emerged as a powerful learning objective
for unsupervised representation learning obtaining state-of-the-art performance
in applications such as object recognition, speech recognition, and reinforcement
learning. However, such approaches are fundamentally limited since a tight lower
bound on mutual information requires sample size exponential in the mutual
information. This limits the applicability of these approaches for prediction tasks
with high mutual information, such as in video understanding or reinforcement
learning. In these settings, such techniques are prone to overfit, both in theory and
in practice, and capture only a few of the relevant factors of variation. This leads to
incomplete representations that are not optimal for downstream tasks. In this work,
we empirically demonstrate that mutual information-based representation learning
approaches do fail to learn complete representations on a number of designed
and real-world tasks. To mitigate these problems we introduce the Wasserstein
dependency measure, which learns more complete representations by using the
Wasserstein distance instead of the KL divergence in the mutual information
estimator. We show that a practical approximation to this theoretically motivated
solution, constructed using Lipschitz constraint techniques from the GAN literature,
achieves substantially improved results on tasks where incomplete representations
are a major challenge.

1

Introduction

Recent success in supervised learning can arguably be attributed to the paradigm shift from engineering representations to learning representations [32]. Especially in the supervised setting, effective
representations can be acquired directly from the labels. However, representation learning in the
unsupervised setting, without hand-specified labels, becomes significantly more challenging: although much more data is available for learning, this data lacks the clear learning signal that would
be provided by human-specified semantic labels.
Nevertheless, unsupervised representation learning has made significant progress recently, due to
a number of different approaches. Representations can be learned via implicit generative methods
[22, 17, 16, 40], via explicit generative models [28, 44, 13, 44, 29], and self-supervised learning
[6, 15, 50, 14, 47, 49, 24]. Among these, the latter methods are particularly appealing because
they remove the need to actually generate full observations (e.g., image pixels or audio waveform).
Self-supervised learning techniques have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in speech and
image understanding [47, 24], reinforcement learning [25, 18, 26], imitation learning [45, 5], and
natural language processing [12, 43].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

