Computing Linear Restrictions of Neural Networks

Aditya V. Thakur
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
avthakur@ucdavis.edu

Matthew Sotoudeh
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
masotoudeh@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
A linear restriction of a function is the same function with its domain restricted to
points on a given line. This paper addresses the problem of computing a succinct
representation for a linear restriction of a piecewise-linear neural network. This
primitive, which we call E XACT L INE, allows us to exactly characterize the result
of applying the network to all of the infinitely many points on a line. In particular,
E XACT L INE computes a partitioning of the given input line segment such that the
network is affine on each partition. We present an efficient algorithm for computing
E XACT L INE for networks that use ReLU, MaxPool, batch normalization, fullyconnected, convolutional, and other layers, along with several applications. First,
we show how to exactly determine decision boundaries of an ACAS Xu neural network, providing significantly improved confidence in the results compared to prior
work that sampled finitely many points in the input space. Next, we demonstrate
how to exactly compute integrated gradients, which are commonly used for neural
network attributions, allowing us to show that the prior heuristic-based methods
had relative errors of 25-45% and show that a better sampling method can achieve
higher accuracy with less computation. Finally, we use E XACT L INE to empirically
falsify the core assumption behind a well-known hypothesis about adversarial
examples, and in the process identify interesting properties of adversarially-trained
networks.

1

Introduction

The past decade has seen the rise of deep neural networks (DNNs) [1] to solve a variety of problems, including image recognition [2, 3], natural-language processing [4], and autonomous vehicle
control [5]. However, such models are difficult to meaningfully interpret and check for correctness.
Thus, researchers have tried to understand the behavior of such networks. For instance, networks
have been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples—inputs changed in a way imperceptible
to humans but resulting in a misclassification by the network [6–9]–and fooling examples—inputs
that are completely unrecognizable by humans but classified with high confidence by DNNs [10].
The presence of such adversarial and fooling inputs as well as applications in safety-critical systems
has led to efforts to verify, certify, and improve robustness of DNNs [11–20]. Orthogonal approaches
help visualize the behavior of the network [21–23] and interpret its decisions [24–28]. Despite the
tremendous progress, more needs to be done to help understand DNNs and increase their adoption
[29–32].
In this paper, we present algorithms for computing the E XACT L INE primitive: given a piecewiselinear neural network (e.g. composed of convolutional and ReLU layers) and line in the input space
QR, we partition QR such that the network is affine on each partition. Thus, E XACT L INE precisely
captures the behavior of the network for the infinite set of points lying on the line between two points.
In effect, E XACT L INE computes a succinct representation for a linear restriction of a piecewise-linear
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

