The Landscape of Non-convex Empirical Risk with
Degenerate Population Risk

Shuang Li, Gongguo Tang, and Michael B. Wakin
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO 80401
{shuangli,gtang,mwakin}@mines.edu

Abstract
The landscape of empirical risk has been widely studied in a series of machine
learning problems, including low-rank matrix factorization, matrix sensing, matrix
completion, and phase retrieval. In this work, we focus on the situation where the
corresponding population risk is a degenerate non-convex loss function, namely, the
Hessian of the population risk can have zero eigenvalues. Instead of analyzing the
non-convex empirical risk directly, we first study the landscape of the corresponding
population risk, which is usually easier to characterize, and then build a connection
between the landscape of the empirical risk and its population risk. In particular,
we establish a correspondence between the critical points of the empirical risk and
its population risk without the strongly Morse assumption, which is required in
existing literature but not satisfied in degenerate scenarios. We also apply the theory
to matrix sensing and phase retrieval to demonstrate how to infer the landscape of
empirical risk from that of the corresponding population risk.

1

Introduction

Understanding the connection between empirical risk and population risk can yield valuable insight
into an optimization problem [1, 2]. Mathematically, the empirical risk f (x) with respect to a
parameter vector x is defined as
M

f (x) ,

1 X
L(x, ym ).
M m=1

Here, L(·) is a loss function and we are interested in losses that are non-convex in x in this work.
y = [y1 , · · · , yM ]> is a vector containing the random training samples, and M is the total number of
samples contained in the training set. The population risk, denoted as g(x), is the expectation of the
empirical risk with respect to the random measure used to generate the samples y, i.e., g(x) = Ef (x).
Recently, the landscapes of empirical and population risk have been extensively studied in many
fields of science and engineering, including machine learning and signal processing. In particular, the
local or global geometry has been characterized in a wide variety of convex and non-convex problems,
such as matrix sensing [3, 4], matrix completion [5, 6, 7], low-rank matrix factorization [8, 9, 10],
phase retrieval [11, 12], blind deconvolution [13, 14], tensor decomposition [15, 16, 17], and so on.
In this work, we focus on analyzing global geometry, which requires understanding not only regions
near critical points but also the landscape away from these points.
It follows from empirical process theory that the empirical risk can uniformly converge to the
corresponding population risk as M → ∞ [18]. A recent work [1] exploits the uniform convergence
of the empirical risk to the corresponding population risk and establishes a correspondence of their
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

