Stability of Graph Scattering Transforms

Fernando Gama
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Eng.
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
fgama@seas.upenn.edu

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute of Math. Sci.
New York University
New York, NY 10012
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Alejandro Ribeiro
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Eng.
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
aribeiro@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Scattering transforms are non-trainable deep convolutional architectures that exploit the multi-scale resolution of a wavelet filter bank to obtain an appropriate
representation of data. More importantly, they are proven invariant to translations,
and stable to perturbations that are close to translations. This stability property
provides the scattering transform with a robustness to small changes in the metric
domain of the data. When considering network data, regular convolutions do not
hold since the data domain presents an irregular structure given by the network
topology.
In this work, we extend scattering transforms to network data by using multiresolution graph wavelets, whose computation can be obtained by means of graph
convolutions. Furthermore, we prove that the resulting graph scattering transforms
are stable to metric perturbations of the underlying network. This renders graph
scattering transforms robust to changes on the network topology, making it particularly useful for cases of transfer learning, topology estimation or time-varying
graphs.

1

Introduction

Linear information processing architectures have been the preferred tool for extracting useful information from data due to their robustness and provable performance [1–6]. With the desire to model
increasingly more complex mappings between data and useful information, linear approaches started
to fall short in terms of performance, giving rise to a myriad of other nonlinear alternatives [2, Chap.
8], [6, Part 4]. Of these, arguably the most successful have been convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [7]. CNNs consist of a cascade of layers, each of which computes a convolution with a bank
of filters followed by a pointwise nonlinearity, and act as a parameterization of the nonlinear mapping
between the input data and the desired useful information [8].
The inclusion of nonlinearities coupled with the use of trained coefficients has effectively increased
the performance, but it also has obscured the limits and guarantees of CNNs [9]. In the theoretical
realm, [10, 11] opted for controlling for one of the sources of uncertainty, by fixing the bank of
filters to be a set of pre-defined, multiresolution wavelets. Then, [10] proved that under admissible
conditions on the wavelets, the resulting non-trainable CNN (called scattering transform) satisfies
energy conservation, as well as stability to domain deformations that are close to translations. In
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

