Unsupervised Scale-consistent Depth and Ego-motion
Learning from Monocular Video

Jia-Wang Bian1,2 , Zhichao Li3 , Naiyan Wang3 , Huangying Zhan1,2
Chunhua Shen1,2 , Ming-Ming Cheng4 , Ian Reid1,2
1

2

University of Adelaide, Australia
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australia
3
TuSimple, China
4
Nankai University, China

Abstract
Recent work has shown that CNN-based depth and ego-motion estimators can
be learned using unlabelled monocular videos. However, the performance is
limited by unidentified moving objects that violate the underlying static scene
assumption in geometric image reconstruction. More significantly, due to lack
of proper constraints, networks output scale-inconsistent results over different
samples, i.e., the ego-motion network cannot provide full camera trajectories over
a long video sequence because of the per-frame scale ambiguity. This paper tackles
these challenges by proposing a geometry consistency loss for scale-consistent
predictions and an induced self-discovered mask for handling moving objects and
occlusions. Since we do not leverage multi-task learning like recent works, our
framework is much simpler and more efficient. Comprehensive evaluation results
demonstrate that our depth estimator achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
the KITTI dataset. Moreover, we show that our ego-motion network is able to
predict a globally scale-consistent camera trajectory for long video sequences, and
the resulting visual odometry accuracy is competitive with the recent model that is
trained using stereo videos. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to
show that deep networks trained using unlabelled monocular videos can predict
globally scale-consistent camera trajectories over a long video sequence.

1

Introduction

Depth and ego-motion estimation is crucial for various applications in robotics and computer vision.
Traditional methods are usually hand-crafted stage-wise systems, which rely on correspondence
search [1, 2] and multi-view geometry [3, 4] for estimation. Recently, deep learning based methods [5,
6] show that the depth can be inferred from a single image by using Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Especially, unsupervised methods [7–11] show that CNN-based depth and ego-motion
networks can be solely trained on monocular video sequences without using ground-truth depth or
stereo image pairs (pose supervision). The principle is that one can warp the image in one frame to
another frame using the predicted depth and ego-motion, and then employ the image reconstruction
loss as the supervision signal [7] to train the network. However, the performance limitation arises
due to the moving objects that violate the underlying static scene assumption in geometric image
reconstruction. More significantly, due to lack of proper constraints the network predicts scale33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

