Characterization and Learning of Causal Graphs
with Latent Variables from Soft Interventions
Murat Kocaoglu∗
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research MA, USA
murat@ibm.com

Amin Jaber∗
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University, USA
jaber0@purdue.edu

Karthikeyan Shanmugam∗
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
IBM Research NY, USA
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University, USA
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
The challenge of learning the causal structure underlying a certain phenomenon is
undertaken by connecting the set of conditional independences (CIs) readable from
the observational data, on the one side, with the set of corresponding constraints
implied over the graphical structure, on the other, which are tied through a graphical
criterion known as d-separation (Pearl, 1988). In this paper, we investigate the more
general setting where multiple observational and experimental distributions are
available. We start with the simple observation that the invariances given by CIs/dseparation are just one special type of a broader set of constraints, which follow
from the careful comparison of the different distributions available. Remarkably,
these new constraints are intrinsically connected with do-calculus (Pearl, 1995) in
the context of soft-interventions. We then introduce a novel notion of interventional
equivalence class of causal graphs with latent variables based on these invariances,
which associates each graphical structure with a set of interventional distributions
that respect the do-calculus rules. Given a collection of distributions, two causal
graphs are called interventionally equivalent if they are associated with the same
family of interventional distributions, where the elements of the family are indistinguishable using the invariances obtained from a direct application of the calculus
rules. We introduce a graphical representation that can be used to determine if
two causal graphs are interventionally equivalent. We provide a formal graphical
characterization of this equivalence. Finally, we extend the FCI algorithm, which
was originally designed to operate based on CIs, to combine observational and
interventional datasets, including new orientation rules particular to this setting.

1

Introduction

Explaining a complex system through their cause and effect relations is one of the fundamental challenges in science. Data is collected and experiments are performed with the intent of understanding
how a certain phenomenon comes about, or how the underlying system works, which could be social,
biological, artificial, among others. The study of causal relations can be seen through the lens of
learning and inference [16, 21]. The learning component is concerned with discovering the causal
structure, which is the very subject of interest in many domains, since they can provide insight about
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

