Abstract Reasoning with Distracting Features

Kecheng Zheng
University of Science
and Technology of China
zkcys001@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Zheng-jun Zha∗
University of Science
and Technology of China
zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Wei Wei
Google Research
wewei@google.com

Abstract
Abstraction reasoning is a long-standing challenge in artificial intelligence. Recent
studies suggest that many of the deep architectures that have triumphed over
other domains failed to work well in abstract reasoning. In this paper, we first
illustrate that one of the main challenges in such a reasoning task is the presence
of distracting features, which requires the learning algorithm to leverage counterevidence and to reject any of the false hypotheses in order to learn the true patterns.
We later show that carefully designed learning trajectory over different categories of
training data can effectively boost learning performance by mitigating the impacts
of distracting features. Inspired by this fact, we propose feature robust abstract
reasoning (FRAR) model, which consists of a reinforcement learning based teacher
network to determine the sequence of training and a student network for predictions.
Experimental results demonstrated strong improvements over baseline algorithms
and we are able to beat the state-of-the-art models by 18.7% in the RAVEN dataset
and 13.3% in the PGM dataset.

1

Introduction

A critical feature of biological intelligence is its capacity for acquiring principles of abstract reasoning
from a sequence of images. Developing machines with skills of abstract reasoning help us to improve
the understandings of underlying elemental cognitive processes. It is one of the long-standing
challenges of artificial intelligence research [3, 12, 31, 34]. Recently, Raven’s Progressive Matrices
(RPM), as a visual abstract reasoning IQ test for humans, is used to effectively estimate a model’s
capacity to extract and process abstract reasoning principles.
Various models have been developed to tackle the problem of abstract reasoning. Some traditional
models [4, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30] rely on the assumptions and heuristics rules about various measurements of image similarity to perform abstract reasoning. As Wang and Su [38] propose an
automatic system to efficiently generate a large number using first-order logic. There has also been
substantial progress in both reasoning and abstract representation learning using deep neural networks
[14, 15, 34, 39]. However, these deep neural based methods simply adopt existing networks such as
CNN [22], ResNet [11] and relational network [35] to perform abstract reasoning but largely ignore
some of the reasoning’s fundamental characteristics.
One aspect that makes abstract reasoning substantially difficult is the presence of distracting features
in addition to the reasoning features that are necessary to solve the problem. Learning algorithms
would have to leverage various counter-evidence to reject any false hypothesis before reaching the
correct one. Some other methods [36, 37] design an unsupervised mapping from high-dimensional
feature space to a few explanatory factors of variation that are subsequently used by reasoning models
to complete the abstract reasoning task. Although these models boost the performance of abstract
∗
1

Corresponding author.
Full code are available at https://github.com/zkcys001/distracting_feature.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

