More Is Less: Learning Efficient Video
Representations by Big-Little Network and Depthwise
Temporal Aggregation

Quanfu Fan†,1 , Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen†,2 , Hilde Kuehne1 , Marco Pistoia2 , David Cox1
†: Equal contribution
1
MIT-IBM Waston AI Lab, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
2
IBM T.J. Waston Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{qfan, chenrich, pistoia}@us.ibm.com, {kuehne, david.d.cox}@ibm.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art models for video action recognition are mostly based on
expensive 3D ConvNets. This results in a need for large GPU clusters to train and
evaluate such architectures. To address this problem, we present an lightweight
and memory-friendly architecture for action recognition that performs on par with
or better than current architectures by using only a fraction of resources. The
proposed architecture is based on a combination of a deep subnet operating on
low-resolution frames with a compact subnet operating on high-resolution frames,
allowing for high efficiency and accuracy at the same time. We demonstrate that our
approach achieves a reduction by 3 ∼ 4 times in FLOPs and ∼ 2 times in memory
usage compared to the baseline. This enables training deeper models with more
input frames under the same computational budget. To further obviate the need for
large-scale 3D convolutions, a temporal aggregation module is proposed to model
temporal dependencies in a video at very small additional computational costs.
Our models achieve strong performance on several action recognition benchmarks
including Kinetics, Something-Something and Moments-in-time. The code and
models are available at https://github.com/IBM/bLVNet-TAM.

1

Introduction

Current state-of-the-art approaches for video action recognition are based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). These include the best performing 3D models, such as I3D [1] and ResNet3D [2],
and some effective 2D models, such as Temporal Relation Networks (TRN) [3] and Temporal Shift
Modules (TSM) [4]. A CNN-based model usually considers a sequence of frames as input, obtained
through either uniform or dense sampling from a video [1, 5]. In general, Longer input sequences
yield better recognition results. However, one problem arising for a model requesting more input
frames is that the GPU resources required for training and inference also significantly increase in
both memory and time. For example, the top-performing I3D models [1] on the Kinetics [6] dataset
were trained with 64 frames on a cluster of 32 GPUs, and the non-local network [7] even uses 128
frames as input. Another problem for action recognition is the lack of effective methods for temporal
modeling when moving away from 3D spatiotemporal convolutions. While 2D convolutional models
are more resource-friendly than their 3D counterparts, they lack expressiveness over time and thus
cannot take much benefit from richer input data.
In this paper, we present an efficient and memory-friendly spatio-temporal representation for action
recognition, which enables training of deeper models while allowing for more input frames. The first
part of our approach is inspired by the Big-Little-Net architecture (bLNet [8]). We propose a new
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

