Non-asymptotic Analysis of Stochastic Methods for
Non-Smooth Non-Convex Regularized Problems

Yi Xu1 , Rong Jin2 , Tianbao Yang1
1. Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA
2. Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{yi-xu, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Stochastic Proximal Gradient (SPG) methods have been widely used for solving optimization problems with a simple (possibly non-smooth) regularizer in
machine learning and statistics. However, to the best of our knowledge no nonasymptotic convergence analysis of SPG exists for non-convex optimization with a
non-smooth and non-convex regularizer. All existing non-asymptotic analysis
of SPG for solving non-smooth non-convex problems require the non-smooth
regularizer to be a convex function, and hence are not applicable to a non-smooth
non-convex regularized problem. This work initiates the analysis to bridge this
gap and opens the door to non-asymptotic convergence analysis of non-smooth
non-convex regularized problems. We analyze several variants of mini-batch
SPG methods for minimizing a non-convex objective that consists of a smooth
non-convex loss and a non-smooth non-convex regularizer. Our contributions are
two-fold: (i) we show that they enjoy the same complexities as their counterparts
for solving convex regularized non-convex problems in terms of finding an approximate stationary point; (ii) we develop more practical variants using dynamic
mini-batch size instead of a fixed mini-batch size without requiring the target
accuracy level of solution. The significance of our results is that they improve upon
the-state-of-art results for solving non-smooth non-convex regularized problems.
We also empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of the considered SPG methods
in comparison with other peer stochastic methods.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider the following stochastic non-smooth non-convex optimization problem:
min F (x) := Eξ [f (x; ξ)] +r(x),
(1)
| {z }
x∈Rd
f (x)

where ξ is a random variable, f (x) is a smooth non-convex function, and r(x) : Rd → R is a proper
non-smooth non-convex lower-semicontinuous function. A special case of problem (1) in machine
learning is of the following finite-sum form:
n
1X
min F (x) :=
fi (x) + r(x),
(2)
n i=1
x∈Rd
where n is the number of data samples. In the sequel, we refer to the problem (1) with a finite-sum
structure as in the finite-sum setting and otherwise as in the online setting [29, 43]. The family of
optimization problems with a non-convex smooth loss and a non-convex non-smooth regularizer
is important and broad in machine learning and statistics. Examples of smooth non-convex losses
include non-linear square loss for classification [20], truncated square loss for regression [44], and
cross-entropy loss for learning a neural network with a smooth activation function. Examples of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

