Icebreaker:
Element-wise Efficient Information Acquisition with
a Bayesian Deep Latent Gaussian Model

Wenbo Gong1∗ , Sebastian Tschiatschek2 , Richard E. Turner12 ,
Sebastian Nowozin2† , José Miguel Hernández-Lobato12 , Cheng Zhang2

Abstract
In this paper, we address the ice-start problem, i.e., the challenge of deploying
machine learning models when only a little or no training data is initially available,
and acquiring each feature element of data is associated with costs. This setting
is representative of the real-world machine learning applications. For instance, in
the health-care domain, obtaining every single measurement comes with a cost.
We propose Icebreaker, a principled framework for element-wise training data
acquisition. Icebreaker introduces a full Bayesian Deep Latent Gaussian Model
(BELGAM) with a novel inference method, which combines recent advances in
amortized inference and stochastic gradient MCMC to enable fast and accurate
posterior inference. By utilizing BELGAM’s ability to fully quantify model uncertainty, we also propose two information acquisition functions for imputation
and active prediction problems. We demonstrate that BELGAM performs significantly better than previous variational autoencoder (VAE) based models, when
the data set size is small, using both machine learning benchmarks and real-world
recommender systems and health-care applications. Moreover, Icebreaker not only
demonstrates improved performance compared to baselines, but it is also capable
of achieving better test performance with less training data available.

1

Introduction

Acquiring information is costly in many real-world applications. For example, a medical doctor often
needs to carry out a sequence of lab tests to make a correct diagnosis, where each of these tests is
associated with a cost in terms of money, time, and health risks. To this end, an AI system should be
able to suggest the information to be acquired in the form of "one measurement (feature) at a time" for
accurate predictions (diagnosis) of any new user. Recently, test-time active prediction methods, such
as EDDI (Efficient Dynamic Discovery of high-value Inference) [28], provide a solution for such a
problem when there is a sufficient amount of training data. Unfortunately, in many scenarios, training
data can also be challenging and costly to obtain. For example, new data needs to be collected by
taking measurements of currently hospitalized patients with their consent. Ideally, we would like to
deploy an AI system, such as EDDI, when no or only limited training data is available. We call this
problem the ice-start problem.
The key to address the ice-start problem is to have a scalable model that knows what it does not know,
namely to quantify the epistemic uncertainty. This knowledge can be used to guide the acquisition of
1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Contributed during internship in Microsoft Research
2
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, UK
†
Now at Google AI, Berlin, Germany (contributed while being with Microsoft Research)
Correspondence to: Cheng Zhang <Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com> and Wenbo Gong <wg242@cam.ac.uk>
∗

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

