Learning Hierarchical Priors in VAEs

Alexej Klushyn1 2 Nutan Chen1 Richard Kurle1 2 Botond Cseke1 Patrick van der Smagt1
1

Machine Learning Research Lab, Volkswagen Group, Germany
Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
{alexej.klushyn, nutan.chen, richardk, botond.cseke, smagt}@argmax.ai
2

Abstract
We propose to learn a hierarchical prior in the context of variational autoencoders
to avoid the over-regularisation resulting from a standard normal prior distribution.
To incentivise an informative latent representation of the data, we formulate the
learning problem as a constrained optimisation problem by extending the Taming
VAEs framework to two-level hierarchical models. We introduce a graph-based
interpolation method, which shows that the topology of the learned latent representation corresponds to the topology of the data manifold—and present several
examples, where desired properties of latent representation such as smoothness
and simple explanatory factors are learned by the prior.

1

Introduction

Variational autoencoders (VAEs) [15, 24] are a class of probabilistic latent variable models for
unsupervised learning. The learned generative model and the corresponding (approximate) posterior
distribution of the latent variables provide a decoder/encoder pair that often captures semantically
meaningful features of the data. In this paper, we address the issue of learning informative latent
representations/encodings of the data.
The vanilla VAE uses a standard normal prior distribution for the latent variables. It has been shown
that this can lead to over-regularising the posterior distribution, resulting in latent representations
that do not represent well the structure of the data [1]. There are several approaches to alleviate this
problem: (i) defining and learning complex prior distributions that can better model the encoded data
manifold [10, 28]; (ii) using specialised optimisation algorithms, which try to find local/global minima
of the training objective that correspond to informative latent representations [4, 27, 14, 25]; and
(iii) adding mutual-information-based constraints or regularisers to incentivise a good correspondence
between the data and the latent variables [1, 31, 9]. In this paper, we focus on the first two approaches.
We use a two-level stochastic model, where the first layer corresponds to the latent representation and
the second layer models a hierarchical prior (continuous mixture). In order to learn such hierarchical
priors, we extend the optimisation framework introduced in [25], where the authors reformulate the
VAE objective as the Lagrangian of a constrained optimisation problem. They impose an inequality
constraint on the reconstruction error and use the KL divergence between the approximate posterior
and the standard normal prior as the optimisation objective. We substitute the standard normal prior
with the hierarchical one and use an importance-weighted bound [5] to approximate the resulting
intractable marginal. Concurrently, we introduce the associated optimisation algorithm, which is
inspired by GECO [25]—the latter does not always lead to good encodings (e.g., Sec. 4.1). Our
approach better avoids posterior collapse and enhances interpretability compared to similar methods.
We adopt the manifold hypothesis [6, 26] to validate the quality of a latent representation. We do this
by proposing a nearest-neighbour graph-based method for interpolating between different data points
along the learned data manifold in the latent space.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

