Unsupervised Curricula
for Visual Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Allan Jabriα Kyle Hsuβ,† Benjamin Eysenbachγ
Abhishek Guptaα Sergey Levineα Chelsea Finnδ

Abstract
In principle, meta-reinforcement learning algorithms leverage experience across
many tasks to learn fast reinforcement learning (RL) strategies that transfer to
similar tasks. However, current meta-RL approaches rely on manually-defined
distributions of training tasks, and hand-crafting these task distributions can be
challenging and time-consuming. Can “useful” pre-training tasks be discovered in
an unsupervised manner? We develop an unsupervised algorithm for inducing an
adaptive meta-training task distribution, i.e. an automatic curriculum, by modeling
unsupervised interaction in a visual environment. The task distribution is scaffolded
by a parametric density model of the meta-learner’s trajectory distribution. We
formulate unsupervised meta-RL as information maximization between a latent
task variable and the meta-learner’s data distribution, and describe a practical
instantiation which alternates between integration of recent experience into the task
distribution and meta-learning of the updated tasks. Repeating this procedure leads
to iterative reorganization such that the curriculum adapts as the meta-learner’s
data distribution shifts. In particular, we show how discriminative clustering for
visual representation can support trajectory-level task acquisition and exploration
in domains with pixel observations, avoiding pitfalls of alternatives. In experiments
on vision-based navigation and manipulation domains, we show that the algorithm
allows for unsupervised meta-learning that transfers to downstream tasks specified
by hand-crafted reward functions and serves as pre-training for more efficient
supervised meta-learning of test task distributions.

1

Introduction

The discrepancy between animals and learning machines in their capacity to gracefully adapt and
generalize is a central issue in artificial intelligence research. The simple nematode C. elegans is
capable of adapting foraging strategies to varying scenarios [9], while many higher animals are driven
to acquire reusable behaviors even without extrinsic task-specific rewards [64, 45]. It is unlikely that
we can build machines as adaptive as even the simplest of animals by exhaustively specifying shaped
rewards or demonstrations across all possible environments and tasks. This has inspired work in
reward-free learning [28], intrinsic motivation [55], multi-task learning [11], meta-learning [50], and
continual learning [59].
An important aspect of generalization is the ability to share and transfer ability between related tasks.
In reinforcement learning (RL), a common strategy for multi-task learning is conditioning the policy
on side-information related to the task. For instance, contextual policies [49] are conditioned on a task
description (e.g. a goal) that is meant to modulate the strategy enacted by the policy. Meta-learning of
reinforcement learning (meta-RL) is yet more general as it places the burden of inferring the task on
the learner itself, such that task descriptions can take a wider range of forms, the most general being
an MDP. In principle, meta-reinforcement learning (meta-RL) requires an agent to distill previous
α
†

UC Berkeley β University of Toronto γ Carnegie Mellon University δ Stanford University
Work done as a visiting student researcher at UC Berkeley.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

