Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation using the
Bounding Box Tightness Prior

Cheng-Chun Hsu1∗
Kuang-Jui Hsu2∗
Chung-Chi Tsai2
1,3
1,4
Yen-Yu Lin
Yung-Yu Chuang
1
2
Academia Sinica
Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
3
4
National Chiao Tung University
National Taiwan University
hsu06118@citi.sinica.edu.tw
{kuangjui, chuntsai}@qti.qualcomm.com
lin@cs.nctu.edu.tw
cyy@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
This paper presents a weakly supervised instance segmentation method that consumes training data with tight bounding box annotations. The major difficulty lies
in the uncertain figure-ground separation within each bounding box since there is
no supervisory signal about it. We address the difficulty by formulating the problem
as a multiple instance learning (MIL) task, and generate positive and negative bags
based on the sweeping lines of each bounding box. The proposed deep model
integrates MIL into a fully supervised instance segmentation network, and can
be derived by the objective consisting of two terms, i.e., the unary term and the
pairwise term. The former estimates the foreground and background areas of each
bounding box while the latter maintains the unity of the estimated object masks.
The experimental results show that our method performs favorably against existing
weakly supervised methods and even surpasses some fully supervised methods
for instance segmentation on the PASCAL VOC dataset. The code is available at
https://github.com/chengchunhsu/WSIS_BBTP.

1

Introduction

Instance-aware semantic segmentation [1, 2, 3, 4], or instance segmentation for short, has attracted
increasing attention in computer vision. It involves object detection and semantic segmentation, and
aims to jointly detect and segment object instances of interest in an image. As a crucial component to
image understanding, instance segmentation facilitates many high-level vision applications ranging
from autonomous driving [5, 6], pose estimation [7, 8, 9] to image synthesis [10].
Significant progress on instance segmentation such as [7, 11, 12, 13, 14] has been made based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [15] where instance-aware feature representations and
segmentation models are derived simultaneously. Despite effectiveness, these CNN-based methods
require a large number of training images with instance-level pixel-wise annotations. Collecting this
kind of training data is labor-intensive because of the efforts on delineating the contours of object
instances as mentioned in the previous work [16]. The expensive annotation cost has restricted the
applicability of instance segmentation.
In this work, we address this issue by proposing a CNN-based method where a model is learned for
instance segmentation using training data with bounding box annotations. Compared with the contour,
the bounding box of an object instance can be labeled by simply clicking the four outermost points of
that instance, leading to a greatly reduced annotation cost. There is only one method for instance
segmentation [17] that adopts box-level annotated training data. However, the method [17] is not
∗

indicates equal contributios

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

