Learning Robust Options
by Conditional Value at Risk Optimization
Takuya Hiraoka 1,2,3 , Takahisa Imagawa 2 , Tatsuya Mori 1,2,3 , Takashi Onishi 1,2 ,
Yoshimasa Tsuruoka 2,4
1

NEC Corporation
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology
3
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
4
The University of Tokyo
{takuya-h1, tmori, takashi.onishi}@nec.com
imagawa.t@aist.go.jp, tsuruoka@logos.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2

Abstract
Options are generally learned by using an inaccurate environment model (or simulator), which contains uncertain model parameters. While there are several methods
to learn options that are robust against the uncertainty of model parameters, these
methods only consider either the worst case or the average (ordinary) case for learning options. This limited consideration of the cases often produces options that do
not work well in the unconsidered case. In this paper, we propose a conditional
value at risk (CVaR)-based method to learn options that work well in both the average and worst cases. We extend the CVaR-based policy gradient method proposed
by Chow and Ghavamzadeh (2014) to deal with robust Markov decision processes
and then apply the extended method to learning robust options. We conduct experiments to evaluate our method in multi-joint robot control tasks (HopperIceBlock,
Half-Cheetah, and Walker2D). Experimental results show that our method produces
options that 1) give better worst-case performance than the options learned only to
minimize the average-case loss, and 2) give better average-case performance than
the options learned only to minimize the worst-case loss.

1

Introduction

In the reinforcement learning context, an Option means a temporally extended sequence of actions [30], and is regarded as useful for many purposes, such as speeding up learning, transferring
skills across domains, and solving long-term planning problems. Because of its usefulness, the
methods for discovering (learning) options have been actively studied (e.g., [1, 17, 18, 20, 28, 29]).
Learning options successfully in practical domains requires a large amount of training data, but
collecting data from a real-world environment is often prohibitively expensive [15]. In such cases,
environment models (i.e., simulators) are used for learning options instead, but such models usually
contain uncertain parameters (i.e., a reality gap) since they are constructed based on insufficient
knowledge of a real environment. Options learned with an inaccurate model can lead to a significant
degradation of the performance of the agent when deployed in the real environment [19]. This
problem is a severe obstacle to applying the options framework to practical tasks in the real world,
and has driven the need for methods that can learn robust options against inaccuracy of models.
Some previous work has addressed the problem of learning options that are robust against inaccuracy
of models. Mankowitz et al. [19] proposed a method to learn options that minimize the expected loss
(or maximize an expected return) on the environment model with the worst-case model parameter
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

