Universality in Learning from Linear Measurements

Ehsan Abbasi
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, 91125
eabbasi@caltech.edu

Fariborz Salehi
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, 91125
fsalehi@caltech.edu

Babak Hassibi∗
Department of Electrical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, 91125
hassibi@caltech.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of recovering a structured signal from independently and
identically drawn linear measurements. A convex penalty function f (·) is considered which penalizes deviations from the desired structure, and signal recovery is
performed by minimizing f (·) subject to the linear measurement constraints. The
main question of interest is to determine the minimum number of measurements
that is necessary and sufficient for the perfect recovery of the unknown signal
with high probability. Our main result states that, under some mild conditions on
f (·) and on the distribution from which the linear measurements are drawn, the
minimum number of measurements required for perfect recovery depends only on
the first and second order statistics of the measurement vectors. As a result, the
required of number of measurements can be determining by studying measurement
vectors that are Gaussian (and have the same mean vector and covariance matrix)
for which a rich literature and comprehensive theory exists. As an application, we
show that the minimum number of random quadratic measurements (also known as
rank-one projections) required to recover a low rank positive semi-definite matrix
is 3nr, where n is the dimension of the matrix and r is its rank. As a consequence,
we settle the long standing open question of determining the minimum number
of measurements required for perfect signal recovery in phase retrieval using the
celebrated PhaseLift algorithm, and show it to be 3n.

1

Introduction

Recovering a structured signal from a set of linear observations appears in many applications in areas
ranging from finance to biology, and from imaging to signal processing. More formally, the goal is to
recover an unknown vector x0 ∈ Rn , from observations of the form yi = aT
i x0 , for i = 1, . . . , m. In
many modern applications, the ambient dimension of the signal, n, is often (overwhelmingly) larger
than the number of observations, m. In such cases, there are infinitely many solutions that satisfy the
linear equations arising from the observations, and therefore to obtain a unique solution one must
assume some prior structure on the unknown vector. Common examples of structured signals are
sparse and group-sparse vectors [13, 6], low-rank matrices [24, 5], and simultaneously-structured
matrices [8, 21]. To this end, we use a convex penalty function f : Rn → R, that captures the
structure of the structured signal, in the sense that signals that do not adhere to the desired structure
∗
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0932428, CCF1018927, CCF-1423663 and CCF-1409204, by a grant from Qualcomm Inc., by a grant from Futurewei Inc., by
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory through the President and Director’s Fund, and by King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

