Reconciling meta-learning and continual learning
with online mixtures of tasks
Ghassen Jerfel ⇤
gj47@duke.edu
Duke University

Erin Grant ⇤
eringrant@berkeley.edu
UC Berkeley

Thomas L. Griffiths
tomg@princeton.edu
Princeton University

Katherine Heller
kheller@stat.duke.edu
Duke University

Abstract
Learning-to-learn or meta-learning leverages data-driven inductive bias to increase
the efficiency of learning on a novel task. This approach encounters difficulty when
transfer is not advantageous, for instance, when tasks are considerably dissimilar
or change over time. We use the connection between gradient-based meta-learning
and hierarchical Bayes to propose a Dirichlet process mixture of hierarchical
Bayesian models over the parameters of an arbitrary parametric model such as a
neural network. In contrast to consolidating inductive biases into a single set of
hyperparameters, our approach of task-dependent hyperparameter selection better
handles latent distribution shift, as demonstrated on a set of evolving, image-based,
few-shot learning benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning algorithms aim to increase the efficiency of learning by treating task-specific learning
episodes as examples from which to generalize [47]. The central assumption of a meta-learning
algorithm is that some tasks are inherently related and so inductive transfer can improve sample
efficiency and generalization [8, 9, 5]. In learning a single set of domain-general hyperparameters
that parameterize a metric space [53] or an optimizer [40, 14], recent meta-learning algorithms
make the assumption that tasks are equally related, and therefore non-adaptive, mutual transfer is
appropriate. This assumption has been cemented in recent few-shot learning benchmarks, which
comprise a set of tasks generated in a uniform manner [e.g., 53, 14].
However, the real world often presents scenarios in which an agent must decide what degree of
transfer is appropriate. In some cases, a subset of tasks are more strongly related to each other, and
so non-uniform transfer provides a strategic advantage. On the other hand, transfer in the presence
of dissimilar or outlier tasks worsens generalization performance [44, 12]. Moreover, when the
underlying task distribution is non-stationary, inductive transfer to previously observed tasks should
exhibit graceful degradation to address the catastrophic forgetting problem [28]. In these settings, the
consolidation of all inductive biases into a single set of hyperparameters is not well-posed to deal
with changing or diverse tasks. In contrast, in order to account for this degree of task heterogeneity,
humans detect and adapt to novel contexts by attending to relationships between tasks [10].
In this work, we learn a mixture of hierarchical models that allows a meta-learner to adaptively
select over a set of learned parameter initializations for gradient-based adaptation to a new task. The
method is equivalent to clustering task-specific parameters in the hierarchical model induced by
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

