Provable Certificates for Adversarial Examples:
Fitting a Ball in the Union of Polytopes

Matt Jordan∗
University of Texas at Austin
mjordan@cs.utexas.edu

Justin Lewis∗
University of Texas at Austin
justin94lewis@utexas.edu

Alexandros G. Dimakis
University of Texas at Austin
dimakis@austin.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel method for computing exact pointwise robustness of deep
neural networks for all convex `p norms. Our algorithm, GeoCert, finds the largest
`p ball centered at an input point x0 , within which the output class of a given neural
network with ReLU nonlinearities remains unchanged. We relate the problem
of computing pointwise robustness of these networks to that of computing the
maximum norm ball with a fixed center that can be contained in a non-convex
polytope. This is a challenging problem in general, however we show that there
exists an efficient algorithm to compute this for polyhedral complices. Further
we show that piecewise linear neural networks partition the input space into a
polyhedral complex. Our algorithm has the ability to almost immediately output a
nontrivial lower bound to the pointwise robustness which is iteratively improved
until it ultimately becomes tight. We empirically show that our approach generates
distance lower bounds that are tighter compared to prior work, under moderate
time constraints.

1

Introduction

The problem we consider in this paper is that of finding the `p -pointwise robustness of a neural net
with ReLU nonlinearities with respect to general `p norms. The pointwise robustness of a neural net
classifier, f , for a given input point x0 is defined as the smallest distance from x0 to the decision
boundary [1]. Formally, this is defined as
ρ(f, x0 , p) := inf { ≥ 0 | f (x) 6= f (x0 ) ∧ ||x − x0 ||p = }.
x

(1)

Computing the pointwise robustness is the central problem in certifying that neural nets are robust to
adversarial attacks. Exactly computing this quantity this problem has been shown to be NP-complete
in the `∞ setting [11], with hardness of approximation results under the `1 norm [25]. Despite these
hardness results, multiple algorithms have been devised to exactly compute the pointwise robustness,
though they may require exponential time in the worst case. As a result, efficient algorithms have
also been developed to give provable lower bounds to the pointwise robustness, though these lower
bounds may be quite loose.
In this work, we propose an algorithm that initially outputs a nontrivial lower bound to the pointwise
robustness and continually improves this lower bound until it becomes tight. Although our algorithm
∗

First two authors have equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

