Efficient Rematerialization for Deep Networks

Ravi Kumar
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Manish Purohit
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
mpurohit@google.com

Erik Vee
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
erikvee@google.com

Zoya Svitkina
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
zoya@google.com

Joshua R. Wang
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
joshuawang@google.com

Abstract
When training complex neural networks, memory usage can be an important
bottleneck. The question of when to rematerialize, i.e., to recompute intermediate
values rather than retaining them in memory, becomes critical to achieving the best
time and space efficiency. In this work we consider the rematerialization problem
and devise efficient algorithms that use structural characterizations of computation
graphs—treewidth and pathwidth—to obtain provably efficient rematerialization
schedules. Our experiments demonstrate the performance of these algorithms on
many common deep learning models.

1

Introduction

The world of deep learning is moving toward bigger model architectures. The recent successes in
speech, language understanding, vision, and others have repeatedly demonstrated that bigger and
deeper models yield the best results for a task, thereby advancing the state of the art. In addition to
the size, the models themselves and the methods to train them are becoming increasingly complex
and intricate in terms of data dependencies, gradient propagation, optimization steps, etc. Specialized
hardware such as GPUs and AI accelerators have been vastly influential in training these complex
models. They are particularly helpful from a computational point of view, but are limited by memory
capacity that falls short of the peak demands of training these large models. Since memory turns out
to be a bottleneck, it becomes an issue of feasibility—can a given model be trained at all?
While the growing model complexity is the root cause
of severe demands on memory, the actual schedule in
which the computation is carried out also plays a critical role in determining peak memory requirements.
To see why, it is helpful to view the computational
steps in training these models as a directed acyclic
graph (e.g., Figure 1) whose nodes represent operations and directed edges represent data dependencies.
(In TensorFlow parlance, this is a dataflow graph.)
Each node consumes a set of inputs from its incoming edges, does some computation, and outputs the
result of this computation on its outgoing edges; it is
assumed that both inputs and outputs of this computation are to be held in memory. The order in which the
nodes are computed, i.e., the schedule, will determine

A

B

C

D

E

Figure 1: The schedule hA, B, C, D, Ei needs
four units of memory—while computing D, two
units are needed for inputs to D, one for output
from D, and one unit to keep the output of A as
an input to E. The schedule hA, B, C, D, A, Ei
needs three units of memory—at node D the output
of A need not be retained in memory since it will
be recomputed right after computing D.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

