Data-dependent Sample Complexity of Deep Neural
Networks via Lipschitz Augmentation
Colin Wei
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
colinwei@stanford.edu

Tengyu Ma
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Existing Rademacher complexity bounds for neural networks rely only on norm
control of the weight matrices and depend exponentially on depth via a product of
the matrix norms. Lower bounds show that this exponential dependence on depth is
unavoidable when no additional properties of the training data are considered. We
suspect that this conundrum comes from the fact that these bounds depend on the
training data only through the margin. In practice, many data-dependent techniques
such as Batchnorm improve the generalization performance. For feedforward
neural nets as well as RNNs, we obtain tighter Rademacher complexity bounds by
considering additional data-dependent properties of the network: the norms of the
hidden layers of the network, and the norms of the Jacobians of each layer with
respect to all previous layers. Our bounds scale polynomially in depth when these
empirical quantities are small, as is usually the case in practice. To obtain these
bounds, we develop general tools for augmenting a sequence of functions to make
their composition Lipschitz and then covering the augmented functions. Inspired
by our theory, we directly regularize the network’s Jacobians during training and
empirically demonstrate that this improves test performance.

1

Introduction

Deep networks trained in practice typically use many more parameters than training examples, and
therefore have the capacity to overfit to the training set [Zhang et al., 2016]. Fortunately, there are also
many known (and unknown) sources of regularization during training: model capacity regularization
such as simple weight decay, implicit or algorithmic regularization [Gunasekar et al., 2017, 2018b,
Soudry et al., 2018, Li et al., 2018], and finally regularization that depends on the training data such as
Batchnorm [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015], layer normalization [Ba et al., 2016], group normalization [Wu
and He, 2018], path normalization [Neyshabur et al., 2015a], dropout [Srivastava et al., 2014, Wager
et al., 2013], and regularizing the variance of activations [Littwin and Wolf, 2018].
In many cases, it remains unclear why data-dependent regularization can improve the final test
error — for example, why Batchnorm empirically improves the generalization performance in
practice [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015, Zhang et al., 2019]. We do not have many tools for analyzing
data-dependent regularization in the literature; with the exception of Dziugaite and Roy [2018], [Arora
et al., 2018] and [Nagarajan and Kolter, 2019] (with which we compare later in more detail), existing
bounds typically consider properties of the weights of the learned model but little about their
interactions with the training set. Formally, define a data-dependent property as any function of
the learned model and the training data. In this work, we prove tighter generalization bounds by
considering additional data-dependent properties of the network. Optimizing these bounds leads to
data-dependent regularization techniques that empirically improve performance.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

