Variational Structured Semantic Inference for
Diverse Image Captioning
Fuhai Chen1 , Rongrong Ji12∗, Jiayi Ji1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 , Baochang Zhang3 , Xuri Ge1 ,
Yongjian Wu4 , Feiyue Huang4 , Yan Wang5
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University,
2
Peng Cheng Lab, 3 Beihang University, 4 Tencent Youtu Lab, 5 Pinterest
{cfh3c.xmu,jjyxmu,xurigexmu}@gmail.com, {rrji,xssun}@xmu.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn,
{littlekenwu,garyhuang}@tencent.com, yanw@pinterest.com

Abstract
Despite the exciting progress in image captioning, generating diverse captions
for a given image remains as an open problem. Existing methods typically apply generative models such as Variational Auto-Encoder to diversify the captions,
which however neglect two key factors of diverse expression, i.e., the lexical diversity and the syntactic diversity. To model these two inherent diversities in image captioning, we propose a Variational Structured Semantic Inferring model
(termed VSSI-cap) executed in a novel structured encoder-inferer-decoder schema.
VSSI-cap mainly innovates in a novel structure, i.e., Variational Multi-modal Inferring tree (termed VarMI-tree). In particular, conditioned on the visual-textual
features from the encoder, the VarMI-tree models the lexical and syntactic diversities by inferring their latent variables (with variations) in an approximate posterior inference guided by a visual semantic prior. Then, a reconstruction loss and
the posterior-prior KL-divergence are jointly estimated to optimize the VSSI-cap
model. Finally, diverse captions are generated upon the visual features and the
latent variables from this structured encoder-inferer-decoder model. Experiments
on the benchmark dataset show that the proposed VSSI-cap achieves significant
improvements over the state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Image captioning has recently attracted extensive research attention with broad application prospects.
Most state-of-the-art image captioning models adopt an encoder-decoder architecture [1, 2, 3], which
encodes the image into a feature representation via Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and then
decodes the feature into a caption via Recurrent Neural Networks with Long-Short Term Memory
units (LSTM). Despite the exciting progress, one common defect is that the generated captions
are semantically synonymous and syntactically similar, which goes against the inherent diversity
delivered by the image, i.e., “A picture is worth a thousand words”. Nevertheless, generating diverse
captions from a given image remains as an open problem. As shown in Fig. 1 (Left-Top), it is quite
intuitive to derive heterogeneous understanding from human being, while the traditional models
typically tend to generate homogeneous sentences due to the limited variation in the maximum
likelihood objective [4].
Several recent works have been proposed to investigate diverse image captioning [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], which
typically employed a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) or Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) as
the generative model. For example, [5] designed an adversarial model trained with an approximate
sampler to implicitly match the generated distribution to the human caption. For another instance,
[8] proposed a conditional VAE based captioning model guided by an object-wise prior, as roughly
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

