Learning Sample-Specific Models with Low-Rank
Personalized Regression
Benjamin Lengerich
Carnegie Mellon University
blengeri@cs.cmu.edu

Bryon Aragam
University of Chicago
bryon@chicagobooth.edu

Eric P. Xing
Carnegie Mellon University
epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Modern applications of machine learning (ML) deal with increasingly heterogeneous datasets comprised of data collected from overlapping latent subpopulations.
As a result, traditional models trained over large datasets may fail to recognize
highly predictive localized effects in favour of weakly predictive global patterns.
This is a problem because localized effects are critical to developing individualized
policies and treatment plans in applications ranging from precision medicine to
advertising. To address this challenge, we propose to estimate sample-specific
models that tailor inference and prediction at the individual level. In contrast to
classical ML models that estimate a single, complex model (or only a few complex
models), our approach produces a model personalized to each sample. These
sample-specific models can be studied to understand subgroup dynamics that go
beyond coarse-grained class labels. Crucially, our approach does not assume that
relationships between samples (e.g. a similarity network) are known a priori.
Instead, we use unmodeled covariates to learn a latent distance metric over the
samples. We apply this approach to financial, biomedical, and electoral data as
well as simulated data and show that sample-specific models provide fine-grained
interpretations of complicated phenomena without sacrificing predictive accuracy
compared to state-of-the-art models such as deep neural networks.

1

Introduction

The scale of modern datasets allows an unprecedented opportunity to infer individual-level effects
by borrowing power across large cohorts; however, principled statistical methods for accomplishing
this goal are lacking. Standard approaches for adapting to heterogeneity in complex data include
random effects models, mixture models, varying coefficients, and hierarchical models. Recent work
includes the network lasso [11], the pliable lasso [32], personalized multi-task learning [37], and the
localized lasso [38]. Despite this long history, these methods either fail to estimate individual-level
(i.e. sample-specific) effects, or require prior knowledge regarding the relation between samples
(e.g. a network). At the same time, as datasets continue to increase in size and complexity, the
possibility of inferring sample-specific phenomena by exploiting patterns in these large datasets has
driven interest in important scientific problems such as precision medicine [5, 24]. The relevance
and potential impact of sample-specific inference has also been widely acknowledged in applications
including psychology [9], education [12], and finance [1].
In this paper, we explore a solution to this dilemma through the framework of “personalized” models.
Personalized modeling seeks to estimate a large collection of simple models in which each model is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

