Interaction Hard Thresholding:
Consistent Sparse Quadratic Regression in
Sub-quadratic Time and Space

Shuo Yang ∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
yangshuo_ut@utexas.edu

Yanyao Shen ∗
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
shenyanyao@utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
Quadratic regression involves modeling the response as a (generalized) linear
function of not only the features xj , but also of quadratic terms xj1 xj2 . The
inclusion of such higher-order “interaction terms" in regression often provides an
easy way to increase accuracy in already-high-dimensional problems. However,
this explodes the problem dimension from linear O(p) to quadratic O(p2 ), and it is
common to look for sparse interactions (typically via heuristics).
In this paper we provide a new algorithm – Interaction Hard Thresholding (IntHT)
– which is the first one to provably accurately solve this problem in sub-quadratic
time and space. It is a variant of Iterative Hard Thresholding; one that uses the
special quadratic structure to devise a new way to (approx.) extract the top elements
of a p2 size gradient in sub-p2 time and space.
Our main result is to theoretically prove that, in spite of the many speedup-related
approximations, IntHT linearly converges to a consistent estimate under standard
high-dimensional sparse recovery assumptions. We also demonstrate its value via
synthetic experiments.
Moreover, we numerically show that IntHT can be extended to higher-order regression problems, and also theoretically analyze an SVRG variant of IntHT.

1

Introduction

Simple linear regression aims to predict a response y via a (possibly generalized) linear function θ > x
of the feature vector x. Quadratic regression aims to predict y as a quadratic function x> Θx of the
features x
Linear Model
Quadratic Model
y ∼ θ> x
y ∼ x> Θ x
The inclusion of such higher-order interaction terms – in this case second-order terms of the form
xj1 xj2 – is common practice, and has been seen to provide much more accurate predictions in
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

