An Adaptive Mirror-Prox Algorithm for
Variational Inequalities with Singular Operators

Kimon Antonakopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France.
kimon.antonakopoulos@inria.fr

E. Veronica Belmega
ETIS/ENSEA
Univ. de Cergy-Pontoise-CNRS, France
belmega@ensea.fr

Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP,
LIG 38000 Grenoble, France.
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
Lipschitz continuity is a central requirement for achieving the optimal O(1/T ) rate
of convergence in monotone, deterministic variational inequalities (a setting that
includes convex minimization, convex-concave optimization, nonatomic games,
and many other problems). However, in many cases of practical interest, the
operator defining the variational inequality may exhibit singularities at the boundary
of the feasible region, precluding in this way the use of fast gradient methods
that attain this optimal rate (such as Nemirovski’s mirror-prox algorithm and its
variants). To address this issue, we consider a regularity condition which relates the
variation of the operator to that of a suitably chosen Bregman function. Leveraging
this Bregman continuity condition, we derive an adaptive mirror-prox algorithm
which attains the optimal O(1/T ) rate of convergence in problems with possibly
singular operators, without any prior knowledge of the degree of smoothness (the
Bregman analogue of the Lipschitz constant). We also show
√ that, under Bregman
continuity, the mirror-prox algorithm achieves a O(1/ T ) convergence rate in
stochastic variational inequalities.

1

Introduction

The seminal introduction of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [18] has ushered in a new
optimization paradigm in deep learning: instead of focusing on the minimization of an empirical loss
function, GAN training hinges on a zero-sum game between a generator and a discriminator. In fact,
in many cases GAN training goes even beyond the min-max setting, either because there are more
than two networks involved, or because the objectives of the generator and the discriminator are not
entirely opposed – e.g., as in the widely used ACGAN framework of Odena et al. [43]. In these cases,
the most compact way of representing the problem’s training landscape is by means of a variational
inequality (VI).
Tracing their origins to the work of Stampacchia [49] on the Signorini problem, variational inequalities
have since found a broad range of applications in physics, engineering, economics – and, more
recently, machine learning. One of the main reasons for their extensive applicability is that they
comprise a flexible optimization framework which can simultaneously account for loss function
minimization, saddle-point, game-theoretic, and fixed point problems. As a result, there has been
considerable interest in the literature to develop optimal algorithms for solving VI problems; for an
appetizing introduction, see [16] and references therein.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

