Learning to Predict 3D Objects with an
Interpolation-based Differentiable Renderer

Wenzheng Chen1,2,3

Jun Gao1,2,3,∗

Jaakko Lehtinen1,5
NVIDIA1

University of Toronto2

Huan Ling1,2,3,∗

Alec Jacobson2
Vector Institute3

Edward J. Smith1,4,∗

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

McGill University4

Aalto University5

{wenzchen, huling, jung, esmith, jlehtinen, sfidler}@nvidia.com, jacobson@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Many machine learning models operate on images, but ignore the fact that images
are 2D projections formed by 3D geometry interacting with light, in a process
called rendering. Enabling ML models to understand image formation might be key
for generalization. However, due to an essential rasterization step involving discrete
assignment operations, rendering pipelines are non-differentiable and thus largely
inaccessible to gradient-based ML techniques. In this paper, we present DIB-R,
a differentiable rendering framework which allows gradients to be analytically
computed for all pixels in an image. Key to our approach is to view foreground
rasterization as a weighted interpolation of local properties and background rasterization as a distance-based aggregation of global geometry. Our approach allows
for accurate optimization over vertex positions, colors, normals, light directions
and texture coordinates through a variety of lighting models. We showcase our
approach in two ML applications: single-image 3D object prediction, and 3D
textured object generation, both trained using exclusively using 2D supervision.
Our project website is: https://nv-tlabs.github.io/DIB-R/

1

Introduction

3D visual perception contributes invaluable information when understanding and interacting with the
real world. However, the raw sensory input to both human and machine visual processing streams are
2D projections (images), formed by the complex interactions of 3D geometry with light. Enabling
machine learning models to understand the image formation process could facilitate disentanglement
of geometry from the lighting effects, which is key in achieving invariance and robustness.
The process of generating a 2D image from a 3D model is called rendering. Rendering is a well
understood process in graphics with different algorithms developed over the years. Making these
pipelines amenable to deep learning requires us to differentiate through them.
In [17], the authors introduced a differentiable ray tracer which builds on Monte Carlo ray tracing,
and can thus deal with secondary lighting effects such as shadows and indirect light. Most of
the existing work focuses on rasterization-based renderers, which, while simpler in nature as they
geometrically project 3D objects onto the image plane and cannot support more advanced lighting
effects, have been demonstrated to work well in a variety of ML applications such as single-image
3D prediction [22, 14, 20, 21]. Here, we follow this line of work.
Existing rasterization-based approaches typically compute approximate gradients [22, 14] which
impacts performance. Furthermore, current differentiable rasterizertion methods fail to support
differentiation with respect to many informative scene properties, such as textures and lighting,
leading to low fidelity rendering, and less informative learning signals [14, 20, 21] .
∗

authors contributed equally

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

