PerspectiveNet: A Scene-consistent Image Generator
for New View Synthesis in Real Indoor Environments

David Novotny

Benjamin Graham
Jeremy Reizenstein
Facebook AI Research
London
{dnovotny,benjamingraham,reizenstein}@fb.com

Abstract
Given a set of a reference RGBD views of an indoor environment, and a new
viewpoint, our goal is to predict the view from that location. Prior work on newview generation has predominantly focused on significantly constrained scenarios,
typically involving artificially rendered views of isolated CAD models. Here we
tackle a much more challenging version of the problem. We devise an approach
that exploits known geometric properties of the scene (per-frame camera extrinsics
and depth) in order to warp reference views into the new ones. The defects in the
generated views are handled by a novel RGBD inpainting network, PerspectiveNet,
that is fine-tuned for a given scene in order to obtain images that are geometrically
consistent with all the views in the scene camera system. Experiments conducted
on the ScanNet and SceneNet datasets reveal performance superior to strong
baselines.

1

Introduction

Decisions often have to be made on the basis of incomplete information about our visual environment.
Humans instinctively fill the gaps in from prior experience. This is an enabler of many tasks such
as navigation, and machine learning should strive to match this ability. One way of quantitatively
measuring it is via generating new views within a partially explored environment. Many variants of
this problem, known as new view synthesis, exist, ranging from a category-specific setup, where the
hallucinated views are conditioned on image(s) of an isolated instance of a well defined visual object
category (car, chair) [9], to inferring new photo-realistic pictures of outdoor or indoor scenes given
a set of reference images [13]. The former can be seen as a subtask of the latter, since real scenes
contain many instances of various object categories in an arbitrary geometric configuration. Perhaps
due to the challenging nature of the more unconstrained setup, the community in recent years mostly
focused on the category-specific scenario, restricting a large portion of the experimental evaluation to
clean synthetic datasets such as ShapeNet [4].
In this work, we take a step toward the more complex task of generating new views of real indoor
environments. Historically, the new view synthesis task has been addressed with either learning
based methods [43, 20, 19], that leverage deep nets to map an encoding of a viewpoint and style to a
new view, or methods that exploit geometric properties of a given scene to warp reference images
into a target viewpoint, usually with some human intervention, possibly followed by an inpainting
step that fills the newly appearing holes [17, 7]. While learning based methods are suitable for the
category-specific setup, where the viewpoint-to-image mapping is less complex, due to the regular
geometric structure of object categories, the indoor scene synthesis was predominantly addressed
with different variants of the render-inpaint technique. Similar to previous approaches, we tackle the
task by devising a novel variant of the render-inpaint approach.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

