Semi-supervisedly Co-embedding Attributed
Networks
Zaiqiao Meng⇤
Department of Computing Science
Sun Yat-sen University, and University of Glasgow
zaiqiao.meng@gmail.com
Jinyuan Fang
School of Data and Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
fangjy6@gmail.com

Shangsong Liang†
School of Data and Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
liangshangsong@gmail.com
Teng Xiao
School of Data and Computer Science
Sun Yat-sen University
tengxiao01@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep generative models (DGMs) have achieved remarkable advances. Semisupervised variational auto-encoders (SVAE) as a classical DGM offer a principled
framework to effectively generalize from small labelled data to large unlabelled
ones, but it is difficult to incorporate rich unstructured relationships within the
multiple heterogeneous entities. In this paper, to deal with the problem, we present
a semi-supervised co-embedding model for attributed networks (SCAN) based on
the generalized SVAE for heterogeneous data, which collaboratively learns lowdimensional vector representations of both nodes and attributes for partially labelled
attributed networks semi-supervisedly. The node and attribute embeddings obtained
in a unified manner by our SCAN can benefit for capturing not only the proximities
between nodes but also the affinities between nodes and attributes. Moreover, our
model also trains a discriminative network to learn the label predictive distribution
of nodes. Experimental results on real-world networks demonstrate that our model
yields excellent performance in a number of applications such as attribute inference,
user profiling and node classification compared to the state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

Network embedding has been receiving significant attention in recent years due to the ubiquity
of networks in our daily lives. The goal of network embedding is to encode entities, e.g. nodes
and attributes, of a specific network into low-dimensional representation vectors, while features
of the network, e.g. nodes’ topological structure [1] and their communities [2], can be decoded
from the inferred embedding vectors. Various graph-based applications, e.g. node classification and
clustering [3, 4], community detection [2, 5], link prediction [6] and expert cognition [7], have been
shown to be able to benefit from network embedding techniques.
Attributed networks as one category of the most important networks are ubiquitous in a myriad of
critical domains, ranging from online social networks to academic collaborative networks, where rich
attributes, e.g. nationalities of the users and journals/conferences the authors published at, describing
the properties of the nodes, are available. Many embedding methods for attributed networks [8, 9, 10]
have been proposed to learn the low-dimensional vector representations of nodes via leveraging their
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
⇤
†

This work was done when the first author was with the Sun Yat-sen University.
Shangsong Liang is the corresponding author.

