An Embedding Framework for Consistent Polyhedral
Surrogates

Jessie Finocchiaro
jefi8453@colorado.edu
CU Boulder

Rafael Frongillo
raf@colorado.edu
CU Boulder

Bo Waggoner
bwag@colorado.edu
CU Boulder

Abstract
We formalize and study the natural approach of designing convex surrogate loss
functions via embeddings for problems such as classification or ranking. In this
approach, one embeds each of the finitely many predictions (e.g. classes) as a point
in Rd , assigns the original loss values to these points, and convexifies the loss in
some way to obtain a surrogate. We prove that this approach is equivalent, in a
strong sense, to working with polyhedral (piecewise linear convex) losses. Moreover, given any polyhedral loss L, we give a construction of a link function through
which L is a consistent surrogate for the loss it embeds. We go on to illustrate
the power of this embedding framework with succinct proofs of consistency or
inconsistency of various polyhedral surrogates in the literature.

1

Introduction

Convex surrogate losses are a central building block in machine learning for classification and
classification-like problems. A growing body of work seeks to design and analyze convex surrogates
for given loss functions, and more broadly, understand when such surrogates can and cannot be found.
For example, recent work has developed tools to bound the required number of dimensions of the
surrogate’s hypothesis space [13, 24]. Yet in some cases these bounds are far from tight, such as
for abstain loss (classification with an abstain option) [4, 24, 25, 33, 34]. Furthermore, the kinds of
strategies available for constructing surrogates, and their relative power, are not well-understood.
We augment this literature by studying a particularly natural approach for finding convex surrogates,
wherein one “embeds” a discrete loss. Specifically, we say a convex surrogate L embeds a discrete
loss ` if there is an injective embedding from the discrete reports (predictions) to a vector space
such that (i) the original loss values are recovered, and (ii) a report is `-optimal if and only if the
embedded report is L-optimal. If this embedding can be extended to a calibrated link function, which
maps approximately L-optimal reports to `-optimal reports, then consistency follows [2]. Common
examples of this general construction include hinge loss as a surrogate for 0-1 loss and the abstain
surrogate mentioned above.
Using tools from property elicitation, we show a tight relationship between such embeddings and
the class of polyhedral (piecewise-linear convex) loss functions. In particular, by focusing on Bayes
risks, we show that every discrete loss is embedded by some polyhedral loss, and every polyhedral
loss function embeds some discrete loss. Moreover, we show that any polyhedral loss gives rise to
a calibrated link function to the loss it embeds, thus giving a very general framework to construct
consistent convex surrogates for arbitrary losses.
Related works. The literature on convex surrogates focuses mainly on smooth surrogate losses [4,
5, 7, 8, 26, 30]. Nevertheless, nonsmooth losses, such as the polyhedral losses we consider, have
been proposed and studied for a variety of classification-like problems [19, 31, 32]. A notable
addition to this literature is Ramaswamy et al. [25], who argue that nonsmooth losses may enable
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

