Privacy Amplification by Mixing
and Diffusion Mechanisms
Borja Balle

Gilles Barthe
MPI for Security and Privacy
IMDEA Software Institute

Marco Gaboardi
Boston University

Joseph Geumlek
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
A fundamental result in differential privacy states that the privacy guarantees of
a mechanism are preserved by any post-processing of its output. In this paper
we investigate under what conditions stochastic post-processing can amplify the
privacy of a mechanism. By interpreting post-processing as the application of a
Markov operator, we first give a series of amplification results in terms of uniform
mixing properties of the Markov process defined by said operator. Next we provide
amplification bounds in terms of coupling arguments which can be applied in cases
where uniform mixing is not available. Finally, we introduce a new family of
mechanisms based on diffusion processes which are closed under post-processing,
and analyze their privacy via a novel heat flow argument. On the applied side, we
generalize the analysis of “privacy amplification by iteration” in Noisy SGD and
show it admits an exponential improvement in the strongly convex case, and study
a mechanism based on the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck diffusion process which contains
the Gaussian mechanism with optimal post-processing on bounded inputs as a
special case.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [15] has arisen in the last decade into a strong de-facto standard for privacypreserving computation in the context of statistical analysis. The success of DP is based, at least
in part, on the availability of robust building blocks (e.g., the Laplace, exponential and Gaussian
mechanisms) together with relatively simple rules for analyzing complex mechanisms built out of
these blocks (e.g., composition and robustness to post-processing). The inherent tension between
privacy and utility in practical applications has sparked a renewed interest into the development of
further rules leading to tighter privacy bounds. A trend in this direction is to find ways to measure the
privacy introduced by sources of randomness that are not accounted for by standard composition rules.
Generally speaking, these are referred to as privacy amplification rules, with prominent examples
being amplification by subsampling [9, 18, 20, 6, 5, 8, 2, 27], shuffling [16, 10, 3] and iteration [17].
Motivated by these considerations, in this paper we initiate a systematic study of privacy amplification
by stochastic post-processing. Specifically, given a DP mechanism M producing (probabilistic)
outputs in X and a Markov operator K defining a stochastic transition between X and Y, we are
interested in measuring the privacy of the post-processed mechanism K ◦ M producing outputs in Y.
The standard post-processing property of DP states that K ◦ M is at least as private as M . Our goal
is to understand under what conditions the post-processed mechanism K ◦ M is strictly more private
than M . Roughly speaking, this amplification should be non-trivial when the operator K “forgets”
information about the distribution of its input M (D). Our main insight is that, at least when Y = X,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

