Saccader: Improving Accuracy of Hard Attention
Models for Vision
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed
Google Research, Brain Team
gamaleldin@google.com

Simon Kornblith
Google Research, Brain Team

Quoc V. Le
Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract
Although deep convolutional neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance
across nearly all image classification tasks, their decisions are difficult to interpret.
One approach that offers some level of interpretability by design is hard attention,
which uses only relevant portions of the image. However, training hard attention
models with only class label supervision is challenging, and hard attention has
proved difficult to scale to complex datasets. Here, we propose a novel hard
attention model, which we term Saccader. Key to Saccader is a pretraining step that
requires only class labels and provides initial attention locations for policy gradient
optimization. Our best models narrow the gap to common ImageNet baselines,
achieving 75% top-1 and 91% top-5 while attending to less than one-third of the
image.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) across many computer vision tasks,
their predictions are difficult to interpret. Because CNNs compute complex nonlinear functions of
their inputs, it is often unclear what aspects of the input contributed to the prediction. Although
many researchers have attempted to design methods to interpret predictions of off-the-shelf CNNs
[Zhou et al., 2016, Baehrens et al., 2010, Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014, Zeiler and Fergus, 2014,
Springenberg et al., 2014, Bach et al., 2015, Yosinski et al., 2015, Nguyen et al., 2016, Montavon
et al., 2017, Zintgraf et al., 2017], it is unclear whether these explanations faithfully describe the
underlying model [Kindermans et al., 2017, Adebayo et al., 2018, Hooker et al., 2018, Rudin, 2019].
Additionally, adversarial machine learning research [Szegedy et al., 2013, Goodfellow et al., 2017,
2014] has demonstrated that imperceptible modifications to inputs can change classifier predictions,
underscoring the unintuitive nature of CNN-based image classifiers.
One interesting class of models that offers more interpretable decisions are “hard” visual attention
models. These models rely on a controller that selects relevant parts of the input to contribute to
the decision, which provides interpretability by design. These models are inspired by human vision,
where the fovea and visual system process only a limited portion of the visual scene at high resolution
[Wandell, 1995], and top-down pathways control eye movements to sequentially sample salient parts
of visual scenes [Schütz et al., 2011]. Although models with hard attention perform well on simple
datasets [Larochelle and Hinton, 2010, Mnih et al., 2014, Ba et al., 2014, Gregor et al., 2015], it has
been challenging to scale these models from small tasks to real world images [Sermanet et al., 2015].
Here, we propose a novel hard visual attention model that we name Saccader, as well as an effective
procedure to train this model. The Saccader model learns features for different patches in the image
that reflect the degree of relevance to the classification task, then proposes a sequence of image
patches for classification. Our pretraining procedure overcomes the sparse-reward problem that makes
hard attention models difficult to optimize. It requires access to only class labels and provides initial
attention locations. These initial locations provide better rewards for the policy gradient learning. Our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

