Variational Temporal Abstraction

Taesup Kim1,3,† , Sungjin Ahn2∗ , Yoshua Bengio1∗
1

Mila, Université de Montréal, 2 Rutgers University, 3 Kakao Brain

Abstract
We introduce a variational approach to learning and inference of temporally hierarchical structure and representation for sequential data. We propose the Variational
Temporal Abstraction (VTA), a hierarchical recurrent state space model that can
infer the latent temporal structure and thus perform the stochastic state transition
hierarchically. We also propose to apply this model to implement the jumpy imagination ability in imagination-augmented agent-learning in order to improve the
efficiency of the imagination. In experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed
method can model 2D and 3D visual sequence datasets with interpretable temporal
structure discovery and that its application to jumpy imagination enables more
efficient agent-learning in a 3D navigation task.

1

Introduction

Discovering temporally hierarchical structure and representation in sequential data is the key to many
problems in machine learning. In particular, for an intelligent agent exploring an environment, it
is critical to learn such spatio-temporal structure hierarchically because it can, for instance, enable
efficient option-learning and jumpy future imagination, abilities critical to resolving the sample
efficiency problem (Hamrick, 2019). Without such temporal abstraction, imagination would easily
become inefficient; imagine a person planning one-hour driving from her office to home with future
imagination at the scale of every second. It is also biologically evidenced that future imagination is
the very fundamental function of the human brain (Mullally & Maguire, 2014; Buckner, 2010) which
is believed to be implemented via hierarchical coding of the grid cells (Wei et al., 2015).
There have been approaches to learn such hierarchical structure in sequences such as the HMRNN (Chung et al., 2016). However, as a deterministic model, it has the main limitation that it
cannot capture the stochastic nature prevailing in the data. In particular, this is a critical limitation
to imagination-augmented agents because exploring various possible futures according to the uncertainty is what makes the imagination meaningful in many cases. There have been also many
probabilistic sequence models that can deal with such stochastic nature in the sequential data (Chung
et al., 2015; Krishnan et al., 2017; Fraccaro et al., 2017). However, unlike HMRNN, these models
cannot automatically discover the temporal structure in the data.
In this paper, we propose the Hierarchical Recurrent State Space Model (HRSSM) that combines the
advantages of both worlds: it can discover the latent temporal structure (e.g., subsequences) while also
modeling its stochastic state transitions hierarchically. For its learning and inference, we introduce a
variational approximate inference approach to deal with the intractability of the true posterior. We also
propose to apply the HRSSM to implement efficient jumpy imagination for imagination-augmented
agents. We note that the proposed HRSSM is a generic generative sequence model that is not tied to
the specific application to the imagination-augmented agent but can be applied to any sequential data.
In experiments, on 2D bouncing balls and 3D maze exploration, we show that the proposed model
∗
Equal advising, † work also done while visiting Rutgers University.
Correspondence to taesup.kim@umontreal.ca and sungjin.ahn@rutgers.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

