Optimal Decision Tree with Noisy Outcomes

Su Jia∗
Carnegie Mellon University
sjia1@andrew.cmu.edu

Fatemeh Navidi†
University of Michigan
navidi@umich.edu

Viswanath Nagarajan
University of Michigan
viswa@umich.edu

R. Ravi
Carnegie Mellon University
ravi@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
A fundamental task in active learning involves performing a sequence of tests to
identify an unknown hypothesis that is drawn from a known distribution. This
problem, known as optimal decision tree induction, has been widely studied for
decades and the asymptotically best-possible approximation algorithm has been
devised for it. We study a generalization where certain test outcomes are noisy,
even in the more general case when the noise is persistent, i.e., repeating a test gives
the same noisy output, disallowing simple repetition as a way to gain confidence.
We design new approximation algorithms for both the non-adaptive setting, where
the test sequence must be fixed a-priori, and the adaptive setting where the test
sequence depends on the outcomes of prior tests. Previous work in the area
assumed at most a logarithmic number of noisy outcomes per hypothesis and
provided approximation ratios that depended on parameters such as the minimum
probability of a hypothesis. Our new approximation algorithms provide guarantees
that are nearly best-possible and work for the general case of a large number of
noisy outcomes per test or per hypothesis where the performance degrades smoothly
with this number. Our results adapt and generalize methods used for submodular
ranking and stochastic set cover. We evaluate the performance of our algorithms
on two natural applications with noise: toxic chemical identification and active
learning of linear classifiers. Despite our theoretical logarithmic approximation
guarantees, our methods give solutions with cost very close to the information
theoretic minimum, demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods.

1

Introduction

The classic optimal decision tree (ODT) problem involves identifying an initially unknown hypothesis
x̄ that is drawn from a known probability distribution over a set of m possible hypotheses. We can
perform tests in order to distinguish between these hypotheses. Each test produces a binary outcome
(positive or negative) and the precise outcome of each hypothesis-test pair is known beforehand. 3 So
an instance of ODT can be viewed as a ±1 matrix with the hypotheses as rows and tests as columns.
The goal is to identify hypothesis x̄ using the minimum number of tests in expectation.
As a motivating application, consider the following task in medical diagnosis [25]. A doctor needs
to diagnose a patient’s disease by performing tests. Given an a priori probability distribution over
possible diseases, what sequence of tests should the doctor perform? Another application is in active
∗

Su Jia and Fatemeh Navidi contributed equally to this work.
Research of F. Navidi and V. Nagarajan partly supported by NSF grant CCF-1750127.
3
We consider binary test outcomes only for simplicity: our results also hold for finitely many outcomes.

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

