Putting An End to End-to-End:
Gradient-Isolated Learning of Representations

Sindy Löwe∗

Peter O’Connor

Bastiaan S. Veeling∗

AMLab
University of Amsterdam
loewe.sindy@gmail.com, basveeling@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a novel deep learning method for local self-supervised representation
learning that does not require labels nor end-to-end backpropagation but exploits
the natural order in data instead. Inspired by the observation that biological neural
networks appear to learn without backpropagating a global error signal, we split
a deep neural network into a stack of gradient-isolated modules. Each module
is trained to maximally preserve the information of its inputs using the InfoNCE
bound from Oord et al. [2018]. Despite this greedy training, we demonstrate that
each module improves upon the output of its predecessor, and that the representations created by the top module yield highly competitive results on downstream
classification tasks in the audio and visual domain. The proposal enables optimizing modules asynchronously, allowing large-scale distributed training of very deep
neural networks on unlabelled datasets.

1

Introduction

Modern deep learning models are typically optimized using end-to-end backpropagation and a global,
supervised loss function. Although empirically proven to be highly successful [Krizhevsky et al.,
2012, Szegedy et al., 2015], this approach is considered biologically implausible. For one, supervised
learning requires large labeled datasets to ensure generalization. In contrast, children can learn to
recognize a new category based on a handful of samples. Additionally, despite some evidence for
top-down connections in the brain, there does not appear to be a global objective that is optimized by
backpropagating error signals [Crick, 1989, Marblestone et al., 2016]. Instead, the biological brain is
highly modular and learns predominantly based on local information [Caporale and Dan, 2008].
In addition to lacking a natural counterpart, the supervised training of neural networks with end-to-end
backpropagation suffers from practical disadvantages as well. Supervised learning requires labeled
inputs, which are expensive to obtain. As a result, it is not applicable to the majority of available data,
and suffers from a higher risk of overfitting, as the number of parameters required for a deep model
often exceeds the number of labeled datapoints at hand. At the same time, end-to-end backpropagation
creates a substantial memory overhead in a naïve implementation, as the entire computational graph,
including all parameters, activations and gradients, needs to fit in a processing unit’s working memory.
Current approaches to prevent this require either the recomputation of intermediate outputs [Salimans
and Bulatov, 2017] or expensive reversible layers [Jacobsen et al., 2018]. This inhibits the application
of deep learning models to high-dimensional input data that surpass current memory constraints. This
problem is perpetuated as end-to-end training does not allow for an exact way of asynchronously
optimizing individual layers [Jaderberg et al., 2017]. In a globally optimized network, every layer
needs to wait for its predecessors to provide its inputs, as well as for its successors to provide gradients.
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

