XNAS: Neural Architecture Search
with Expert Advice

Niv Nayman∗ , Asaf Noy∗ , Tal Ridnik∗, Itamar Friedman, Rong Jin, Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group
{niv.nayman,asaf.noy,tal.ridnik,itamar.friedman,jinrong.jr,lihi.zelnik}
@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel optimization method for differential neural architecture search, based on the theory of prediction with expert advice. Its optimization
criterion is well fitted for an architecture-selection, i.e., it minimizes the regret incurred by a sub-optimal selection of operations. Unlike previous search relaxations,
that require hard pruning of architectures, our method is designed to dynamically
wipe out inferior architectures and enhance superior ones. It achieves an optimal
worst-case regret bound and suggests the use of multiple learning-rates, based on
the amount of information carried by the backward gradients. Experiments show
that our algorithm achieves a strong performance over several image classification
datasets. Specifically, it obtains an error rate of 1.6% for CIFAR-10, 23.9% for
ImageNet under mobile settings, and achieves state-of-the-art results on three
additional datasets.

1

Introduction

In recent years tremendous efforts have been put into a manual design of high performance neural
networks [22, 16, 40, 39]. An emerging alternative approach is replacing the manual design with
automated Neural Architecture Search (NAS). NAS excels in finding architectures which yield
state-of-the-art results. Earlier NAS works were based on reinforcement learning [55, 56], sequential
optimization [24], and evolutionary algorithms [33], and required immense computational resources,
sometimes demanding years of GPU compute time in order to output an architecture. More recent
NAS methods reduce the search time significantly, e.g. via weight-sharing [30] or by a continuous
relaxation of the space [25], making the search affordable and applicable to real problems.
While current NAS methods provide encouraging results, they still suffer from several shortcomings.
For example, a large number of hyper-parameters that are not easy to tune, hard pruning decisions that
are performed sub-optimally at once at the end of the search, and a weak theoretical understanding.
This cultivates skepticism and criticism of the utility of NAS in general. Some recent works even
suggest that current search methods are only slightly better than random search and further imply that
some selection methods are not well principled and are basically random [23, 35].
To provide more principled methods, we view NAS as an online selection task, and rely on Prediction
with Experts Advice (PEA) theory [4] for the selection. Our key contribution is the introduction of
XNAS (eXperts Neural Architecture Search), an optimization method (section 2.2) that is well suited
for optimizing inner architecture weights over a differentiable architecture search space (section 2.1).
We propose a setup in which the experts represent inner neural operations and connections, whose
dominance is specified by architecture weights.
∗

These authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

