Robust Bi-Tempered Logistic Loss
Based on Bregman Divergences

Ehsan Amid ‹:

Manfred K. Warmuth ‹:

Rohan Anil :

Tomer Koren :§

‹ Department of Computer Science, University of California, Santa Cruz
§ School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
: Google Brain
{eamid,manfred,rohananil,tkoren}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a temperature into the exponential function and replace the softmax
output layer of the neural networks by a high-temperature generalization. Similarly,
the logarithm in the loss we use for training is replaced by a low-temperature
logarithm. By tuning the two temperatures, we create loss functions that are
non-convex already in the single layer case. When replacing the last layer of
the neural networks by our bi-temperature generalization of the logistic loss, the
training becomes more robust to noise. We visualize the effect of tuning the two
temperatures in a simple setting and show the efficacy of our method on large
datasets. Our methodology is based on Bregman divergences and is superior to a
related two-temperature method that uses the Tsallis divergence.

1

Introduction

The logistic loss, also known as the softmax loss, has been the standard choice in training deep
neural networks for classification. The loss involves the application of the softmax function on the
activations of the last layer to form the class probabilities followed by the relative entropy (aka
the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence) between the true labels and the predicted probabilities. The
logistic loss is known to be a convex function of the activations (and consequently, the weights) of
the last layer.
Although desirable from an optimization standpoint, convex losses have been shown to be prone
to outliers [15] as the loss of each individual example unboundedly increases as a function of
the activations. These outliers may correspond to extreme examples that lead to large gradients, or
misclassified training examples that are located far away from the classification boundary. Requiring a
convex loss function at the output layer thus seems somewhat arbitrary, in particular since convexity in
the last layer’s activations does not guarantee convexity with respect to the parameters of the network
outside the last layer. Another issue arises due to the exponentially decaying tail of the softmax
function that assigns probabilities to the classes. In the presence of mislabeled training examples near
the classification boundary, the short tail of the softmax probabilities enforces the classifier to stretch
the decision boundary towards the noisy training examples. In contrast, heavy-tailed alternatives for
the softmax probabilities have been shown to significantly improve the robustness of the loss to these
examples [8].
The logistic loss is essentially the negative logarithm of the predicted class probabilities, which are
computed as the normalized exponentials of the inputs. In this paper, we tackle both shortcomings of
the logistic loss, pertaining to its convexity as well as its tail-lightness, by replacing the logarithm
and the exponential functions with their corresponding “tempered” versions. We define the function
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

