Fast AutoAugment

Sungbin Lim∗ †
UNIST
sungbin@unist.ac.kr

Ildoo Kim∗
Kakao Brain
ildoo.kim@kakaobrain.com

Taesup Kim
MILA, Université de Montréal, Canada
taesup.kim@umontreal.ca

Chiheon Kim
Kakao Brain
chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com

Sungwoong Kim
Kakao Brain
swkim@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Data augmentation is an essential technique for improving generalization ability
of deep learning models. Recently, AutoAugment [5] has been proposed as an
algorithm to automatically search for augmentation policies from a dataset and has
significantly enhanced performances on many image recognition tasks. However,
its search method requires thousands of GPU hours even for a relatively small
dataset. In this paper, we propose an algorithm called Fast AutoAugment that finds
effective augmentation policies via a more efficient search strategy based on density
matching. In comparison to AutoAugment, the proposed algorithm speeds up the
search time by orders of magnitude while achieves comparable performances on
image recognition tasks with various models and datasets including CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, SVHN, and ImageNet. Our code is open to the public by the official
GitHub3 of Kakao Brain.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has become a state-of-the-art technique for computer vision tasks, including object
recognition [16, 28, 37], detection [23, 29], and segmentation [4, 11]. However, deep learning models
with large capacity often suffer from overfitting unless significantly large amounts of labeled data are
supported. Data augmentation (DA) has been shown as a useful regularization technique to increase
both the quantity and the diversity of training data. Notably, applying a carefully designed set of
augmentations rather than naive random transformations in training improves the generalization
ability of a network significantly [21, 26]. However, in most cases, designing such augmentations has
relied on human experts with prior knowledge on the dataset.
With the recent advancement of automated machine learning (AutoML), there exist some efforts
for designing an automated process of searching for augmentation strategies directly from a dataset.
AutoAugment [5] uses reinforcement learning (RL) to automatically find data augmentation policy
when a target dataset and a model are given. It samples an augmentation policy at a time using a
controller RNN, trains the model using the policy, and gets the validation accuracy as a reward to
∗

Equal Contribution
This work is done at Kakao Brain
3
https://github.com/kakaobrain/fast-autoaugment

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

