MaCow: Masked Convolutional Generative Flow
Xuezhe Ma, Xiang Kong, Shanghang Zhang, Eduard Hovy
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
xuezhem,xiangk@cs.cmu.edu, shanghaz@andrew.cmu.edu, hovy@cmu.edu

Abstract
Flow-based generative models, conceptually attractive due to tractability of the
exact log-likelihood computation and latent-variable inference as well as efficiency
in training and sampling, has led to a number of impressive empirical successes
and spawned many advanced variants and theoretical investigations. Despite computational efficiency, the density estimation performance of flow-based generative
models significantly falls behind those of state-of-the-art autoregressive models.
In this work, we introduce masked convolutional generative flow (M AC OW), a
simple yet effective architecture for generative flow using masked convolution. By
restricting the local connectivity to a small kernel, M AC OW features fast and stable
training along with efficient sampling while achieving significant improvements
over Glow for density estimation on standard image benchmarks, considerably
narrowing the gap with autoregressive models.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning of probabilistic models is a central yet challenging problem. Deep generative models have shown promising results in modeling complex distributions such as natural
images (Radford et al., 2015), audio (Van Den Oord et al., 2016) and text (Bowman et al., 2015).
Multiple approaches emerged in recent years, including Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma
and Welling, 2014), Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), autoregressive neural networks (Larochelle and Murray, 2011; Oord et al., 2016), and flow-based generative
models (Dinh et al., 2014, 2016; Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018). Among these, flow-based generative models gained popularity for this capability of estimating densities of complex distributions,
efficiently generating high-fidelity syntheses, and automatically learning useful latent spaces.
Flow-based generative models typically warp a simple distribution into a complex one by mapping
points from the simple distribution to the complex data distribution through a chain of invertible
transformations with Jacobian determinants that are efficient to compute. This design guarantees that
the density of the transformed distribution can be analytically estimated, making maximum likelihood
learning feasible. Flow-based generative models have spawned significant interests for improving
and analyzing its algorithms both theoretically and practically, and applying them to a wide range of
tasks and domains.
In their pioneering work, Dinh et al. (2014) first proposed Non-linear Independent Component
Estimation (NICE) to apply flow-based models for modeling complex high-dimensional densities.
RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2016) extended NICE with a more flexible invertible transformation to
experiment with natural images. However, these flow-based generative models resulted in worse
density estimation performance compared to state-of-the-art autoregressive models, and are incapable
of realistic synthesis of large images compared to GANs (Karras et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2019).
Recently, Kingma and Dhariwal (2018) proposed Glow as a generative flow with invertible 1 × 1
convolutions, which significantly improved the density estimation performance on natural images.
Importantly, they demonstrated that flow-based generative models optimized towards the plain
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

