A General Theory of Equivariant CNNs on
Homogeneous Spaces

Taco S. Cohen
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Qualcomm Technologies Netherlands B.V.
tacos@qti.qualcomm.com

Mario Geiger
PCSL Research Group
EPFL
mario.geiger@epfl.ch

Maurice Weiler
QUVA Lab
U. of Amsterdam
m.weiler@uva.nl

Abstract
We present a general theory of Group equivariant Convolutional Neural Networks
(G-CNNs) on homogeneous spaces such as Euclidean space and the sphere. Feature
maps in these networks represent fields on a homogeneous base space, and layers
are equivariant maps between spaces of fields. The theory enables a systematic
classification of all existing G-CNNs in terms of their symmetry group, base
space, and field type. We also consider a fundamental question: what is the most
general kind of equivariant linear map between feature spaces (fields) of given
types? Following Mackey, we show that such maps correspond one-to-one with
convolutions using equivariant kernels, and characterize the space of such kernels.

1

Introduction

Through the use of convolution layers, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have a built-in
understanding of locality and translational symmetry that is inherent in many learning problems.
Because convolutions are translation equivariant (a shift of the input leads to a shift of the output),
convolution layers preserve the translation symmetry. This is important, because it means that further
layers of the network can also exploit the symmetry.
Motivated by the success of CNNs, many researchers have worked on generalizations, leading to a
growing body of work on Group equivariant CNNs (G-CNNs) for signals on Euclidean space and
the sphere [1–7] as well as graphs [8, 9]. With the proliferation of equivariant network layers, it has
become difficult to see the relations between the various approaches. Furthermore, when faced with
a new modality (diffusion tensor MRI, say), it may not be immediately obvious how to create an
equivariant network for it, or whether a given kind of equivariant layer is the most general one.
In this paper we present a general theory of homogeneous G-CNNs. Feature spaces are modelled
as spaces of fields on a homogeneous space. They are characterized by a group of symmetries
G, a subgroup H ≤ G that together with G determines a homogeneous space B ≃ G/H, and a
representation ρ of H that determines the type of field (vector, tensor, etc.). Related work is classified
by (G, H, ρ). The main theorems say that equivariant linear maps between fields over B can be
written as convolutions with an equivariant kernel, and that the space of equivariant kernels can be
realized in three equivalent ways. We will assume some familiarity with groups, cosets, quotients,
representations and related notions (see Appendix A).
This paper does not contain truly new mathematics (in the sense that a professional mathematician
with expertise in the relevant subjects would not be surprised by our results), but instead provides
a new formalism for the study of equivariant convolutional networks. This formalism turns out to
be a remarkably good fit for describing real-world G-CNNs. Moreover, by describing G-CNNs in a
language used throughout modern physics and mathematics (fields, fiber bundles, etc.), it becomes
possible to apply knowledge gained over many decades in those domains to machine learning.
*Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

