Controllable Text-to-Image Generation

Bowen Li, Xiaojuan Qi, Thomas Lukasiewicz, Philip H. S. Torr
University of Oxford
{bowen.li, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk
{xiaojuan.qi, philip.torr}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel controllable text-to-image generative adversarial network (ControlGAN), which can effectively synthesise high-quality images
and also control parts of the image generation according to natural language descriptions. To achieve this, we introduce a word-level spatial and channel-wise
attention-driven generator that can disentangle different visual attributes, and allow
the model to focus on generating and manipulating subregions corresponding to
the most relevant words. Also, a word-level discriminator is proposed to provide fine-grained supervisory feedback by correlating words with image regions,
facilitating training an effective generator which is able to manipulate specific
visual attributes without affecting the generation of other content. Furthermore,
perceptual loss is adopted to reduce the randomness involved in the image generation, and to encourage the generator to manipulate specific attributes required
in the modified text. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing state of the art, and is able to effectively
manipulate synthetic images using natural language descriptions. Code is available
at https://github.com/mrlibw/ControlGAN.

1

Introduction

Generating realistic images that semantically match given text descriptions is a challenging problem
and has tremendous potential applications, such as image editing, video games, and computer-aided
design. Recently, thanks to the success of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [4, 6, 15] in
generating realistic images, text-to-image generation has made remarkable progress [16, 25, 27] by
implementing conditional GANs (cGANs) [5, 16, 17], which are able to generate realistic images
conditioned on given text descriptions.
However, current generative networks are typically uncontrollable, which means that if users change
some words of a sentence, the synthetic image would be significantly different from the one generated
from the original text as shown in Fig. 1. When the given text description (e.g., colour) is changed,
corresponding visual attributes of the bird are modified, but other unrelated attributes (e.g., the pose
and position) are changed as well. This is typically undesirable in real-world applications, when a
user wants to further modify the synthetic image to satisfy her preferences.
The goal of this paper is to generate images from text, and also allow the user to manipulate synthetic
images using natural language descriptions, in one framework. In particular, we focus on modifying
visual attributes (e.g., category, texture, and colour) of objects in the generated images by changing
given text descriptions. To achieve this, we propose a novel controllable text-to-image generative
adversarial network (ControlGAN), which can synthesise high-quality images, and also allow the
user to manipulate objects’ attributes, without affecting the generation of other content.
Our ControlGAN contains three novel components. The first component is the word-level spatial
and channel-wise attention-driven generator, where an attention mechanism is exploited to allow the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

