Offline Contextual Bayesian Optimization
Ian Char1 , Youngseog Chung1 , Willie Neiswanger1 , Kirthevasan Kandasamy2 , Andrew
Oakleigh Nelson3 , Mark D Boyer3 , Egemen Kolemen3 , and Jeff Schneider1
1

Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University
{ichar, youngsec, willie, schneide}@cs.cmu.edu
2
Department of EECS, University of California Berkeley
kandasamy@eecs.berkeley.edu
3
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
{anelson, mboyer, ekolemen}@pppl.gov

Abstract
In black-box optimization, an agent repeatedly chooses a configuration to test, so
as to find an optimal configuration. In many practical problems of interest, one
would like to optimize several systems, or “tasks”, simultaneously; however, in
most of these scenarios the current task is determined by nature. In this work, we
explore the “offline” case in which one is able to bypass nature and choose the
next task to evaluate (e.g. via a simulator). Because some tasks may be easier
to optimize and others may be more critical, it is crucial to leverage algorithms
that not only consider which configurations to try next, but also which tasks to
make evaluations for. In this work, we describe a theoretically grounded Bayesian
optimization method to tackle this problem. We also demonstrate that if the model
of the reward structure does a poor job of capturing variation in difficulty between
tasks, then algorithms that actively pick tasks for evaluation may end up doing
more harm than good. Following this, we show how our approach can be used for
real world applications in science and engineering, including optimizing tokamak
controls for nuclear fusion.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization is the problem in which one tries to find the maximum of an unknown function
solely using evaluations for specified inputs. In many interesting scenarios, there is a collection of
unknown, possibly correlated functions (or tasks) that need to be simultaneously optimized. This
problem set up often occurs in applications where one wants to design an agent that makes an action
based on some contextual information from the environment. However, we would prefer that the agent
not run potentially costly or poor performing experimental actions online. Also, because the agent
may have to make these decisions at a rapid pace, we often do not have time to compute an expensive
experimentation policy. We consider applications that provide the ability to run offline experiments
where nature can be bypassed and the contextual information can be manually set (e.g. on a surrogate
system or on a simulation). These experiments are used to discover a good action policy which is
then encoded into a fast cache, such as a look-up table. Even though the experiments are done offline,
they are still expensive and we must search the design space efficiently. The following are examples
of this problem:
• Nuclear Fusion A tokamak is a device used to magnetically confine plasma and is the most
commonly pursued means of generating power from controlled nuclear fusion. A current
obstacle in realizing sustained nuclear fusion is the difficulty in maintaining the plasma’s
stability at the required temperatures and pressures for a prolonged period of time. We
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

