Write, Execute, Assess:
Program Synthesis with a REPL

Kevin Ellis∗
MIT

Maxwell Nye∗
MIT

Yewen Pu∗
MIT

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT

Felix Sosa∗
Harvard University

Armando Solar-Lezama
MIT

Abstract
We present a neural program synthesis approach integrating components which
write, execute, and assess code to navigate the search space of possible programs.
We equip the search process with an interpreter or a read-eval-print-loop (REPL),
which immediately executes partially written programs, exposing their semantics.
The REPL addresses a basic challenge of program synthesis: tiny changes in syntax
can lead to huge changes in semantics. We train a pair of models, a policy that
proposes the new piece of code to write, and a value function that assesses the
prospects of the code written so-far. At test time we can combine these models
with a Sequential Monte Carlo algorithm. We apply our approach to two domains:
synthesizing text editing programs and inferring 2D and 3D graphics programs.

1

Introduction

When was the last time you typed out a large body of code all at once, and had it work on the first
try? If you are like most programmers, this hasn’t happened much since “Hello, World.” Writing a
large body of code is a process of trial and error that alternates between trying out a piece of code,
executing it to see if you’re still on the right track, and trying out something different if the current
execution looks buggy. Crucial to this human work-flow is the ability to execute the partially-written
code, and the ability to assess the resulting execution to see if one should continue with the current
approach. Thus, if we wish to build machines that automatically write large, complex programs,
designing systems with the ability to effectively transition between states of writing, executing, and
assessing the code may prove crucial.
In this work, we present a model that integrates components which write, execute, and assess code to
perform a stochastic search over the semantic space of possible programs. We do this by equipping
our model with one of the oldest and most basic tools available to a programmer: an interpreter,
or read-eval-print-loop (REPL), which immediately executes partially written programs, exposing
their semantics. The REPL addresses a fundamental challenge of program synthesis: tiny changes
in syntax can lead to huge changes in semantics. The mapping between syntax and semantics is a
difficult relation for a neural network to learn, but comes for free given a REPL. By conditioning the
search solely on the execution states rather than the program syntax, the search is performed entirely
in the semantic space. By allowing the search to branch when it is uncertain, discard branches when
they appear less promising, and attempt more promising alternative candidates, the search process
emulates the natural iterative coding process used by a human programmer.
In the spirit of systems such as AlphaGo [1], we train a pair of models – a policy that proposes
new pieces of code to write, and a value function that evaluates the long-term prospects of the code
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

