An adaptive nearest neighbor rule for classification
Akshay Balsubramani
abalsubr@stanford.edu

Sanjoy Dasgupta
dasgupta@eng.ucsd.edu

Yoav Freund
yfreund@eng.ucsd.edu

Shay Moran
shaym@princeton.edu

Abstract
We introduce a variant of the k-nearest neighbor classifier in which k is chosen
adaptively for each query, rather than being supplied as a parameter. The choice
of k depends on properties of each neighborhood, and therefore may significantly
vary between different points. For example, the algorithm will use larger k for
predicting the labels of points in noisy regions.
We provide theory and experiments that demonstrate that the algorithm performs
comparably to, and sometimes better than, k-NN with an optimal choice of k.
In particular, we bound the convergence rate of our classifier in terms of a local quantity we call the “advantage”, giving results that are both more general
and more accurate than the smoothness-based bounds of earlier nearest neighbor
work. Our analysis uses a variant of the uniform convergence theorem of VapnikChervonenkis that is for empirical estimates of conditional probabilities and may
be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

We introduce an adaptive nearest neighbor classification rule. Given a training set with labels {±1},
its prediction at a query point x is based on the training points closest to x, rather like the k-nearest
neighbor rule. However, the value of k that it uses can vary from query to query. Specifically, if there
are n training points, then for any query x, the smallest k is sought for which the k points closest to x
have labels whose average is either greater than + (n, k), in which case the prediction is +1, or less
than
(n, k), in which casep
the prediction is 1; and if no such k exists, then “?” (“don’t know”)
is returned. Here, (n, k) ⇠ (log n)/k corresponds to a confidence interval for the average label
in the region around the query.

We study this rule in the standard statistical framework in which all data are i.i.d. draws from some
unknown underlying distribution P on X ⇥ Y, where X is the data space and Y is the label space. We
take X to be a separable metric space, with distance function d : X ⇥X ! R, and we take Y = {±1}.
We can decompose P into the marginal distribution µ on X and the conditional expectation of the
label at each point x: if (X, Y ) represents a random draw from P , define ⌘(x) = E(Y |X = x). In
this terminology, the Bayes-optimal classifier is the rule g ⇤ : X ! {±1} given by
⇢
sign(⌘(x))
if ⌘(x) 6= 0
⇤
g (x) =
(1)
either 1 or +1 if ⌘(x) = 0
and its error rate is the Bayes risk, R⇤ = 12 EX⇠µ [1 |⌘(X)|]. A variety of nonparametric classification schemes are known to have error rates that converge asymptotically to R⇤ . These include
k-nearest neighbor (henceforth, k-NN) rules [FH51] in which k grows with the number of training
points n according to a suitable schedule (kn ), under certain technical conditions on the metric
measure space (X , d, µ).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

