Graph Normalizing Flows

Jenny Liu∗
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
jyliu@cs.toronto.edu

Aviral Kumar∗†
UC Berkeley
aviralk@berkeley.edu

Jamie Kiros
Google Research
kiros@google.com

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
jba@cs.toronto.edu

Kevin Swersky
Google Research
kswersky@google.com

Abstract
We introduce graph normalizing flows: a new, reversible graph neural network
model for prediction and generation. On supervised tasks, graph normalizing flows
perform similarly to message passing neural networks, but at a significantly reduced
memory footprint, allowing them to scale to larger graphs. In the unsupervised
case, we combine graph normalizing flows with a novel graph auto-encoder to
create a generative model of graph structures. Our model is permutation-invariant,
generating entire graphs with a single feed-forward pass, and achieves competitive
results with the state-of-the art auto-regressive models, while being better suited to
parallel computing architectures.

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in science and engineering, and modeling graphs is an important
component of being able to make predictions and reason about these domains. Machine learning
has recently turned its attention to modeling graph-structured data using graph neural networks
(GNNs) [8, 23, 16, 13, 6] that can exploit the structure of relational systems to create more accurate
and generalizable predictions. For example, these can be used to predict the properties of molecules
in order to aid in search and discovery [5, 6], or to learn physical properties of robots such that new
robots with different structures can be controlled without re-learning a control policy [27].
In this paper, we introduce a new formulation for graph neural networks by extending the framework
of normalizing flows [22, 3, 4] to graph-structured data. We call these models graph normalizing
flows (GNFs). GNFs have the property that the message passing computation is exactly reversible,
meaning that one can exactly reconstruct the input node features from the GNN representation; this
results in GNFs having several useful properties.
In the supervised case, we leverage a similar mechanism to [7] to obtain significant memory savings
in a model we call reversible graph neural networks, or GRevNets. Ordinary GNNs require the
storage of hidden states after every message passing step in order to facilitate backpropagation. This
means one needs to store O(#nodes × #message passing steps) states, which can be costly for large
graphs. In contrast, GRevNets can reconstruct hidden states in lower layers from higher layers
during backpropagation, meaning one only needs to store O(#nodes) states. A recent approach for
memory saving based on recurrent backpropagation (RBP) [1, 20, 18] requires running message
passing to convergence, followed by the approximate, iterative inversion of a large matrix. Conversely,
GRevNets get the exact gradients at a minor additional cost, equivalent to one extra forward pass. We
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Work done during an internship at Google

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

