Control What You Can
Intrinsically Motivated Task-Planning Agent

Sebastian Blaes

Marin Vlastelica Pogančić

Jia-Jie Zhu

Georg Martius

Autonomous Learning Group
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
{sebastian.blaes,marin.vlastelica,jzhu,georg.martius}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
We present a novel intrinsically motivated agent that learns how to control the
environment in a sample efficient manner, that is with as few environment interactions as possible, by optimizing learning progress. It learns what can be controlled,
how to allocate time and attention as well as the relations between objects using
surprise-based motivation. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated in a
synthetic and robotic manipulation environment yielding considerably improved
performance and smaller sample complexity compared to an intrinsically motivated, non-hierarchical and state-of-the-art hierarchical baseline. In a nutshell, our
work combines several task-level planning agent structures (backtracking search
on task-graph, probabilistic road-maps, allocation of search efforts) with intrinsic
motivation to achieve learning from scratch.

1

Introduction

This paper studies the question of how to make an autonomous agent learn to gain maximal control
of its environment under little external reward. To answer this question, we turn to the true learning
experts: children. Children are remarkably fast in learning new skills; How do they do this? In
recent years psychologists and psychiatrists acquired a much better understanding of the underlying
mechanisms that facilitate these abilities. Babies seemingly do it by conducting experiments and
analyzing the statistics in their observations to form intuitive theories about the world [12]. Thereby,
human learning seems to be supported by hard-wired abilities, e.g. identifying human faces or
the well tuned relationship between teacher (adult) and student (infant) [11] and by self-motivated
playing, often with any objects within their reach. The purpose may not be immediately clear to us.
But to play is to manipulate, to gain control. In the spirit of this cognitive developmental process,
we specifically design an agent that is 1) intrinsically motivated to gain control of the environment
2) capable of learning its own curriculum and to reason about object relations.
As a motivational example, consider an environment with a heavy object that cannot be moved without
using a tool such as a forklift, as depicted in Fig. 1(6). To move the heavy object, the agent needs
to learn first how to control itself and then how to use the tool. In the beginning, we do not assume
the agent has knowledge of the tool, object, or physics. Everything needs to be learned from scratch
which is highly challenging for current RL algorithms. Without external rewards, an agent may be
driven by intrinsic motivation (IM) to gain control of its own internal representation of the world,
which includes itself and objects in the environment. It often faces a decision of what to attempt to
learn with limited time and attention: If there are several objects that can be manipulated, which one
should be dealt with first? In our approach the scheduling is solved by an automatic curriculum that
aims at improving learning progress. The learning progress may have its unique advantage over other
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

