Input-Output Equivalence of Unitary and
Contractive RNNs
Melikasadat Emami
Dept. ECE
UCLA
emami@ucla.edu

Mojtaba Sahraee-Ardakan
Dept. ECE
UCLA
msahraee@ucla.edu

Sundeep Rangan
Dept. ECE
NYU
srangan@nyu.edu

Alyson K. Fletcher
Dept. Statistics
UCLA
akfletcher@ucla.edu

Abstract
Unitary recurrent neural networks (URNNs) have been proposed as a method to
overcome the vanishing and exploding gradient problem in modeling data with
long-term dependencies. A basic question is how restrictive is the unitary constraint
on the possible input-output mappings of such a network? This work shows that
for any contractive RNN with ReLU activations, there is a URNN with at most
twice the number of hidden states and the identical input-output mapping. Hence,
with ReLU activations, URNNs are as expressive as general RNNs. In contrast, for
certain smooth activations, it is shown that the input-output mapping of an RNN
cannot be matched with a URNN, even with an arbitrary number of states. The
theoretical results are supported by experiments on modeling of slowly-varying
dynamical systems.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) – originally proposed in the late 1980s [20, 6] – refer to a widelyused and powerful class of models for time series and sequential data. In recent years, RNNs have
become particularly important in speech recognition [9, 10] and natural language processing [5, 2, 24]
tasks.
A well-known challenge in training recurrent neural networks is the vanishing and exploding gradient
problem [3, 18]. RNNs have a transition matrix that maps the hidden state at one time to the next time.
When the transition matrix has an induced norm greater than one, the RNN may become unstable.
In this case, small perturbations of the input at some time can result in a change in the output that
grows exponentially over the subsequent time. This instability leads to a so-called exploding gradient.
Conversely, when the norm is less than one, perturbations can decay exponentially so inputs at one
time have negligible effect in the distant future. As a result, the loss surface associated with RNNs can
have steep walls that may be difficult to minimize. Such problems are particularly acute in systems
with long-term dependencies, where the output sequence can depend strongly on the input sequence
many time steps in the past.
Unitary RNNs (URNNs) [1] is a simple and commonly-used approach to mitigate the vanishing
and exploding gradient problem. The basic idea is to restrict the transition matrix to be unitary (an
orthogonal matrix for the real-valued case). The unitary transitional matrix is then combined with
a non-expansive activation such as a ReLU or sigmoid. As a result, the overall transition mapping
cannot amplify the hidden states, thereby eliminating the exploding gradient problem. In addition,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

