A Solvable High-Dimensional Model of GAN

Chuang Wang1,2
wangchuang@ia.ac.cn

Hong Hu2
honghu@g.harvard.edu

Yue M. Lu2
yuelu@seas.harvard.edu

1. National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Science, 95 Zhong Guan Cun Dong Lu, Beijing 100190, China
2. John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University
33 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA

Abstract
We present a theoretical analysis of the training process for a single-layer GAN
fed by high-dimensional input data. The training dynamics of the proposed model
at both microscopic and macroscopic scales can be exactly analyzed in the highdimensional limit. In particular, we prove that the macroscopic quantities measuring
the quality of the training process converge to a deterministic process characterized by an ordinary differential equation (ODE), whereas the microscopic states
containing all the detailed weights remain stochastic, whose dynamics can be
described by a stochastic differential equation (SDE). This analysis provides a new
perspective different from recent analyses in the limit of small learning rate, where
the microscopic state is always considered deterministic, and the contribution of
noise is ignored. From our analysis, we show that the level of the background
noise is essential to the convergence of the training process: setting the noise level
too strong leads to failure of feature recovery, whereas setting the noise too weak
causes oscillation. Although this work focuses on a simple copy model of GAN,
we believe the analysis methods and insights developed here would prove useful
in the theoretical understanding of other variants of GANs with more advanced
training algorithms.

1

Introduction

A generative adversarial network (GAN) [1] seeks to learn a high-dimensional probability distribution
from samples. While there have been numerous advances on the application front [2–6], considerably
less is known about the underlying theory and conditions that can explain or guarantee the successful
trainings of GANs.
Recently, it has been a very active area of research to study either the equilibrium properties [7–9]
or the training dynamics [10, 11]. Specifically, there is a line of works studying the dynamics of
the gradient-based training algorithms e.g., [11–16]. The basic idea is the following. The evolution
of the learnable parameters in the training dynamics can be considered as a discrete-time process.
With a proper time scaling, this discrete-time process converges to a deterministic continuous-time
process as the learning rates tend to 0, which is characterized by an ordinary differential equation
(ODE). By studying local stability of the ODE’s fixed points, [12] shows that oscillation in the
training algorithm is due to the eigenvalues of the Jacobian of the gradient vector field with zero real
part and large imaginary part. Due to this fact, various stabilization approaches are proposed, for
example adding additional regularizers [13, 14], and using two timescale [15] training. Very recently,
[16] argues that those stabilization techniques may encourage the algorithms to converge non-Nash
stationary points. All above works consider a small-learning-rates limit, where the limiting process
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

