Fast Sparse Group Lasso

1

Yasutoshi Ida1,3
Yasuhiro Fujiwara2
Hisashi Kashima3,4
2
NTT Software Innovation Center
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
3
4
Kyoto University
RIKEN AIP
yasutoshi.ida@ieee.org
yasuhiro.fujiwara.kh@hco.ntt.co.jp
kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Sparse Group Lasso is a method of linear regression analysis that finds sparse parameters in terms of both feature groups and individual features. Block Coordinate
Descent is a standard approach to obtain the parameters of Sparse Group Lasso,
and iteratively updates the parameters for each parameter group. However, as an
update of only one parameter group depends on all the parameter groups or data
points, the computation cost is high when the number of the parameters or data
points is large. This paper proposes a fast Block Coordinate Descent for Sparse
Group Lasso. It efficiently skips the updates of the groups whose parameters must
be zeros by using the parameters in one group. In addition, it preferentially updates
parameters in a candidate group set, which contains groups whose parameters must
not be zeros. Theoretically, our approach guarantees the same results as the original
Block Coordinate Descent. Experiments show that our algorithm enhances the
efficiency of the original algorithm without any loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

Sparse Group Lasso (SGL) [3, 17] is a popular feature-selection method based on the linear regression
model for data that have group structures. For the analysis of such data, it is important to identify not
only individual features but also groups of features that have some relationships with the response.
SGL finds such groups and features by obtaining sparse parameters corresponding to the features in
the linear regression model. In particular, SGL effectively achieves parameter sparsity by utilizing
two types of regularizations: feature- and group-level regularization. Owing to its effectiveness, SGL
is used in the analysis of the various data, e.g., gene expression data [11, 16] and climate data [13].
In order to obtain the sparse parameters in SGL, Block Coordinate Descent (BCD) is used as a
standard approach [3, 17]. BCD iteratively updates the parameters for each group until convergence.
In particular, it first checks whether the parameters in a group are zeros by using all the parameters or
data points. This process induces group-level sparsity. If the parameters in the group are determined
as nonzeros, BCD updates the parameters in the group. It applies the aforementioned steps to the
parameters of each group until the parameters of all groups converge.
Although SGL is practical for analyzing group structured data, BCD suffers from high computation
costs. The main bottleneck is the computation to check whether the parameters of a group are
zeros, because the computation uses all the parameters or data points. The screening technique is
the main existing approach for reducing the computation cost of BCD by reducing the data size
[18, 12–14]. This technique eliminates features and groups whose parameters are zeros, before
entering the iterations of BCD. However, the screening techniques cannot be expected to reduce the
data size when the initial parameters are far from optimal [9]. The screening techniques often face
such problems in practice, and the efficiency of BCD would not be increased in such cases. Therefore,
speeding up BCD is still an important topic of study for handling large data sizes.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

