Average Individual Fairness:
Algorithms, Generalization and Experiments

Michael Kearns
University of Pennsylvania
mkearns@cis.upenn.edu

Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Saeed Sharifi-Malvajerdi
University of Pennsylvania
saeedsh@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract
We propose a new family of fairness definitions for classification problems that
combine some of the best properties of both statistical and individual notions of
fairness. We posit not only a distribution over individuals, but also a distribution
over (or collection of) classification tasks. We then ask that standard statistics
(such as error or false positive/negative rates) be (approximately) equalized across
individuals, where the rate is defined as an expectation over the classification tasks.
Because we are no longer averaging over coarse groups (such as race or gender),
this is a semantically meaningful individual-level constraint. Given a sample of
individuals and problems, we design an oracle-efficient algorithm (i.e. one that is
given access to any standard, fairness-free learning heuristic) for the fair empirical
risk minimization task. We also show that given sufficiently many samples, the
ERM solution generalizes in two directions: both to new individuals, and to new
classification tasks, drawn from their corresponding distributions. Finally we
implement our algorithm and empirically verify its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

The community studying fairness in machine learning has yet to settle on definitions. At a high level,
existing definitional proposals can be divided into two groups: statistical fairness definitions and
individual fairness definitions. Statistical fairness definitions partition individuals into “protected
groups” (often based on race, gender, or some other binary protected attribute) and ask that some
statistic of a classifier (error rate, false positive rate, positive classification rate, etc.) be approximately
equalized across those groups. In contrast, individual definitions of fairness have no notion of
“protected groups”, and instead ask for constraints that bind on pairs of individuals. These constraints
can have the semantics that “similar individuals should be treated similarly” (Dwork et al. (2012)), or
that “less qualified individuals should not be preferentially favored over more qualified individuals”
(Joseph et al. (2016)). Both families of definitions have serious problems, which we will elaborate on.
But in summary, statistical definitions of fairness provide only very weak promises to individuals,
and so do not have very strong semantics. Existing proposals for individual fairness guarantees, on
the other hand, have very strong semantics, but have major obstacles to deployment, requiring strong
assumptions on either the data generating process or on society’s ability to instantiate an agreed-upon
fairness metric.
Statistical definitions of fairness are the most popular in the literature, in large part because they can
be easily checked and enforced on arbitrary data distributions. For example, a popular definition
(Hardt et al. (2016); Kleinberg et al. (2017); Chouldechova (2017)) asks that a classifier’s false
positive rate should be equalized across the protected groups. This can sound attractive: in settings
in which a positive classification leads to a bad outcome (e.g. incarceration), it is the false positives
that are harmed by the errors of the classifier, and asking that the false positive rate be equalized
across groups is asking that the harm caused by the algorithm should be proportionately spread
across protected populations. But the meaning of this guarantee to an individual is limited, because
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

