Blended Matching Pursuit

Cyrille W. Combettes
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA, USA
cyrille@gatech.edu

Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin and TU Berlin
Berlin, Germany
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
Matching pursuit algorithms are an important class of algorithms in signal processing and machine learning. We present a blended matching pursuit algorithm,
combining coordinate descent-like steps with stronger gradient descent steps, for
minimizing a smooth convex function over a linear space spanned by a set of atoms.
We derive sublinear to linear convergence rates according to the smoothness and
sharpness orders of the function and demonstrate computational superiority of our
approach. In particular, we derive linear rates for a large class of non-strongly
convex functions, and we demonstrate in experiments that our algorithm enjoys
very fast rates of convergence and wall-clock speed while maintaining a sparsity of
iterates very comparable to that of the (much slower) orthogonal matching pursuit.

1

Introduction

Let H be a separable real Hilbert space, D ⊂ H be a dictionary, and f : H → R be a smooth convex
function. In this paper, we aim at solving the problem:
Find a solution to min f (x) which is sparse relative to D.
x∈H

(1)

Together with fast convergence, achieving high sparsity, i.e., keeping the iterates as linear combinations of a small number of atoms in the dictionary D, is a primary objective and leads to better
generalization, interpretability, and decision-making in machine learning. In signal processing, Problem (1) encompasses a wide range of applications, including compressed sensing, signal denoising,
and information retrieval, and is often solved with the Matching Pursuit algorithm [Mallat and Zhang,
1993]. Our approach is inspired by the Blended Conditional Gradients algorithm [Braun et al.,
2019] which solves the constrained setting of Problem (1), i.e., minimizing f over the convex hull
conv(D) of the dictionary, and is ultimately based on the Frank-Wolfe algorithm [Frank and Wolfe,
1956] a.k.a. Conditional Gradient algorithm [Levitin and Polyak, 1966]. It enhances the vanilla
Frank-Wolfe algorithm by replacing the linear minimization oracle with a weak-separation oracle
[Braun et al., 2017] and by blending the traditional Frank-Wolfe steps with lazified Frank-Wolfe
steps and projected gradient steps, while still avoiding projections. Frank-Wolfe algorithms are
particularly well-suited for problems with a desired sparsity in the solution (see, e.g., Jaggi [2013]
and the references therein) however, from an optimization perspective, although they approximate the
optimal descent direction −∇f (xt ) via the linear minimization oracle vtFW ← arg minD h∇f (xt ), vi,
they move in the direction vtFW − xt in order to ensure feasibility, which provides less progress.
An analogy between Frank-Wolfe algorithms and the unconstrained Problem (1) was proposed by
Locatello et al. [2017]. They unified the Frank-Wolfe and Matching Pursuit algorithms, and proposed
a Generalized Matching Pursuit algorithm (GMP) and an Orthogonal Matching Pursuit algorithm
(OMP) for solving Problem (1), which descend in the directions vtFW . Essentially, Locatello et al.
[2017] established that GMP corresponds to the vanilla Frank-Wolfe algorithm and OMP corresponds
to the Fully-Corrective Frank-Wolfe algorithm. GMP and OMP converge with similar rates in the
various regimes, namely with a sublinear rate for smooth convex functions and with a linear rate for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

