Data-driven Estimation of Sinusoid Frequencies

Gautier Izacard
Ecole Polytechnique
gautier.izacard@polytechnique.edu

Sreyas Mohan
Center for Data Science
New York University
sm7582@nyu.edu

Carlos Fernandez-Granda
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
and Center for Data Science
New York University
cfgranda@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Frequency estimation is a fundamental problem in signal processing, with applications in radar imaging, underwater acoustics, seismic imaging, and spectroscopy.
The goal is to estimate the frequency of each component in a multisinusoidal signal
from a finite number of noisy samples. A recent machine-learning approach uses a
neural network to output a learned representation with local maxima at the position
of the frequency estimates. In this work, we propose a novel neural-network architecture that produces a significantly more accurate representation, and combine
it with an additional neural-network module trained to detect the number of frequencies. This yields a fast, fully-automatic method for frequency estimation that
achieves state-of-the-art results. In particular, it outperforms existing techniques by
a substantial margin at medium-to-high noise levels.

1

Introduction

1.1

Estimation of sinusoid frequencies

Estimating the frequencies of multisinusoidal signals from a finite number of samples is a fundamental problem in signal processing. Examples of applications include underwater acoustics [2],
seismic imaging [5], target identification [3, 11], digital filter design [37], nuclear-magnetic-resonance
spectroscopy [43], and power electronics [27]. In radar and sonar systems, the frequencies encode
the direction of electromagnetic or acoustic waves arriving at a linear array of antennae or microphones [26].
In signal processing, multisinusoidal signals are usually represented as linear combinations of complex
exponentials,
m
X
S(t) :=
aj exp(i2πfj t) = Re(aj ) cos(2πfj t) + i Im(aj ) sin(2πfj t).
(1)
j=1

where the unknown amplitudes a ∈ Cm encode the magnitude and phase of the different sinusoidal
components, and t denotes time. The frequencies f1 , . . . , fm quantify the oscillation rate of each
component. The goal of frequency estimation is to determine their values from noisy samples of the
signal S.
Without loss of generality, let us assume that the true frequencies belong to the unit interval, i.e.
0 ≤ fj ≤ 1, 1 ≤ j ≤ m. By the Sampling Theorem [25, 30, 35] the signal in equation 1 is completely
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

