Differentiable Ranks and Sorting
using Optimal Transport

Marco Cuturi Olivier Teboul Jean-Philippe Vert
Google Research, Brain Team
{cuturi,oliviert,jpvert}@google.com

Abstract
Sorting is used pervasively in machine learning, either to define elementary algorithms, such as k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) rules, or to define test-time metrics,
such as top-k classification accuracy or ranking losses. Sorting is however a poor
match for the end-to-end, automatically differentiable pipelines of deep learning.
Indeed, sorting procedures output two vectors, neither of which is differentiable:
the vector of sorted values is piecewise linear, while the sorting permutation itself
(or its inverse, the vector of ranks) has no differentiable properties to speak of, since
it is integer-valued. We propose in this paper to replace the usual sort procedure
with a differentiable proxy. Our proxy builds upon the fact that sorting can be
seen as an optimal assignment problem, one in which the n values to be sorted are
matched to an auxiliary probability measure supported on any increasing family
of n target values. From this observation, we propose extended rank and sort
operators by considering optimal transport (OT) problems (the natural relaxation
for assignments) where the auxiliary measure can be any weighted measure supported on m increasing values, where m 6= n. We recover differentiable operators
by regularizing these OT problems with an entropic penalty, and solve them by
applying Sinkhorn iterations. Using these smoothed rank and sort operators, we
propose differentiable proxies for the classification 0/1 loss as well as for the
quantile regression loss.

1

Introduction

Sorting n real values stored in an array x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) ∈ Rn requires finding a permutation
σ in the symmetric group Sn such that xσ := (xσ1 , . . . , xσn ) is increasing. A call to a sorting
procedure returns either the vector of sorted values S(x) := xσ , or the vector R(x) of the ranks
of these values, namely the inverse of the sorting permutation, R(x) := σ −1 . For instance, if the
input vector x = (0.38, 4, −2, 6, −9), one has σ = (5, 3, 1, 2, 4), and the sorted vector S(x) is
xσ = (−9, −2, 0.38, 4, 6), while R(x) = σ −1 = (3, 4, 2, 5, 1) lists the rank of each entry in x.

On (not) learning with sorting and ranking. Operators R and S play an important role across
statistics and machine learning. For instance, R is the main workhorse behind order statistics [12],
but also appears prominently in k-NN rules, in which R is applied on a vector of distances to select
the closest neighbors to a query point. Ranking is also used to assess the performance of an algorithm:
either at test time, such as 0/1 and top-k classification accuracies and NDCG metrics when learningto-rank [21], or at train time, by selecting pairs [9, 8] and triplets [37] of points of interest. The
sorting operator S is of no less importance, and can be used to handle outliers in robust statistics, as
in trimmed [20] and least-quantile regression [32] or median-of-means estimators [26, 25]. Yet, and
although examples of using R and S abound in ML, neither R nor S are actively used in end-to-end
learning approaches: while S is not differentiable everywhere, R is outright pathological, since it is
piecewise constant and has therefore a Jacobian ∂R/∂x that is almost everywhere zero.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

