Spike-Train Level Backpropagation for Training
Deep Recurrent Spiking Neural Networks

Wenrui Zhang
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
wenruizhang@ucsb.edu

Peng Li
University of California, Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
lip@ucsb.edu

Abstract
Spiking neural networks (SNNs) well support spatio-temporal learning and energyefficient event-driven hardware neuromorphic processors. As an important class
of SNNs, recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs) possess great computational power. However, the practical application of RSNNs is severely limited by
challenges in training. Biologically-inspired unsupervised learning has limited
capability in boosting the performance of RSNNs. On the other hand, existing
backpropagation (BP) methods suffer from high complexity of unfolding in time,
vanishing and exploding gradients, and approximate differentiation of discontinuous spiking activities when applied to RSNNs. To enable supervised training of
RSNNs under a well-defined loss function, we present a novel Spike-Train level
RSNNs Backpropagation (ST-RSBP) algorithm for training deep RSNNs. The
proposed ST-RSBP directly computes the gradient of a rate-coded loss function
defined at the output layer of the network w.r.t tunable parameters. The scalability
of ST-RSBP is achieved by the proposed spike-train level computation during
which temporal effects of the SNN is captured in both the forward and backward
pass of BP. Our ST-RSBP algorithm can be broadly applied to RSNNs with a
single recurrent layer or deep RSNNs with multiple feedforward and recurrent
layers. Based upon challenging speech and image datasets including TI46 [25],
N-TIDIGITS [3], Fashion-MNIST [40] and MNIST, ST-RSBP is able to train
SNNs with an accuracy surpassing that of the current state-of-the-art SNN BP
algorithms and conventional non-spiking deep learning models.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated outstanding performance in natural
language processing, speech recognition, visual object recognition, object detection, and many other
domains [6, 14, 21, 36, 13]. On the other hand, it is believed that biological brains operate rather
differently [17]. Neurons in artificial neural networks (ANNs) are characterized by a single, static, and
continuous-valued activation function. More biologically plausible spiking neural networks (SNNs)
compute based upon discrete spike events and spatio-temporal patterns while enjoying rich coding
mechanisms including rate and temporal codes [11]. There is theoretical evidence supporting that
SNNs possess greater computational power over traditional ANNs [11]. Moreover, the event-driven
nature of SNNs enables ultra-low-power hardware neuromorphic computing devices [7, 2, 10, 28].
Backpropagation (BP) is the workhorse for training deep ANNs [22]. Its success in the ANN world
has made BP a target of intensive research for SNNs. Nevertheless, applying BP to biologically
more plausible SNNs is nontrivial due to the necessity in dealing with complex neural dynamics
and non-differentiability of discrete spike events. It is possible to train an ANN and then convert
it to an SNN [9, 10, 16]. However, this suffers from conversion approximations and gives up the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

