NAT: Neural Architecture Transformer for Accurate
and Compact Architectures

Yong Guo∗, Yin Zheng∗ , Mingkui Tan∗† , Qi Chen,
Jian Chen†, Peilin Zhao, Junzhou Huang
South China University of Technology, Weixin Group, Tencent,
Tencent AI Lab, University of Texas at Arlington
{guo.yong, sechenqi}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {mingkuitan, ellachen}@scut.edu.cn,
{yinzheng, masonzhao}@tencent.com, jzhuang@uta.edu

Abstract
Designing effective architectures is one of the key factors behind the success of
deep neural networks. Existing deep architectures are either manually designed
or automatically searched by some Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods.
However, even a well-searched architecture may still contain many non-significant
or redundant modules or operations (e.g., convolution or pooling), which may
not only incur substantial memory consumption and computation cost but also
deteriorate the performance. Thus, it is necessary to optimize the operations inside
an architecture to improve the performance without introducing extra computation
cost. Unfortunately, such a constrained optimization problem is NP-hard. To make
the problem feasible, we cast the optimization problem into a Markov decision
process (MDP) and seek to learn a Neural Architecture Transformer (NAT) to
replace the redundant operations with the more computationally efficient ones
(e.g., skip connection or directly removing the connection). Based on MDP, we
learn NAT by exploiting reinforcement learning to obtain the optimization policies
w.r.t. different architectures. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed strategies,
we apply NAT on both hand-crafted architectures and NAS based architectures.
Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10 and ImageNet,
demonstrate that the transformed architecture by NAT significantly outperforms
both its original form and those architectures optimized by existing methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) [25] have been producing state-of-the-art results in many challenging
tasks including image classification [12, 23, 42, 57, 58, 18, 11, 53], face recognition [38, 43, 56],
brain signal processing [33, 34], video analysis [50, 49] and many other areas [55, 54, 24, 3, 10, 9, 4].
One of the key factors behind the success lies in the innovation of neural architectures, such as
VGG [40] and ResNet[13]. However, designing effective neural architectures is often labor-intensive
and relies heavily on substantial human expertise. Moreover, the human-designed process cannot
fully explore the whole architecture space and thus the designed architectures may not be optimal.
Hence, there is a growing interest to replace the manual process of architecture design with Neural
Architecture Search (NAS).
Recently, substantial studies [29, 35, 61] have shown that the automatically discovered architectures
are able to achieve highly competitive performance compared to existing hand-crafted architectures.
∗

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
2
This work is done when Yong Guo works as an intern in Tencent AI Lab.

†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

