VIREL : A Variational Inference Framework

for Reinforcement Learning

Matthew Fellows∗ Anuj Mahajan∗ Tim G. J. Rudner
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Shimon Whiteson

Abstract
Applying probabilistic models to reinforcement learning (RL) enables the uses
of powerful optimisation tools such as variational inference in RL. However, existing inference frameworks and their algorithms pose significant challenges for
learning optimal policies, for example, the lack of mode capturing behaviour in
pseudo-likelihood methods, difficulties learning deterministic policies in maximum
entropy RL based approaches, and a lack of analysis when function approximators are used. We propose VIREL, a theoretically grounded inference framework
for RL that utilises a parametrised action-value function to summarise future dynamics of the underlying MDP, generalising existing approaches. VIREL also
benefits from a mode-seeking form of KL divergence, the ability to learn deterministic optimal polices naturally from inference, and the ability to optimise value
functions and policies in separate, iterative steps. Applying variational expectationmaximisation to VIREL, we show that the actor-critic algorithm can be reduced
to expectation-maximisation, with policy improvement equivalent to an E-step
and policy evaluation to an M-step. We derive a family of actor-critic methods
from VIREL, including a scheme for adaptive exploration and demonstrate that our
algorithms outperform state-of-the-art methods based on soft value functions in
several domains.

1

Introduction

Efforts to combine reinforcement learning (RL) and probabilistic inference have a long history,
spanning diverse fields such as control, robotics, and RL [64, 62, 46, 47, 27, 74, 75, 73, 36]. Formalising RL as probabilistic inference enables the application of many approximate inference tools
to reinforcement learning, extending models in flexible and powerful ways [35]. However, existing
methods at the intersection of RL and inference suffer from several deficiencies. Methods that
derive from the pseudo-likelihood inference framework [12, 64, 46, 26, 44, 1] and use expectationmaximisation (EM) favour risk-seeking policies [34], which can be suboptimal. Yet another approach,
the MERL inference framework [35] (which we refer to as MERLIN), derives from maximum entropy
reinforcement learning (MERL) [33, 74, 75, 73]. While MERLIN does not suffer from the issues of
the pseudo-likelihood inference framework, it presents different practical difficulties. These methods
do not naturally learn deterministic optimal policies and constraining the variational policies to be
deterministic renders inference intractable [47]. As we show by way of counterexample in Section 2.2,
an optimal policy under the reinforcement learning objective is not guaranteed from the optimal
MERL objective. Moreover, these methods rely on soft value functions which are sensitive to a
pre-defined temperature hyperparameter.
Additionally, no existing framework formally accounts for replacing exact value functions with
function approximators in the objective; learning function approximators is carried out independently of the inference problem and no analysis of convergence is given for the corresponding
algorithms.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Correspondence
anuj.mahajan@cs.ox.ac.uk.

to

matthew.fellows@cs.ox.ac.uk

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

and

