Enabling hyperparameter optimization in sequential
autoencoders for spiking neural data

Mohammad Reza Keshtkaran
Coulter Dept. of Biomedical Engineering
Emory University and Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30322
mkeshtk@emory.edu

Chethan Pandarinath
Coulter Dept. of Biomedical Engineering
Dept of Neurosurgery
Emory University and Georgia Tech
Atlanta, GA 30322
chethan@gatech.edu

Abstract
Continuing advances in neural interfaces have enabled simultaneous monitoring of
spiking activity from hundreds to thousands of neurons. To interpret these largescale data, several methods have been proposed to infer latent dynamic structure
from high-dimensional datasets. One recent line of work uses recurrent neural
networks in a sequential autoencoder (SAE) framework to uncover dynamics. SAEs
are an appealing option for modeling nonlinear dynamical systems, and enable a
precise link between neural activity and behavior on a single-trial basis. However,
the very large parameter count and complexity of SAEs relative to other models
has caused concern that SAEs may only perform well on very large training sets.
We hypothesized that with a method to systematically optimize hyperparameters
(HPs), SAEs might perform well even in cases of limited training data. Such a
breakthrough would greatly extend their applicability. However, we find that SAEs
applied to spiking neural data are prone to a particular form of overfitting that
cannot be detected using standard validation metrics, which prevents standard HP
searches. We develop and test two potential solutions: an alternate validation
method (“sample validation”) and a novel regularization method (“coordinated
dropout”). These innovations prevent overfitting quite effectively, and allow us to
test whether SAEs can achieve good performance on limited data through largescale HP optimization. When applied to data from motor cortex recorded while
monkeys made reaches in various directions, large-scale HP optimization allowed
SAEs to better maintain performance for small dataset sizes. Our results should
greatly extend the applicability of SAEs in extracting latent dynamics from sparse,
multidimensional data, such as neural population spiking activity.

1

Introduction

Over the past decade, our ability to monitor the simultaneous spiking activity of large populations
of neurons has increased exponentially, promising new avenues for understanding the brain. These
capabilities have motivated the development and application of numerous methods for uncovering
dynamical structure underlying neural population spiking acqtivity, such as linear or switched
linear dynamical systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], Gaussian processes [6, 7, 8, 9], and nonlinear dynamical
systems [10, 11, 12, 13]. With this rich space of models, several factors influence which model is
most appropriate for any given application, such as whether the data can be well-modeled as an
autonomous dynamical system, whether interpretability of the dynamics is desirable, whether it
is important to link neural activity to behavioral or task variables, and simply the amount of data
available.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

