Point-Voxel CNN for Efficient 3D Deep Learning

Zhijian Liu∗
MIT

Haotian Tang∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Yujun Lin
MIT

Song Han
MIT

Abstract
We present Point-Voxel CNN (PVCNN) for efficient, fast 3D deep learning. Previous work processes 3D data using either voxel-based or point-based NN models.
However, both approaches are computationally inefficient. The computation cost
and memory footprints of the voxel-based models grow cubically with the input
resolution, making it memory-prohibitive to scale up the resolution. As for pointbased networks, up to 80% of the time is wasted on structuring the sparse data
which have rather poor memory locality, not on the actual feature extraction. In this
paper, we propose PVCNN that represents the 3D input data in points to reduce the
memory consumption, while performing the convolutions in voxels to reduce the
irregular, sparse data access and improve the locality. Our PVCNN model is both
memory and computation efficient. Evaluated on semantic and part segmentation
datasets, it achieves a much higher accuracy than the voxel-based baseline with
10× GPU memory reduction; it also outperforms the state-of-the-art point-based
models with 7× measured speedup on average. Remarkably, the narrower version
of PVCNN achieves 2× speedup over PointNet (an extremely efficient model) on
part and scene segmentation benchmarks with much higher accuracy. We validate
the general effectiveness of PVCNN on 3D object detection: by replacing the primitives in Frustrum PointNet with PVConv, it outperforms Frustrum PointNet++ by
up to 2.4% mAP with 1.8× measured speedup and 1.4× GPU memory reduction.

1

Introduction

3D deep learning has received increased attention thanks to its wide applications: e.g., AR/VR and
autonomous driving. These applications need to interact with people in real time and therefore require
low latency. However, edge devices (such as mobile phones and VR headsets) are tightly constrained
by hardware resources and battery. Therefore, it is important to design efficient and fast 3D deep
learning models for real-time applications on the edge.
Collected by the LiDAR sensors, 3D data usually comes in the format of point clouds. Conventionally,
researchers rasterize the point cloud into voxel grids and process them using 3D volumetric convolutions [4, 33]. With low resolutions, there will be information loss during voxelization: multiple points
will be merged together if they lie in the same grid. Therefore, a high-resolution representation is
needed to preserve the fine details in the input data. However, the computational cost and memory
requirement both increase cubically with voxel resolution. Thus, it is infeasible to train a voxel-based
model with high-resolution inputs: e.g., 3D-UNet [51] requires more than 10 GB of GPU memory on
64×64×64 inputs with batch size of 16, and the large memory footprint makes it rather difficult to
scale beyond this resolution.
Recently, another stream of models attempt to directly process the input point clouds [17, 23, 30, 32].
These point-based models require much lower GPU memory than voxel-based models thanks to the
sparse representation. However, they neglect the fact that the random memory access is also very
inefficient. As the points are scattered over the entire 3D space in an irregular manner, processing
∗ indicates equal contributions. The first two authors are listed in the alphabetical order.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

