On the (In)fidelity and Sensitivity of Explanations

Chih-Kuan Yeh ˚, Cheng-Yu Hsieh :, Arun Sai Suggala ;
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University
David I. Inouye §
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Purdue University

Pradeep Ravikumar ¶
Department of Machine Learning
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We consider objective evaluation measures of saliency explanations for complex
black-box machine learning models. We propose simple robust variants of two
notions that have been considered in recent literature: (in)fidelity, and sensitivity.
We analyze optimal explanations with respect to both these measures, and while
the optimal explanation for sensitivity is a vacuous constant explanation, the
optimal explanation for infidelity is a novel combination of two popular explanation
methods. By varying the perturbation distribution that defines infidelity, we obtain
novel explanations by optimizing infidelity, which we show to out-perform existing
explanations in both quantitative and qualitative measurements. Another salient
question given these measures is how to modify any given explanation to have
better values with respect to these measures. We propose a simple modification
based on lowering sensitivity, and moreover show that when done appropriately,
we could simultaneously improve both sensitivity as well as fidelity.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of how to explain a complex machine learning model, abstracted as a function
that predicts a response given an input feature vector, given only black-box access to the model. A
popular approach to do so is to attribute any given prediction to the set of input features: ranging from
providing a vector of importance weights, one per input feature, to simply providing a set of important
features. For instance, given a deep neural network for image classification, we may explain a specific
prediction by showing the set of salient pixels, or a heatmap image showing the importance weights
for all the pixels. But how good is any such explanation mechanism? We can distinguish between
two classes of explanation evaluation measures [22, 27]: objective measures and subjective measures.
The predominant evaluations of explanations have been subjective measures, since the notion of
explanation is very human-centric; these range from qualitative displays of explanation examples, to
crowd-sourced evaluations of human satisfaction with the explanations, as well as whether humans
are able to understand the model. Nonetheless, it is also important to consider objective measures
of explanation effectiveness, not only because these place explanations on a sounder theoretical
foundation, but also because they allow us to improve our explanations by improving their objective
measures.
One way to objectively evaluate explanations is to verify whether the explanation mechanism satisfies
(or does not satisfy) certain axioms, or properties [25, 43]. In this paper, we focus on quantitative
objective measures, and provide and analyze two such measures. First, we formalize the notion
of fidelity of an explanation to the predictor function. One natural approach to measure fidelity,
when we have apriori information that only a particular subset of features is relevant, is to test if the
˚

cjyeh@cs.cmu.edu
chyu.hsieh@gmail.com
;
asuggala@andrew.cmu.edu
§
dinouye@purdue.edu
¶
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu
:

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

