Bootstrapping Upper Confidence Bound

Botao Hao
Purdue University
haobotao000@gmail.com

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori
VinAI
yasin.abbasi@gmail.com

Zheng Wen
Deepmind
zhengwen@google.com

Guang Cheng
Purdue University
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) method is arguably the most celebrated one used
in online decision making with partial information feedback. Existing techniques
for constructing confidence bounds are typically built upon various concentration
inequalities, which thus lead to over-exploration. In this paper, we propose a nonparametric and data-dependent UCB algorithm based on the multiplier bootstrap.
To improve its finite sample performance, we further incorporate second-order
correction into the above construction. In theory, we derive both problem-dependent
and problem-independent regret bounds for multi-armed bandits with symmetric
rewards under a much weaker tail assumption than the standard sub-Gaussianity.
Numerical results demonstrate significant regret reductions by our method, in
comparison with several baselines in a range of multi-armed and linear bandit
problems.

1

Introduction

In artificial intelligence, learning to make decisions online plays a critical role in many fields, such
as personalized news recommendation [1], robotics [2] and the game of Go [3]. To learn to make
optimal decisions as soon as possible, the decision-makers must carefully design an algorithm to
balance the trade-off between the exploration and exploitation [4, 5]. Over-exploration could be
expensive and unethical in practice, e.g., medical decision making [6, 7, 8]. On the other hand,
insufficient exploration tends to make an algorithm stuck at a sub-optimal solution. The delicate
design of exploration methods stands in the heart of online learning and decision making.
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) [9, 10, 11, 12, 13] is a class of highly effective algorithms in dealing
with the exploration-exploitation trade-off in bandits and reinforcement learning. The tightness of
confidence bound, as is known, is the key ingredient to achieve the optimal degree of explorations. To
the best of our knowledge, nearly all the existing works construct confidence bounds based on various
concentration inequalities, e.g. Hoeffding-type [10], empirical Bernstein type [14] or self-normalized
type [13]. Those concentration-based confidence bounds, however, are typically conservative since
they are data-independent. Concentration inequalities only exploit tail information, e.g., bounded or
sub-Gaussian, rather than the whole distribution knowledge. In general, the loose constant factor may
result in confidence bounds that are too wide to be informative [15].
In this paper, we propose a non-parametric and data-dependent UCB algorithm based on the multiplier
bootstrap [16, 17, 18, 19, 20], called bootstrapped UCB. The principle is to use the multiplier
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

