A Similarity-preserving Neural Network Trained on
Transformed Images Recapitulates Salient Features
of the Fly Motion Detection Circuit

Yanis Bahroun †
Anirvan M. Sengupta †‡
Dmitri B. Chklovskii†∗
†
‡
∗
Flatiron Institute Rutgers University NYU Langone Medical Center
{ybahroun,dchklovskii}@flatironinstitute.org, anirvans@physics.rutgers.edu,

Abstract
Learning to detect content-independent transformations from data is one of the
central problems in biological and artificial intelligence. An example of such problem is unsupervised learning of a visual motion detector from pairs of consecutive
video frames. Rao and Ruderman formulated this problem in terms of learning
infinitesimal transformation operators (Lie group generators) via minimizing image
reconstruction error. Unfortunately, it is difficult to map their model onto a biologically plausible neural network (NN) with local learning rules. Here we propose a
biologically plausible model of motion detection. We also adopt the transformationoperator approach but, instead of reconstruction-error minimization, start with a
similarity-preserving objective function. An online algorithm that optimizes such
an objective function naturally maps onto an NN with biologically plausible learning rules. The trained NN recapitulates major features of the well-studied motion
detector in the fly. In particular, it is consistent with the experimental observation
that local motion detectors combine information from at least three adjacent pixels,
something that contradicts the celebrated Hassenstein-Reichardt model.

1

Introduction

Humans can recognize objects, such as human faces, even when presented at various distances, from
various angles and under various illumination conditions. Whereas the brain performs such a task
almost effortlessly, this is a challenging unsupervised learning problem. Because the number of
training views for any given face is limited, such transformations must be learned from data comprising different faces, or in a content-independent manner. Therefore, learning content-independent
transformations plays a central role in reverse engineering the brain and building artificial intelligence.
Perhaps the simplest example of this task is learning a visual motion detector, which computes the
optic flow from pairs of consecutive video frames regardless of their content. Motion detector learning
was addressed by Rao and Ruderman [31] who formulated this problem as learning infinitesimal
translation operators (or generators of the translation Lie group). They learned a motion detector by
minimizing, for each pair of consecutive video frames, the squared mismatch between the observed
variation in pixel intensity values and that predicted by the scaled infinitesimal translation operator.
Whereas such an approach learns the operators and evaluates transformation magnitudes correctly
[31, 22, 42], its biological implementation has been lacking (see below).
The non-biological nature of the neural networks (NNs) derived from the reconstruction approach has
been previously encountered in the context of discovery of latent degrees of freedom, e.g. dimensionality reduction and sparse coding [8, 26]. When such NNs are derived from the reconstruction-errorminimization objective they require non-local learning rules, which are not biologically plausible. To
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

