ZO-AdaMM: Zeroth-Order Adaptive Momentum
Method for Black-Box Optimization

Xiangyi Chen1,∗ Sijia Liu2,∗ Kaidi Xu3,∗ Xingguo Li4,∗
Xue Lin3 Mingyi Hong1 David Cox2
1
University of Minnesota, USA
2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, USA
3
Northeastern University, USA
4
Princeton University, USA

Abstract
The adaptive momentum method (AdaMM), which uses past gradients to update
descent directions and learning rates simultaneously, has become one of the most
popular first-order optimization methods for solving machine learning problems.
However, AdaMM is not suited for solving black-box optimization problems,
where explicit gradient forms are difficult or infeasible to obtain. In this paper,
we propose a zeroth-order AdaMM (ZO-AdaMM) algorithm, that generalizes
AdaMM to the gradient-free regime. We show that the convergence rate of √
ZOAdaMM for both convex and nonconvex optimization is roughly a factor of O( d)
worse than that of the first-order AdaMM algorithm, where d is problem size. In
particular, we provide a deep understanding on why Mahalanobis distance matters
in convergence of ZO-AdaMM and other AdaMM-type methods. As a byproduct,
our analysis makes the first step toward understanding adaptive learning rate
methods for nonconvex constrained optimization. Furthermore, we demonstrate
two applications, designing per-image and universal adversarial attacks from blackbox neural networks, respectively. We perform extensive experiments on ImageNet
and empirically show that ZO-AdaMM converges much faster to a solution of high
accuracy compared with 6 state-of-the-art ZO optimization methods.

1

Introduction

The development of gradient-free optimization methods has become increasingly important to solve
many machine learning problems in which explicit expressions of the gradients are expensive or
infeasible to obtain [1–7]. Zeroth-Order (ZO) optimization methods, one type of gradient-free
optimization methods, mimic first-order (FO) methods but approximate the full gradient (or stochastic
gradient) through random gradient estimates, given by the difference of function values at random
query points [8, 9]. Compared to Bayesian optimization, derivative-free trust region methods,
genetic algorithms and other types of gradient-free methods [10–13], ZO optimization has two main
advantages: a) ease of implementation, via slight modification of commonly-used gradient-based
algorithms, and b) comparable convergence rates to first-order algorithms.
Due to the stochastic nature of ZO optimization, which arises from both data sampling and random
gradient estimation, existing ZO methods suffer from large variance of the noisy gradient compared
to FO stochastic methods [14]. In practice, this causes poor convergence performance and/or function
query efficiency. To partially mitigate these issues, ZO sign-based SGD (ZO-signSGD) was proposed
by [14] with the rationale that taking the sign of random gradient estimates (i.e., normalizing gradient
estimates elementwise) as the descent direction improves the robustness of gradient estimators
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

