When Does Label Smoothing Help?

Rafael Müller∗, Simon Kornblith, Geoffrey Hinton
Google Brain
Toronto
rafaelmuller@google.com

Abstract
The generalization and learning speed of a multi-class neural network can often
be significantly improved by using soft targets that are a weighted average of the
hard targets and the uniform distribution over labels. Smoothing the labels in this
way prevents the network from becoming over-confident and label smoothing has
been used in many state-of-the-art models, including image classification, language
translation and speech recognition. Despite its widespread use, label smoothing is
still poorly understood. Here we show empirically that in addition to improving
generalization, label smoothing improves model calibration which can significantly
improve beam-search. However, we also observe that if a teacher network is
trained with label smoothing, knowledge distillation into a student network is much
less effective. To explain these observations, we visualize how label smoothing
changes the representations learned by the penultimate layer of the network. We
show that label smoothing encourages the representations of training examples
from the same class to group in tight clusters. This results in loss of information
in the logits about resemblances between instances of different classes, which is
necessary for distillation, but does not hurt generalization or calibration of the
model’s predictions.

1

Introduction

It is widely known that neural network training is sensitive to the loss that is minimized. Shortly
after Rumelhart et al. [1] derived backpropagation for the quadratic loss function, several researchers
noted that better classification performance and faster convergence could be attained by performing
gradient descent to minimize cross entropy [2, 3]. However, even in these early days of neural
network research, there were indications that other, more exotic objectives could outperform the
standard cross entropy loss [4, 5]. More recently, Szegedy et al. [6] introduced label smoothing,
which improves accuracy by computing cross entropy not with the “hard" targets from the dataset,
but with a weighted mixture of these targets with the uniform distribution.
Label smoothing has been used successfully to improve the accuracy of deep learning models across
a range of tasks, including image classification, speech recognition, and machine translation (Table 1).
Szegedy et al. [6] originally proposed label smoothing as a strategy that improved the performance of
the Inception architecture on the ImageNet dataset, and many state-of-the-art image classification
models have incorporated label smoothing into training procedures ever since [7, 8, 9]. In speech
recognition, Chorowski and Jaitly [10] used label smoothing to reduce the word error rate on the
WSJ dataset. In machine translation, Vaswani et al. [11] attained a small but important improvement
in BLEU score, despite a reduction in perplexity.
Although label smoothing is a widely used “trick" to improve network performance, not much is
known about why and when label smoothing should work. This paper tries to shed light upon behavior
∗

This work was done as part of the Google AI Residency.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

