Leader Stochastic Gradient Descent for Distributed
Training of Deep Learning Models

Yunfei Teng∗,1
yt1208@nyu.edu
Anna Choromanska
ac5455@nyu.edu

Wenbo Gao∗,2
wg2279@columbia.edu
Donald Goldfarb
goldfarb@columbia.edu

Francois Chalus
chalusf3@gmail.com
Adrian Weller
aw665@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We consider distributed optimization under communication constraints for training
deep learning models. We propose a new algorithm, whose parameter updates
rely on two forces: a regular gradient step, and a corrective direction dictated
by the currently best-performing worker (leader). Our method differs from the
parameter-averaging scheme EASGD [1] in a number of ways: (i) our objective
formulation does not change the location of stationary points compared to the
original optimization problem; (ii) we avoid convergence decelerations caused by
pulling local workers descending to different local minima to each other (i.e. to the
average of their parameters); (iii) our update by design breaks the curse of symmetry
(the phenomenon of being trapped in poorly generalizing sub-optimal solutions in
symmetric non-convex landscapes); and (iv) our approach is more communication
efficient since it broadcasts only parameters of the leader rather than all workers.
We provide theoretical analysis of the batch version of the proposed algorithm,
which we call Leader Gradient Descent (LGD), and its stochastic variant (LSGD).
Finally, we implement an asynchronous version of our algorithm and extend it to
the multi-leader setting, where we form groups of workers, each represented by its
own local leader (the best performer in a group), and update each worker with a
corrective direction comprised of two attractive forces: one to the local, and one to
the global leader (the best performer among all workers). The multi-leader setting
is well-aligned with current hardware architecture, where local workers forming
a group lie within a single computational node and different groups correspond
to different nodes. For training convolutional neural networks, we empirically
demonstrate that our approach compares favorably to state-of-the-art baselines.

1

Introduction

As deep learning models and data sets grow in size, it becomes increasingly helpful to parallelize
their training over a distributed computational environment. These models lie at the core of many
modern machine-learning-based systems for image recognition [2], speech recognition [3], natural
language processing [4], and more. This paper focuses on the parallelization of the data, not the
model, and considers collective communication scheme [5] that is most commonly used nowadays.
A typical approach to data parallelization in deep learning [6, 7] uses multiple workers that run
variants of SGD [8] on different data batches. Therefore, the effective batch size is increased by the
number of workers. Communication ensures that all models are synchronized and critically relies
on a scheme where each worker broadcasts its parameter gradients to all the remaining workers.
*,1: Equal contribution. Algorithm development and implementation on deep models.
*,2: Equal contribution. Theoretical analysis and implementation on matrix completion.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

