Online EXP3 Learning in Adversarial Bandits with
Delayed Feedback

Ilai Bistritz1 , Zhengyuan Zhou23 , Xi Chen2 , Nicholas Bambos1 , Jose Blanchet1
1
Stanford University
2
New York University, Stern School of Business
3
IBM Research
{bistritz,bambos,jose.blanchet}@stanford.edu, {zzhou,xchen3}@stern.nyu.edu

Abstract
Consider a player that in each of T rounds chooses one of K arms. An adversary chooses the cost of each arm in a bounded interval, and a sequence
of feedback delays {dt } that are unknown to the player. After picking arm
at at round t, the player receives the cost of playing this arm dt rounds
later. In cases where t + dt > T , this feedback is simply missing. We
prove that the EXP3 algorithm
r (that uses the delayedfeedback upon its arPT
rival) achieves a regret of O
ln K KT + t=1 dt . For the case where
PT
t=1 dt and T are unknown, we propose a novel doubling trick for online
learning
delays and prove that this adaptive EXP3 achieves a regret of
r with


PT
ln K K 2 T + t=1 dt . We then consider a two player zero-sum game
O
where players experience asynchronous delays. We show that even when the delays are large enough such that players no longer enjoy the “no-regret property”,
(e.g., where dt = O (t log t)) the ergodic average of the strategy profile still converges to the set of Nash equilibria of the game. The result is made possible by
choosing an adaptive step size ηt that is not summable but is square summable,
and proving a “weighted regret bound” for this general case.

1

Introduction

Consider an agent that makes T sequential decisions from a set of K options (i.e., arms), where each
decision incurs some cost. The cost sequences are chosen by an adversary that knows the agent’s
strategy. The agent’s goal is to minimize this cost over time. In the full information case the agent
gets to know the cost of all arms after choosing a single arm. A more challenging case is the bandit
feedback one, where the agent only observes the cost of the chosen arm. In this paper, we consider
the bandit feedback case. The question of what the agent learns about the costs (i.e., full information
or bandit) naturally influences the best performance the agent can guarantee. Another fundamental
question is when the agent gets to know the cost.
An online learning scenario with no delays means that the agent always knows how beneficial all
the past actions were when making the current decision. This is rarely the case in practice, where
many decisions have to be made before all the feedback from past choices is received. Determining
the feedback in practice is not always straightforward and might involve some computations and estimations. Furthermore, the time it takes to receive the feedback varies between different decisions
and times. All of these effects are accentuated when an adversary has control over the feedback
mechanism. Following this reasoning, online learning with delayed feedback has attracted consid33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

