Generalization Bounds of Stochastic Gradient
Descent for Wide and Deep Neural Networks

Yuan Cao
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
yuancao@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
CA 90095, USA
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the training and generalization of deep neural networks (DNNs) in the
over-parameterized regime, where the network width (i.e., number of hidden nodes
per layer) is much larger than the number of training data points. We show that, the
expected 0-1 loss of a wide enough ReLU network trained with stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) and random initialization can be bounded by the training loss of
a random feature model induced by the network gradient at initialization, which
we call a neural tangent random feature (NTRF) model. For data distributions
that can be classified by NTRF model with sufficiently small error, our result
r ´1{2 q that is independent
yields a generalization error bound in the order of Opn
of the network width. Our result is more general and sharper than many existing
generalization error bounds for over-parameterized neural networks. In addition,
we establish a strong connection between our generalization error bound and the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) proposed in recent work.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved great success in a wide range of applications including image processing
[20], natural language processing [17] and reinforcement learning [34]. Most of the deep neural
networks used in practice are highly over-parameterized, such that the number of parameters is much
larger than the number of training data. One of the mysteries in deep learning is that, even in an
over-parameterized regime, neural networks trained with stochastic gradient descent can still give
small test error and do not overfit. In fact, a famous empirical study by Zhang et al. [38] shows the
following phenomena:
• Even if one replaces the real labels of a training data set with purely random labels, an overparameterized neural network can still fit the training data perfectly. However since the labels are
independent of the input, the resulting neural network does not generalize to the test dataset.
• If the same over-parameterized network is trained with real labels, it not only achieves small
training loss, but also generalizes well to the test dataset.
While a series of recent work has theoretically shown that a sufficiently over-parameterized (i.e.,
sufficiently wide) neural network can fit random labels [12, 2, 11, 39], the reason why it can generalize
well when trained with real labels is less understood. Existing generalization bounds for deep neural
networks [29, 6, 27, 15, 13, 5, 24, 35, 28] based on uniform convergence usually cannot provide
non-vacuous bounds [21, 13] in the over-parameterized regime. In fact, the empirical observation by
Zhang et al. [38] indicates that in order to understand deep learning, it is important to distinguish the
true data labels from random labels when studying generalization. In other words, it is essential to
quantify the “classifiability” of the underlying data distribution, i.e., how difficult it can be classified.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

