Teaching Multiple Concepts to a Forgetful Learner

Anette Hunziker† Yuxin Chen¶ Oisin Mac Aodha§ Manuel Gomez Rodriguez*
Andreas Krause‡ Pietro Perona? Yisong Yue? Adish Singla*
†

University of Zurich, anette.hunziker@gmail.com,
University of Chicago, chenyuxin@uchicago.edu,
§
University of Edinburgh, oisin.macaodha@ed.ac.uk,
‡
ETH Zurich, krausea@ethz.ch,
?
Caltech, {perona, yyue}@caltech.edu,
*
MPI-SWS, {manuelgr, adishs}@mpi-sws.org
¶

Abstract
How can we help a forgetful learner learn multiple concepts within a limited time
frame? While there have been extensive studies in designing optimal schedules for
teaching a single concept given a learner’s memory model, existing approaches for
teaching multiple concepts are typically based on heuristic scheduling techniques
without theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we look at the problem from the
perspective of discrete optimization and introduce a novel algorithmic framework
for teaching multiple concepts with strong performance guarantees. Our framework
is both generic, allowing the design of teaching schedules for different memory
models, and also interactive, allowing the teacher to adapt the schedule to the
underlying forgetting mechanisms of the learner. Furthermore, for a well-known
memory model, we are able to identify a regime of model parameters where our
framework is guaranteed to achieve high performance. We perform extensive evaluations using simulations along with real user studies in two concrete applications:
(i) an educational app for online vocabulary teaching; and (ii) an app for teaching
novices how to recognize animal species from images. Our results demonstrate the
effectiveness of our algorithm compared to popular heuristic approaches.

1

Introduction

In many real-world educational applications, human learners often intend to learn more than one
concept. For example, in a language learning scenario, a learner aims to memorize many vocabulary
words from a foreign language. In citizen science projects such as eBird [34] and iNaturalist [38],
the goal of a learner is to recognize multiple animal species from a given geographic region. As the
number of concepts increases, the learning problem can become very challenging due to the learner’s
limited memory and propensity to forget. It has been well established in the psychology literature that
in the context of human learning, the knowledge of a learner decays rapidly without reconsolidation
[7]. Somewhat analogously, in the sequential machine learning setting, modern machine learning
methods, such as artificial neural networks, can be drastically disrupted when presented with new
information from different domains, which leads to catastrophic interference and forgetting [19, 14].
Therefore, to retain long-term memory (for both human and machine learners), it is crucial to devise
teaching strategies that adapt to the underlying forgetting mechanisms of the learner.
Teaching forgetful learners requires repetition. Properly scheduled repetitions and reconsolidations of
previous knowledge have proven effective for a wide variety of real-world learning tasks, including
piano [30], surgery [39, 33], video games [29], and vocabulary learning [4], among others. For many
of the above applications, it has been shown that by carefully designing the scheduling policy, one can
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

