Recovering Bandits

Ciara Pike-Burke∗
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona, Spain
c.pikeburke@gmail.com

Steffen Grünewälder
Lancaster University
Lancaster, UK
s.grunewalder@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the recovering bandits problem, a variant of the stochastic multi-armed
bandit problem where the expected reward of each arm varies according to some
unknown function of the time since the arm was last played. While being a natural
extension of the classical bandit problem that arises in many real-world settings,
this variation is accompanied by significant difficulties. In particular, methods
need to plan ahead and estimate many more quantities than in the classical bandit
setting. In this work, we explore the use of Gaussian processes to tackle the
estimation and planing problem. We also discuss different regret definitions that let
us quantify the performance of the methods. To improve computational efficiency
of the methods, we provide an optimistic planning approximation. We complement
these discussions with regret bounds and empirical studies.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit problem [2, 29] is a sequential decision making problem, where, in each
round t, we play an arm Jt and receive a reward Yt,Jt generated from the unknown reward distribution
of the arm. The aim is to maximize the total reward over T rounds. Bandit algorithms have become
ubiquitous in many settings such as web advertising and product recommendation. Consider, for
example, suggesting items to a user on an internet shopping platform. This is modeled as a bandit
problem where each product (or group of products) is an arm. Over time, the bandit algorithm will
learn to suggest only good products. In particular, once the algorithm learns that a product (eg. a
television) has high reward, it will continue to suggest it. However, if the user buys a television, the
benefit of continuing to show it immediately diminishes, but may increase again as the television
reaches the end of its lifetime. To improve customer experience (and profit), it would be beneficial for
the recommendation algorithm to learn not to recommend the same product again immediately, but
to wait an appropriate amount of time until the reward from that product has ‘recovered’. Similarly,
in film and TV recommendation, a user may wish to wait before re-watching their favorite film,
or conversely, may want to continue watching a series but will lose interest in it if they haven’t
seen it recently. It would be advantageous for the recommendation algorithm to learn the different
reward dynamics and suggest content based on the time since it was last seen. The recovering bandits
framework presented here extends the stochastic bandit problem to capture these phenomena.
In the recovering bandits problem, the expected reward of each arm is given by an unknown function
of the number of rounds since it was last played. In particular, for each arm j, there is a function
fj (z) that specifies the expected reward from playing arm j when it has not been played for z rounds.
We take a Bayesian approach and assume that the fj ’s are sampled from a Gaussian process (GP)
(see Figure 1a). Using GPs allows us to capture a wide variety of functions and deal appropriately
with uncertainty. For any round t, let Zj,t be the number of rounds since arm j was last played. This
changes for both the played arm (it resets to 0) and also for the unplayed arms (it increases by 1) in
∗

This work was carried out while CPB was a PhD student at STOR-i, Lancaster University, UK.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

