Layer-Dependent Importance Sampling for Training
Deep and Large Graph Convolutional Networks

Difan Zou∗, Ziniu Hu∗ , Yewen Wang, Song Jiang, Yizhou Sun, Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095
{knowzou,bull,wyw10804,songjiang,yzsun,qgu}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have recently received wide attentions, due
to their successful applications in different graph tasks and different domains. Training GCNs for a large graph, however, is still a challenge. Original full-batch GCN
training requires calculating the representation of all the nodes in the graph per
GCN layer, which brings in high computation and memory costs. To alleviate this
issue, several sampling-based methods have been proposed to train GCNs on a subset of nodes. Among them, the node-wise neighbor-sampling method recursively
samples a fixed number of neighbor nodes, and thus its computation cost suffers
from exponential growing neighbor size; while the layer-wise importance-sampling
method discards the neighbor-dependent constraints, and thus the nodes sampled
across layer suffer from sparse connection problem. To deal with the above two
problems, we propose a new effective sampling algorithm called LAyer-Dependent
ImportancE Sampling (LADIES) 2 . Based on the sampled nodes in the upper layer,
LADIES selects their neighborhood nodes, constructs a bipartite subgraph and
computes the importance probability accordingly. Then, it samples a fixed number
of nodes by the calculated probability, and recursively conducts such procedure
per layer to construct the whole computation graph. We prove theoretically and
experimentally, that our proposed sampling algorithm outperforms the previous
sampling methods in terms of both time and memory costs. Furthermore, LADIES
is shown to have better generalization accuracy than original full-batch GCN, due
to its stochastic nature.

1

Introduction

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) recently proposed by Kipf et al. [12] adopt the concept of
convolution filter into graph domain [2, 6–8]. For a given node, a GCN layer aggregates the embeddings of its neighbors from the previous layer, followed by a non-linear transformation, to obtain an
updated contextualized node representation. Similar to the convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
[13] in the computer vision domain, by stacking multiple GCN layers, each node representation
can utilize a wide receptive field from both its immediate and distant neighbors, which intuitively
increases the model capacity.
Despite the success of GCNs in many graph-related applications [12, 17, 15], training a deep GCN
for large-scale graphs remains a big challenge. Unlike tokens in a paragraph or pixels in an image,
which normally have limited length or size, graph data in practice can be extremely large. For
example, Facebook social network in 2019 contains 2.7 billion users3 . Such a large-scale graph is
impossible to be handled using full-batch GCN training, which takes all the nodes into one batch
to update parameters. However, conducting mini-batch GCN training is non-trivial, as the nodes
∗

equal contribution
codes are avaiable at https://github.com/acbull/LADIES
3
https://zephoria.com/top-15-valuable-facebook-statistics/

2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

