Learning Data Manipulation for Augmentation and
Weighting

Zhiting Hu1,2∗, Bowen Tan1∗ , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 , Tom Mitchell1 , Eric P. Xing1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Petuum Inc.
{zhitingh,btan2,rsalakhu,tom.mitchell}@cs.cmu.edu, eric.xing@petuum.com

Abstract
Manipulating data, such as weighting data examples or augmenting with new
instances, has been increasingly used to improve model training. Previous work
has studied various rule- or learning-based approaches designed for specific types
of data manipulation. In this work, we propose a new method that supports learning
different manipulation schemes with the same gradient-based algorithm. Our
approach builds upon a recent connection of supervised learning and reinforcement
learning (RL), and adapts an off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm from RL for
joint data manipulation learning and model training. Different parameterization
of the “data reward” function instantiates different manipulation schemes. We
showcase data augmentation that learns a text transformation network, and data
weighting that dynamically adapts the data sample importance. Experiments show
the resulting algorithms significantly improve the image and text classification
performance in low data regime and class-imbalance problems.

1

Introduction

The performance of machines often crucially depend on the amount and quality of the data used for
training. It has become increasingly ubiquitous to manipulate data to improve learning, especially in
low data regime or in presence of low-quality datasets (e.g., imbalanced labels). For example, data
augmentation applies label-preserving transformations on original data points to expand the data size;
data weighting assigns an importance weight to each instance to adapt its effect on learning; and data
synthesis generates entire artificial examples. Different types of manipulation can be suitable for
different application settings.
Common data manipulation methods are usually designed manually, e.g., augmenting by flipping
an image or replacing a word with synonyms, and weighting with inverse class frequency or loss
values [10, 32]. Recent work has studied automated approaches, such as learning the composition of
augmentation operators with reinforcement learning [38, 5], deriving sample weights adaptively from
a validation set via meta learning [39], or learning a weighting network by inducing a curriculum [21].
These learning-based approaches have alleviated the engineering burden and produced impressive
results. However, the algorithms are usually designed specifically for certain types of manipulation
(e.g., either augmentation or weighting) and thus have limited application scope in practice.
In this work, we propose a new approach that enables learning for different manipulation schemes
with the same single algorithm. Our approach draws inspiration from the recent work [46] that
shows equivalence between the data in supervised learning and the reward function in reinforcement
learning. We thus adapt an off-the-shelf reward learning algorithm [52] to the supervised setting
for automated data manipulation. The marriage of the two paradigms results in a simple yet general
algorithm, where various manipulation schemes are reduced to different parameterization of the
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

