On Human-Aligned Risk Minimization
Liu Leqi
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
leqil@cs.cmu.edu

Adarsh Prasad
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
adarshp@cs.cmu.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon Universit
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The statistical decision theoretic foundations of modern machine learning have
largely focused on the minimization of the expectation of some loss function for
a given task. However, seminal results in behavioral economics have shown that
human decision-making is based on different risk measures than the expectation of
any given loss function. In this paper, we pose the following simple question: in
contrast to minimizing expected loss, could we minimize a better human-aligned
risk measure? While this might not seem natural at ﬁrst glance, we analyze the
properties of such a revised risk measure, and surprisingly show that it might also
better align with additional desiderata like fairness that have attracted considerable
recent attention. We focus in particular on a class of human-aligned risk measures
inspired by cumulative prospect theory. We empirically study these risk measures,
and demonstrate their improved performance on desiderata such as fairness, in
contrast to the traditional workhorse of expected loss minimization.

1

Introduction

The decision-theoretic foundations of modern machine learning models have largely focused on
estimating model parameters that minimize the expectation of some loss function. This ensures that
the resulting model have high average case performance, which loosely is what is meant by good
generalization performance. However, as ML models are increasingly deployed in broader societal
settings, and in particular, to assist humans in decision-making, it is clear that humans want models
to have not just good average performance but also properties like fairness. Due to the importance of
these additional desiderata, there have been a burgeoning interest in capturing these properties via
appropriate constraints and modiﬁcations of the classical objective of expected loss [8, 12, 18, 27].
In this work, we posit a very natural if simple solution to addressing these varied desiderata that are
driven in large part by human considerations. Speciﬁcally, we suggest that in contrast to using the
standard workhorse of expected loss, we draw from theories of human cognition in psychology and
behavioral economics, to consider a “human-aligned” risk instead.
Alternatives to expected loss based risk measures have a long history in decision-making [16], with
earlier efforts focusing on percentile risk criteria [11]. In machine learning, instead of minimizing
expected loss, various risk measures have been considered in different settings. In risk sensitive
reinforcement learning, conditional value-at-risk (CVaR), a percentile risk measure that quantiﬁes the
tail performance of a model, has been connected to robustness to modeling errors [5, 21]. Recently,
human-aligned risk measures have also been explored in bandit [14] and reinforcement learning [23],
where the goal of the agent is to produce long term returns aligned with the preferences of one or
more humans.
Contributions. In this work, we introduce a novel notion of human risk minimization (Section 3),
by bringing ideas from cumulative prospect theory (Section 2) into supervised learning. We explore
various salient characteristics of our objective such as diminishing sensitivity, decision-making
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

