SMILe : Scalable Meta Inverse Reinforcement
Learning through Context-Conditional Policies

Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
kamyar@cs.toronto.edu

Shixiang Gu
Google Brain
shanegu@google.com

Richard Zemel
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
zemel@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Imitation Learning (IL) has been successfully applied to complex sequential
decision-making problems where standard Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms fail. A number of recent methods extend IL to few-shot learning scenarios,
where a meta-trained policy learns to quickly master new tasks using limited
demonstrations. However, although Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) often
outperforms Behavioral Cloning (BC) in terms of imitation quality, most of these
approaches build on BC due to its simple optimization objective. In this work, we
propose SMILe, a scalable framework for Meta Inverse Reinforcement Learning
(Meta-IRL) based on maximum entropy IRL, which can learn high-quality policies
from few demonstrations. We examine the efficacy of our method on a variety
of high-dimensional simulated continuous control tasks and observe that SMILe
significantly outperforms Meta-BC. Furthermore, we observe that SMILe performs
comparably or outperforms Meta-DAgger, while being applicable in the state-only
setting and not requiring online experts. To our knowledge, our approach is the
first efficient method for Meta-IRL that scales to the function approximator setting. For datasets and reproducing results please refer to https://github.com/
KamyarGh/rl_swiss/blob/master/reproducing/smile_paper.md.

1

Introduction

Modern advances in reinforcement learning aim to alleviate the need for hand-engineered decisionmaking and control algorithms by designing general purpose methods that learn to optimize provided
reward functions. In many cases however, it is either too challenging to optimize a given reward
(e.g. due to sparsity of signal), or it is simply impossible to design a reward function that captures
the intricate details of desired outcomes. One approach to overcoming such hurdles is Imitation
Learning (IL) (also known as Learning from Demonstrations (LfD)) [29, 28, 21], where algorithms
are provided with expert demonstrations of how to accomplish desired tasks.
In practical applications such as robotics we are interested in learning policies for accomplishing a
variety of tasks with very few demonstrations. As a result, a number of recent works study IL in the
context of few-shot or meta learning [3, 7, 35, 33]. By leveraging the shared structure among tasks,
these approaches can learn a generic policy that adapts quickly to related new tasks using small sets
of new demonstrations.
Despite the importance and popularity of Meta-IL, existing approaches [3, 7, 35] mostly rely on
Behavioral Cloning (BC) [28], where learning from demonstrations is treated as a supervised learning
problem and policies are trained to regress expert actions from a dataset of expert demonstrations.
On the other hand, much less work explores meta learning through the lens of Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL) [21, 1], whose aim is to infer the reward function of the expert, and subsequently train
a policy to optimize this reward. In single-task benchmarks for continuous control [2], recent IRL
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

