Robust Multi-agent Counterfactual Prediction

Alexander Peysakhovich∗
Facebook AI Research

Christian Kroer∗
Facebook Core Data Science

Adam Lerer∗
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We consider the problem of using logged data to make predictions about what
would happen if we changed the ‘rules of the game’ in a multi-agent system. This
task is difficult because in many cases we observe actions individuals take but
not their private information or their full reward functions. In addition, agents are
strategic, so when the rules change, they will also change their actions. Existing
methods (e.g. structural estimation, inverse reinforcement learning) assume that
agents’ behavior comes from optimizing some utility or that the system is in
equilibrium. They make counterfactual predictions by using observed actions
to learn the underlying utility function (a.k.a. type) and then solving for the
equilibrium of the counterfactual environment. This approach imposes heavy
assumptions such as the rationality of the agents being observed and a correct
model of the environment and agents’ utility functions. We propose a method
for analyzing the sensitivity of counterfactual conclusions to violations of these
assumptions, which we call robust multi-agent counterfactual prediction (RMAC).
We provide a first-order method for computing RMAC bounds. We apply RMAC to
classic environments in market design: auctions, school choice, and social choice.

1

Introduction

Constructing rules that lead optimizing agents to good collective outcomes is the goal of the field
of mechanism design (Roth and Peranson, 1999; Roth et al., 2005; Abdulkadiroğlu et al., 2005;
Klemperer, 2002; Roth, 2002; Porter et al., 2003). Good mechanism design is particularly important
for businesses which make their livelihoods as platforms (e.g. internet ad auctions, ride sharing,
dating sites). A key challenge for designers in practice is to observe an existing set of rules at work
and make a counterfactual statement about how outcomes would change if the rules changed (Bottou
et al., 2013; Athey, 2015).
The multi-agent counterfactual question is difficult for two reasons. First, participants are strategic.
An agent’s optimal action can change due to changes in the rules, and often, can change when other
agents change what they are doing. Second, agents have private information that is not known to the
designer so even knowledge of the rules, and ability to compute optimal actions, is insufficient to
estimate counterfactual outcomes. The analysis of online ad auctions provides a good example: if we
observe data from a series of first-price sealed bid auctions and wanted to predict what would happen
to revenue if we changed the auction format to second price with a reserve we would need to account
for how agent behavior would change in response to these new incentives.
A common class of approaches to this question assume that observed actions are coming from a
multi-agent system where all agents are optimizing some latent reward functions. In other words, that
the system is in some form of Nash equilibrium. Further, they assume that once changes are made,
the system will again equilibriate. Given these two assumptions, counterfactual prediction becomes a
question of how equilibria change as the mechanism changes. Such assumptions are typical in the
∗

Equal contribution, author order has been randomized.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

