Hyperbolic Graph Neural Networks

Qi Liu∗, Maximilian Nickel and Douwe Kiela
Facebook AI Research
{qiliu,maxn,dkiela}@fb.com

Abstract
Learning from graph-structured data is an important task in machine learning and
artificial intelligence, for which Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown great
promise. Motivated by recent advances in geometric representation learning, we
propose a novel GNN architecture for learning representations on Riemannian
manifolds with differentiable exponential and logarithmic maps. We develop a
scalable algorithm for modeling the structural properties of graphs, comparing
Euclidean and hyperbolic geometry. In our experiments, we show that hyperbolic
GNNs can lead to substantial improvements on various benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of supervised learning on entire graphs. Neural methods have been applied
with great success to (semi) supervised node and edge classification [26, 51]. They have also shown
promise for the classification of graphs based on their structural properties [e.g., 18]. By being
invariant to node and edge permutations [3], GNNs can exploit symmetries in graph-structured data,
which makes them well-suited for a wide range of problems, ranging from quantum chemistry [18] to
modelling social and interaction graphs [50].
In this work, we are concerned with the representational geometry of GNNs. Results in network
science have shown that hyperbolic geometry in particular is well-suited for modeling complex
networks. Typical properties such as heterogeneous degree distributions and strong clustering
can often be explained by assuming an underlying hierarchy which is well captured in hyperbolic
space [28, 35]. These insights led, for instance, to hyperbolic geometric graph models, which allow
for the generation of random graphs with real-world properties by sampling nodes uniformly in
hyperbolic space [1]. Moreover, it has recently been shown that hyperbolic geometry lends itself
particularly well for learning hierarchical representations of symbolic data and can lead to substantial
gains in representational efficiency and generalization performance [32].
Motivated by these results, we examine if graph neural networks may be equipped with geometrically
appropriate inductive biases for capturing structural properties, e.g., information about which nodes
are highly connected (and hence more central) or the overall degree distribution in a graph. For this
purpose, we extend graph neural networks to operate on Riemannian manifolds with differentiable
exponential and logarithmic maps. This allows us to investigate non-Euclidean geometries within a
general framework for supervised learning on graphs – independently of the underlying space and
its curvature. Here, we compare standard graph convolutional networks [26] that work in Euclidean
space with different hyperbolic graph neural networks (HGNNs): one that operates on the Poincaré
ball as in [32] and one that operates on the Lorentz model of hyperbolic geometry as in [33]. We
focus specifically on the ability of hyperbolic graph neural networks to capture structural properties.
Our contributions are as follows: we generalize graph neural networks to be manifold-agnostic, and
show that hyperbolic graph neural networks can provide substantial improvements for full-graph
∗

Work done as an AI Resident.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

