Defending Against Neural Fake News
Rowan Zellers , Ari Holtzman , Hannah Rashkin , Yonatan Bisk
Ali Farhadi~ , Franziska Roesner , Yejin Choi~

Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
~
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
https://rowanzellers.com/grover

Abstract
Recent progress in natural language generation has raised dual-use concerns. While
applications like summarization and translation are positive, the underlying technology also might enable adversaries to generate neural fake news: targeted propaganda that closely mimics the style of real news.
Modern computer security relies on careful threat modeling: identifying potential
threats and vulnerabilities from an adversary’s point of view, and exploring potential
mitigations to these threats. Likewise, developing robust defenses against neural
fake news requires us first to carefully investigate and characterize the risks of these
models. We thus present a model for controllable text generation called Grover.
Given a headline like ‘Link Found Between Vaccines and Autism,’ Grover can
generate the rest of the article; humans find these generations to be more trustworthy
than human-written disinformation.
Developing robust verification techniques against generators like Grover is critical.
We find that best current discriminators can classify neural fake news from real,
human-written, news with 73% accuracy, assuming access to a moderate level of
training data. Counterintuitively, the best defense against Grover turns out to be
Grover itself, with 92% accuracy, demonstrating the importance of public release
of strong generators. We investigate these results further, showing that exposure
bias – and sampling strategies that alleviate its e↵ects – both leave artifacts that
similar discriminators can pick up on. We conclude by discussing ethical issues
regarding the technology, and plan to release Grover publicly, helping pave the
way for better detection of neural fake news.

1

Introduction

Online fake news – news designed to intentionally deceive – has recently emerged as a major
societal problem. Malicious actors spread fallacious viral stories in order to gain advertising revenue,
influence opinions, and even tip elections (Faris et al., 2017; Wardle and Derakhshan, 2017). As such,
countering the spread of disinformation online presents an urgent technical and political issue.
To the best of our knowledge, most disinformation online today is manually written (Vargo et al., 2018).
However, as progress continues in natural language generation, malicious actors will increasingly be
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
The Newest York Times

SCIENCE

SUBSCRIBE NOW

LOG IN

Link Found Between Vaccines and Autism

e
k
a
f

By Paul Waldman

News
Verification

May 29, 2019

Those who have been vaccinated against measles have a more than
5-fold higher chance of developing autism, researchers at the
University of California San Diego School of Medicine and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report today in the
Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health.
(continued)

Fake
news!

Fake News
Generation

Figure 1: In this paper, we explore Grover, a model which can detect and generate neural fake news.
Humans find the articles difficult to distinguish from “real news” without high levels of scrutiny.

