Spherical Text Embedding
Yu Meng1 , Jiaxin Huang1 , Guangyuan Wang1 , Chao Zhang2 ,
Honglei Zhuang1⇤, Lance Kaplan3 , Jiawei Han1
1
Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
U.S. Army Research Laboratory
1
{yumeng5,jiaxinh3,gwang10,hzhuang3,hanj}@illinois.edu
2
chaozhang@gatech.edu 3 lance.m.kaplan.civ@mail.mil

Abstract
Unsupervised text embedding has shown great power in a wide range of NLP tasks.
While text embeddings are typically learned in the Euclidean space, directional
similarity is often more effective in tasks such as word similarity and document
clustering, which creates a gap between the training stage and usage stage of text
embedding. To close this gap, we propose a spherical generative model based
on which unsupervised word and paragraph embeddings are jointly learned. To
learn text embeddings in the spherical space, we develop an efficient optimization
algorithm with convergence guarantee based on Riemannian optimization. Our
model enjoys high efficiency and achieves state-of-the-art performances on various
text embedding tasks including word similarity and document clustering.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed enormous success of unsupervised text embedding techniques [29,
30, 33] in various natural language processing and text mining tasks. Such techniques capture
the semantics of textual units (e.g., words, paragraphs) via learning low-dimensional distributed
representations in an unsupervised way, which can be either directly used as feature representations
or further fine-tuned with training data from downstream supervised tasks. Notably, the popular
Word2Vec method [29, 30] learns word embeddings in the Euclidean space, by modeling local word
co-occurrences in the corpus. This strategy has later been extended to obtain embeddings of other
textual units such as sentences [2, 19] and paragraphs [22].
Despite the success of unsupervised text embedding techniques, an intriguing gap exists between the
training procedure and the practical usages of the learned embeddings. While the embeddings are
learned in the Euclidean space, it is often the directional similarity between word vectors that captures
word semantics more effectively. Across a wide range of word similarity and document clustering
tasks [3, 16, 23], it is common practice to either use cosine similarity as the similarity metric or first
normalize word and document vectors before computing textual similarities. Current procedures of
training text embeddings in the Euclidean space and using their similarities in the spherical space
is clearly suboptimal. After projecting the embedding from Euclidean space to spherical space, the
optimal solution to the loss function in the original space may not remain optimal in the new space.
In this work, we propose a method that learns spherical text embeddings in an unsupervised way. In
contrast to existing techniques that learn text embeddings in the Euclidean space and use normalization
as a post-processing step, we directly learn text embeddings in a spherical space by imposing unitnorm constraints on embeddings. Specifically, we define a two-step generative model on the surface
of a unit sphere: A word is first generated according to the semantics of the paragraph, and then
⇤

Currently at Google Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

