Low-Rank Bandit Methods for High-Dimensional
Dynamic Pricing
Jonas Mueller
MIT CSAIL
jonasmueller@csail.mit.edu

Vasilis Syrgkanis
Microsoft Research
vasy@microsoft.com

Matt Taddy
Chicago Booth
taddy@chicagobooth.edu

Abstract
We consider dynamic pricing with many products under an evolving but lowdimensional demand model. Assuming the temporal variation in cross-elasticities
exhibits low-rank structure based on fixed (latent) features of the products, we
show that the revenue maximization problem reduces to an online bandit convex
optimization with side information given by the observed demands. We design
dynamic pricing algorithms whose revenue approaches that of the best fixed price
vector in hindsight, at a rate that only depends on the intrinsic rank of the demand
model and not the number of products. Our approach applies a bandit convex
optimization algorithm in a projected low-dimensional space spanned by the latent
product features, while simultaneously learning this span via online singular value
decomposition of a carefully-crafted matrix containing the observed demands.

1

Introduction

In this work, we consider a seller offering N products, where N is large, and the pricing of certain
products may influence the demand for others in unknown ways. We let pt P RN denote the vector
of selected prices at which each product is sold during time period t P t1, . . . , T u, which results
in total demands for the products over this period represented in the vector qt P RN . Note that qt
represents a (noisy) evaluation of the aggregate demand curve at the chosen prices pt , but we never
observe the counterfactual demand that would have resulted had we selected a different price-point.
This is referred to as bandit feedback in the online optimization literature [Dani et al., 2007]. Our
goal is find a setting of the prices for each time period to maximize the total revenue of the seller
(over all rounds). This is equivalent to minimizing the negative revenue over time:
Rpp1 , . . . , pT q “

T
ÿ

t“1

Rt ppt q where Rt ppt q “ ´xqt , pt y

We can alternatively maximize total profits instead of revenue by simply redefining pt as the difference
between the product-prices and the cost of each product-unit. In practice, the seller can only consider
prices within some constraint set S Ä RN , which we assume is convex throughout. To find the
optimal prices, we introduce the following linear model of the aggregate demands, which is allowed
to change over time in a nonstationary fashion:
q t “ c t ´ Bt p t ` ✏ t

(1)

Here, ct P RN denotes the baseline demand for each product in round t. Bt P RN ˆN is an
asymmetric matrix of demand elasticities which represents how changing the price of one product
may affect the demand of not only this product, but also demand for other products as well. By
conventional economic wisdom, Bt will have the largest entries along its diagonal because demand
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

