Covariate-Powered Empirical Bayes Estimation
Stefan Wager
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
swager@stanford.edu

Nikolaos Ignatiadis
Statistics Department
Stanford University
ignat@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study methods for simultaneous analysis of many noisy experiments in the
presence of rich covariate information. The goal of the analyst is to optimally
estimate the true effect underlying each experiment. Both the noisy experimental
results and the auxiliary covariates are useful for this purpose, but neither data
source on its own captures all the information available to the analyst. In this
paper, we propose a flexible plug-in empirical Bayes estimator that synthesizes
both sources of information and may leverage any black-box predictive model.
We show that our approach is within a constant factor of minimax for a simple
data-generating model. Furthermore, we establish robust convergence guarantees
for our method that hold under considerable generality, and exhibit promising
empirical performance on both real and simulated data.

1

Introduction

It is nowadays common for a geneticist to simultaneously study the association of thousands of
different genes with a disease [Efron et al., 2001, Lönnstedt and Speed, 2002, Love et al., 2014],
for a technology firm to have records from thousands of randomized experiments [McMahan et al.,
2013], or for a social scientist to examine data from hundreds of different regions at once [Abadie
and Kasy, 2018]. In all of these settings, we are fundamentally interested in learning something about
each sample (i.e., gene, experimental intervention, etc.) on its own; however, the abundance of data
on other samples can give us useful context with which to interpret our measurements about each
individual sample [Efron, 2010, Robbins, 1964]. In this paper, we propose a method for simultaneous
analysis of many noisy experiments, and show that it is able to exploit rich covariate information for
improved power by leveraging existing machine learning tools geared towards a basic prediction task.
As a motivation for our statistical setting, suppose we have access to a dataset of movie reviews
where each movie i = 1, ..., n has an average rating Zi over a limited number of viewers; we also
have access to a number of covariates Xi about the movie (e.g., genre, length, cast, etc.). The task is
to estimate the “true” rating µi of the movie, i.e., the average rating had the movie been reviewed
by a large number of reviewers similar to the ones who already reviewed it. A first simple approach
to estimating µi is to use its observed average rating as a point estimate, i.e., to set µ̂i = Zi . This
approach is clearly valid for movies where we have enough data for sampling noise to dissipate, e.g.,
with over 50,000 reviews in the MovieLens 20M data [Harper and Konstan, 2016], we expect the
4.2/5 rating of Pulp Fiction to be quite stable. Conversely, for movies with fewer reviews, this strategy
may be unstable: the rating 1.6/5 of Urban Justice is based on less than 20 reviews, and appears liable
to change as we collect more data. A second alternative would
 be to just rely
 on covariates: We could
learn to predict average ratings from covariates, m(x) = E Zi Xi = x , and then set µ̂i = m̂(Xi ).
This may be more appropriate than using the observed mean rating for movies with very few reviews,
but is limited in its accuracy if the covariates aren’t expressive enough to perfectly capture µi .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

