A Zero-Positive Learning Approach for
Diagnosing Software Performance Regressions

Mejbah Alam
Intel Labs

Justin Gottschlich
Intel Labs

mejbah.alam@intel.com

justin.gottschlich@intel.com

Nesime Tatbul
Intel Labs and MIT

Javier Turek
Intel Labs

tatbul@csail.mit.edu

javier.turek@intel.com

Timothy Mattson
Intel Labs

Abdullah Muzahid
Texas A&M University

timothy.g.mattson@intel.com

abdullah.muzahid@tamu.edu

Abstract
The field of machine programming (MP), the automation of the development
of software, is making notable research advances. This is, in part, due to the
emergence of a wide range of novel techniques in machine learning. In this paper,
we apply MP to the automation of software performance regression testing. A
performance regression is a software performance degradation caused by a code
change. We present AutoPerf – a novel approach to automate regression testing
that utilizes three core techniques: (i) zero-positive learning, (ii) autoencoders,
and (iii) hardware telemetry. We demonstrate AutoPerf’s generality and efficacy
against 3 types of performance regressions across 10 real performance bugs in 7
benchmark and open-source programs. On average, AutoPerf exhibits 4% profiling
overhead and accurately diagnoses more performance bugs than prior state-of-theart approaches. Thus far, AutoPerf has produced no false negatives.

1

Introduction

Machine programming (MP) is the automation of the development and maintenance of software.
Research in MP is making considerable advances, in part, due to the emergence of a wide range of
novel techniques in machine learning and formal program synthesis [11, 12, 16, 37, 43, 44, 46, 47, 52,
55, 62]. A recent review paper proposed Three Pillars of Machine Programming as a framework for
organizing research on MP [25]. These pillars are intention, invention, and adaptation.
Intention is concerned with simplifying and broadening the way a user’s ideas are expressed to
machines. Invention is the exploration of ways to automatically discover the right algorithms to
fulfill those ideas. Adaptation is the refinement of those algorithms to function correctly, efficiently,
and securely for a specific software and hardware ecosystem. In this paper, we apply MP to the
automation of software testing, with a specific emphasis on parallel program performance regressions.
Using the three pillars nomenclature, this work falls principally in the adaptation pillar.
Software performance regressions are defects that are erroneously introduced into software as it
evolves from one version to the next. While they do not impact the functional correctness of the
software, they can cause significant degradation in execution speed and resource efficiency (e.g., cache
contention). From database systems to search engines to compilers, performance regressions are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

