Think out of the “Box”: Generically-Constrained
Asynchronous Composite Optimization and Hedging
Pooria Joulani⇤
DeepMind, UK
pjoulani@google.com

András György
DeepMind, UK
agyorgy@google.com

Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind, UK
szepi@google.com

Abstract
We present two new algorithms, A SYN CADA and H EDGE H OG, for asynchronous
sparse online and stochastic optimization. A SYN CADA is, to our knowledge,
the first asynchronous stochastic optimization algorithm with finite-time datadependent convergence guarantees for generic convex constraints. In addition,
A SYN CADA: (a) allows for proximal (i.e., composite-objective) updates and
adaptive step-sizes; (b) enjoys any-time convergence guarantees without requiring
an exact global clock; and (c) when the data is sufficiently sparse, its convergence
rate for (non-)smooth, (non-)strongly-convex, and even a limited class of nonconvex objectives matches the corresponding serial rate, implying a theoretical
“linear speed-up”. The second algorithm, H EDGE H OG, is an asynchronous parallel
version of the Exponentiated Gradient (EG) algorithm for optimization over the
probability simplex (a.k.a. Hedge in online learning), and, to our knowledge, the
first asynchronous algorithm enjoying linear speed-ups under sparsity with nonSGD-style updates. Unlike previous work, A SYN CADA and H EDGE H OG and
their convergence and speed-up analyses are not limited to individual coordinatewise (i.e., “box-shaped”) constraints or smooth and strongly-convex objectives.
Underlying both results is a generic analysis framework that is of independent
interest, and further applicable to distributed and delayed feedback optimization.

1

Introduction

Many modern machine learning methods are based on iteratively optimizing a regularized objective.
Given a convex, non-empty set of feasible model parameters X ⇢ Rd , a differentiable loss function
f : Rd ! R, and a convex (possibly non-differentiable) regularizer function : Rd ! R, these
methods seek the parameter vector x⇤ 2 X that minimizes f + (assuming a minimizer exists):
x⇤ = arg min f (x) + (x) .

(1)

x2X

In particular, empirical risk minimization (ERM) methods such as (regularized) least-squares, logistic
regression, LASSO, andPsupport vector machines solve optimization problems of the form (1). In
m
1
these cases, f (x) = m
i=1 F (x, ⇠i ) is the average of the loss F (x, ⇠i ) of the model parameter x
on the given training data ⇠1 , ⇠2 , . . . , ⇠m and (x) is a norm (or a combination of norms) on Rd (e.g.,
F (x, ⇠) = log(1 + exp(x> ⇠)) and (x) = 12 kxk22 in linear logistic regression [13]).

To bring the power of modern parallel computing architectures to such optimization problems, several
papers in the past decade have studied parallel variants of the stochastic optimization algorithms
applied to these problems. Here one of the main questions is to quantify the cost of parallelization,
that is, how much extra work is needed by a parallel algorithm to achieve the same accuracy as its
serial variant. Ideally, a parallel algorithm is required to do no more work than the serial version, but
⇤

Work partially done when the author was at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

