Projected Stein Variational Newton: A Fast and
Scalable Bayesian Inference Method
in High Dimensions

Peng Chen, Keyi Wu, Joshua Chen, Thomas O’Leary-Roseberry, Omar Ghattas
Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712.
{peng, keyi, joshua, tom, omar}@oden.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a projected Stein variational Newton (pSVN) method for highdimensional Bayesian inference. To address the curse of dimensionality, we exploit
the intrinsic low-dimensional geometric structure of the posterior distribution in
the high-dimensional parameter space via its Hessian (of the log posterior) operator and perform a parallel update of the parameter samples projected into a
low-dimensional subspace by an SVN method. The subspace is adaptively constructed using the eigenvectors of the averaged Hessian at the current samples. We
demonstrate fast convergence of the proposed method, complexity independent of
the parameter and sample dimensions, and parallel scalability.

1

Introduction

Bayesian inference provides an optimal probability formulation for learning complex models from
observational or experimental data under uncertainty by updating the model parameters from their
prior distribution to a posterior distribution [30]. In Bayesian inference we typically face the task
of drawing samples from the posterior probability distribution to compute various statistics of some
given quantities of interest. However, this is often prohibitive when the posterior distribution is
high-dimensional; many conventional methods for Bayesian inference suffer from the curse of
dimensionality, i.e., computational complexity grows exponentially or convergence deteriorates with
increasing parameter dimension.
To address this curse of dimensionality, several efficient and dimension-independent methods have
been developed that exploit the intrinsic properties of the posterior distribution, such as its smoothness, sparsity, and intrinsic low-dimensionality. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods
exploiting geometry of the log-likelihood function have been developed [16, 21, 24, 12, 3], providing
more effective sampling than black-box MCMC. For example, the DILI MCMC method [12] uses
the low rank structure of the Hessian of the negative log likelihood in conjunction with operatorweighted proposals that are well-defined on function space to yield a sampler whose performance is
dimension-independent and effective at capturing information provided by the data. However, despite
these enhancements, MCMC methods remain prohibitive for problems with expensive-to-evaluate
likelihoods (i.e., involving complex models) and in high parameter dimensions. Deterministic sparse
quadratures were developed in [28, 26, 8] and shown to converge rapidly with dimension-independent
rates for smooth and sparse problems. However, the fast convergence is lost when the posterior has
significant local variations, despite enhancements with Hessian-based transformation [27, 9].
Variational inference methods reformulate the sampling problem as an optimization problem that
approximates the posterior by minimizing its Kullback–Leibler divergence with a transformed prior
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

