Global Sparse Momentum SGD for Pruning Very
Deep Neural Networks

Xiaohan Ding 1 Guiguang Ding 1 Xiangxin Zhou 2
Yuchen Guo 1, 3 Jungong Han 4 Ji Liu 5
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist);
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University;
Institute for Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
WMG Data Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
5
Kwai Seattle AI Lab, Kwai FeDA Lab, Kwai AI platform
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn
xx-zhou16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
yuchen.w.guo@gmail.com
jungonghan77@gmail.com
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep Neural Network (DNN) is powerful but computationally expensive and
memory intensive, thus impeding its practical usage on resource-constrained frontend devices. DNN pruning is an approach for deep model compression, which
aims at eliminating some parameters with tolerable performance degradation. In
this paper, we propose a novel momentum-SGD-based optimization method to
reduce the network complexity by on-the-fly pruning. Concretely, given a global
compression ratio, we categorize all the parameters into two parts at each training
iteration which are updated using different rules. In this way, we gradually zero
out the redundant parameters, as we update them using only the ordinary weight
decay but no gradients derived from the objective function. As a departure from
prior methods that require heavy human works to tune the layer-wise sparsity
ratios, prune by solving complicated non-differentiable problems or finetune the
model after pruning, our method is characterized by 1) global compression that
automatically finds the appropriate per-layer sparsity ratios; 2) end-to-end training;
3) no need for a time-consuming re-training process after pruning; and 4) superior
capability to find better winning tickets which have won the initialization lottery.

1

Introduction

The recent years have witnessed great success of Deep Neural Network (DNN) in many real-world
applications. However, today’s very deep models have been accompanied by millions of parameters,
thus making them difficult to be deployed on computationally limited devices. In this context,
DNN pruning approaches have attracted much attention, where we eliminate some connections (i.e.,
individual parameters) [21, 22, 31], or channels [32], thus the required storage space and computations
can be reduced. This paper is focused on connection pruning, but the proposed method can be easily
generalized to structured pruning (e.g., neuron-, kernel- or filter-level). In order to reach a good
trade-off between accuracy and model size, many pruning methods have been proposed, which can
be categorized into two typical paradigms. 1) Some researchers [13, 18, 21, 22, 26, 31, 32, 39, 41]
propose to prune the model by some means to reach a certain level of compression ratio, then finetune
it using ordinary SGD to restore the accuracy. 2) The other methods seek to produce sparsity in the
model through a customized learning procedure [1, 12, 33, 34, 51, 54, 56].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

