LIIR: Learning Individual Intrinsic Reward in
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yali Du∗
University College London
London, UK
yali.du@ucl.ac.uk

Lei Han∗
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
leihan.cs@gmail.com

Meng Fang
Tencent Robotics X
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
mfang@tencent.com

Tianhong Dai
Imperial College London
London, UK
tianhong.dai15@imperial.ac.uk

Ji Liu
Kwai Inc.
Seattle, U.S.A.
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre,
The University of Sydney
NSW, Australia
dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
A great challenge in cooperative decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) is generating diversified behaviors for each individual agent when receiving only a team reward. Prior studies have paid many efforts on reward shaping
or designing a centralized critic that can discriminatively credit the agents. In this
paper, we propose to merge the two directions and learn each agent an intrinsic reward function which diversely stimulates the agents at each time step. Specifically,
the intrinsic reward for a specific agent will be involved in computing a distinct
proxy critic for the agent to direct the updating of its individual policy. Meanwhile,
the parameterized intrinsic reward function will be updated towards maximizing
the expected accumulated team reward from the environment so that the objective
is consistent with the original MARL problem. The proposed method is referred to
as learning individual intrinsic reward (LIIR) in MARL. We compare LIIR with
a number of state-of-the-art MARL methods on battle games in StarCraft II. The
results demonstrate the effectiveness of LIIR, and we show LIIR can assign each
individual agent an insightful intrinsic reward per time step.

1

Introduction

Many real-world problems, such as traffic light control [1], coordination of autonomous vehicles
[2], resources management [3] and multi-player video games [4, 5], can be naturally formulated into
cooperative multi-agent systems, where the objective is to maximize the return in the perspective of a
team of agents. When the agents are manipulated with a centralized controller which could access
the joint or global state of all the agents, coordination among the agents is easier and the main effort
of the controller is usually paid on finding an effective communication scheme among the agents.
Examples include a wide range of approaches on designing effective centralized MARL architectures
[5, 6, 7, 8].
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to the first two authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

