Constrained deep neural network architecture search
for IoT devices accounting for hardware calibration

Florian Scheidegger1,2
Luca Benini1,3
Costas Bekas2
Cristiano Malossi2
1 ETH Zürich, Rämistrasse 101, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
2 IBM Research - Zürich, Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland
3 Università di Bologna, Via Zamboni 33, 40126 Bologna, Italy

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve outstanding results for challenging image classification tasks. However, the design of network topologies is a complex task, and the
research community is conducting ongoing efforts to discover top-accuracy topologies, either manually or by employing expensive architecture searches. We propose
a unique narrow-space architecture search that focuses on delivering low-cost
and rapidly executing networks that respect strict memory and time requirements
typical of Internet-of-Things (IoT) near-sensor computing platforms. Our approach
provides solutions with classification latencies below 10 ms running on a low-cost
device with 1 GB RAM and a peak performance of 5.6 GFLOPS. The narrow-space
search of floating-point models improves the accuracy on CIFAR10 of an established IoT model from 70.64% to 74.87% within the same memory constraints. We
further improve the accuracy to 82.07% by including 16-bit half types and obtain
the highest accuracy of 83.45% by extending the search with model-optimized
IEEE 754 reduced types. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical
demonstration of more than 3000 trained models that run with reduced precision
and push the Pareto optimal front by a wide margin. Within a given memory
constraint, accuracy is improved by more than 7% points for half and more than
1% points for the best individual model format.

1

Introduction

Designing an economically viable artificial intelligence system has become a formidable challenge in
view of the increasing number of published methods, data, models, newly available deep-learning
frameworks as well as the hype surrounding special-purpose hardware accelerators as they become
commercially available. The availability of large-scale datasets with known ground truths [12, 42, 13,
51, 28, 10, 33, 54, 9, 5, 34, 37] and the widespread commercial availability of higher computational
performance—usually achieved with graphic-processing units (GPUs)—has driven the current growth
of and strong interest in deep learning and the emergence of related new businesses. Smart homes
[29], smart grids [15] and smart cities [17] trigger a natural demand for the Internet of Things (IoT),
which are products designed to be low in cost and feature low energy consumption and fast reaction
times due to the inherent constraints given by final applications that typically demand autonomy
with long battery lifetimes or fast real-time operation. Experts estimate that there will be some 30
billion IoT devices in use by 2020 [35], many of which serve applications that benefit from artificial
intelligence deployment.
In this context, we propose an automatic way to design deep-learning models that satisfy user-defined
constraints specifically tailored to match typical IoT requirements, such as inference latency bounds.
Additionally, our approach is designed in a modular manner that allows future adaptations and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

