Provably Efficient Q-learning with Function
Approximation via Distribution Shift Error Checking
Oracle
Simon S. Du
Institute for Advanced Study
ssdu@ias.edu

Yuping Luo
Princeton University
yupingl@cs.princeton.edu

Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Hanrui Zhang
Duke University
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Q-learning with function approximation is one of the most popular methods in
reinforcement learning. Though the idea of using function approximation was
proposed at least 60 years ago [27], even in the simplest setup, i.e, approximating
Q-functions with linear functions, it is still an open problem how to design a
provably efficient algorithm that learns a near-optimal policy. The key challenges
are how to efficiently explore the state space and how to decide when to stop
exploring in conjunction with the function approximation scheme.
The current paper presents a provably efficient algorithm for Q-learning with linear function approximation. Under certain regularity assumptions, our algorithm,
Difference Maximization Q-learning (DMQ), combined with linear function
approximation, returns a near-optimal policy using polynomial number of trajectories. Our algorithm introduces a new notion, the Distribution Shift Error Checking
(DSEC) oracle. This oracle tests whether there exists a function in the function
class that predicts well on a distribution D1 , but predicts poorly on another distribution D2 , where D1 and D2 are distributions over states induced by two different
exploration policies. For the linear function class, this oracle is equivalent to
solving a top eigenvalue problem. We believe our algorithmic insights, especially
the DSEC oracle, are also useful in designing and analyzing reinforcement learning
algorithms with general function approximation.

1

Introduction

Q-learning is a foundational method in reinforcement learning [35] and has been successfully applied
in various domains. Q-learning aims at learning the optimal state-action value function (Q-function).
Once we have learned the Q-function, at every state, we can just greedily choose the action with the
largest Q value, which is guaranteed to be an optimal policy.
Although being a fundamental method, theoretically, we only have a good understanding of Qlearning in the tabular setting. Strehl et al. [30] and Jin et al. [18] showed with proper exploration
techniques, one can obtain a near-optimal Q-function (and so a near-optimal policy) using polynomial
number of trajectories, in terms of number of states, actions and planning horizon. While these
analyses provide valuable insights, they are of limited practical importance because the number of
states in most applications is enormous. Even worse, it has been proved that in the tabular setting, the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

