Placeto: Learning Generalizable Device Placement
Algorithms for Distributed Machine Learning
Ravichandra Addanki∗, Shaileshh Bojja Venkatakrishnan,
Shreyan Gupta, Hongzi Mao, Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{addanki, bjjvnkt, shreyang, hongzi, alizadeh}@mit.edu

Abstract
We present Placeto, a reinforcement learning (RL) approach to efficiently find device placements for distributed neural network training. Unlike prior approaches
that only find a device placement for a specific computation graph, Placeto can
learn generalizable device placement policies that can be applied to any graph.
We propose two key ideas in our approach: (1) we represent the policy as performing iterative placement improvements, rather than outputting a placement in
one shot; (2) we use graph embeddings to capture relevant information about the
structure of the computation graph, without relying on node labels for indexing.
These ideas allow Placeto to train efficiently and generalize to unseen graphs. Our
experiments show that Placeto requires up to 6.1× fewer training steps to find
placements that are on par with or better than the best placements found by prior
approaches. Moreover, Placeto is able to learn a generalizable placement policy
for any given family of graphs, which can then be used without any retraining
to predict optimized placements for unseen graphs from the same family. This
eliminates the large overhead incurred by prior RL approaches whose lack of generalizability necessitates re-training from scratch every time a new graph is to be
placed.

1

Introduction & Related Work

The computational requirements for training neural networks have steadily increased in recent years.
As a result, a growing number of applications [14, 21] use distributed training environments in which
a neural network is split across multiple GPU and CPU devices. A key challenge for distributed
training is how to split a large model across multiple heterogeneous devices to achieve the fastest
possible training speed. Today device placement is typically left to human experts, but determining
an optimal device placement can be very challenging, particularly as neural networks grow in complexity (e.g., networks with many interconnected branches) or approach device memory limits. In
shared clusters, the task is made even more challenging due to interference and variability caused
by other applications.
Motivated by these challenges, a recent line of work [13, 12, 6] has proposed an automated approach
to device placement based on reinforcement learning (RL). In this approach, a neural network policy is trained to optimize the device placement through repeated trials. For example, Mirhoseini et
al. [13] use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to process a computation graph and predict a placement for each operation. They show that the RNN, trained to minimize computation time, produces
device placements that outperform both human experts and graph partitioning heuristics such as
Scotch [18]. Subsequent work [12] improved the scalability of this approach with a hierarchical
model and explored more sophisticated policy optimization techniques [6].
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

