Stochastic Runge-Kutta Accelerates
Langevin Monte Carlo and Beyond
Xuechen Li1, 2 , Denny Wu1, 2 , Lester Mackey3 , Murat A. Erdogdu1, 2
University of Toronto1 , Vector Institute2 , Microsoft Research3
{lxuechen, dennywu, erdogdu}@cs.toronto.edu, lmackey@microsoft.com

Abstract
Sampling with Markov chain Monte Carlo methods often amounts to discretizing
some continuous-time dynamics with numerical integration. In this paper, we
establish the convergence rate of sampling algorithms obtained by discretizing
smooth Itô diffusions exhibiting fast Wasserstein-2 contraction, based on local
deviation properties of the integration scheme. In particular, we study a sampling
algorithm constructed by discretizing the overdamped Langevin diffusion with the
method of stochastic Runge-Kutta. For strongly convex potentials that are smooth
up to a certain order, its iterates converge to the target distribution in 2-Wasserstein
distance in Õ(d✏ 2/3 ) iterations. This improves upon the best-known rate for
strongly log-concave sampling based on the overdamped Langevin equation using
only the gradient oracle without adjustment. In addition, we extend our analysis of
stochastic Runge-Kutta methods to uniformly dissipative diffusions with possibly
non-convex potentials and show they achieve better rates compared to the EulerMaruyama scheme in terms of the dependence on tolerance ✏. Numerical studies
show that these algorithms lead to better stability and lower asymptotic errors.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a probability distribution is a fundamental problem that arises in machine learning,
statistics, and optimization. In many situations, the goal is to obtain samples from a target distribution
given only the unnormalized density [2, 27, 40]. A prominent approach to this problem is the method
of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), where an ergodic Markov chain is simulated so that iterates
converge exactly or approximately to the distribution of interest [43, 2].
MCMC samplers based on numerically integrating continuous-time dynamics have proven very
useful due to their ability to accommodate a stochastic gradient oracle [65]. Moreover, when used
as optimizations algorithms, these methods can deliver strong theoretical guarantees in non-convex
settings [50]. A popular example in this regime is the unadjusted Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC)
algorithm [51]. Fast mixing of LMC is inherited from exponential Wasserstein decay of the Langevin
diffusion, and numerical integration using the Euler-Maruyama scheme with a sufficiently small
step size ensures the Markov chain tracks the diffusion. Asymptotic guarantees of this algorithm are
well-studied [51, 26, 42], and non-asymptotic analyses specifying explicit constants in convergence
bounds were recently conducted [14, 11, 18, 7, 20, 9].
To the best of our knowledge, the best known rate of LMC in 2-Wasserstein distance is due to Durmus
and Moulines [18] – Õ(d✏ 1 ) iterations are required to reach ✏ accuracy to d-dimensional target
distributions with strongly convex potentials under the additional Lipschitz Hessian assumption, where
Õ hides insubstantial poly-logarithmic factors. Due to its simplicity and well-understood theoretical
properties, LMC and its derivatives have found numerous applications in statistics and machine
learning [65, 15]. However, from the numerical integration point of view, the Euler-Maruyama
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

