Modeling Expectation Violation in Intuitive Physics
with Coarse Probabilistic Object Representations

Kevin A. Smith1,2,∗, Lingjie Mei3,∗ , Shunyu Yao4,∗ , Jiajun Wu3
Elizabeth Spelke2,5 , Joshua B. Tenenbaum1,2,3 , Tomer D. Ullman2,5
1

MIT BCS, 2 Center for Brains, Minds, & Machines, 3 MIT CSAIL,
4
Princeton University, 5 Harvard Psychology

Abstract
From infancy, humans have expectations about how objects will move and interact.
Even young children expect objects not to move through one another, teleport, or
disappear. They are surprised by mismatches between physical expectations and
perceptual observations, even in unfamiliar scenes with completely novel objects.
A model that exhibits human-like understanding of physics should be similarly
surprised, and adjust its beliefs accordingly. We propose ADEPT, a model that
uses a coarse (approximate geometry) object-centric representation for dynamic
3D scene understanding. Inference integrates deep recognition networks, extended
probabilistic physical simulation, and particle filtering for forming predictions
and expectations across occlusion. We also present a new test set for measuring
violations of physical expectations, using a range of scenarios derived from developmental psychology. We systematically compare ADEPT, baseline models,
and human expectations on this test set. ADEPT outperforms standard network
architectures in discriminating physically implausible scenes, and often performs
this discrimination at the same level as people.

1

Introduction

People have a rich understanding of everyday physics that they use to predict how the future might
unfold [Battaglia et al., 2013, Smith and Vul, 2013], plan actions, and manipulate tools [Osiurak and
Badets, 2016]. This commonsense reasoning includes a set of early developing or possibly innate
expectations about the behavior of objects, which are part of ‘core knowledge’ [Spelke and Kinzler,
2007]. For example, even very young infants generally expect objects to remain coherent wholes that
follow spatially contiguous paths, and not wink in and out of existence [Baillargeon, 1987, Spelke
et al., 1992]. Intelligent machines that can interact with the physical world in a human-like way
should hold human-like physical intuitions [Lake et al., 2017].
We propose that human-like physical understanding is based on explicit object-centric representations
and their associated dynamics, similar to the idea of a Mental Game Engine [Battaglia et al., 2013,
Ullman et al., 2017]. Such object representations have constant physical properties regardless of their
perceptual appearance, an appearance that can differ greatly depending on factors such as viewpoint,
distance, and occlusion. We assume these object-based representations as given, and propose that the
main computational burden is learning how visual input is parsed into these representations.
Our work has two aims. We first aim to formalize human (especially infant) physical cognition.
But we also aim to show how this modeling of infant cognition can inspire more robust AI vision
systems that extract physical object representations from video and can detect violations of physical
expectations to use as learning signals, similar to infants [Stahl and Feigenson, 2015].
∗

Indicates equal contribution. Model code, training and testing stimuli, and data can be accessed at http:
//physadept.csail.mit.edu/
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

