A Generalized Algorithm for Multi-Objective
Reinforcement Learning and Policy Adaptation

Runzhe Yang
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
runzhey@cs.princeton.edu

Xingyuan Sun
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
xs5@cs.princeton.edu

Karthik Narasimhan
Department of Computer Science
Princeton University
karthikn@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new algorithm for multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL)
with linear preferences, with the goal of enabling few-shot adaptation to new tasks.
In MORL, the aim is to learn policies over multiple competing objectives whose
relative importance (preferences) is unknown to the agent. While this alleviates
dependence on scalar reward design, the expected return of a policy can change
significantly with varying preferences, making it challenging to learn a single
model to produce optimal policies under different preference conditions. We
propose a generalized version of the Bellman equation to learn a single parametric
representation for optimal policies over the space of all possible preferences. After
an initial learning phase, our agent can execute the optimal policy under any given
preference, or automatically infer an underlying preference with very few samples.
Experiments across four different domains demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach.1

1

Introduction

In recent years, there has been increased interest
Turn left at the
in the paradigm of multi-objective reinforcement
next intersection.
learning (MORL), which deals with learning
success 0.5
success 0.7
control policies to simultaneously optimize over
brevity 0.5
brevity 0.3
several criteria. Compared to traditional RL,
(weather)
(driving)
where the aim is to optimize for a scalar reward,
the optimal policy in a multi-objective setting Figure 1: Task-oriented dialogue policy learning is a
depends on the relative preferences among com- real-life example of unknown linear preference scenario.
peting criteria. For example, consider a virtual Users may expect either briefer dialogue or more inforassistant (Figure 1) that can communicate with mative dialogue depending on the task.
a human to perform a specific task (e.g., provide
weather or navigation information). Depending on the user’s relative preferences between aspects like
success rate or brevity, the agent might need to follow completely different strategies. If success is all
that matters (e.g., providing an accurate weather report), the agent might provide detailed responses
or ask several follow-up questions. On the other hand, if brevity is crucial (e.g., while providing
Showers this evening, becoming
a steady rain overnight. Low 6C.
Winds S at 15 to 25 km/h. Chance
of rain 100%…

1

Code is available at https://github.com/RunzheYang/MORL

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

