Sobolev Independence Criterion
Youssef Mroueh, Tom Sercu, Mattia Rigotti, Inkit Padhi, Cicero Dos Santos ⇤
IBM Research & MIT-IBM Watson AI lab
mroueh,mrigotti@us.ibm.com,inkit.padhi@ibm.com

Abstract
We propose the Sobolev Independence Criterion (SIC), an interpretable dependency
measure between a high dimensional random variable X and a response variable
Y . SIC decomposes to the sum of feature importance scores and hence can be used
for nonlinear feature selection. SIC can be seen as a gradient regularized Integral
Probability Metric (IPM) between the joint distribution of the two random variables
and the product of their marginals. We use sparsity inducing gradient penalties
to promote input sparsity of the critic of the IPM. In the kernel version we show
that SIC can be cast as a convex optimization problem by introducing auxiliary
variables that play an important role in feature selection as they are normalized
feature importance scores. We then present a neural version of SIC where the critic
is parameterized as a homogeneous neural network, improving its representation
power as well as its interpretability. We conduct experiments validating SIC for
feature selection in synthetic and real-world experiments. We show that SIC enables
reliable and interpretable discoveries, when used in conjunction with the holdout
randomization test and knockoffs to control the False Discovery Rate. Code is
available at http://github.com/ibm/sic.

1

Introduction

Feature Selection is an important problem in statistics and machine learning for interpretable predictive modeling and scientific discoveries. Our goal in this paper is to design a dependency measure that
is interpretable and can be reliably used to control the False Discovery Rate in feature selection. The
mutual information between two random variables X and Y is the most commonly used dependency
measure. The mutual information I(X; Y ) is defined as the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the
joint distribution pxy of X, Y and the product of their marginals px py , I(X; Y ) = KL(pxy , px py ).
Mutual information is however challenging to estimate from samples, which motivated the introduction of dependency measures based on other f -divergences or Integral Probability Metrics [1]
than the KL divergence. For instance, the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [2] uses
the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [3] to assess the dependency between two variables, i.e.
HSIC(X, Y ) = MMD(pxy , px py ), which can be easily estimated from samples via Kernel mean
embeddings in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) [4]. In this paper we introduce the
Sobolev Independence Criterion (SIC), a form of gradient regularized Integral Probability Metric
(IPM) [5, 6, 7] between the joint distribution and the product of marginals. SIC relies on the statistics
of the gradient of a witness function, or critic, for both (1) defining the IPM constraint and (2) finding
the features that discriminate between the joint and the marginals. Intuitively, the magnitude of
the average gradient with respect to a feature gives an importance score for each feature. Hence,
promoting its sparsity is a natural constraint for feature selection.
The paper is organized as follows: we show in Section 2 how sparsity-inducing gradient penalties can
be used to define an interpretable dependency measure that we name Sobolev Independence Criterion
⇤

Tom Sercu is now with Facebook AI Research, and Cicero Dos Santos with Amazon AWS AI. The work
was done when they were at IBM Research.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

