Provable Non-linear Inductive Matrix Completion
Kai Zhong
Amazon
kaizhong@amazon.com
Prateek Jain
Microsoft
prajain@microsoft.com

Zhao Song
University of Washington
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com
Inderjit S. Dhillon
Amazon & University of Texas at Austin
isd@amazon.com

Abstract
Consider a standard recommendation/retrieval problem where given a query, the
goal is to retrieve the most relevant items. Inductive matrix completion (IMC)
method is a standard approach for this problem where the given query as well as
the items are embedded in a common low-dimensional space. The inner product between a query embedding and an item embedding reflects relevance of the
(query, item) pair. Non-linear IMC (NIMC) uses non-linear networks to embed the
query as well as items, and is known to be highly effective for a variety of tasks,
such as video recommendations for users, semantic web search, etc. Despite its
wide usage, existing literature lacks rigorous understanding of NIMC models. A
key challenge in analyzing such models is to deal with the non-convexity arising
out of non-linear embeddings in addition to the non-convexity arising out of the
low-dimensional restriction of the embedding space, which is akin to the low-rank
restriction in the standard matrix completion problem. In this paper, we provide
the first theoretical analysis for a simple NIMC model in the realizable setting,
where the relevance score of a (query, item) pair is formulated as the inner product between their single-layer neural representations. Our results show that under
mild assumptions we can recover the ground truth parameters of the NIMC model
using standard (stochastic) gradient descent methods if the methods are initialized within a small distance to the optimal parameters. We show that a standard
tensor method can be used to initialize the solution within the required distance
to the optimal parameters. Furthermore, we show that the number of query-item
relevance observations required, a key parameter in learning such models, scales
nearly linearly with the input dimensionality thus matching existing results for the
standard linear inductive matrix completion.

1

Introduction

Real-world recommendation systems and information retrieval systems aim to obtain the relevance
between “queries” and “items”, such as user-item ratings, query-web relevance, query-product relevance, etc. A classic technique to model a recommendation system is matrix completion or collaborative filtering [CR09, GUH16] where the model is learned from a few observed user-item ratings
without the need for the entire user/item information. Modern recommendation systems also have
access to a large amount of side information about the users and the items. In the meantime, the development of deep learning models has facilitated the extraction of effective neural representations
for the users/items. Therefore modern recommendation systems such as Youtube video recommendation [CAS16], image recommendation [LLL+ 16], music recommendation [WW14], etc, are
adopting deep learning representations for users/items. On the other hand, modern information re33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

