Towards Explaining the Regularization Effect of
Initial Large Learning Rate in Training Neural
Networks
Yuanzhi Li
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu

Colin Wei
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
colinwei@stanford.edu

Tengyu Ma
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent with a large initial learning rate is widely used for
training modern neural net architectures. Although a small initial learning rate
allows for faster training and better test performance initially, the large learning
rate achieves better generalization soon after the learning rate is annealed. Towards
explaining this phenomenon, we devise a setting in which we can prove that a
two layer network trained with large initial learning rate and annealing provably
generalizes better than the same network trained with a small learning rate from
the start. The key insight in our analysis is that the order of learning different
types of patterns is crucial: because the small learning rate model first memorizes
easy-to-generalize, hard-to-fit patterns, it generalizes worse on hard-to-generalize,
easier-to-fit patterns than its large learning rate counterpart. This concept translates
to a larger-scale setting: we demonstrate that one can add a small patch to CIFAR10 images that is immediately memorizable by a model with small initial learning
rate, but ignored by the model with large learning rate until after annealing. Our
experiments show that this causes the small learning rate model’s accuracy on
unmodified images to suffer, as it relies too much on the patch early on.

1

Introduction

It is a commonly accepted fact that a large initial learning rate is required to successfully train a
deep network even though it slows down optimization of the train loss. Modern state-of-the-art
architectures typically start with a large learning rate and anneal it at a point when the model’s fit to
the training data plateaus [25, 32, 17, 42]. Meanwhile, models trained using only small learning rates
have been found to generalize poorly despite enjoying faster optimization of the training loss.
A number of papers have proposed explanations for this phenomenon, such as sharpness of the local
minima [22, 20, 24], the time it takes to move from initialization [18, 40], and the scale of SGD
noise [38]. However, we still have a limited understanding of a surprising and striking part of the
large learning rate phenomenon: from looking at the section of the accuracy curve before annealing, it
would appear that a small learning rate model should outperform the large learning rate model in both
training and test error. Concretely, in Fig. 1, the model trained with small learning rate outperforms
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

