Extending Stein’s unbiased risk estimator to train
deep denoisers with correlated pairs of noisy images

Magauiya Zhussip
Shakarim Soltanayev
Se Young Chun
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST)
{mzhussip, shakarim, sychun}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, Stein’s unbiased risk estimator (SURE) has been applied to unsupervised
training of deep neural network Gaussian denoisers that outperformed classical
non-deep learning based denoisers and yielded comparable performance to those
trained with ground truth. While SURE requires only one noise realization per
image for training, it does not take advantage of having multiple noise realizations
per image when they are available (e.g., two uncorrelated noise realizations per
image for Noise2Noise). Here, we propose an extended SURE (eSURE) to train
deep denoisers with correlated pairs of noise realizations per image and applied it to
the case with two uncorrelated realizations per image to achieve better performance
than SURE based method and comparable results to Noise2Noise. Then, we
further investigated the case with imperfect ground truth (i.e., mild noise in ground
truth) that may be obtained considering painstaking, time-consuming, and even
expensive processes of collecting ground truth images with multiple noisy images.
For the case of generating noisy training data by adding synthetic noise to imperfect
ground truth to yield correlated pairs of images, our proposed eSURE based training
method outperformed conventional SURE based method as well as Noise2Noise.
Code is available at https://github.com/Magauiya/Extended_SURE

1

Introduction

Powerful deep neural networks (DNNs) have been created and investigated for high-level computer
vision tasks such as image classification [1, 2], object detection [3, 4], and semantic segmentation [5]
as well as for low-level computer vision tasks such as image denoising [6, 7, 8, 9]. Initially, it was
challenging for DNNs to outperform powerful classical denoisers such as BM3D [7]. However, recent
works with DNNs proposed and demonstrated that it is possible for DNNs to outperform classical
denoisers for synthetic Gaussian noise [8] as well as for real noise [10]. All aforementioned DNN
based denoisers were trained in a supervised way with noiseless ground truth images.
Collecting high-quality noiseless images for training and evaluating DNN denoisers is challenging.
Plotz and Roth collected high-quality benchmark data for denoising by averaging 19 independent
noise realizations per one image [11]. It is a painstaking process to take tens of photos for one highresolution image of static objects and to perform post-processing to compensate for lighting changes.
It seems even more challenging, time-consuming, and even expensive to collect noiseless high-quality
ground truth data for slowly moving objects (e.g., animals, humans), for medical imaging, and for
airborne hyper-spectral imaging. Even though it is possible to take 19 pictures, it may be inevitable
that such a ground truth image contains mild noise if each picture is relatively noisy. For example, an
average of 19 pictures contaminated with Gaussian noise of σ = 25 yields a picture with noise level
of σ = 5.74 assuming temporal independence of noise. Thus, it seems desirable to have methods to
deal with imperfect ground truth data (i.e., mild noise in ground truth) and/or to train DNN denoisers
without clean ground truth.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

