Online Normalization for Training Neural Networks

Vitaliy Chiley∗
Ryan Reece

Ilya Sharapov∗

Sofía Samaniego de la Fuente

Atli Kosson

Urs Koster

Vishal Subbiah

Michael James∗ †

Cerebras Systems
175 S. San Antonio Road
Los Altos, California 94022

Abstract
Online Normalization is a new technique for normalizing the hidden activations
of a neural network. Like Batch Normalization, it normalizes the sample dimension. While Online Normalization does not use batches, it is as accurate as Batch
Normalization. We resolve a theoretical limitation of Batch Normalization by introducing an unbiased technique for computing the gradient of normalized activations.
Online Normalization works with automatic differentiation by adding statistical
normalization as a primitive. This technique can be used in cases not covered by
some other normalizers, such as recurrent networks, fully connected networks,
and networks with activation memory requirements prohibitive for batching. We
show its applications to image classification, image segmentation, and language
modeling. We present formal proofs and experimental results on ImageNet, CIFAR,
and PTB datasets.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, neural networks are functions that map inputs deterministically to outputs. Normalization makes this non-deterministic because each sample is affected not only by the network weights
but also by the statistical distribution of samples. Therefore, normalization re-defines neural networks
to be statistical operators. Normalized networks treat each neuron’s output as a random variable that
ultimately depends on the network’s parameters and input distribution. No matter how it is stimulated,
a normalized neuron produces an output distribution with zero mean and unit variance.
While normalization has enjoyed widespread success, current normalization methods have theoretical
and practical limitations. These limitations stem from an inability to compute the gradient of the
ideal normalization operator.
Batch methods are commonly used to approximate ideal normalization. These methods use the
distribution of the current minibatch as a proxy for the distribution of the entire dataset. They produce
biased estimates of the gradient that violate a fundamental tenet of stochastic gradient descent (SGD):
It is not possible to recover the true gradient from any number of small batch evaluations. This bias
becomes more pronounced as batch size is reduced.
Increasing the minibatch size provides more accurate approximations of normalization and its gradient
at the cost of increased memory consumption. This is especially problematic for image processing
and volumetric networks. Here neural activations outnumber network parameters, and even modest
batch sizes reduce the trainable network size by an order of magnitude.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author: michael@cerebras.net

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

