Practical Differentially Private Top-k Selection with
Pay-what-you-get Composition
David Durfee1 and Ryan Rogers1
1

Data Science Applied Research, LinkedIn

Abstract
We study the problem of top-k selection over a large domain universe subject to
user-level differential privacy. Typically, the exponential mechanism or report noisy
max are the algorithms used to solve this problem. However, these algorithms
require querying the database for the count of each domain element. We focus on
the setting where the data domain is unknown, which is different than the setting
of frequent itemsets where an apriori type algorithm can help prune the space
of domain elements to query. We design algorithms that ensures (approximate)
(ε, δ > 0)-differential privacy and only needs access to the true top-k̄ elements
from the data for any chosen k̄ ≥ k. We consider both the setting where a user’s
data can modify an arbitrary number of counts by at most 1, i.e. unrestricted
sensitivity, and the setting where a user’s data can modify at most some small,
fixed number of counts by at most 1, i.e. restricted sensitivity. Additionally, we
provide a pay-what-you-get privacy composition bound for our algorithms. That is,
our algorithms might return fewer than k elements when the top-k elements are
queried, but the overall privacy budget only decreases by the size of the outcome.

1

Introduction

Determining the top-k most frequent items from a massive dataset in an efficient way is one of the
most fundamental problems in data science, see Ilyas et al. [17] for a survey of top-k processing
techniques. However, it is important to consider users’ privacy in the dataset, since results from data
mining approaches can reveal sensitive information about a user’s data [20]. Simple thresholding
techniques, e.g. k-anonymity, do not provide formal privacy guarantees, since adversary background
knowledge or linking other datasets may cause someone’s data in a protected dataset to be revealed
[24]. Our aim is to provide rigorous privacy techniques for determining the top-k so that it can be
built on top of highly distributed, real-time systems that might already be in place.
Differential privacy has become the gold standard for rigorous privacy guarantees in data analytics.
One of the primary benefits of differential privacy is that the privacy loss of a computation on a
dataset can be quantified. Many companies have adopted differential privacy, including Google [15],
Apple [1], Uber [18], Microsoft [9], and LinkedIn [21], as well as government agencies, like the U.S.
Census Bureau [8]. In this work, we hope to extend the use of differential privacy in practical systems
to allow analysts to compute the k most frequent elements in a given dataset. We are certainly not
the first to explore this topic, yet the previous works require querying the count of every domain
element, e.g. report noisy max [10] and the exponential mechanism [25], or require some structure
on the large domain universe, e.g. frequent item sets (see Related Work). We aim to design practical,
(approximate) differentially private algorithms that do not require any structure on the data domain,
which is typically the case in exploratory data analysis. Our algorithms work in the setting where data
is preprocessed prior to running our algorithms, so that the differentially private computation only
accesses a subset of the data while still providing user level privacy in the full underlying dataset.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

