Solving graph compression via optimal transport
Vikas K. Garg
CSAIL, MIT
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Tommi Jaakkola
CSAIL, MIT
tommi@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a new approach to graph compression by appeal to optimal transport.
The transport problem is seeded with prior information about node importance,
attributes, and edges in the graph. The transport formulation can be setup for
either directed or undirected graphs, and its dual characterization is cast in terms
of distributions over the nodes. The compression pertains to the support of node
distributions and makes the problem challenging to solve directly. To this end, we
introduce Boolean relaxations and specify conditions under which these relaxations
are exact. The relaxations admit algorithms with provably fast convergence. Moreover, we provide an exact O(d log d) algorithm for the subproblem of projecting a
d-dimensional vector to transformed simplex constraints. Our method outperforms
state-of-the-art compression methods on graph classification.

1

Introduction

Graphs are widely used to capture complex relational objects, from social interactions to molecular
structures. Large, richly connected graphs can be, however, computationally unwieldy if used
as-is, and spurious features present in the graphs that are unrelated to the task can be statistically
distracting. A significant effort thus has been spent on developing methods for compressing or
summarizing graphs towards graph sketches [1]. Beyond computational gains, these sketches take
center stage in numerous tasks pertaining to graphs such as partitioning [2, 3], unraveling complex or
multi-resolution structures [4, 5, 6, 7], obtaining coarse-grained diffusion maps [8], including neural
convolutions [9, 10, 11].
State-of-the-art compression methods broadly fall into two categories: (a) sparsification (removing
edges) and (b) coarsening (merging vertices). These methods measure spectral similarity between
the original graph and a compressed representation in terms of a (inverse) Laplacian quadratic form
[12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. Thus, albeit some of these methods approximately preserve the graph spectrum
(see, e.g., [1]), they are oblivious to, and thus less effective for, downstream tasks such as classification
that rely on labels or attributes of the nodes. Also, the key compression steps in most of these methods
are, typically, either heuristic or detached from their original objective [17].
We address these issues by taking a novel perspective that appeals to the theory of optimal transport
[18], and develops its connections to minimum cost flow on graphs [19, 20]. Specifically, we interpret
graph compression as minimizing the transport cost from a fixed initial distribution supported on
all vertices to an unknown target distribution whose size of support is limited by the amount of
compression desired. Thus, the compressed graph in our case is a subgraph of the original graph,
restricted to a subset of the vertices selected via the associated transport problem. The transport
cost depends on the specified prior information such as importance of the nodes and their labels or
attributes, and thus can be informed by the downstream task. Moreover, we take into account the
underlying geometry toward the transport cost, unlike agnostic measures such as KL-divergence [21].
There are several technical challenges that we must address. First, the standard notion of optimal
transport on graphs is tailored to directed graphs where the transport cost decomposes as a directed
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

