Aligning Visual Regions and Textual Concepts for
Semantic-Grounded Image Representations

Fenglin Liu1∗, Yuanxin Liu3,4∗, Xuancheng Ren2∗, Xiaodong He5 , Xu Sun2
1
ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
JD AI Research
{fenglinliu98, renxc, xusun}@pku.edu.cn, liuyuanxin@iie.ac.cn
xiaodong.he@jd.com

Abstract
In vision-and-language grounding problems, fine-grained representations of the
image are considered to be of paramount importance. Most of the current systems
incorporate visual features and textual concepts as a sketch of an image. However,
plainly inferred representations are usually undesirable in that they are composed
of separate components, the relations of which are elusive. In this work, we aim at
representing an image with a set of integrated visual regions and corresponding
textual concepts, reflecting certain semantics. To this end, we build the Mutual
Iterative Attention (MIA) module, which integrates correlated visual features and
textual concepts, respectively, by aligning the two modalities. We evaluate the
proposed approach on two representative vision-and-language grounding tasks,
i.e., image captioning and visual question answering. In both tasks, the semanticgrounded image representations consistently boost the performance of the baseline
models under all metrics across the board. The results demonstrate that our approach is effective and generalizes well to a wide range of models for image-related
applications.2

1

Introduction

Recently, there is a surge of research interest in multidisciplinary tasks such as image captioning
[7] and visual question answering (VQA) [3], trying to explain the interaction between vision and
language. In image captioning, an intelligence system takes an image as input and generates a
description in the form of natural language. VQA is a more challenging problem that takes an extra
question into account and requires the model to give an answer depending on both the image and
the question. Despite their different application scenarios, a shared goal is to understand the image,
which necessitates the acquisition of grounded image representations.
In the literature, an image is typically represented in two fundamental forms: visual features and
textual concepts (see Figure 1). Visual Features [30, 2, 18] represent an image in the vision domain
and contain abundant visual information. For CNN-based visual features, an image is split into
equally-sized visual regions without encoding global relationships such as position and adjacency. To
obtain better image representations with respect to concrete objects, RCNN-based visual features that
are defined by bounding boxes of interests are proposed. Nevertheless, the visual features are based
∗
2

Equal contribution.
The code is available at https://github.com/fenglinliu98/MIA

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

