Expressive power of tensor-network
factorizations for probabilistic modeling

Ivan Glasser1,2∗, Ryan Sweke3 , Nicola Pancotti1,2 , Jens Eisert3,4 , J. Ignacio Cirac1,2
1
Max-Planck-Institut für Quantenoptik, D-85748 Garching
2
Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology (MCQST), D-80799 München
3
Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems, Freie Universität Berlin, D-14195 Berlin
4
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin, D-14195 Berlin

Abstract
Tensor-network techniques have recently proven useful in machine learning, both
as a tool for the formulation of new learning algorithms and for enhancing the
mathematical understanding of existing methods. Inspired by these developments,
and the natural correspondence between tensor networks and probabilistic graphical
models, we provide a rigorous analysis of the expressive power of various tensornetwork factorizations of discrete multivariate probability distributions. These
factorizations include non-negative tensor-trains/MPS, which are in correspondence with hidden Markov models, and Born machines, which are naturally related
to the probabilistic interpretation of quantum circuits. When used to model probability distributions, they exhibit tractable likelihoods and admit efficient learning
algorithms. Interestingly, we prove that there exist probability distributions for
which there are unbounded separations between the resource requirements of some
of these tensor-network factorizations. Of particular interest, using complex instead
of real tensors can lead to an arbitrarily large reduction in the number of parameters
of the network. Additionally, we introduce locally purified states (LPS), a new
factorization inspired by techniques for the simulation of quantum systems, with
provably better expressive power than all other representations considered. The
ramifications of this result are explored through numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Many problems in diverse areas of computer science and physics involve constructing efficient
representations of high-dimensional functions. Neural networks are a particular example of such
representations that have enjoyed great empirical success, and much effort has been dedicated to
understanding their expressive power - i.e. the set of functions that they can efficiently represent.
Analogously, tensor networks are a class of powerful representations of high-dimensional arrays
(tensors), for which a variety of algorithms and methods have been developed. Examples of such
tensor networks are tensor trains/matrix product states (MPS) [1, 2] or the hierarchical Tucker
decomposition [3, 4], which have found application in data compression [5–7], the simulation of
physical systems [8–10] and the design of machine learning algorithms [11–16]. In addition to
their use in numerical algorithms, tensor networks enjoy a rich analytical understanding which has
facilitated their use as a tool for obtaining rigorous results on the expressive power of deep learning
models [17–22], and fundamental insights into the structure of quantum mechanical systems [23].
In the context of probabilistic modeling, tensor networks have been shown to be in natural correspondence with probabilistic graphical models [24–29], as well as with Sum-Product Networks and
∗

Corresponding author, ivan.glasser@mpq.mpg.de

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

