Generative models for graph-based protein design

John Ingraham, Vikas K. Garg, Regina Barzilay, Tommi Jaakkola
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Lab, MIT
{ingraham, vgarg, regina, tommi}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Engineered proteins offer the potential to solve many problems in biomedicine,
energy, and materials science, but creating designs that succeed is difficult in
practice. A significant aspect of this challenge is the complex coupling between
protein sequence and 3D structure, with the task of finding a viable design often
referred to as the inverse protein folding problem. In this work, we introduce a
conditional generative model for protein sequences given 3D structures based on
graph representations. Our approach efficiently captures the complex dependencies
in proteins by focusing on those that are long-range in sequence but local in 3D
space. This graph-based approach improves in both speed and reliability over
conventional and other neural network-based approaches, and takes a step toward
rapid and targeted biomolecular design with the aid of deep generative models.

1

Introduction

A central goal for computational protein design is to automate the invention of protein molecules
with defined structural and functional properties. This field has seen tremendous progess in the past
two decades [1], including the design of novel 3D folds [2], enzymes [3], and complexes [4]. Despite
these successes, current approaches are often unreliable, requiring multiple rounds of trial-and-error
in which initial designs often fail [5, 6]. Moreover, diagnosing the origin of this unreliability is
difficult, as contemporary bottom-up approaches depend both on the accuracy of complex, composite
energy functions for protein physics and also on the efficiency of sampling algorithms for jointly
exploring the protein sequence and structure space.
Here, we explore an alternative, top-down framework for protein design that directly learns a
conditional generative model for protein sequences given a specification of the target structure, which
is represented as a graph over the residues (amino acids). Specifically, we augment the autoregressive
self-attention of recent sequence models [7] with graph-based representations of 3D molecular
structure. By composing multiple layers of this structured self-attention, our model can effectively
capture higher-order, interaction-based dependencies between sequence and structure, in contrast to
previous parameteric approaches [8, 9] that are limited to only the first-order effects.
A graph-structured sequence model offers several benefits, including favorable computational efficiency, inductive bias, and representational flexibility. We accomplish the first two by leveraging
a well-evidenced finding in protein science, namely that long-range dependencies in sequence are
generally short-range in 3D space [10–12]. By making the graph and self-attention similarly sparse
and localized in 3D space, we achieve computational scaling that is linear in sequence length. Additionally, graph structured inputs offer representational flexibility, as they accomodate both coarse,
‘flexible backbone’ (connectivity and topology) as well as fine-grained (precise atom locations)
descriptions of structure.
We demonstrate the merits of our approach via a detailed empirical study. Specifically, we evaluate
our model’s performance for structural generalization to sequences of protein 3D folds that are
topologically distinct from those in the training set. For fixed-backbone sequence design, we find that
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

