Towards closing the gap between the theory and
practice of SVRG

Othmane Sebbouh
LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
othmane.sebbouh@gmail.com
Samy Jelassi
ORFE Department
Princeton University
sjelassi@princeton.edu

Nidham Gazagnadou
LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
nidham.gazagnadou@telecom-paris.fr
Francis Bach
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
francis.bach@inria.fr

Robert M. Gower
LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris
robert.gower@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract

Amongst the very first variance reduced stochastic methods for solving the empirical risk minimization problem was the SVRG method [13]. SVRG is an inner-outer
loop based method, where in the outer loop a reference full gradient is evaluated, after which m ∈ N steps of an inner loop are executed where the reference gradient is
used to build a variance reduced estimate of the current gradient. The simplicity of
the SVRG method and its analysis have lead to multiple extensions and variants for
even non-convex optimization. Yet there is a significant gap between the parameter
settings that the analysis suggests and what is known to work well in practice. Our
first contribution is that we take several steps towards closing this gap. In particular,
the current analysis shows that m should be of the order of the condition number so
that the resulting method has a favorable complexity. Yet in practice m = n works
well regardless of the condition number, where n is the number of data points.
Furthermore, the current analysis shows that the inner iterates have to be reset
using averaging after every outer loop. Yet in practice SVRG works best when
the inner iterates are updated continuously and not reset. We provide an analysis
of these aforementioned practical settings and show that they achieve the same
favorable complexity as the original analysis (with slightly better constants). Our
second contribution is to provide a more general analysis than had been previously
done by using arbitrary sampling, which allows us to analyse virtually all forms
of mini-batching through a single theorem. Since our setup and analysis reflect
what is done in practice, we are able to set the parameters such as the mini-batch
size and step size using our theory in such a way that produces a more efficient
algorithm in practice, as we show in extensive numerical experiments.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

