Handling correlated and repeated measurements with
the smoothed multivariate square-root Lasso

Quentin Bertrand ∗
Université Paris Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau, 91120, France
quentin.bertrand@inria.fr

Mathurin Massias ∗
Université Paris Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau, 91120, France
mathurin.massias@inria.fr

Alexandre Gramfort
Université Paris Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau, 91120, France
alexandre.gramfort@inria.fr

Joseph Salmon
Univ. Montpellier, CNRS
Montpellier, France
joseph.salmon@umontpellier.fr

Abstract
A limitation of Lasso-type estimators is that the optimal regularization parameter
depends on the unknown noise level. Estimators such as the concomitant Lasso
address this dependence by jointly estimating the noise level and the regression
coefficients. Additionally, in many applications, the data is obtained by averaging
multiple measurements: this reduces the noise variance, but it dramatically reduces
sample sizes and prevents refined noise modeling. In this work, we propose a
concomitant estimator that can cope with complex noise structure by using nonaveraged measurements, its data-fitting term arising as a smoothing of the nuclear
norm. The resulting optimization problem is convex and amenable, thanks to
smoothing theory, to state-of-the-art optimization techniques that leverage the
sparsity of the solutions. Practical benefits are demonstrated on toy datasets,
realistic simulated data and real neuroimaging data.

1

Introduction

In many statistical applications, the number of parameters p is much larger than the number of
observations n. A popular approach to tackle linear regression problems in such scenarios is to
consider convex `1 -type penalties, as popularized by Tibshirani (1996). The use of these penalties
relies on a regularization parameter λ trading data fidelity versus sparsity. Unfortunately, Bickel
et al. (2009) showed that, in the case of white Gaussian noise, the optimal λ depends linearly on
the standard deviation of the noise – referred to as noise level. Because the latter is rarely known in
practice, one can jointly estimate the noise level and the regression coefficients, following pioneering
work on concomitant estimation (Huber and Dutter, 1974; Huber, 1981). Adaptations to sparse
regression (Owen, 2007) have been analyzed under the names of square-root Lasso (Belloni et al.,
2011) or scaled Lasso (Sun and Zhang, 2012). Generalizations have been proposed in the multitask
setting, the canonical estimator being Multi-Task Lasso (Obozinski et al., 2010).
The latter estimators take their roots in a white Gaussian noise model. However some real-world
data (such as magneto-electroencephalographic data) are contaminated with strongly non-white
Gaussian noise (Engemann and Gramfort, 2015). From a statistical point of view, the non-uniform
noise level case has been widely explored: Daye et al. (2012); Wagener and Dette (2012); Kolar and
Sharpnack (2012); Dalalyan et al. (2013). In a more general case, with a correlated Gaussian noise
∗

These authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

