PAC-Bayes Un-Expected Bernstein Inequality

Zakaria Mhammedi
The Australian National University and Data61
zak.mhammedi@anu.edu.au

Peter D. Grünwald
CWI and Leiden University
pdg@cwi.nl

Benjamin Guedj
Inria and University College London
benjamin.guedj@inria.fr

Abstract
We
√ present a new PAC-Bayesian generalization bound. Standard bounds contain a
Ln ⋅ KL/n complexity term which dominates unless Ln , the empirical error of
the learning algorithm’s randomized predictions, vanishes. We manage to replace
Ln by a term which vanishes in many more situations, essentially whenever the
employed learning algorithm is sufficiently stable on the dataset at hand. Our new
bound consistently beats state-of-the-art bounds both on a toy example and on
UCI datasets (with large enough n). Theoretically, unlike existing bounds, our
new bound can be expected to converge to 0 faster whenever a Bernstein/Tsybakov
condition holds, thus connecting PAC-Bayesian generalization and excess risk
bounds—for the latter it has long been known that faster convergence can be
obtained under Bernstein conditions. Our main technical tool is a new concentration
inequality which is like Bernstein’s but with X 2 taken outside its expectation.

1

Introduction

PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds [1, 8, 9, 17, 18, 20, 28, 29, 30] have recently obtained renewed
interest within the context of deep neural networks [14, 34, 42]. In particular, Zhou et al. [42] and
Dziugaite and Roy [14] showed that, by extending an idea due to Langford and Caruana [23], one
can obtain nontrivial (but still not very strong) generalization bounds on real-world datasets such as
MNIST and ImageNet. Since using alternative methods, nontrivial generalization bounds are even
harder to get, there remains a strong interest in improved PAC-Bayesian bounds. In this paper, we
provide a considerably improved bound whenever the employed learning algorithm is sufficiently
stable on the given data.
√
Most standard bounds have an order Ln ⋅ COMPn /n term on the right, where COMPn represents
model complexity in the form of a Kullback-Leibler divergence between a prior and a posterior,
and Ln is the posterior expected loss on the training sample. The latter only vanishes if there is a
sufficiently large neighborhood around the “center” of the posterior at which the training error is 0.
In the two papers [14, 42] mentioned above, this is not the case. For example, the various deep net
experiments
reported by Dziugaite et al. [14, Table 1]
√
√ with n = 150000 all have Ln around 0.03, so
that COMPn /n is multiplied by a non-negligible 0.03 ≈ 0.17. Furthermore, they have COMPn
√
√
increasing substantially with n, making Ln ⋅ COMPn /n converge to 0 at rate slower than 1/ n.
In this paper, we provide a bound (Theorem 3) with Ln replaced by a second-order term Vn —a term
which will go to 0 in many cases in which Ln does not. This can be viewed as an extension of an
earlier second-order approach by Tolstikhin and Seldin [39] (TS from now on); they also replace Ln ,
but by a term that, while usually smaller than Ln , will tend to be larger than our Vn . Specifically, as
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

