Policy Evaluation with Latent Confounders via
Optimal Balance
Andrew Bennett˚
Cornell University
awb222@cornell.edu

Nathan Kallus˚
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
Evaluating novel contextual bandit policies using logged data is crucial in applications where exploration is costly, such as medicine. But it usually relies on the
assumption of no unobserved confounders, which is bound to fail in practice. We
study the question of policy evaluation when we instead have proxies for the latent
confounders and develop an importance weighting method that avoids fitting a
latent outcome regression model. We show that unlike the unconfounded case
no single set of weights can give unbiased evaluation for all outcome models,
yet we propose a new algorithm that can still provably guarantee consistency by
instead minimizing an adversarial balance objective. We further develop tractable
algorithms for optimizing this objective and demonstrate empirically the power of
our method when confounders are latent.

1

Introduction

Personalized intervention policies are of increasing importance in education [32], healthcare [3],
and public policy [26]. In many of these domains exploration is costly or otherwise prohibitive,
and so it is crucial to evaluate new policies using existing observational data. Usually, this relies
on an assumption of no unobserved confounding (aka unconfoundedness or ignorability): that
conditioned on observables, interventions are independent of idiosyncrasies that affect outcomes,
so that counterfactuals can be reliably and correctly predicted. In particular, this enables the use
of inverse propensity score (IPS) estimators of policy value [4, 21, 29] that eschew the need to
actually fit outcome prediction models and doubly robust estimators that work even if such models
are misspecified [8].
In practice, however, it may be unlikely that we observe confounders exactly. Nonetheless, if we
observe very many features they may serve as good proxies for the true confounders, which can enable
an alternative route to identification [22, 30]. In particular, noisy observations of true confounders can
serve as valid proxies. For example, if intelligence is latent but affects both selection and outcome, we
can instead use many noisy observations of intelligence such as school grades, IQ test, etc. Similarly,
many medical measurements taken together can serve as proxies for underlying healthfulness.
In this paper, we study the problem of policy evaluation from observational data where we observe
proxies instead of true confounders and we develop new weighting estimators based on optimizing
balance in the latent confounders. Unlike the unconfounded setting where IPS weights ensure balance
regardless of outcome model, we show that in this new setting there cannot exist any single of weights
that ensure such unbiasedness regardless of outcome model. Instead, we develop an adversarial
objective that bounds the conditional mean square error (CMSE) of any weighted estimator and,
by appealing to game theoretic and empirical process arguments, we show that this objective can
actually be driven to zero by a single set of weights. We therefore propose a novel policy evaluation
˚

Alphabetical order.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

