Non-Asymptotic Gap-Dependent Regret Bounds for
Tabular MDPs
Max Simchowitz
UC Berkeley
msimchow@berkeley.edu

Kevin Jamieson
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
This paper establishes that optimistic algorithms attain gap-dependent and nonasymptotic logarithmic regret for episodic MDPs. In contrast to prior work,
our bounds do not suffer a dependence on diameter-like quantities or ergodicity, and√smoothly interpolate between the gap dependent logarithmic-regret, and
e HSAT )-minimax rate. The key technique in our analysis is a novel
the O(
“clipped” regret decomposition which applies to a broad family of recent optimistic algorithms for episodic MDPs.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a powerful paradigm for modeling a learning agent’s interactions
with an unknown environment, in an attempt to accumulate as much reward as possible. Because
of its flexibility, RL can encode such a vast array of different problem settings - many of which are
entirely intractable. Therefore, it is crucial to understand what conditions enable an RL agent to
effectively learn about its environment, and to account for the success of RL methods in practice.
In this paper, we consider tabular Markov decision processes (MDPs), a canonical RL setting where
the agent seeks to learn a policy mapping discrete states x ∈ S to one of finitely many actions a ∈ A,
in an attempt to maximize cumulative reward over an episode horizon H. We shall study the regret
setting, where the learner plays a policy πk for a sequence of episodes k = 1, . . . , K, and suffers a
regret proportional to the average sub-optimality of the policies π1 , . . . , πK .
In recent years, the vast majority of literature has focused on obtaining minimax regret bounds that
match the worst-case dependence
p on the number states |S|, actions |A|, and horizon length H;
namely, a cumulative regret of H|S||A|T , where T = KH denotes the total number of rounds of
the game [1]. While these bounds are succinct and easy to interpret, they paint an overly pessimistic
account of the complexity of these problems, and do not elucidate the favorable structural properties
of which a learning agent can hope to take advantage.
The earlier literature, on the other hand, establishes a considerable more favorable regret of the
form C log T , where C is an instance-dependent constant given in terms of the sub-optimality gaps
associated with each action at a given state, defined as
?

?

gap∞ (x, a) = Vπ (x) − Qπ (x, a),
?

?

(1)

where Vπ and Qπ denote the value and Q functions for an optimal policy π ? , and the subscript-∞
denotes these bounds hold for a non-episodic, infinite horizon setting.
Depending on the constant
√
C, the regret C log T can yield a major improvement over the T minimax scaling. Unfortunately, these analyses are asymptotic in nature, and only take effect after a large number of rounds,
depending on other potentially-large, highly-conservative, or difficult-to-verify problem-dependent
quantities such as hitting times or measures of uniform ergodicity [8, 13, 10].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

