Stagewise Training Accelerates Convergence of
Testing Error Over SGD

†

Zhuoning Yuan† , Yan Yan† , Rong Jin‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
Machine Intelligence Technology, Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{zhuoning-yuan, yan-yan-2, tianbao-yang}@uiowa.edu, jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Stagewise training strategy is widely used for learning neural networks, which runs
a stochastic algorithm (e.g., SGD) starting with a relatively large step size (aka
learning rate) and geometrically decreasing the step size after a number of iterations.
It has been observed that the stagewise SGD has much faster convergence than
the vanilla SGD with a polynomially decaying step size in terms of both training
error and testing error. But how to explain this phenomenon has been largely
ignored by existing studies. This paper provides some theoretical evidence for
explaining this faster convergence. In particular, we consider a stagewise training
strategy for minimizing empirical risk that satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL)
condition, which has been observed/proved for neural networks and also holds for
a broad family of convex functions. For convex loss functions and two classes
of “nice-behaved" non-convex objectives that are close to a convex function, we
establish faster convergence of stagewise training than the vanilla SGD under the
PL condition on both training error and testing error. Experiments on stagewise
learning of deep neural networks exhibits that it satisfies one type of non-convexity
assumption and therefore can be explained by our theory.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider learning a predictive model by using a stochastic algorithm to minimize
the expected risk via solving the following empirical risk problem:
n
1X
min FS (w) :=
f (w, zi ),
(1)
w∈Ω
n i=1
where f (w, z) is a smooth loss function of the model w on the data z, Ω is a closed convex set,
and S = {z1 , . . . , zn } denotes a set of n observed data points that are sampled from an underlying
distribution Pz with support on Z.
There are tremendous studies devoted to solving this empirical risk minimization (ERM) problem
in machine learning and related fields. Among all existing algorithms, stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is probably the simplest and attracts most attention, which takes the following update:
wt+1 = ΠΩ [wt − ηt ∇f (wt , zit )],
(2)
where it ∈ {1, . . . , n} is randomly sampled, ΠΩ is the projection operator, and ηt is the step size
that is usually decreasing to 0. Convergence theories
have been extensively studied for SGD with a
√
polynomially decaying step size (e.g., 1/t, 1/ t) for an objective that satisfies various assumptions,
e.g., convexity [25], non-convexity [12], strong convexity [15], local strong convexity [27], PolyakŁojasiewicz inequality [18], Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz inequality [30], etc. The list of papers about SGD
is so long that can not be exhausted here.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

