Progressive Augmentation of GANs

Dan Zhang
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
dan.zhang2@bosch.com

Anna Khoreva
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
anna.khoreva@bosch.com

Abstract
Training of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is notoriously fragile, requiring to maintain a careful balance between the generator and the discriminator
in order to perform well. To mitigate this issue we introduce a new regularization
technique - progressive augmentation of GANs (PA-GAN). The key idea is to gradually increase the task difficulty of the discriminator by progressively augmenting its
input or feature space, thus enabling continuous learning of the generator. We show
that the proposed progressive augmentation preserves the original GAN objective,
does not compromise the discriminator’s optimality and encourages a healthy competition between the generator and discriminator, leading to the better-performing
generator. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of PA-GAN across
different architectures and on multiple benchmarks for the image synthesis task, on
average achieving ∼ 3 point improvement of the FID score.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11] are a recent development in the field of deep learning,
that have attracted a lot of attention in the research community [27, 30, 2, 15]. The GAN framework
can be formulated as a competing game between the generator and the discriminator. Since both the
generator and the discriminator are typically parameterized as deep convolutional neural networks
with millions of parameters, optimization is notoriously difficult in practice [2, 12, 24].
The difficulty lies in maintaining a healthy competition between the generator and discriminator. A
commonly occurring problem arises when the discriminator overshoots, leading to escalated gradients
and oscillatory GAN behaviour [23, 4]. Moreover, the supports of the data and model distributions
typically lie on low dimensional manifolds and are often disjoint [1]. Consequently, there exists
a nearly trivial discriminator that can perfectly distinguish real data samples from synthetic ones.
Once such a discriminator is produced, its loss quickly converges to zero and the gradients used for
updating parameters of the generator become useless. For improving the training stability of GANs
regularization techniques [28, 12] can be used to constrain the learning of the discriminator. But as
shown in [4, 18] they also impair the generator and lead to the performance degradation.
In this work we introduce a new regularization technique to alleviate this problem - progressive
augmentation of GANs (PA-GAN) - that helps to control the behaviour of the discriminator and thus
improve the overall training.1 The key idea is to progressively augment the input of the discriminator
network or its intermediate feature layers with auxiliary random bits in order to gradually increase
the discrimination task difficulty (see Fig. 1). In doing so, the discriminator can be prevented from
becoming over-confident, enabling continuous learning of the generator. As opposed to standard
augmentation techniques (e.g. rotation, cropping, resizing), the proposed progressive augmentation
does not directly modify the data samples or their features, but rather structurally appends to them.
Moreover, it can also alter the input class. For instance, in the single-level augmentation the data
sample or its features x are combined with a random bit s and both are provided to the discriminator.
1

https://github.com/boschresearch/PA-GAN

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

