Beyond Alternating Updates for Matrix Factorization
with Inertial Bregman Proximal Gradient Algorithms

Mahesh Chandra Mukkamala
Mathematical Optimization Group
Saarland University, Germany
mukkamala@math.uni-sb.de

Peter Ochs
Mathematical Optimization Group
Saarland University, Germany
ochs@math.uni-sb.de

Abstract
Matrix Factorization is a popular non-convex optimization problem, for which
alternating minimization schemes are mostly used. They usually suffer from
the major drawback that the solution is biased towards one of the optimization
variables. A remedy is non-alternating schemes. However, due to a lack of Lipschitz
continuity of the gradient in matrix factorization problems, convergence cannot
be guaranteed. A recently developed approach relies on the concept of Bregman
distances, which generalizes the standard Euclidean distance. We exploit this theory
by proposing a novel Bregman distance for matrix factorization problems, which,
at the same time, allows for simple/closed form update steps. Therefore, for nonalternating schemes, such as the recently introduced Bregman Proximal Gradient
(BPG) method and an inertial variant Convex–Concave Inertial BPG (CoCaIn
BPG), convergence of the whole sequence to a stationary point is proved for Matrix
Factorization. In several experiments, we observe a superior performance of our
non-alternating schemes in terms of speed and objective value at the limit point.

1

Introduction

Matrix factorization has numerous applications in Machine Learning [43, 57], Computer Vision
[17, 58, 62, 28], Bio-informatics [56, 12] and many others. Given a matrix A ∈ RM ×N , one is
interested in the factors U ∈ RM ×K and Z ∈ RK×N such that A ≈ UZ holds. This is usually cast
into the following non-convex optimization problem


1
2
(1.1)
min
Ψ ≡ kA − UZkF + R1 (U) + R2 (Z) ,
U∈U ,Z∈Z
2
where U, Z are constraint sets and R1 , R2 are regularization terms. The most frequently used
techniques for solving matrix factorization problems involve alternating updates (Gauss–Seidel type
methods [26]) like PALM [8], iPALM [53], BCD [63], BC-VMFB [18], HALS [19] and many
others. A common disadvantage of these schemes is their bias towards one of the optimization
variables. Such alternating schemes involve fixing a subset of variables to do the updates. In order
to guarantee convergence to a stationary point, alternating schemes require the first term in (1.1)
to have a Lipschitz continuous gradient only with respect to each subset of variables. However,
in general Lipschitz continuity of the gradient fails to hold for all variables. The same problem
appears in various practical applications such as Quadratic Inverse Problems, Poisson Linear Inverse
Problems, Cubic Regularized Non-convex Quadratic Problems and Robust Denoising Problems with
Non-convex Total Variation Regularization [46, 9, 4]. They belong to the following broad class of
non-convex additive composite minimization problems

(P)
inf Ψ ≡ f (x) + g (x) : x ∈ C ,
(1.2)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

