Concentration of risk measures:
A Wasserstein distance approach

Sanjay P. Bhat
Tata Consultancy Services Limited
Hyderabad, Telangana, India
sanjay.bhat@tcs.com

Prashanth L.A.
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
prashla@cse.iitm.ac.in
∗

Abstract
Known finite-sample concentration bounds for the Wasserstein distance between
the empirical and true distribution of a random variable are used to derive a twosided concentration bound for the error between the true conditional value-at-risk
(CVaR) of a (possibly unbounded) random variable and a standard estimate of its
CVaR computed from an i.i.d. sample. The bound applies under fairly general
assumptions on the random variable, and improves upon previous bounds which
were either one sided, or applied only to bounded random variables. Specializations
of the bound to sub-Gaussian and sub-exponential random variables are also
derived. Using a different proof technique, the results are extended to the class
of spectral risk measures having a bounded risk spectrum. A similar procedure
is followed to derive concentration bounds for the error between the true and
estimated Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) value of a random variable, in cases
where the random variable is bounded or sub-Gaussian. These bounds are shown
to match a known bound in the bounded case, and improve upon the known bound
in the sub-Gaussian case. The usefulness of the bounds is illustrated through an
algorithm, and corresponding regret bound for a stochastic bandit problem, where
the underlying risk measure to be optimized is CVaR.

1

Introduction

Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) and cumulative prospect theory (CPT) value are two popular risk
measures. CVaR is popular in financial applications, where it is necessary to minimize the worst-case
losses, say in a portfolio optimization context. CVaR is a special instance of the class of spectral
risk measures [Acerbi, 2002]. CVaR is an appealing risk measure because it is coherent [Artzner
et al., 1999], and spectral risk measures retain this property. CPT value is a risk measure, proposed
by Tversky and Kahnemann, that is useful for modeling human preferences. The central premise in
risk-sensitive optimization is that the expected value is not an appealing objective in several practical
applications, and it is necessary to incorporate some notion of risk in the optimization process. The
reader is referred to extensive literature on risk-sensitive optimization, in particular, the shortcomings
of the expected value - cf. [Allais, 1953, Ellsberg, 1961, Kahneman and Tversky, 1979, Rockafellar
and Uryasev, 2000].
In practical applications, the information about the underlying distribution is typically unavailable.
However, one can often obtain samples from the distribution, and the aim is to estimate the chosen
risk measure using these samples. We consider this problem of estimation in the context of three
risk measures: CVaR, a general spectral risk measure, and CPT-value. For each of the three
risk measures, we examine the estimator obtained by applying the risk measure to the empirical
∗

Supported in part by a DST grant under the ECRA program.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

