GIFT: Learning Transformation-Invariant
Dense Visual Descriptors via Group CNNs

Yuan Liu Zehong Shen Zhixuan Lin Sida Peng Hujun Bao∗ Xiaowei Zhou∗
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, ZJU-Sensetime Joint Lab of 3D Vision, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Finding local correspondences between images with different viewpoints requires
local descriptors that are robust against geometric transformations. An approach
for transformation invariance is to integrate out the transformations by pooling the
features extracted from transformed versions of an image. However, the feature
pooling may sacrifice the distinctiveness of the resulting descriptors. In this paper,
we introduce a novel visual descriptor named Group Invariant Feature Transform
(GIFT), which is both discriminative and robust to geometric transformations. The
key idea is that the features extracted from the transformed versions of an image
can be viewed as a function defined on the group of the transformations. Instead of
feature pooling, we use group convolutions to exploit underlying structures of the
extracted features on the group, resulting in descriptors that are both discriminative
and provably invariant to the group of transformations. Extensive experiments show
that GIFT outperforms state-of-the-art methods on several benchmark datasets and
practically improves the performance of relative pose estimation.

1

Introduction

Establishing local feature correspondences between images is a fundamental problem in many
computer vision tasks such as structure from motion [21], visual localization [17], SLAM [43], image
stitching [5] and image retrieval [47]. Finding reliable correspondences requires image descriptors
that effectively encode distinctive image patterns while being invariant to geometric and photometric
image transformations caused by viewpoint and illumination changes.
To achieve the invariance to viewpoints, traditional methods [36, 37] use patch detectors [33, 39]
to extract transformation covariant local patches which are then normalized for transformation
invariance. Then, invariant descriptors can be extracted on the detected local patches. However,
a typical image may have very few pixels for which viewpoint covariant patches can be reliably
detected [22]. Also, “hand-crafted" detectors such as DoG [36] and Affine-Harris [39] are sensitive to
image artifacts and lighting conditions. Reliably detecting covariant regions is still an open problem
[29, 11] and a performance bottleneck in the traditional pipeline of correspondence estimation.
Instead of relying on a sparse set of covariant patches, some recent works [20, 7, 11] propose to
extract dense descriptors by feeding the whole image into a convolutional neural network (CNN) and
constructing pixel-wise descriptors from the feature maps of the CNN. However, the CNN-based
descriptors are usually sensitive to viewpoint changes as convolutions are inherently not invariant
to geometric transformations. While augmenting training data with warped images improves the
robustness of learned features, the invariance is not guaranteed and a larger network is typically
required to fit the augmented datasets.
In order to explicitly improve invariance to geometric transformations, some works [60, 55, 22] resort
to integrating out the transformations by pooling the features extracted from transformed versions of
∗

Corresponding authors: {xzhou,bao}@cad.zju.edu.cn. Project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/GIFT.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

