Procrastinating with Confidence: Near-Optimal,
Anytime, Adaptive Algorithm Configuration
Robert Kleinberg
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
rdk@cs.cornell.edu

Kevin Leyton-Brown
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
kevinlb@cs.ubc.ca

Brendan Lucier
Microsoft Research
brlucier@microsoft.com

Devon Graham
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
drgraham@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Algorithm configuration methods optimize the performance of a parameterized
heuristic algorithm on a given distribution of problem instances. Recent work
introduced an algorithm configuration procedure (“Structured Procrastination”)
that provably achieves near optimal performance with high probability and with
nearly minimal runtime in the worst case. It also offers an anytime property: it keeps
tightening its optimality guarantees the longer it is run. Unfortunately, Structured
Procrastination is not adaptive to characteristics of the parameterized algorithm:
it treats every input like the worst case. Follow-up work (“LeapsAndBounds”)
achieves adaptivity but trades away the anytime property. This paper introduces a
new algorithm, “Structured Procrastination with Confidence”, that preserves the
near-optimality and anytime properties of Structured Procrastination while adding
adaptivity. In particular, the new algorithm will perform dramatically faster in
settings where many algorithm configurations perform poorly. We show empirically
both that such settings arise frequently in practice and that the anytime property is
useful for finding good configurations quickly.

1

Introduction

Algorithm configuration is the task of searching a space of configurations of a given algorithm
(typically represented as joint assignments to a set of algorithm parameters) in order to find a single
configuration that optimizes a performance objective on a given distribution of inputs. In this paper,
we focus exclusively on the objective of minimizing average runtime. Considerable progress has
recently been made on solving this problem in practice via general-purpose, heuristic techniques such
as ParamILS (Hutter et al., 2007, 2009), GGA (Ansótegui et al., 2009, 2015), irace (Birattari et al.,
2002; López-Ibáñez et al., 2011) and SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011a,b). Notably, in the context of this
paper, all these methods are adaptive: they surpass their worst-case performance when presented
with “easier” search problems.
Recently, algorithm configuration has also begun to attract theoretical analysis. While there is a
large body of less-closely related work that we survey in Section 1.3, the first nontrivial worst-case
performance guarantees for general algorithm configuration with an average runtime minimization
objective were achieved by a recently introduced algorithm called Structured Procrastination (SP)
(Kleinberg et al., 2017). This work considered a worst-case setting in which an adversary causes every
deterministic choice to play out as poorly as possible, but where observations of random variables are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

