Non-Stationary Markov Decision Processes
a Worst-Case Approach using Model-Based
Reinforcement Learning

Erwan Lecarpentier
Université de Toulouse
ONERA - The French Aerospace Lab
erwan.lecarpentier@isae-supaero.fr

Emmanuel Rachelson
Université de Toulouse
ISAE-SUPAERO
emmanuel.rachelson@isae-supaero.fr

Abstract
This work tackles the problem of robust planning in non-stationary stochastic
environments. We study Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) evolving over time
and consider Model-Based Reinforcement Learning algorithms in this setting. We
make two hypotheses: 1) the environment evolves continuously with a bounded
evolution rate; 2) a current model is known at each decision epoch but not its
evolution. Our contribution can be presented in four points. 1) we define a specific
class of MDPs that we call Non-Stationary MDPs (NSMDPs). We introduce the
notion of regular evolution by making an hypothesis of Lipschitz-Continuity on the
transition and reward functions w.r.t. time; 2) we consider a planning agent using
the current model of the environment but unaware of its future evolution. This leads
us to consider a worst-case method where the environment is seen as an adversarial
agent; 3) following this approach, we propose the Risk-Averse Tree-Search (RATS)
algorithm, a Model-Based method similar to minimax search; 4) we illustrate the
benefits brought by RATS empirically and compare its performance with reference
Model-Based algorithms.

1

Introduction

One of the hot topics of modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the ability for an agent to adapt its
behavior to changing tasks. In the literature, this problem is often linked to the setting of Lifelong
Reinforcement Learning (LRL) [Silver et al., 2013, Abel et al., 2018a,b] and learning in non-stationary
environments [Choi et al., 1999, Jaulmes et al., 2005, Hadoux, 2015]. In LRL, the tasks presented to
the agent change sequentially at discrete transition epochs [Silver et al., 2013]. Similarly, the nonstationary environments considered in the literature often evolve abruptly [Hadoux, 2015, Hadoux
et al., 2014, Doya et al., 2002, Da Silva et al., 2006, Choi et al., 1999, 2000, 2001, Campo et al., 1991,
Wiering, 2001]. In this paper, we investigate environments continuously changing over time that we
call Non-Stationary Markov Decision Processes (NSMDPs). In this setting, it is realistic to bound
the evolution rate of the environment using a Lipschitz Continuity (LC) assumption.
Model-based Reinforcement Learning approaches [Sutton et al., 1998] benefit from the knowledge
of a model allowing them to reach impressive performances, as demonstrated by the Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm [Silver et al., 2016]. In this matter, the necessity to have access to a
model is a great concern of AI [Asadi et al., 2018, Jaulmes et al., 2005, Doya et al., 2002, Da Silva
et al., 2006]. In the context of NSMDPs, we assume that an agent is provided with a snapshot model
when its action is computed. By this, we mean that it only has access to the current model of the
environment but not its future evolution, as if it took a photograph but would be unable to predict how
it is going to evolve. This hypothesis is realistic, because many environments have a tractable state
while their future evolution is hard to predict [Da Silva et al., 2006, Wiering, 2001]. In order to solve
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

