Training Language GANs from Scratch

Cyprien de Masson d’Autume∗ Mihaela Rosca∗ Jack Rae Shakir Mohamed
DeepMind
{cyprien,mihaelacr,jwrae,shakir}@google.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) enjoy great success at image generation, but have proven difficult to train in the domain of natural language. Challenges with gradient estimation, optimization instability, and mode collapse have
lead practitioners to resort to maximum likelihood pre-training, followed by small
amounts of adversarial fine-tuning. The benefits of GAN fine-tuning for language
generation are unclear, as the resulting models produce comparable or worse samples than traditional language models. We show it is in fact possible to train a
language GAN from scratch — without maximum likelihood pre-training. We
combine existing techniques such as large batch sizes, dense rewards and discriminator regularization to stabilize and improve language GANs. The resulting
model, ScratchGAN, performs comparably to maximum likelihood training on
EMNLP2017 News and WikiText-103 corpora according to quality and diversity
metrics.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised word level text generation is a stepping stone for a plethora of applications, from
dialogue generation to machine translation and summarization [1, 2, 3, 4]. While recent innovations
such as architectural changes and leveraging big datasets are promising [5, 6, 7], the problem of
unsupervised text generation is far from being solved.
Today, language models trained using maximum likelihood are the most successful and widespread
approach to text modeling, but they are not without limitations. Since they explicitly model sequence
probabilities, language models trained by maximum likelihood are often confined to an autoregressive structure, limiting applications such as one-shot language generation. Non-autoregressive maximum likelihood models have been proposed, but due to reduced model capacity they rely on distilling autoregressive models to achieve comparable performance on machine translation tasks [8].
When combined with maximum likelihood training, autoregressive modelling can result in poor
samples due exposure bias [9]– a distributional shift between training sequences used for learning
and model data required for generation. Recently, [10] showed that sampling from state of the
art language models can lead to repetitive, degenerate output. Scheduled sampling [9] has been
proposed as a solution, but is thought to encourage sample quality by reducing sample diversity,
inducing mode collapse [11].
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12] are an alternative to models trained via maximum
likelihood. GANs do not suffer from exposure bias since the model learns to sample during training:
the learning objective is to generate samples which are indistinguishable from real data according to
a discriminator. Since GANs don’t require an explicit probability model, they remove the restriction
to autoregressive architectures, allowing one shot feed-forward generation [13].
The sequential and discrete nature of text has made the application of GANs to language challenging,
with fundamental issues such as difficult gradient estimation and mode collapse yet to be addressed.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

