Novel positional encodings to enable
tree-based transformers
Chris Quirk
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
chrisq@microsoft.com

Vighnesh Leonardo Shiv
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA
vishiv@microsoft.com

Abstract
Neural models optimized for tree-based problems are of great value in tasks like
SQL query extraction and program synthesis. On sequence-structured data, transformers have been shown to learn relationships across arbitrary pairs of positions
more reliably than recurrent models. Motivated by this property, we propose
a method to extend transformers to tree-structured data, enabling sequence-totree, tree-to-sequence, and tree-to-tree mappings. Our approach abstracts the
transformer’s sinusoidal positional encodings, allowing us to instead use a novel
positional encoding scheme to represent node positions within trees. We evaluated our model in tree-to-tree program translation and sequence-to-tree semantic
parsing settings, achieving superior performance over both sequence-to-sequence
transformers and state-of-the-art tree-based LSTMs on several datasets. In particular, our results include a 22% absolute increase in accuracy on a JavaScript to
CoffeeScript translation dataset.

1

Introduction

1.1

Sequence modeling

Neural networks have been successfully applied to an increasing range of tasks, including speech
recognition and machine translation. These domains crucially depend on techniques for modeling
streams of audio and text, represented as dynamically sized sequences of tokens. Researchers have
historically handled such data primarily with recurrent techniques, which encode sequences into
fixed-length representations. The sequence-to-sequence LSTM model (Sutskever et al., 2014) is a
particularly notable example in recent times.
Recurrent architectures have some disadvantages. From a generalization perspective, recurrent
cells face the challenge of learning relationships between tokens many time steps apart. Attention
mechanisms are now commonly employed to mitigate this issue, driving new state-of-the-art results in
difficult tasks such as machine translation (Wu et al., 2016). From an efficiency standpoint, recurrence
does not lend itself to parallelism, often rendering recurrent models expensive to train. Recurrent
models are also difficult to interpret, employing an obtuse series of neural layers between time steps
that render relationships modeled within the data unclear.
The transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) is a stateless sequence-to-sequence architecture motivated by
these issues, constructed by forgoing recurrence altogether in favor of extensive attention. This design
allows information to flow over unbounded distances during training and inference, without the need
for complex gates and gradient clipping. This type of long distance flow, driven by learned attention
transforms over positional encoding, provides a powerful computational mechanism. Transformers
also lend themselves to easier interpretation, as their attention layers can at least reveal information
about learned relationships between elements of a sequence.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

