Learning Mean-Field Games

Xin Guo
University of California, Berkeley
xinguo@berkeley.edu

Anran Hu
University of California, Berkeley
anran_hu@berkeley.edu

Renyuan Xu
University of California, Berkeley
renyuanxu@berkeley.edu

Junzi Zhang
Stanford University
junziz@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a general mean-field game (GMFG) framework for simultaneous learning and decision-making in stochastic games with a large population. It
first establishes the existence of a unique Nash Equilibrium to this GMFG, and explains that naively combining Q-learning with the fixed-point approach in classical
MFGs yields unstable algorithms. It then proposes a Q-learning algorithm with
Boltzmann policy (GMF-Q), with analysis of convergence property and computational complexity. The experiments on repeated Ad auction problems demonstrate
that this GMF-Q algorithm is efficient and robust in terms of convergence and
learning accuracy. Moreover, its performance is superior in convergence, stability, and learning ability, when compared with existing algorithms for multi-agent
reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

Motivating example. This paper is motivated by the following Ad auction problem for an advertiser.
An Ad auction is a stochastic game on an Ad exchange platform among a large number of players, the
advertisers. In between the time a web user requests a page and the time the page is displayed, usually
within a millisecond, a Vickrey-type of second-best-price auction is run to incentivize interested
advertisers to bid for an Ad slot to display advertisement. Each advertiser has limited information
before each bid: first, her own valuation for a slot depends on an unknown conversion of clicks for
the item; secondly, she, should she win the bid, only knows the reward after the user’s activities on
the website are finished. In addition, she has a budget constraint in this repeated auction.
The question is, how should she bid in this online sequential repeated game when there is a large
population of bidders competing on the Ad platform, with unknown distributions of the conversion of
clicks and rewards?
Besides the Ad auction, there are many real-world problems involving a large number of players
and unknown systems. Examples include massive multi-player online role-playing games [19], high
frequency tradings [24], and the sharing economy [13].
Our work. Motivated by these problems, we consider a general framework of simultaneous learning
and decision-making in stochastic games with a large population. We formulate a general mean-fieldgame (GMFG) with incorporation of action distributions, (randomized) relaxed policies, and with
unknown rewards and dynamics. This general framework can also be viewed as a generalized version
of MFGs of McKean-Vlasov type [1], which is a different paradigm from the classical MFG. It is
also beyond the scope of the existing Q-learning framework for Markov decision problem (MDP)
with unknown distributions, as MDP is technically equivalent to a single player stochastic game.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

