Towards Automatic Concept-based Explanations

Amirata Ghorbani∗
Stanford University
amiratag@stanford.edu

James Wexler
Google Brain
jwexler@google.com

James Zou
Stanford University
jamesz@stanford.edu

Been Kim
Google Brain
beenkim@google.com

Abstract
Interpretability has become an important topic of research as more machine learning (ML) models are deployed and widely used to make important decisions. Most
of the current explanation methods provide explanations through feature importance scores, which identify features that are important for each individual input.
However, how to systematically summarize and interpret such per sample feature
importance scores itself is challenging. In this work, we propose principles and
desiderata for concept based explanation, which goes beyond per-sample features
to identify higher level human-understandable concepts that apply across the entire
dataset. We develop a new algorithm, ACE, to automatically extract visual concepts.
Our systematic experiments demonstrate that ACE discovers concepts that are
human-meaningful, coherent and important for the neural network’s predictions.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) becomes widely used in applications ranging from medicine [17] to
commerce [38], gaining insights into ML models’ predictions has become an important topic of
study, and in some cases a legal requirement [16]. The industry is also recognizing explainability as
one of the main components of responsible use of ML [1]; not just a nice-to-have component but a
must-have one.
Most of the recent literature on ML explanation methods has revolved around deep learning models.
Methods that are focused on providing explanations of ML models follow a common procedure: For
each input to the model, they alter individual features (pixels, super-pixels, word-vectors, etc) either
in the form of removal (zero-out, blur, shuffle, etc) [29, 5] or perturbation [35, 34] to approximate the
importance of each feature for model’s prediction. These “feature-based” explanations suffer from
several drawbacks. There has been a line of research focused on showing that these methods are not
as reliable [14, 3, 15]. For examples, Kindermans et al.discussed vulnerability even to simple shifts
in the input [21] while Ghorbani et al.designed adversarial perturbations against these methods. A
more important concern, however, is that human experiments show that these methods are susceptible
to human confirmation biases [20], and also showing that these methods do not increase human
understanding of the model and human trust in the model [28, 20]. For example, Kim et al. [20]
showed that given identical feature-based explanations, human subjects confidently find evidence for
completely contradicting conclusions.
As a consequence, a recent line of research has focused on providing explanations in the form of highlevel human “concepts” [46, 20]. Instead of assigning importance to individual features or pixels, the
∗

Work done while interning at Google Brain.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

