Probabilistic Logic Neural Networks for Reasoning

1

Meng Qu1,2 , Jian Tang1,3,4
Mila - Quebec AI Institute 2 University of Montréal
3
HEC Montréal 4 CIFAR AI Research Chair

Abstract
Knowledge graph reasoning, which aims at predicting the missing facts through
reasoning with the observed facts, is critical to many applications. Such a problem
has been widely explored by traditional logic rule-based approaches and recent
knowledge graph embedding methods. A principled logic rule-based approach is
the Markov Logic Network (MLN), which is able to leverage domain knowledge
with first-order logic and meanwhile handle the uncertainty. However, the inference
in MLNs is usually very difficult due to the complicated graph structures. Different
from MLNs, knowledge graph embedding methods (e.g. TransE, DistMult) learn
effective entity and relation embeddings for reasoning, which are much more
effective and efficient. However, they are unable to leverage domain knowledge.
In this paper, we propose the probabilistic Logic Neural Network (pLogicNet),
which combines the advantages of both methods. A pLogicNet defines the joint
distribution of all possible triplets by using a Markov logic network with first-order
logic, which can be efficiently optimized with the variational EM algorithm. In
the E-step, a knowledge graph embedding model is used for inferring the missing
triplets, while in the M-step, the weights of logic rules are updated based on both
the observed and predicted triplets. Experiments on multiple knowledge graphs
prove the effectiveness of pLogicNet over many competitive baselines.

1

Introduction

Many real-world entities are interconnected with each other through various types of relationships,
forming massive relational data. Naturally, such relational data can be characterized by a set of (h, r, t)
triplets, meaning that entity h has relation r with entity t. To store the triplets, many knowledge graphs
have been constructed such as Freebase [14] and WordNet [24]. These graphs have been proven
useful in many tasks, such as question answering [49], relation extraction [34] and recommender
systems [4]. However, one big challenge of knowledge graphs is that their coverage is limited.
Therefore, one fundamental problem is how to predict the missing links based on the existing triplets.
One type of methods for reasoning on knowledge graphs are the symbolic logic rule-based approaches [12, 17, 35, 41, 46]. These rules can be either handcrafted by domain experts [42] or mined
from knowledge graphs themselves [10]. Traditional methods such as expert systems [12, 17] use
hard logic rules for prediction. For example, given a logic rule ∀x, y, Husband(x, y) ⇒ Wife(y, x)
and a fact that A is the husband of B, we can derive that B is the wife of A. However, in many cases
logic rules can be imperfect or even contradictory, and hence effectively modeling the uncertainty
of logic rules is very critical. A more principled method for using logic rules is the Markov Logic
Network (MLN) [35, 39], which combines first-order logic and probabilistic graphical models. MLNs
learn the weights of logic rules in a probabilistic framework and thus soundly handle the uncertainty.
Such methods have been proven effective for reasoning on knowledge graphs. However, the inference
process in MLNs is difficult and inefficient due to the complicated graph structure among triplets.
Moreover, the results can be unsatisfactory as many missing triplets cannot be inferred by any rules.
Another type of methods for reasoning on knowledge graphs are the recent knowledge graph embedding based methods (e.g., TransE [3], DistMult [48] and ComplEx [44]). These methods learn
useful embeddings of entities and relations by projecting existing triplets into low-dimensional spaces.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

