A New Distribution on the Simplex
with Auto-Encoding Applications

Andrew Stirn∗, Tony Jebara†, David A Knowles‡
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{andrew.stirn,jebara,daknowles}@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We construct a new distribution for the simplex using the Kumaraswamy distribution and an ordered stick-breaking process. We explore and develop the
theoretical properties of this new distribution and prove that it exhibits symmetry
(exchangeability) under the same conditions as the well-known Dirichlet. Like
the Dirichlet, the new distribution is adept at capturing sparsity but, unlike the
Dirichlet, has an exact and closed form reparameterization–making it well suited
for deep variational Bayesian modeling. We demonstrate the distribution’s utility
in a variety of semi-supervised auto-encoding tasks. In all cases, the resulting
models achieve competitive performance commensurate with their simplicity, use
of explicit probability models, and abstinence from adversarial training.

1

Introduction

The Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [12] is a computationally efficient approach for performing
variational inference [11, 27] since it avoids per-data-point variational parameters through the use of
an inference network with shared global parameters. For models where stochastic gradient variational
Bayes requires Monte Carlo estimates in lieu of closed-form expectations, [23, 12] note that lowvariance estimators can be calculated from gradients of samples with respect to the variational
parameters that describe their generating densities. In the case of the normal distribution, such
gradients are straightforward to obtain via an explicit, tractable reparameterization, which is often
referred to as the “reparameterization trick”. Unfortunately, most distributions do not admit such
a convenient reparameterization. Computing low-bias and low-variance stochastic gradients is an
active area of research with a detailed breakdown of current methods presented in [4]. Of particular
interest in Bayesian modeling is the well-known Dirichlet distribution that often serves as a conjugate
prior for latent categorical variables. Perhaps the most desirable property of a Dirichlet prior is its
ability to induce sparsity by concentrating mass towards the corners of the simplex. In this work, we
develop a surrogate distribution for the Dirichlet that offers explicit, tractable reparameterization, the
ability to capture sparsity, and has barycentric symmetry (exchangeability) properties equivalent to
the Dirichlet.
Generative processes can be used to infer missing class labels in semi-supervised learning. The
first VAE-based method that used deep generative models for semi-supervised learning derived two
variational objectives for the same the generative process–one for when labels are observed and one
for when labels are latent–that are jointly optimized [13]. As they note, however, the variational
distribution over class labels appears only in the objective for unlabeled data. Its absence from
∗

jointly affiliated with New York Genome Center
jointly affiliated with Spotify Technology S.A.
‡
jointly affiliated with Columbia University’s Data Science Institute and the New York Genome Center
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

