A Refined Margin Distribution Analysis for Forest
Representation Learning

Shen-Huan Lyu, Liang Yang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{lvsh,yangl,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we formulate the forest representation learning approach named
casForest as an additive model, and show that the generalization error can be
bounded by O(ln m/m), when the margin ratio related to the margin standard
deviation against the margin mean is sufficiently small. This inspires us to optimize
the ratio. To this end, we design a margin distribution reweighting approach for the
deep forest model to attain a small margin ratio. Experiments confirm the relation
between the margin distribution and generalization performance. We remark that
this study offers a novel understanding of casForest from the perspective of the
margin theory and further guides the layer-by-layer forest representation learning.

1

Introduction

In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved excellent performance in many application
scenarios such as face recognition and automatic speech recognition [19]. It is well known that
deep neural networks are difficult to be interpreted. This severely restricts the development of deep
learning in application scenarios where the interpretability of the model is crucial. Moreover, deep
neural networks are data-hungry and the performance will degrades significantly when the size of the
training data is not big enough [12, 20]. In real-world tasks, due to the high cost of data collection
and labeling, the amount of labeled training data may be insufficient for deep neural networks.
In such a situation, conventional learning methods such as support-vector machines (SVMs) [7],
random forests (RFs) [3], gradient boosting decision trees (GBDTs) [15, 5], etc., are still good choices.
By realizing that the essence of deep learning lies in the layer-by-layer processing, in-model feature
transformation, and sufficient model complexity, recently Zhou & Feng [32, 33] propose the deep
forest model and the gcForest algorithm that incorporate forest representation learning. It can achieve
excellent performance on a broad range of tasks, and even perform well on small or middle-scale
data. Later on, a more efficient improvement is made by Pang et al. [21]. Feng & Zhou [13] show
that forests are able to do auto-encoder which was considered as a specialty of neural networks.
The tree-based multi-layer model can do hierarchical distributed representation learning which was
thought to be a special feature of neural networks [14]. Utkin & Ryabinin [25] propose a Siamese
deep forest as an alternative to the Siamese neural network for metric learning tasks.
The cascade forest (abbr. casForest) structure plays an important role in Deep Forest, and it is crucial
for the layer-by-layer processing. This paper attempts to explain the benefits of casForest from the
perspective of the margin theory.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

