Unlabeled Data Improves Adversarial Robustness
Yair Carmon⇤
Stanford University
yairc@stanford.edu

Aditi Raghunathan*
Stanford University
aditir@stanford.edu

Percy Liang
Stanford University
pliang@cs.stanford.edu

Ludwig Schmidt
UC Berkeley
ludwig@berkeley.edu

John C. Duchi
Stanford University
jduchi@stanford.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate, theoretically and empirically, that adversarial robustness can
significantly benefit from semisupervised learning. Theoretically, we revisit the
simple Gaussian model of Schmidt et al. [41] that shows a sample complexity gap
between standard and robust classification. We prove that unlabeled data bridges
this gap: a simple semisupervised learning procedure (self-training) achieves high
robust accuracy using the same number of labels required for achieving high standard accuracy. Empirically, we augment CIFAR-10 with 500K unlabeled images
sourced from 80 Million Tiny Images and use robust self-training to outperform
state-of-the-art robust accuracies by over 5 points in (i) `1 robustness against several strong attacks via adversarial training and (ii) certified `2 and `1 robustness
via randomized smoothing. On SVHN, adding the dataset’s own extra training set
with the labels removed provides gains of 4 to 10 points, within 1 point of the gain
from using the extra labels.
1

Introduction

The past few years have seen an intense research interest in making models robust to adversarial
examples [44, 4, 3]. Yet despite a wide range of proposed defenses, the state-of-the-art in adversarial
robustness is far from satisfactory. Recent work points towards sample complexity as a possible
reason for the small gains in robustness: Schmidt et al. [41] show that in a simple model, learning
a classifier with non-trivial adversarially robust accuracy requires substantially more samples than
achieving good “standard” accuracy. Furthermore, recent empirical work obtains promising gains
in robustness via transfer learning of a robust classifier from a larger labeled dataset [18]. While
both theory and experiments suggest that more training data leads to greater robustness, following
this suggestion can be difficult due to the cost of gathering additional data and especially obtaining
high-quality labels.
To alleviate the need for carefully labeled data, in this paper we study adversarial robustness through
the lens of semisupervised learning. Our approach is motivated by two basic observations. First,
adversarial robustness essentially asks that predictors be stable around naturally occurring inputs.
Learning to satisfy such a stability constraint should not inherently require labels. Second, the added
requirement of robustness fundamentally alters the regime where semi-supervision is useful. Prior
work on semisupervised learning mostly focuses on improving the standard accuracy by leveraging
⇤

Equal contribution.
Code and data are available on GitHub at https://github.com/yaircarmon/semisup-adv and on
CodaLab at https://bit.ly/349WsAC.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

