Learning search spaces for Bayesian optimization:
Another view of hyperparameter transfer learning

Valerio Perrone, Huibin Shen, Matthias Seeger, Cédric Archambeau, Rodolphe Jenatton∗
Amazon
Berlin, Germany
{vperrone, huibishe, matthis, cedrica}@amazon.com

Abstract
Bayesian optimization (BO) is a successful methodology to optimize black-box
functions that are expensive to evaluate. While traditional methods optimize each
black-box function in isolation, there has been recent interest in speeding up BO by
transferring knowledge across multiple related black-box functions. In this work,
we introduce a method to automatically design the BO search space by relying
on evaluations of previous black-box functions. We depart from the common
practice of defining a set of arbitrary search ranges a priori by considering search
space geometries that are learned from historical data. This simple, yet effective
strategy can be used to endow many existing BO methods with transfer learning
properties. Despite its simplicity, we show that our approach considerably boosts
BO by reducing the size of the search space, thus accelerating the optimization of
a variety of black-box optimization problems. In particular, the proposed approach
combined with random search results in a parameter-free, easy-to-implement,
robust hyperparameter optimization strategy. We hope it will constitute a natural
baseline for further research attempting to warm-start BO.

1

Introduction

Tuning the hyperparameters (HPs) of machine leaning (ML) models and in particular deep neural
networks is critical to achieve good predictive performance. Unfortunately, the mapping of the HPs
to the prediction error is in general a black-box in the sense that neither its analytical form nor its
gradients are available. Moreover, every (noisy) evaluation of this black-box is time-consuming as
it requires retraining the model from scratch. Bayesian optimization (BO) provides a principled
approach to this problem: an acquisition function, which takes as input a cheap probabilistic surrogate
model of the target black-box function, repeatedly scores promising HP configurations by performing
an explore-exploit trade-off [30, 22, 37]. The surrogate model is built from the set of black-box
function evaluations observed so far. For example, a popular approach is to impose a Gaussian
process (GP) prior on the unobserved target black-box function f (x). Based on a set of evaluations
{f (xi )}ni=1 , possibly perturbed by Gaussian noise, one can compute the posterior GP, characterized
by a posterior mean and a posterior (co)variance function. The next query points are selected by
optimizing an acquisition function, such as the expected improvement [30], which is analytically
tractable given these two quantities. While BO takes the human out of the loop in ML by automating
HP optimization (HPO), it still requires the user to define a suitable search space a priori. Defining a
default search space for a particular ML problem is difficult and left to human experts.
In this work, we automatically design the BO search space, which is a critical input to any BO
procedure applied to HPO, based on historical data. The proposed approach relies on the observation
that HPO problems occurring in ML are often related (for example, tuning the HPs of an ML model
∗

Work done while affiliated with Amazon; now at Google Brain, Berlin, rjenatton@google.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

