AttentionXML: Label Tree-based Attention-Aware
Deep Model for High-Performance Extreme
Multi-Label Text Classification
Ronghui You1 , Zihan Zhang1 , Ziye Wang2 , Suyang Dai1 ,
Hiroshi Mamitsuka5,6 , Shanfeng Zhu1,3,4,∗
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
2
Centre for Computational Systems Biology, School of Mathematical Sciences,
3
Shanghai Institute of Artificial Intelligence Algorithms and ISTBI,
4
Key Lab of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence (MOE),
Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
5
Bioinformatics Center, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Japan;
6
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo and Helsinki, Finland
{rhyou18,zhangzh17,zywang17,sydai16}@fudan.edu.cn
mami@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp, zhusf@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Extreme multi-label text classification (XMTC) is an important problem in the era
of big data, for tagging a given text with the most relevant multiple labels from an
extremely large-scale label set. XMTC can be found in many applications, such as
item categorization, web page tagging, and news annotation. Traditionally most
methods used bag-of-words (BOW) as inputs, ignoring word context as well as
deep semantic information. Recent attempts to overcome the problems of BOW
by deep learning still suffer from 1) failing to capture the important subtext for
each label and 2) lack of scalability against the huge number of labels. We propose
a new label tree-based deep learning model for XMTC, called AttentionXML,
with two unique features: 1) a multi-label attention mechanism with raw text as
input, which allows to capture the most relevant part of text to each label; and 2) a
shallow and wide probabilistic label tree (PLT), which allows to handle millions
of labels, especially for "tail labels". We empirically compared the performance
of AttentionXML with those of eight state-of-the-art methods over six benchmark
datasets, including Amazon-3M with around 3 million labels. AttentionXML
outperformed all competing methods under all experimental settings. Experimental
results also show that AttentionXML achieved the best performance against tail
labels among label tree-based methods. The code and datasets are available at
http://github.com/yourh/AttentionXML .

1

Introduction

Extreme multi-label text classification (XMTC) is a natural language processing (NLP) task for
tagging each given text with its most relevant multiple labels from an extremely large-scale label set.
XMTC predicts multiple labels for a text, which is different from multi-class classification, where
each instance has only one associated label. Recently, XMTC has become increasingly important,
due to the fast growth of the data scale. In fact, over hundreds of thousands, even millions of labels
and samples can be found in various domains, such as item categorization in e-commerce, web page
tagging, news annotation, to name a few. XMTC poses great computational challenges for developing
effective and efficient classifiers with limited computing resource, such as an extremely large number
of samples/labels and a large number of "tail labels" with very few positive samples.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

