Coresets for Clustering with Fairness Constraints

Lingxiao Huang∗
Yale University, USA

Shaofeng H.-C. Jiang∗
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi∗
Yale University, USA

Abstract
In a recent work, [20] studied the following “fair” variants of classical clustering
problems such as k-means and k-median: given a set of n data points in Rd and
a binary type associated to each data point, the goal is to cluster the points while
ensuring that the proportion of each type in each cluster is roughly the same as
its underlying proportion. Subsequent work has focused on either extending this
setting to when each data point has multiple, non-disjoint sensitive types such as
race and gender [7], or to address the problem that the clustering algorithms in the
above work do not scale well [42, 8, 6]. The main contribution of this paper is an
approach to clustering with fairness constraints that involve multiple, non-disjoint
types, that is also scalable. Our approach is based on novel constructions of
coresets: for the k-median objective, we construct an ε-coreset of size O(Γk 2 ε−d )
where Γ is the number of distinct collections of groups that a point may belong
to, and for the k-means objective, we show how to construct an ε-coreset of size
O(Γk 3 ε−d−1 ). The former result is the first known coreset construction for the fair
clustering problem with the k-median objective, and the latter result removes the
dependence on the size of the full dataset as in [42] and generalizes it to multiple,
non-disjoint types. Plugging our coresets into existing algorithms for fair clustering
such as [6] results in the fastest algorithms for several cases. Empirically, we
assess our approach over the Adult, Bank, Diabetes and Athlete dataset, and
show that the coreset sizes are much smaller than the full dataset; applying coresets
indeed accelerates the running time of computing the fair clustering objective while
ensuring that the resulting objective difference is small. We also achieve a speed-up
to recent fair clustering algorithms [6, 7] by incorporating our coreset construction.

1

Introduction

Clustering algorithms are widely used in automated decision-making tasks, e.g., unsupervised learning [43], feature engineering [33, 27], and recommendation systems [10, 40, 21]. With the increasing
applications of clustering algorithms in human-centric contexts, there is a growing concern that, if
left unchecked, they can lead to discriminatory outcomes for protected groups, e.g., females/black
people. For instance, the proportion of a minority group assigned to some cluster can be far from
its underlying proportion, even if clustering algorithms do not take the sensitive attribute into its
decision making [20]. Such an outcome may, in turn, lead to unfair treatment of minority groups,
e.g., women may receive proportionally fewer job recommendations with high salary [22, 38] due to
their underrepresentation in the cluster of high salary recommendations.
To address this issue, Chierichetti et al. [20] recently proposed the fair clustering problem that
requires the clustering assignment to be balanced with respect to a binary sensitive type, e.g., sex.2
Given a set X of n data points in Rd and a binary type associated to each data point, the goal is
to cluster the points such that the proportion of each type in each cluster is roughly the same as
∗
2

Authors are listed in alphabetical order of family names. Full version: [31].
A type consists of several disjoint groups, e.g., the sex type consists of females and males.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

