Sample-Efficient Deep Reinforcement Learning via
Episodic Backward Update

Su Young Lee, Sungik Choi, Sae-Young Chung
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea
{suyoung.l, si_choi, schung}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose Episodic Backward Update (EBU) – a novel deep reinforcement learning algorithm with a direct value propagation. In contrast to the conventional
use of the experience replay with uniform random sampling, our agent samples
a whole episode and successively propagates the value of a state to its previous
states. Our computationally efficient recursive algorithm allows sparse and delayed rewards to propagate directly through all transitions of the sampled episode.
We theoretically prove the convergence of the EBU method and experimentally
demonstrate its performance in both deterministic and stochastic environments.
Especially in 49 games of Atari 2600 domain, EBU achieves the same mean and
median human normalized performance of DQN by using only 5% and 10% of
samples, respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been successful in many complex environments such as
the Arcade Learning Environment [2] and Go [18]. Despite DRL’s impressive achievements, it is
still impractical in terms of sample efficiency. To achieve human-level performance in the Arcade
Learning Environment, Deep Q-Network (DQN) [14] requires 200 million frames of experience for
training which corresponds to 39 days of gameplay in real-time. Clearly, there is still a tremendous
gap between the learning process of humans and that of deep reinforcement learning agents. This
problem is even more crucial for tasks such as autonomous driving, where we cannot risk many trials
and errors due to the high cost of samples.
One of the reasons why DQN suffers from such low sample efficiency is the sampling method from
the replay memory. In many practical problems, an RL agent observes sparse and delayed rewards.
There are two main problems when we sample one-step transitions uniformly at random. (1) We
have a low chance of sampling a transition with a reward for its sparsity. The transitions with rewards
should always be updated to assign credits for actions that maximize the expected return. (2) In the
early stages of training when all values are initialized to zero, there is no point in updating values
of one-step transitions with zero rewards if the values of future transitions with nonzero rewards
have not been updated yet. Without the future reward signals propagated, the sampled transition will
always be trained to return a zero value.
In this work, we propose Episodic Backward Update (EBU) to present solutions for the problems
raised above. When we observe an event, we scan through our memory and seek for the past event
that caused the later one. Such an episodic control method is how humans normally recognize the
cause and effect relationship [10]. Inspired by this, we can solve the first problem (1) by sampling
transitions in an episodic manner. Then, we can be assured that at least one transition with a non-zero
reward is used for the value update. We can solve the second problem (2) by updating the values of
transitions in a backward manner in which the transitions were made. Afterward, we can perform an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

