Certifying Geometric Robustness of Neural Networks

Mislav Balunović, Maximilian Baader, Gagandeep Singh, Timon Gehr, Martin Vechev
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
{mislav.balunovic, mbaader, gsingh, timon.gehr, martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The use of neural networks in safety-critical computer vision systems calls for their
robustness certification against natural geometric transformations (e.g., rotation,
scaling). However, current certification methods target mostly norm-based pixel
perturbations and cannot certify robustness against geometric transformations. In
this work, we propose a new method to compute sound and asymptotically optimal
linear relaxations for any composition of transformations. Our method is based on
a novel combination of sampling and optimization. We implemented the method
in a system called D EEP G and demonstrated that it certifies significantly more
complex geometric transformations than existing methods on both defended and
undefended networks while scaling to large architectures.

1

Introduction

Robustness against geometric transformations is a critical property that neural networks deployed
in computer vision systems should satisfy. However, recent work [1, 2, 3] has shown that by using
natural transformations (e.g., rotations), one can generate adversarial examples [4, 5] that cause the
network to misclassify the image, posing a safety threat to the entire system. To address this issue, one
would ideally like to prove that a given network is free of such geometric adversarial examples. While
there has been substantial work on certifying robustness to changes in pixel intensity (e.g., [6, 7, 8]),
only the recent work of [9] proposed a method to certify robustness to geometric transformations. Its
key idea is summarized in Fig. 1: Here, the goal is to prove that any image obtained by translating
the original image by some δx , δy ∈ [−4, 4] is classified to label 3. To accomplish this task, [9]
propagates the image and the parameters δx , δy through every component of the transformation using
interval bound propagation. The output region I is a convex shape capturing all images that can be
obtained by translating the original image between −4 and 4 pixels. Finally, I is fed to a standard
neural network verifier which tries to prove that all images in I classify to 3. This method can also be
improved using tighter relaxation based on Polyhedra [10]. Unfortunately, as we show later, bound
propagation is not satisfactory. The core issue is that any approach based on bound propagation
inherently accumulates loss for every intermediate result, often producing regions that are too coarse
to allow the neural network verifier to succeed. Instead, we propose a new method based on sampling
and optimization which computes a convex relaxation for the entire composition of transformations.
Convex relaxations of translation (δx , δy ,

+δy

+δx

P
G

)

NEURAL NETWORK
I

δx , δy ∈ [−4, 4]

Robust
VERIFIER
Not robust

Interval [9]

Polyhedra

D EEP G

Figure 1: End-to-end certification of geometric robustness using different convex relaxations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

