Mixtape: Breaking the Softmax Bottleneck Efficiently

Zhilin Yang1 , Thang Luong2 , Ruslan Salakhutdinov1 , Quoc Le2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google Brain
{zhiliny,rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu, {thangluong,qvl}@google.com

Abstract
The softmax bottleneck has been shown to limit the expressiveness of neural language models. Mixture of Softmaxes (MoS) is an effective approach to address
such a theoretical limitation, but are expensive compared to softmax in terms of
both memory and time. We propose Mixtape, an output layer that breaks the softmax bottleneck more efficiently with three novel techniques—logit space vector
gating, sigmoid tree decomposition, and gate sharing. On four benchmarks including language modeling and machine translation, the Mixtape layer substantially
improves the efficiency over the MoS layer by 3.5x to 10.5x while obtaining similar
performance. A network equipped with Mixtape is only 20% to 34% slower than a
softmax-based network with 10-30K vocabulary sizes, and outperforms softmax in
perplexity and translation quality.

1

Introduction

Softmax has been a standard output layer for a wide variety of neural networks, including the
majority of neural language models [5, 2, 3, 8, 11]. However, as pointed out by [19], softmax is a
fundamental limitation of the expressiveness of neural language models, because it constrains the
output representations to be low-rank, which might not be sufficient for modeling the complexity
of natural language. Such a limitation is called the softmax bottleneck. To break the softmax
bottleneck, [19] proposed Mixture of Softmaxes (MoS) that introduces discrete latent variables into
the output layer so that the log probability matrix is high-rank because of the log-sum-exp nonlinear
transformation. However, MoS is expensive compared to softmax in terms of both memory and time,
which makes it less practically useful when computational budgets are limited.
To reduce the computational cost of MoS, we propose a novel output layer Mixtape to break the
softmax bottleneck efficiently. Mixtape can be plugged into any existing networks as an additional
layer before the cross entropy loss. Instead of employing a scalar mixture in the probability space as in
MoS, Mixtape applies a vector gating mechanism in the logit space to avoid using multiple expensive
softmaxes. In addition, Mixtape uses two more novel techniques to further reduce the computational
cost. First, the vector gating mechanism is expensive because we need to compute a softmax gate for
each word in the vocabulary. We propose sigmoid tree decomposition that decomposes a softmax
probability gating distribution into a depth-2 binary tree structure, where each branch carries a portion
of the probability mass determined by a sigmoid function. Sigmoid tree decomposition is much more
efficient because it avoids the reduction and division operations in softmax. The other technique
gate sharing is to share the gate values for all infrequent words, resulting in partially high-rank
representations. This technique saves a considerable amount of memory and computation without
affecting the performance because the gate values of infrequent words are usually hard to accurately
estimate even without sharing the gates.
With all the above techniques combined, Mixtape substantially improves the efficiency of MoS while
obtaining comparable or even better performances on four benchmarks, including language modeling
and machine translation. With normal vocabulary sizes (e.g., 10K-30K), the Mixtape layer is 1.6x
to 11.5x fater than the MoS layer given the same batch size, and is 3.5x to 10.5x faster given the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

