Assessing Disparate Impact of Personalized
Interventions: Identifiability and Bounds
Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu

Angela Zhou
Cornell University
New York, NY
az434@cornell.edu

Abstract
Personalized interventions in social services, education, and healthcare leverage
individual-level causal effect predictions in order to give the best treatment to each
individual or to prioritize program interventions for the individuals most likely to
benefit. While the sensitivity of these domains compels us to evaluate the fairness
of such policies, we show that actually auditing their disparate impacts per standard
observational metrics, such as true positive rates, is impossible since ground truths
are unknown. Whether our data is experimental or observational, an individual’s
actual outcome under an intervention different than that received can never be
known, only predicted based on features. We prove how we can nonetheless pointidentify these quantities under the additional assumption of monotone treatment
response, which may be reasonable in many applications. We further provide a
sensitivity analysis for this assumption by means of sharp partial-identification
bounds under violations of monotonicity of varying strengths. We show how to use
our results to audit personalized interventions using partially-identified ROC and
xROC curves and demonstrate this in a case study of a French job training dataset.

1

Introduction

The expanding use of predictive algorithms in the public sector for risk assessment has sparked recent
concern and study of fairness considerations [3, 9, 10]. One critique of the use of predictive risk
assessment argues that the discussion should be reframed to instead focus on the role of positive
interventions in distributing beneficial resources, such as directing pre-trial services to prevent
recidivism, rather than in meting out pre-trial detention based on a risk prediction [8]; or using risk
assessment in child welfare services to provide families with additional childcare resources rather
than to inform the allocation of harmful suspicion [29, 62]. However, due to limited resources,
interventions are necessarily targeted. Recent research specifically investigates the use of models that
predict an intervention’s benefit in order to efficiently target their allocation, such as in developing
triage tools to target homeless youth [46, 57]. Both ethics and law compel such personalized
interventions to be fair and to avoid disparities in how they impact different groups defined by certain
protected attributes, such as race, age, or gender.
The delivery of interventions to better target those individuals deemed most likely to respond well,
even if a prediction or policy allocation rule does not have access to the protected attribute, might still
result in disparate impact (with regards to social welfare) for the same reasons that these disparities
occur in machine learning classification models [21]. (See Appendix C for an expanded discussion
on our use of the term “disparate impact.”) However, in the problem of personalized interventions,
the “fundamental problem of causal inference,” that outcomes are not observed for interventions not
administered, poses a fundamental challenge for evaluating the fairness of any intervention allocation
rule, as the true “labels” of intervention efficacy of any individual are never observed in the dataset.
Metrics commonly assessed in the study of fairness in machine learning, such as group true positive
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

