Quaternion Knowledge Graph Embeddings

Shuai Zhang†∗, Yi Tayψ ∗, Lina Yao† , Qi Liuφ
†
University of New South Wales
ψ
Nanyang Technological University, φ University of Oxford

Abstract
In this work, we move beyond the traditional complex-valued representations,
introducing more expressive hypercomplex representations to model entities and
relations for knowledge graph embeddings. More specifically, quaternion embeddings, hypercomplex-valued embeddings with three imaginary components, are
utilized to represent entities. Relations are modelled as rotations in the quaternion
space. The advantages of the proposed approach are: (1) Latent inter-dependencies
(between all components) are aptly captured with Hamilton product, encouraging a
more compact interaction between entities and relations; (2) Quaternions enable
expressive rotation in four-dimensional space and have more degree of freedom
than rotation in complex plane; (3) The proposed framework is a generalization of
ComplEx on hypercomplex space while offering better geometrical interpretations,
concurrently satisfying the key desiderata of relational representation learning
(i.e., modeling symmetry, anti-symmetry and inversion). Experimental results
demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on four wellestablished knowledge graph completion benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Knowledge graphs (KGs) live at the heart of many semantic applications (e.g., question answering,
search, and natural language processing). KGs enable not only powerful relational reasoning but also
the ability to learn structural representations. Reasoning with KGs have been an extremely productive
research direction, with many innovations leading to improvements to many downstream applications.
However, real-world KGs are usually incomplete. As such, completing KGs and predicting missing
links between entities have gained growing interest. Learning low-dimensional representations of
entities and relations for KGs is an effective solution for this task.
Learning KG embeddings in the complex space C has been proven to be a highly effective inductive
bias, largely owing to its intrinsic asymmetrical properties. This is demonstrated by the ComplEx
embedding method which infers new relational triplets with the asymmetrical Hermitian product.
In this paper, we move beyond complex representations, exploring hypercomplex space for learning
KG embeddings. More concretely, quaternion embeddings are utilized to represent entities and
relations. Each quaternion embedding is a vector in the hypercomplex space H with three imaginary
components i, j, k, as opposed to the standard complex space C with a single real component r and
imaginary component i. We propose a new scoring function, where the head entity Qh is rotated by
the relational quaternion embedding through Hamilton product. This is followed by a quaternion
inner product with the tail entity Qt .
There are numerous benefits of this formulation. (1) The Hamilton operator provides a greater extent
of expressiveness compared to the complex Hermitian operator and the inner product in Euclidean
space. The Hamilton operator forges inter-latent interactions between all of r, i, j, k, resulting in
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

