Optimal Sampling and Clustering
in the Stochastic Block Model
Se-Young Yun
KAIST
Daejeon, South Korea
yunseyoung@kaist.ac.kr

Alexandre Proutière
KTH
Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
This paper investigates the design of joint adaptive sampling and clustering algorithms in networks whose structure follows the celebrated Stochastic Block
Model (SBM). To extract hidden clusters, the interaction between edges (pairs
of nodes) may be sampled sequentially, in an adaptive manner. After gathering
samples, the learner returns cluster estimates. We derive information-theoretical
upper bounds on the cluster recovery rate. These bounds actually reveal the optimal
sequential edge sampling strategy, and interestingly, the latter does not depend on
the sampling budget, but on the parameters of the SBM only. We devise a joint
sampling and clustering algorithm matching the recovery rate upper bounds. The
algorithm initially uses a fraction of the sampling budget to estimate the SBM
parameters, and to learn the optimal sampling strategy. This strategy then guides
the remaining sampling process, which confers the optimality of the algorithm.
We show both analytically and numerically that adaptive edge sampling yields
important improvements over random sampling (traditionally used in the SBM
analysis). For example, we prove that adaptive sampling significantly enlarges
the region of the SBM parameters where asymptotically exact cluster recovery is
feasible.

1

Introduction

Extracting clusters in networks is a central task in many fields including biology, computer science,
and social science. The Stochastic Block Model (SBM) [9] and its extensions provide a natural
statistical benchmark to assess the performance of network clustering algorithms. The SBM defines a
random graph with n nodes and consisting of K non-overlapping clusters, V1 , . . . , VK , of respective
sizes α1 n, . . . , αK n with αk > 0 for all k. An edge between two nodes from respective clusters
Vi and Vj indicates whether these nodes interact and appears in the graph with probability pij ,
independently of other edges. The SBM is hence parametrized by p = [pij ]1≤i,j≤K and α =
(α1 , . . . , αK ). We assume that the relative cluster sizes α do not depend on the network size n,
whereas on the contrary, p may vary with n. Most existing work on the SBM and its extensions
investigate the problem of recovering the clusters from an observed realization of the random graph.
In contrast, in this paper, we are interested in active learning scenarios where the interaction between
pairs of nodes may be sampled sequentially, which allows a given node pair to be sampled several
times. In these scenarios, the algorithm samples edges in an adaptive manner: In a given round, the
edge selected to be sampled may depend on the information gathered previously, and should the
algorithm select the edge (v, w) ∈ Vi × Vj , it observes a Bernoulli r.v. with mean pij , independent
of the previous observations. The algorithm has an observation budget of T samples (typically
depending on the network size), and after collecting these samples, it should return estimates of the
clusters. The objective is to devise a joint sampling and clustering algorithm such that the estimated
clusters are as accurate as possible. Specifically, we aim at characterizing the minimal cluster recovery
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

