Towards Optimal Off-Policy Evaluation for
Reinforcement Learning with Marginalized
Importance Sampling

Tengyang Xie∗
Dept. of Computer Science
UIUC
Urbana, IL 61801
tx10@illinois.edu

Yifei Ma
AWS AI Labs
Amazon.com Services, Inc.
East Palo Alto, CA 94303
yifeim@amazon.com

Yu-Xiang Wang
Dept. of Computer Science,
UC Santa Barbara
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the many real-world applications of reinforcement learning (RL) that
require safe-policy iterations, we consider the problem of off-policy evaluation
(OPE) — the problem of evaluating a new policy using the historical data obtained by different behavior policies — under the model of nonstationary episodic
Markov Decision Processes (MDP) with a long horizon and a large action space.
Existing importance sampling (IS) methods often suffer from large variance that
depends exponentially on the RL horizon H. To solve this problem, we consider
a marginalized importance sampling (MIS) estimator that recursively estimates
the state marginal distribution for the target policy at every step. MIS achieves a
mean-squared error of

 π


1 XH
dt (st )2
πt (at |st ) π
Eµ µ
Varµ
V (st+1 ) + rt st + Õ(n−1.5 )
t=1
n
dt (st )2
µt (at |st ) t+1
where µ and π are the logging and target policies, dµt (st ) and dπt (st ) are the
marginal distribution of the state at tth step, H is the horizon, n is the sample
π
size and Vt+1
is the value function of the MDP under π. The result matches the
Cramer-Rao lower bound in Jiang and Li [2016] up to a multiplicative factor of H.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first OPE estimation error bound with a
polynomial dependence on H. Besides theory, we show empirical superiority of our
method in time-varying, partially observable, and long-horizon RL environments.

1

Introduction

The problem of off-policy evaluation (OPE), which predicts the performance of a policy with data only
sampled by a behavior policy [Sutton and Barto, 1998], is crucial for using reinforcement learning
(RL) algorithms responsibly in many real-world applications. In many settings where RL algorithms
have already been deployed, e.g., targeted advertising and marketing [Bottou et al., 2013; Tang et al.,
2013; Chapelle et al., 2015; Theocharous et al., 2015; Thomas et al., 2017] or medical treatments
[Murphy et al., 2001; Ernst et al., 2006; Raghu et al., 2017], online policy evaluation is usually
expensive, risky, or even unethical. Also, using a bad policy in these applications is dangerous and
could lead to severe consequences. Solving OPE is often the starting point in many RL applications.
To tackle the problem of OPE, the idea of importance sampling (IS) corrects the mismatch in the
distributions under the behavior policy and target policy. It also provides typically unbiased or
∗

The research was partially conducted when TX was visiting YW and YM at Amazon AWS AI Labs during
his internship in Summer 2018.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

