Subspace Attack: Exploiting Promising Subspaces for
Query-Efficient Black-box Attacks

Ziang Yan1,3* Yiwen Guo2,3* Changshui Zhang1
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
State Key Lab of Intelligent Technologies and Systems,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
Department of Automation,Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Bytedance AI Lab 3 Intel Labs China
1

yza18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

guoyiwen.ai@bytedance.com

zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unlike the white-box counterparts that are widely studied and readily accessible,
adversarial examples in black-box settings are generally more Herculean on account
of the difficulty of estimating gradients. Many methods achieve the task by issuing
numerous queries to target classification systems, which makes the whole procedure
costly and suspicious to the systems. In this paper, we aim at reducing the query
complexity of black-box attacks in this category. We propose to exploit gradients
of a few reference models which arguably span some promising search subspaces.
Experimental results show that, in comparison with the state-of-the-arts, our method
can gain up to 2× and 4× reductions in the requisite mean and medium numbers
of queries with much lower failure rates even if the reference models are trained
on a small and inadequate dataset disjoint to the one for training the victim model.
Code and models for reproducing our results are available at https://github.
com/ZiangYan/subspace-attack.pytorch.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [37]
that are typically formed by perturbing benign examples with an intention to cause misclassifications.
According to the amount of information that is exposed and possible to be leveraged, an intelligent
adversary shall adopt different categories of attacks. Getting access to critical information (e.g., the
architecture and learned parameters) about a target DNN, the adversaries generally prefer white-box
attacks [37, 7, 24, 2, 23]. After a few rounds of forward and backward passes, such attacks are capable
of generating images that are perceptually indistinguishable to the benign ones but would successfully
trick the target DNN into making incorrect classifications. Whereas, so long as little information is
exposed, the adversaries will have to adopt black-box attacks [28, 22, 3, 25, 13, 26, 38, 14, 8] instead.
In general, black-box attacks require no more information than the confidence score from a target
and thus the threat model is more realistic in practice. Over the past few years, remarkable progress
has been made in this regard. While initial efforts reveal the transferability of adversarial examples
and devote to learning substitute models [28, 22], recent methods focus more on gradient estimation
accomplished via zeroth-order optimizations [3, 25, 13, 26, 38, 14]. By issuing classification queries
to the target (a.k.a., victim model), these methods learn to approach its actual gradient w.r.t. any input,
so as to perform adversarial attacks just like in the white-box setting. Despite many practical merits,
high query complexity is virtually inevitable for computing sensible estimations of input-gradients in
some methods, making their procedures costly and probably suspicious to the classification system.
*The first two authors contributed equally to the work. Work was done when YG was with Intel Labs China.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

