Finite-Sample Analysis for SARSA with Linear
Function Approximation
Shaofeng Zou
Department of Electrical Engineering
University at Buffalo, The State University of New York
Buffalo, NY 14228
szou3@buffalo.edu
Tengyu Xu
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
xu.3260@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
SARSA is an on-policy algorithm to learn a Markov decision process policy in
reinforcement learning. We investigate the SARSA algorithm with linear function approximation under the non-i.i.d. data, where a single sample trajectory is
available. With a Lipschitz continuous policy improvement operator that is smooth
enough, SARSA has been shown to converge asymptotically [28, 23]. However, its
non-asymptotic analysis is challenging and remains unsolved due to the non-i.i.d.
samples and the fact that the behavior policy changes dynamically with time. In
this paper, we develop a novel technique to explicitly characterize the stochastic
bias of a type of stochastic approximation procedures with time-varying Markov
transition kernels. Our approach enables non-asymptotic convergence analyses of
this type of stochastic approximation algorithms, which may be of independent
interest. Using our bias characterization technique and a gradient descent type
of analysis, we provide the finite-sample analysis on the mean square error of
the SARSA algorithm. We then further study a fitted SARSA algorithm, which
includes the original SARSA algorithm and its variant in [28] as special cases. This
fitted SARSA algorithm provides a more general framework for iterative on-policy
fitted policy iteration, which is more memory and computationally efficient. For
this fitted SARSA algorithm, we also provide its finite-sample analysis.

1

Introduction

SARSA, originally proposed in [31], is an on-policy reinforcement learning algorithm, which
continuously updates the behavior policy towards attaining as large an accumulated reward as
possible over time. Specifically, SARSA is initialized with a state and a policy. At each time instance,
it takes an action based on the current policy, observes the next state, and receives a reward. Using
the newly observed information, it first updates the estimate of the action-value function, and then
improves the behavior policy by applying a policy improvement operator, e.g., ✏-greedy, to the
estimated action-value function. Such a process is iteratively taken until it converges (see Algorithm
1 for a precise description of the SARSA algorithm).
With the tabular approach that stores the action-value function, the convergence of SARSA has been
established in [33]. However, the tabular approach may not be applicable when the state space is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

