The Label Complexity of Active Learning from
Observational Data
Songbai Yan
University of California San Diego
yansongbai@eng.ucsd.edu

Kamalika Chaudhuri
University of California San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Tara Javidi
University of California San Diego
tjavidi@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Counterfactual learning from observational data involves learning a classifier on an
entire population based on data that is observed conditioned on a selection policy.
This work considers this problem in an active setting, where the learner additionally
has access to unlabeled examples and can choose to get a subset of these labeled
by an oracle.
Prior work on this problem uses disagreement-based active learning, along with
an importance weighted loss estimator to account for counterfactuals, which leads
to a high label complexity. We show how to instead incorporate a more efficient
counterfactual risk minimizer into the active learning algorithm. This requires us
to modify both the counterfactual risk to make it amenable to active learning, as
well as the active learning process to make it amenable to the risk. We provably
demonstrate that the result of this is an algorithm which is statistically consistent
as well as more label-efficient than prior work.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual learning from observational data is an emerging problem that arises naturally in many
applications. In this problem, the learner is given observational data – a set of examples selected
according to some policy along with their labels – as well as access to the policy that selects the
examples, and the goal is to construct a classifier with high performance on an entire population,
not just the observational data distribution. An example is learning to predict if a treatment will be
effective based on features of a patient. Here, we have some observational data on how the treatment
works for patients that were assigned to it, but if the treatment is given only to a certain category of
patients, then the data is not reflective of the population. Thus the main challenge in counterfactual
learning is how to counteract the effect of the observation policy and build a classifier that applies
more widely.
This work considers counterfactual learning in the active setting, which has received very recent
attention in a few different contexts [25, 21, 3]. In addition to observational data, the learner has
an online stream of unlabeled examples drawn from the underlying population distribution, and the
ability to selectively label a subset of these in an interactive manner. The learner’s goal is to again
build a classifier while using as few label queries as possible. The advantage of the active over the
passive is its potential for more label-efficient solutions; the question however is how to do this
algorithmically.
Prior work in this problem has looked at both probabilistic inference [21, 3] as well as a standard
classification [25], which is the setting of our work. [25] uses a modified version of disagreement33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

