Learning from Label Proportions with
Generative Adversarial Networks
Jiabin Liu∗
Samsung Research China - Beijing
Beijing 100028, China
liujiabin008@126.com

Bo Wang∗
University of International Business and Economics
Beijing 100029, China
wangbo@uibe.edu.cn

Zhiquan Qi†
Yingjie Tian
Yong Shi
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing 100190, China
qizhiquan@foxmail.com, {tyj,yshi}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we leverage generative adversarial networks (GANs) to derive an
effective algorithm LLP-GAN for learning from label proportions (LLP), where
only the bag-level proportional information in labels is available. Endowed with
end-to-end structure, LLP-GAN performs approximation in the light of an adversarial learning mechanism, without imposing restricted assumptions on distribution.
Accordingly, we can directly induce the final instance-level classifier upon the discriminator. Under mild assumptions, we give the explicit generative representation
and prove the global optimality for LLP-GAN. Additionally, compared with existing methods, our work empowers LLP solver with capable scalability inheriting
from deep models. Several experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate vivid
advantages of the proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Deep learning benefits from end-to-end design philosophy, which emphasizes minimal a priori
representational and computational assumption, and greatly avoids explicit structure and “handengineering” [4]. Doubtless, most of its achievements are affirmed by the access to the abundance of
fully supervised data [14, 13, 26]. One reason is that a large amount of complete data can alleviate
the over-fitting problem without deteriorating the hypothesis set complexity (e.g., a sophisticated
network design with vast parameters).
Unfortunately, fully labeled data is not always handy to utilize. Firstly, it is infeasible or laborintensive to obtain abundant accurate labeled data [31]. Secondly, labels are not accessible under
certain circumstances, such as privacy constraints [22]. Therefore, the community begins to pay
attention to weakly supervised learning (a.k.a., weakly labeled learning, WeLL), concerning any
corrosion in supervised information. For example, semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a WeLL
problem by concealing most of the labels in the training stage. Another widespread WeLL problem is
multi-instance learning (MIL) [19], which is also a representative in learning with bags.
Furthermore, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11], which is originally proposed to synthesize
high fidelity data in line with the estimation of underlying data distribution, can be potentially applied
to WeLL. For instance, GANs can deal with K-class SSL [28], by treating the generated data as
∗
†

Joint first authors with equal contribution
Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

