Planning in entropy-regularized
Markov decision processes and games

Jean-Bastien Grill∗
DeepMind Paris
jbgrill@google.com
Pierre Ménard
SequeL team, Inria Lille
pierre.menard@inria.fr

Omar D. Domingues∗
SequeL team, Inria Lille
omar.darwiche-domingues@inria.fr
Rémi Munos
DeepMind Paris
munos@google.com

Michal Valko
DeepMind Paris
valkom@deepmind.com

Abstract
We propose SmoothCruiser, a new planning algorithm for estimating the value
function in entropy-regularized Markov decision processes and two-player games,
given a generative model of the environment. SmoothCruiser makes use of the
smoothness of the Bellman operator promoted by the regularization to achieve
problem-independent sample complexity of order e
O(1/ε4 ) for a desired accuracy ε,
whereas for non-regularized settings there are no known algorithms with guaranteed
polynomial sample complexity in the worst case.

1

Introduction

Planning with a generative model is thinking before acting. An agent thinks using a world model that
it has built from prior experience [Sutton, 1991, Sutton and Barto, 2018]. In the present paper, we
study planning in two types of environments, Markov decision processes (MDPs) and two-player
turn-based zero-sum games. In both settings, agents interact with an environment by taking actions
and receiving rewards. Each action changes the state of the environment and the agent aims to choose
actions to maximize the sum of rewards. We assume that we are given a generative model of the
environment, that takes as input a state and an action and returns a reward and a next state as output.
Such generative models, called oracles, are typically built from known data and involve simulations,
for example, a physics simulation. In many cases, simulations are costly. For example, simulations
may require the computation of approximate solutions of differential equations or the discretization
of continuous state spaces. Therefore, a smart algorithm makes only a small the number of oracles
calls required to estimate the value of a state. The total number of oracle calls made by an algorithm
is referred to as sample complexity.
The value of a state s, denoted by V (s), is the maximum of the sum of discounted rewards that can
be obtained from that state. We want an algorithm that returns an estimate of precision ε of the V (s)
for any fixed s and has a low sample complexity, which should naturally be a function of ε. An agent
can then use this algorithm to predict the value of the possible actions at any given state and choose
the best one. The main advantage in estimating the value of a single given state s at a time instead of
the complete value function2 s 7→ V (s) is that we can have algorithms whose sample complexity
does not depend on the size of the state space, which is important when our state space is very large
or continuous. On the other hand, the disadvantage is that the algorithm must be run each time a new
state is encountered.
∗
2

equal contribution
as done by approximate dynamic programming

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

