Beyond Confidence Regions: Tight Bayesian
Ambiguity Sets for Robust MDPs

Reazul Hasan Russel
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
rrussel@cs.unh.edu

Marek Petrik
Department of Computer Science
University of New Hampshire
mpetrik@cs.unh.edu

Abstract
Robust MDPs (RMDPs) can be used to compute policies with provable worstcase guarantees in reinforcement learning. The quality and robustness of an
RMDP solution are determined by the ambiguity set—the set of plausible transition
probabilities—which is usually constructed as a multi-dimensional confidence
region. Existing methods construct ambiguity sets as confidence regions using
concentration inequalities which leads to overly conservative solutions. This paper
proposes a new paradigm that can achieve better solutions with the same robustness
guarantees without using confidence regions as ambiguity sets. To incorporate
prior knowledge, our algorithms optimize the size and position of ambiguity sets
using Bayesian inference. Our theoretical analysis shows the safety of the proposed
method, and the empirical results demonstrate its practical promise.

1

Introduction

Markov decision processes (MDPs) provide a versatile framework for modeling reinforcement
learning problems [4, 33, 38]. However, they assume that transition probabilities and rewards
are known exactly which is rarely the case. Limited data sets, modeling errors, value function
approximation, and noisy data are common reasons for errors in transition probabilities [16, 30, 45].
This results in policies that are brittle and fail when implemented. This is particularly true in the case
of batch reinforcement learning [18, 20, 23, 32, 42].
A promising framework for computing robust policies is based on Robust MDPs (RMDPs). RMDPs
relax the need for precisely known transition probabilities. Instead, transition probabilities can
take on any value from a so-called ambiguity set which represents a set of plausible transition
probabilities [9, 14, 24, 29, 32, 40, 46, 47]. RMDPs are also reminiscent of dynamic zero-sum games:
the decision maker chooses the best actions, while the adversarial nature chooses the worst transition
probabilities from the ambiguity set.
The practical utility of using RMDPs has been hindered by the lack of good ways of constructing ambiguity sets that lead to solutions that are robust without being too conservative. The standard approach
to constructing ambiguity sets from concentration inequalities [1, 32, 42, 44] leads to theoretical
guarantees but provides solutions that hopelessly conservative. Many problem-specific methods have
been proposed too, but they are hard to use and typically lack finite-sample guarantees [3, 5, 16, 28].
The main contribution of this work is to introduce a new method for constructing ambiguity sets that
are both significantly less conservative than existing ones [21, 32, 42] and also provide strong finitesample guarantees. Similarly to some prior work on robust reinforcement learning and optimization,
we use Bayesian assumptions to take advantage of domain knowledge which is often available [7,
8, 13, 47]. Our main innovation is to realize that the natural approach to building ambiguity sets
as confidence intervals is unnecessarily conservative. Surprisingly, in the Bayesian setting, using a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

