Streaming Bayesian Inference for Crowdsourced
Classification
Edoardo Manino
University of Southampton
E.Manino@soton.ac.uk

Long Tran-Thanh
University of Southampton
l.tran-thanh@soton.ac.uk

Nicholas R. Jennings
Imperial College, London
n.jennings@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
A key challenge in crowdsourcing is inferring the ground truth from noisy and
unreliable data. To do so, existing approaches rely on collecting redundant information from the crowd, and aggregating it with some probabilistic method.
However, oftentimes such methods are computationally inefficient, are restricted to
some specific settings, or lack theoretical guarantees. In this paper, we revisit the
problem of binary classification from crowdsourced data. Specifically we propose
Streaming Bayesian Inference for Crowdsourcing (SBIC), a new algorithm that
does not suffer from any of these limitations. First, SBIC has low complexity and
can be used in a real-time online setting. Second, SBIC has the same accuracy
as the best state-of-the-art algorithms in all settings. Third, SBIC has provable
asymptotic guarantees both in the online and offline settings.

1

Introduction

Crowdsourcing works by collecting the annotations of large groups of human workers, typically
through an online platform like Amazon Mechanical Turk1 or Figure Eight.2 On one hand, this
paradigm can help process high volumes of small tasks that are currently difficult to automate at
an affordable price [Snow et al., 2008]. On the other hand, the open nature of the crowdsourcing
process gives no guarantees on the quality of the data we collect. Leaving aside malicious attempts
at thwarting the result of the crowdsourcing process [Downs et al., 2010], even well-intentioned
crowdworkers can report incorrect answers [Ipeirotis et al., 2010].
Thus, the success of a crowdsourcing project relies on our ability to reconstruct the ground-truth
from the noisy data we collect. This challenge has attracted the attention of the research community
which has explored a number of algorithmic solutions. Some authors focus on probabilistic inference
on graphical methods, including the early work of Dawid and Skene [1979] on EM estimation,
variational inference [Welinder and Perona, 2010; Liu et al., 2012] and belief propagation [Karger et
al., 2014]. These techniques are stable in most settings, easy to generalise to more complex models
(e.g. [Kim and Ghahramani, 2012]), but generally require several passes over the entire dataset to
converge and lack theoretical guarantees. In contrast, other authors have turned to tensor factorisation
[Dalvi et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2016] and the method of moments [Bonald and Combes, 2017].
This choice yields algorithms with tractable theoretical behaviour, but the assumptions required to do
so restrict them to a limited number of settings.
1
2

www.mturk.com
www.figure-eight.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

