The spiked matrix model with generative priors

Benjamin Aubin† , Bruno Loureiro† , Antoine Maillard? ,
Florent Krzakala? , Lenka Zdeborová†

Abstract
Using a low-dimensional parametrization of signals is a generic and powerful
way to enhance performance in signal processing and statistical inference. A very
popular and widely explored type of dimensionality reduction is sparsity; another
type is generative modelling of signal distributions. Generative models based
on neural networks, such as GANs or variational auto-encoders, are particularly
performant and are gaining on applicability. In this paper we study spiked matrix
models, where a low-rank matrix is observed through a noisy channel. This problem
with sparse structure of the spikes has attracted broad attention in the past literature.
Here, we replace the sparsity assumption by generative modelling, and investigate
the consequences on statistical and algorithmic properties. We analyze the Bayesoptimal performance under specific generative models for the spike. In contrast
with the sparsity assumption, we do not observe regions of parameters where
statistical performance is superior to the best known algorithmic performance. We
show that in the analyzed cases the approximate message passing algorithm is able
to reach optimal performance. We also design enhanced spectral algorithms and
analyze their performance and thresholds using random matrix theory, showing
their superiority to the classical principal component analysis. We complement our
theoretical results by illustrating the performance of the spectral algorithms when
the spikes come from real datasets.

1

Introduction

A key idea of modern signal processing is to exploit the structure of the signals under investigation.
A traditional and powerful way of doing so is via sparse representations of the signals. Images are
typically sparse in the wavelet domain, sound in the Fourier domain, and sparse coding [1] is designed
to search automatically for dictionaries in which the signal is sparse. This compressed representation
of the signal can be used to enable efficient signal processing under larger noise or with fewer samples
leading to the ideas behind compressed sensing [2] or sparsity enhancing regularizations. Recent years
brought a surge of interest in another powerful and generic way of representing signals – generative
modeling. In particular the generative adversarial networks (GANs) [3] provide an impressively
powerful way to represent classes of signals. A recent series of works on compressed sensing and
other regression-related problems successfully explored the idea of replacing the traditionally used
sparsity by generative models [4–10]. These results and performances conceivably suggest that [11]:
Generative models are the new sparsity.
Next to compressed sensing and regression, another technique in statistical analysis that uses sparsity
in a fruitful way is sparse principal component analysis (PCA) [12]. Compared to the standard PCA,
† Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CEA, Institut de physique théorique, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
? Laboratoire de Physique de l’École Normale Supérieure, PSL University & CNRS & Sorbonne Universités,
Paris, France.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

