Distributional Reward Decomposition for
Reinforcement Learning

Zichuan Lin∗
Tsinghua University
linzc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Tao Qin
Microsoft Research
taoqin@microsoft.com

Li Zhao
Microsoft Research
lizo@microsoft.com

Guangwen Yang
Tsinghua University
ygw@tsinghua.edu.cn

Derek Yang
UC San Diego
dyang1206@gmail.com
Tie-Yan Liu
Microsoft Research
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Many reinforcement learning (RL) tasks have specific properties that can be leveraged to modify existing RL algorithms to adapt to those tasks and further improve
performance, and a general class of such properties is the multiple reward channel.
In those environments the full reward can be decomposed into sub-rewards obtained
from different channels. Existing work on reward decomposition either requires
prior knowledge of the environment to decompose the full reward, or decomposes
reward without prior knowledge but with degraded performance. In this paper,
we propose Distributional Reward Decomposition for Reinforcement Learning
(DRDRL), a novel reward decomposition algorithm which captures the multiple
reward channel structure under distributional setting. Empirically, our method captures the multi-channel structure and discovers meaningful reward decomposition,
without any requirements on prior knowledge. Consequently, our agent achieves
better performance than existing methods on environments with multiple reward
channels.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning has achieved great success in decision making problems since Deep Qlearning was proposed by Mnih et al. [2015]. While general RL algorithms have been deeply studied,
here we focus on those RL tasks with specific properties that can be utilized to modify general RL
algorithms to achieve better performance. Specifically, we focus on RL environments with multiple
reward channels, but only the full reward is available.
Reward decomposition has been proposed to investigate such properties. For example, in Atari game
Seaquest, rewards of environment can be decomposed into sub-rewards of shooting sharks and those
of rescuing divers. Reward decomposition views the total reward as the sum of sub-rewards that are
usually disentangled and can be obtained independently (Sprague and Ballard [2003], Russell and
Zimdars [2003], Van Seijen et al. [2017], Grimm and Singh [2019]), and aims at decomposing the
total reward into sub-rewards. The sub-rewards may further be leveraged to learn better policies.
Van Seijen et al. [2017] propose to split a state into different sub-states, each with a sub-reward
obtained by training a general value function, and learn multiple value functions with sub-rewards.
The architecture is rather limited due to requiring prior knowledge of how to split into sub-states.
Grimm and Singh [2019] propose a more general method for reward decomposition via maximizing
∗

Contributed during internship at Microsoft Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

