Explicit Explore-Exploit Algorithms in Continuous
State Spaces

Mikael Henaff
Microsoft Research
mihenaff@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a new model-based algorithm for reinforcement learning (RL) which
consists of explicit exploration and exploitation phases, and is applicable in large or
infinite state spaces. The algorithm maintains a set of dynamics models consistent
with current experience and explores by finding policies which induce high disagreement between their state predictions. It then exploits using the refined set of
models or experience gathered during exploration. We show that under realizability
and optimal planning assumptions, our algorithm provably finds a near-optimal
policy with a number of samples that is polynomial in a structural complexity
measure which we show to be low in several natural settings. We then give a
practical approximation using neural networks and demonstrate its performance
and sample efficiency in practice.

1

Introduction

What is a good algorithm for systematically exploring an environment for the purpose of reinforcement
learning? A good answer could make the application of deep RL to complex problems [31, 30, 28, 20]
much more sample efficient. In tabular Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with a small number of
discrete states, model-based algorithms which perform exploration in a provably sample-efficient
manner have existed for over a decade [24, 5, 47]. The first of these, known as the Explicit ExploreExploit (E 3 ) algorithm [24], progressively builds a model of the environment’s dynamics. At each
step, the agent uses this model to plan, either to explore and reach an unknown state, or to exploit
and maximize its reward within the states it knows well. By actively seeking out unknown states,
the algorithm provably learns a near-optimal policy using a number of samples which is at most
polynomial in the number of states. Many problems of interest, however, have a set of states which is
infinite or extremely large (for example, all images represented with finite precision), and in these
settings, tabular algorithms are no longer applicable.
In this work, we propose a new E 3 -style algorithm which operates in large or continuous state spaces.
The algorithm maintains a set of dynamics models which are consistent with the agent’s current
experience, and explores the environment by executing policies designed to induce high disagreement
between their predictions. We show that under realizability and optimal planning assumptions, our
algorithm provably finds a near-optimal policy using a number of samples from the environment
which is independent of the number of states, and is instead polynomial in the rank of the model misfit
matrix, a structural complexity measure which we show to be low in natural settings such as small
tabular MDPs, large MDPs with factored transition dynamics [23] and (potentially infinite) low rank
MDPs. We then present a practical version of the algorithm using neural networks, and demonstrate
its performance and sample efficiency empirically on several problems with large or continuous state
spaces.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

