On the equivalence between graph isomorphism
testing and function approximation with GNNs
Zhengdao Chen
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
zc1216@nyu.edu

Soledad Villar
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Center for Data Science
New York University
soledad.villar@nyu.edu

Lei Chen
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
New York University
lc3909@nyu.edu

Joan Bruna
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Center for Data Science
New York University
bruna@cims.nyu.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved lots of success on graph-structured
data. In light of this, there has been increasing interest in studying their representation power. One line of work focuses on the universal approximation of
permutation-invariant functions by certain classes of GNNs, and another demonstrates the limitation of GNNs via graph isomorphism tests.
Our work connects these two perspectives and proves their equivalence. We further
develop a framework of the representation power of GNNs with the language of
sigma-algebra, which incorporates both viewpoints. Using this framework, we
compare the expressive power of different classes of GNNs as well as other methods
on graphs. In particular, we prove that order-2 Graph G-invariant networks fail to
distinguish non-isomorphic regular graphs with the same degree. We then extend
them to a new architecture, Ring-GNN, which succeeds in distinguishing these
graphs as well as for tasks on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data naturally occur in many areas of knowledge, including computational biology,
chemistry and social sciences. Graph neural networks, in all their forms, yield useful representations
of graph data partly because they take into consideration the intrinsic symmetries of graphs, such as
invariance and equivariance with respect to a relabeling of the nodes [27, 7, 15, 8, 10, 28, 3, 36].
All these different architectures are proposed with different purposes (see [31] for a survey and
references therein), and a priori it is not obvious how to compare their power. The recent work [32]
proposes to study the representation power of GNNs via their performance on graph isomorphism
tests. They developed the Graph Isomorphism Networks (GINs) that are as powerful as the onedimensional Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL or just WL) test for graph isomorphism [30], and showed
that no other neighborhood-aggregating (or message passing) GNN can be more powerful than the
1-WL test. Variants of message passing GNNs include [27, 9].
On the other hand, for feed-forward neural networks, many results have been obtained regarding
their ability to approximate continuous functions, commonly known as the universal approximation
theorems, such as the seminal works of [6, 12]. Following this line of work, it is natural to study
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

