Bandits with Feedback Graphs and Switching Costs
Raman Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Teodor V. Marinov
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
tmarino2@jhu.edu

Mehryar Mohri
Google Research &
Courant Institute of Math. Sciences
New York, NY 10012
mohri@google.com

Abstract
We study the adversarial multi-armed bandit problem where the learner is supplied
with partial observations modeled by a feedback graph and where shifting to a new
action incurs a fixed switching cost. We give two new algorithms for this problem in
1
2
the informed setting. Our best algorithm achieves a pseudo-regret of Õ( (G) 3 T 3 ),
where (G) is the domination number of the feedback graph. This significantly
improves upon the previous best result for the same problem, which was based on
the independence number of G. We also present matching lower bounds for our
result that we describe in detail. Finally, we give a new algorithm with improved
policy regret bounds when partial counterfactual feedback is available.

1

Introduction

A general framework for sequential learning is that of online prediction with expert advice [Littlestone
and Warmuth, 1994, Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1997, Freund and Schapire, 1997], which consists of repeated
interactions between a learner and the environment. The learner maintains a distribution over a set of
experts or actions. At each round, the loss assigned to each action is revealed. The learner incurs
the expected value of these losses for their current distribution and next updates her distribution.
The learner’s goal is to minimize her regret, which, in the simplest case, is defined as the difference
between the cumulative loss over a finite rounds of interactions and that of the best expert in hindsight.
The scenario just described corresponds to the so-called full information setting where the learner is
informed of the loss of all actions at each round. In the bandit setting, only the loss of the action they
select is known to the learner. These settings are both special instances of a general model of online
learning with side information introduced by Mannor and Shamir [2011], where the information
available to the learner is specified by a feedback graph. In an undirected feedback graph, each
vertex represents an action and an edge between vertices a and a0 indicates that the loss of action a0
is observed when action a is selected and vice-versa. The bandit setting corresponds to a feedback
graph reduced to only self-loops at each vertex, the full information setting to a fully connected graph.
Online learning with feedback graphs has been further extensively analyzed by Alon et al. [2013,
2017] and several other authors [Alon et al., 2015, Kocák et al., 2014, Cohen et al., 2016, Yun et al.,
2018, Cortes et al., 2018].
In many applications, the learner also incurs a cost when switching to a new action. Consider, for
example, a commercial bank that issues various credit card products, many of which are similar,
e.g., different branded cards with comparable fees and interest rates. At each round, the bank offers
a specific product to a particular sub-population (e.g., customers at a store). The payoff observed
for this action also reveals feedback for related cards and similar sub-populations. At the same
time, offering a different product to a group incurs a switching cost in terms of designing a new
marketing campaign. Another example of a problem with feedback graph and switching costs is a
large company seeking to allocate and reallocate employees to different tasks so that the productivity
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

