Distinguishing Distributions
When Samples Are Strategically Transformed

Hanrui Zhang
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
hrzhang@cs.duke.edu

Yu Cheng
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
yucheng@cs.duke.edu

Vincent Conitzer
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
conitzer@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Often, a principal must make a decision based on data provided by an agent.
Moreover, typically, that agent has an interest in the decision that is not perfectly
aligned with that of the principal. Thus, the agent may have an incentive to select
from or modify the samples he obtains before sending them to the principal. In
other settings, the principal may not even be able to observe samples directly;
instead, she must rely on signals that the agent is able to send based on the samples
that he obtains, and he will choose these signals strategically.
In this paper, we give necessary and sufficient conditions for when the principal can
distinguish between agents of “good” and “bad” types, when the type affects the
distribution of samples that the agent has access to. We also study the computational
complexity of checking these conditions. Finally, we study how many samples are
needed.

1

Introduction

Anyone can have a bad day. Or a lucky one. Thus, in general, to determine with reasonable confidence
who are the highly capable agents—whether they be people, companies, or anything else—we need
to observe their output over an extended period of time. Moreover, capability is generally not
one-dimensional, and who should be considered highly capable depends on what it is that we are
looking for. Finally, the policy that we set to evaluate agents’ output will in general affect how they
strategically try to shape that output. Thus, we must choose our policy to enable the agents that are
highly capable (according to our definition) to distinguish themselves from others.
Example. Suppose that there are researchers of different types. Specifically, suppose we have the
following set of types:
Θ = {TML-H, TML-L, AML-H, AML-L}
where “TML” stands for “theoretical machine learning,” “AML” for “applied machine learning,” and
“L” and “H” for “low quality” and “high quality,” respectively. Each researcher generates high-quality
ideas (which we will in this paper refer to as samples) according to some probabilistic process.
Suppose here the sample space is
S = {T, A, B}
where “T” stands for a purely theoretical idea without immediate applied significance, “A” for an
applied idea without immediate theoretical significance, and “B” for an idea that has both theoretical
and applied significance. Finally, suppose there are only 3 conferences: COLT, KDD, and NeurIPS
(we will in this paper refer to papers published in these conferences as “signals”).
Σ = {COLT, KDD, NeurIPS}
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

