Fast and Flexible Multi-Task Classification Using
Conditional Neural Adaptive Processes

James Requeima∗
University of Cambridge
Invenia Labs
jrr41@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Gordon∗
University of Cambridge
jg801@cam.ac.uk

Sebastian Nowozin
Google Research Berlin
nowozin@google.com

John Bronskill∗
University of Cambridge
jfb54@cam.ac.uk

Richard E. Turner
University of Cambridge
Microsoft Research
ret26@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to design image classification systems that, after an initial
multi-task training phase, can automatically adapt to new tasks encountered at test
time. We introduce a conditional neural process based approach to the multi-task
classification setting for this purpose, and establish connections to the meta-learning
and few-shot learning literature. The resulting approach, called CNAP S, comprises
a classifier whose parameters are modulated by an adaptation network that takes the
current task’s dataset as input. We demonstrate that CNAP S achieves state-of-theart results on the challenging M ETA -DATASET benchmark indicating high-quality
transfer-learning. We show that the approach is robust, avoiding both over-fitting
in low-shot regimes and under-fitting in high-shot regimes. Timing experiments
reveal that CNAP S is computationally efficient at test-time as it does not involve
gradient based adaptation. Finally, we show that trained models are immediately
deployable to continual learning and active learning where they can outperform
existing approaches that do not leverage transfer learning.

1

Introduction

We consider the development of general purpose image classification systems that can handle tasks
from a broad range of data distributions, in both the low and high data regimes, without the need for
costly retraining when new tasks are encountered. We argue that such systems require mechanisms
that adapt to each task, and that these mechanisms should themselves be learned from a diversity of
datasets and tasks at training time. This general approach relates to methods for meta-learning [1, 2]
and few-shot learning [3]. However, existing work in this area typically considers homogeneous task
distributions at train and test-time that therefore require only minimal adaptation. To handle the more
challenging case of different task distributions we design a fully adaptive system, requiring specific
design choices in the model and training procedure.
Current approaches to meta-learning and few-shot learning for classification are characterized by two
fundamental trade-offs. (i) The number of parameters that are adapted to each task. One approach
adapts only the top, or head, of the classifier leaving the feature extractor fixed [4, 5]. While useful in
simple settings, this approach is prone to under-fitting when the task distribution is heterogeneous
[6]. Alternatively, we can adapt all parameters in the feature extractor [7, 8] thereby increasing
∗

Authors contributed equally

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

