Integrating Markov processes with structural causal modeling
enables counterfactual inference in complex systems

Robert Ness
Gamalon Inc.
robert.ness@gamalon.com

Kaushal Paneri
Northeastern University
kaushalpaneri@gmail.com

Olga Vitek
Northeastern University
o.vitek@northeastern.edu

Abstract
This manuscript contributes a general and practical framework for casting a Markov
process model of a system at equilibrium as a structural causal model, and carrying out counterfactual inference. Markov processes mathematically describe the
mechanisms in the system, and predict the system’s equilibrium behavior upon
intervention, but do not support counterfactual inference. In contrast, structural
causal models support counterfactual inference, but do not identify the mechanisms.
This manuscript leverages the benefits of both approaches. We define the structural
causal models in terms of the parameters and the equilibrium dynamics of the
Markov process models, and counterfactual inference flows from these settings.
The proposed approach alleviates the identifiability drawback of the structural
causal models, in that the counterfactual inference is consistent with the counterfactual trajectories simulated from the Markov process model. We showcase the
benefits of this framework in case studies of complex biomolecular systems with
nonlinear dynamics. We illustrate that, in presence of Markov process model misspecification, counterfactual inference leverages prior data, and therefore estimates
the outcome of an intervention more accurately than a direct simulation.

1

Introduction

Many complex systems contain discrete components that interact in continuous time, and maintain
interactions that are stochastic, dynamic, and governed by natural laws. For example, molecular
systems biology studies molecules (e.g., gene products, proteins) in a living cell that interact according
to biochemical laws. An important aspect of studying these systems is predicting the equilibrium
behavior of the system upon an intervention, and selecting high-value interventions. For example,
we may want to predict the effect of a drug intervention on a new equilibrium of gene expression
[1, 27]. The intervention may have a high value if reduces the expression of a specific gene, while
minimizing changes to the other genes.
Recent work in the reinforcement learning community has highlighted the utility of counterfactual
policy evaluation for evaluating and comparing interventions. Counterfactual policy evaluation uses
data from past experimental interventions to ask whether a higher value could have been achieved
under an alternative intervention [7, 16, 8, 19]. Counterfactual inference answers this question by
predicting the outcome of the alternative intervention, conditional on the outcome of the intervention
for which the data were observed [7, 21].
Predicting the outcome of an intervention requires us to model the system. In particular, discrete-state
continuous-time Markov process models unambiguously describe the changes of system components
across all the system states (i.e., not only at equilibrium) in term of hazard functions [11, 28]. A
Markov process model predicts the equilibrium upon an intervention by applying the intervention to
the initial conditions, performing multiple direct stochastic simulations to reach post-intervention
equilibriums, and averaging over these equilibriums. Markov process modeling is one way of
modeling complexity in biological systems, particularly in systems that are intrinsically stochastic
[1]. The Markov process models are called stochastic kinetic models in this context.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

