Gradient Information for Representation and
Modeling
Jie Ding

Robert Calderbank

School of Statistics

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering

University of Minnesota

Duke University

Minneapolis, MN 55455

Durham, NC 27708

dingj@umn.edu

robert.calderbank@duke.edu
Vahid Tarokh

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
Motivated by Fisher divergence, in this paper we present a new set of information
quantities which we refer to as gradient information. These measures serve as
surrogates for classical information measures such as those based on logarithmic
loss, Kullback-Leibler divergence, directed Shannon information, etc. in many
data-processing scenarios of interest, and often provide significant computational
advantage, improved stability, and robustness. As an example, we apply these
measures to the Chow-Liu tree algorithm, and demonstrate remarkable performance
and significant computational reduction using both synthetic and real data.

1

Introduction

A standard step in data fitting and statistical model selection is the application of a loss function
(sometimes referred to as scoring function) of the form s : (y, p) 7! s(y, p), where y is the observed
data and p(·) is a density function. In this context, it is assumed that the smaller s(y, p), the better y
fits p. A class of such functions that exhibit desirable statistical properties has been studied in the
context of proper scoring functions [1]. As a special case, the logarithmic loss sL (y, p) = log p(y)
has served as the cornerstone of classical statistical analysis because of the intimate relation between
logarithmic loss and the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. In fact, the KL divergence from a density
function p to the true data-generating density function p⇤ can be written as E{sL (y, p)} + c, where
the expectation of sL (y, p) is taken under
Pnp⇤ ), and c is a constant that only depends on p⇤ . Therefore,
minimizing the sample average n 1 i=1 sL (yi , p) over a set of candidates density functions p
asymptotically amounts to finding the closest candidate p̂ to p⇤ in KL divergence.
A notable use of the logarithmic loss function is in maximum likelihood estimation for parametric
Pn
models. By minimizing n 1 i=1 sL (yi , p✓ ) over ✓ 2 ⇥ for some parameter space ⇥, an estimate ✓ˆ
is obtained to represent the data generating model. Some commonly used objective loss function such
as cross-entropy loss for classification and squared loss for regression can be regarded as special cases
of the logarithmic loss function. Another important use of the logarithmic loss is in model comparison
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

