Learning to Optimize in Swarms

Yue Cao, Tianlong Chen, Zhangyang Wang, Yang Shen
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering & Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77840
{cyppsp,wiwjp619,atlaswang,yshen}@tamu.edu

Abstract
Learning to optimize has emerged as a powerful framework for various optimization
and machine learning tasks. Current such “meta-optimizers” often learn in the
space of continuous optimization algorithms that are point-based and uncertaintyunaware. To overcome the limitations, we propose a meta-optimizer that learns
in the algorithmic space of both point-based and population-based optimization
algorithms. The meta-optimizer targets at a meta-loss function consisting of both
cumulative regret and entropy. Specifically, we learn and interpret the update
formula through a population of LSTMs embedded with sample- and feature-level
attentions. Meanwhile, we estimate the posterior directly over the global optimum
and use an uncertainty measure to help guide the learning process. Empirical results
over non-convex test functions and the protein-docking application demonstrate
that this new meta-optimizer outperforms existing competitors. The codes are
publicly available at: https://github.com/Shen-Lab/LOIS.

1

Introduction

Optimization provides a mathematical foundation for solving quantitative problems in many fields,
along with numerical challenges. The no free lunch theorem indicates the non-existence of a universally best optimization algorithm for all objectives. To manually design an effective optimization
algorithm for a given problem, many efforts have been spent on tuning and validating pipelines,
architectures, and hyperparameters. For instance, in deep learning, there is a gallery of gradient-based
algorithms specific to high-dimensional, non-convex objective functions, such as Stochastic Gradient
Descent [1], RmsDrop [2], and Adam [3]. Another example is in ab initio protein docking whose
energy functions as objectives have extremely rugged landscapes and are expensive to evaluate.
Gradient-free algorithms are thus popular there, including Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [4]
and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [5].
To overcome the laborious manual design, an emerging approach of meta-learning (learning to learn)
takes advantage of the knowledge learned from related tasks. In meta-learning, the goal is to learn
a meta-learner that could solve a set of problems, where each sample in the training or test set is a
particular problem. As in classical machine learning, the fundamental assumption of meta-learning
is the generalizability from solving the training problems to solving the test ones. For optimization
problems, a key to meta-learning is how to efficiently utilize the information in the objective function
and explore the space of optimization algorithms.
In this study, we introduce a novel framework in meta-learning, where we train a meta-optimizer that
learns in the space of both point-based and population-based optimization algorithms for continuous
optimization. To that end, we design a novel architecture where a population of RNNs (specifically,
LSTMs) jointly learn iterative update formula for a population of samples (or a swarm of particles).
To balance exploration and exploitation in search, we directly estimate the posterior over the optimum
and include in the meta-loss function the differential entropy of the posterior. Furthermore, we
embed feature- and sample-level attentions in our meta-optimizer to interpret the learned optimization
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

