Dynamic Ensemble Modeling Approach to
Nonstationary Neural Decoding in Brain-Computer
Interfaces
Yu Qi1 , Bin Liu2 , Yueming Wang3,∗ , Gang Pan1,4,∗
qiyu@zju.edu.cn, bins@ieee.org, ymingwang@zju.edu.cn, gpan@zju.edu.cn
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University
4
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) have enabled prosthetic device control by decoding motor movements from neural activities. Neural signals recorded from
cortex exhibit nonstationary property due to abrupt noises and neuroplastic changes
in brain activities during motor control. Current state-of-the-art neural signal
decoders such as Kalman filter assume fixed relationship between neural activities and motor movements, thus will fail if this assumption is not satisfied. We
propose a dynamic ensemble modeling (DyEnsemble) approach that is capable
of adapting to changes in neural signals by employing a proper combination of
decoding functions. The DyEnsemble method firstly learns a set of diverse candidate models. Then, it dynamically selects and combines these models online
according to Bayesian updating mechanism. Our method can mitigate the effect of
noises and cope with different task behaviors by automatic model switching, thus
gives more accurate predictions. Experiments with neural data demonstrate that
the DyEnsemble method outperforms Kalman filters remarkably, and its advantage
is more obvious with noisy signals.

1

Introduction

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) decode motor intentions directly from brain signals for external
device control [1–3]. Intracortical BCIs (iBCIs) utilize neural signals recorded from implanted
electrode arrays to extract information about movement intentions. Advances in iBCIs have enabled
the development in control of prosthetic devices or computer cursors by neural activities [4].
In iBCI systems, neural decoding algorithm plays an important role. Many algorithms have been
proposed to decode motor information from neural signals [5–7], including population vector [8],
linear estimators [9], deep neural networks [10], and recursive Bayesian decoders [11]. Among these
approaches, Kalman filter is considered to provide more accurate trajectory estimation by incorporating the process of trajectory evolution as a prior knowledge [12], which has been successfully applied
to online cursor and prosthetic control, achieving the state-of-the-art performance [5, 13].
One critical challenge in neural decoding is the nonstationary property of neural signals [14]. Current
iBCI neural decoders mostly assume a static functional relationship between neural signals and
movements by using fixed decoding models. However, in an online decoding process, signals
from neurons can be temporarily noised or even lost, and brain activities can also change due to
∗

Corresponding authors: Yueming Wang and Gang Pan

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

