High Fidelity Video Prediction with
Large Stochastic Recurrent Neural Networks
Ruben Villegas1,4 Arkanath Pathak3 Harini Kannan2
Dumitru Erhan2 Quoc V. Le2 Honglak Lee2
1
University of Michigan
2
Google Research
3
Google
4
Adobe Research

Abstract
Predicting future video frames is extremely challenging, as there are many factors of
variation that make up the dynamics of how frames change through time. Previously
proposed solutions require complex inductive biases inside network architectures
with highly specialized computation, including segmentation masks, optical flow,
and foreground and background separation. In this work, we question if such
handcrafted architectures are necessary and instead propose a different approach:
finding minimal inductive bias for video prediction while maximizing network
capacity. We investigate this question by performing the first large-scale empirical
study and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance by learning large models on
three different datasets: one for modeling object interactions, one for modeling
human motion, and one for modeling car driving1 .

1

Introduction

From throwing a ball to driving a car, humans are very good at being able to interact with objects
in the world and anticipate the results of their actions. Being able to teach agents to do the same
has enormous possibilities for training intelligent agents capable of generalizing to many tasks.
Model-based reinforcement learning is one such technique that seeks to do this – by first learning a
model of the world, and then by planning with the learned model. There has been some recent success
with training agents in this manner by first using video prediction to model the world. Particularly,
video prediction models combined with simple planning algorithms [Hafner et al., 2019] or policybased learning [Kaiser et al., 2019] for model-based reinforcement learning have been shown to
perform equally or better than model-free methods with far less interactions with the environment.
Additionally, Ebert et al. [2018] showed that video prediction methods are also useful for robotic
control, especially with regards to specifying unstructured goal positions.
However, training an agent to accurately predict what will happen next is still an open problem. Video
prediction, the task of generating future frames given context frames, is notoriously hard. There are
many spatio-temporal factors of variation present in videos that make this problem very difficult for
neural networks to model. Many methods have been proposed to tackle this problem [Oh et al., 2015,
Finn et al., 2016, Vondrick et al., 2016, Villegas et al., 2017a, Lotter et al., 2017, Tulyakov et al.,
2018, Liang et al., 2017, Denton and Birodkar, 2017, Wichers et al., 2018, Babaeizadeh et al., 2018,
Denton and Fergus, 2018, Lee et al., 2018, Byeon et al., 2018, Yan et al., 2018, Kumar et al., 2018].
Most of these works propose some type of separation of information streams (e.g., motion/pose and
content streams), specialized computations (e.g., warping, optical flow, foreground/background masks,
predictive coding, etc), additional high-level information (e.g., landmarks, semantic segmentation
masks, etc) or are simply shown to work in relatively simpler environments (e.g., Atari, synthetic
shapes, centered human faces and bodies, etc).
1

This work was done while the first author was an intern at Google

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

