Communication-Efficient Distributed Learning via
Lazily Aggregated Quantized Gradients
Jun Sun†
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou, China 310027
sunjun16sj@gmail.com

Tianyi Chen†
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, New York 12180
chent18@rpi.edu

Georgios B. Giannakis
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN 55455
georgios@umn.edu

Zaiyue Yang
Southern U. of Science and Technology
Shenzhen, China 518055
yangzy3@sustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The present paper develops a novel aggregated gradient approach for distributed
machine learning that adaptively compresses the gradient communication. The
key idea is to first quantize the computed gradients, and then skip less informative
quantized gradient communications by reusing outdated gradients. Quantizing and
skipping result in ‘lazy’ worker-server communications, which justifies the term
Lazily Aggregated Quantized gradient that is henceforth abbreviated as LAQ. Our
LAQ can provably attain the same linear convergence rate as the gradient descent
in the strongly convex case, while effecting major savings in the communication
overhead both in transmitted bits as well as in communication rounds. Empirically,
experiments with real data corroborate a significant communication reduction
compared to existing gradient- and stochastic gradient-based algorithms.

1

Introduction

Considering the massive amount of mobile devices, centralized machine learning via cloud computing
incurs considerable communication overhead, and raises serious privacy concerns. Today, the
widespread consensus is that besides in the cloud centers, future machine learning tasks have to be
performed starting from the network edge, namely devices [17, 19]. Typically, distributed learning
tasks can be formulated as an optimization problem of the form
min
✓

X

fm (✓) with fm (✓) :=

Nm
X

`(xm,n ; ✓)

(1)

n=1

m2M

where ✓ 2 Rp denotes the parameter to be learned, M with |M| = M denotes the set of servers,
xm,n represents the n-th data vector at worker m (e.g., feature and label), and Nm is the number of
data samples at worker m. In (1), `(x; ✓) denotes the loss associated with ✓ and x, and fm (✓) denotes
the aggregatedP
loss corresponding to ✓ and all data at worker m. For the ease in exposition, we also
define f (✓) = m2M fm (✓) as the overall loss function.
In the commonly employed worker-server setup, the server collects local gradients from the workers
and updates the parameter using a gradient descent (GD) iteration given by
X
GD iteration
✓ k+1 = ✓ k ↵
rfm ✓ k
(2)
m2M

†

Jun Sun and Tianyi Chen contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

