Volumetric Correspondence Networks
for Optical Flow
∗

Gengshan Yang1 , Deva Ramanan1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Argo AI
{gengshay, deva}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many classic tasks in vision – such as the estimation of optical flow or stereo
disparities – can be cast as dense correspondence matching. Well-known techniques
for doing so make use of a cost volume, typically a 4D tensor of match costs between
all pixels in a 2D image and their potential matches in a 2D search window. Stateof-the-art (SOTA) deep networks for flow/stereo make use of such volumetric
representations as internal layers. However, such layers require significant amounts
of memory and compute, making them cumbersome to use in practice. As a
result, SOTA networks also employ various heuristics designed to limit volumetric
processing, leading to limited accuracy and overfitting. Instead, we introduce
several simple modifications that dramatically simplify the use of volumetric
layers - (1) volumetric encoder-decoder architectures that efficiently capture large
receptive fields, (2) multi-channel cost volumes that capture multi-dimensional
notions of pixel similarities, and finally, (3) separable volumetric filtering that
significantly reduces computation and parameters while preserving accuracy. Our
innovations dramatically improve accuracy over SOTA on standard benchmarks
while being significantly easier to work with - training converges in 7X fewer
iterations, and most importantly, our networks generalize across correspondence
tasks. On-the-fly adaptation of search windows allows us to repurpose optical flow
networks for stereo (and vice versa), and can also be used to implement adaptive
networks that increase search window sizes on-demand.

1

Introduction

Many classic tasks in vision – such as the estimation of optical flow [13] or stereo disparities [34]
– can be cast as dense correspondence matching. Well-known techniques for doing so make use
of a cost volume, typically a 4D tensor of match costs between all pixels in a 2D image and their
potential matches in a 2D search window. State-of-the-art (SOTA) deep networks for stereo can make
use of 3D volumetric representations because the search window reduces to a epipolar line [11, 22].
Search windows for optical flow need to be two-dimensional, implying that cost volumes have to be
4D. Because of the added memory and compute demands, deep optical flow networks have rarely
exploited volumetric processing until recently. Even then, most employ heuristics that reshape cost
volumes into 2D data structures that are processed with 2D spatial processing [7, 18, 19, 39, 42].
Specifically, common workarounds reshape a 4D array (x, y, u, v) into a multichannel 2D array (x, y)
with uv channels. This allows for use of standard 2D convolutional processing routines, but implies
that feature channels are now tied to particular (u, v) displacements. This requires the network to
memorize particular displacements in order to report them at test-time. In practice, such networks are
quite difficult to train because they require massive amounts of data augmentation and millions of
training iterations to effectively memorize [7, 19].
∗

Code will be available at github.com/gengshay-y/VCN.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

