Fast structure learning with modular regularization
Greg Ver Steeg
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
gregv@isi.edu

Hrayr Harutyunyan
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
hrayrh@isi.edu

Daniel Moyer
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
moyerd@usc.edu

Aram Galstyan
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
galstyan@isi.edu

Abstract
Estimating graphical model structure from high-dimensional and undersampled
data is a fundamental problem in many scientific fields. Existing approaches, such
as GLASSO, latent variable GLASSO, and latent tree models, suffer from high
computational complexity and may impose unrealistic sparsity priors in some
cases. We introduce a novel method that leverages a newly discovered connection
between information-theoretic measures and structured latent factor models to
derive an optimization objective which encourages modular structures where each
observed variable has a single latent parent. The proposed method has linear
stepwise computational complexity w.r.t. the number of observed variables. Our
experiments on synthetic data demonstrate that our approach is the only method
that recovers modular structure better as the dimensionality increases. We also
use our approach for estimating covariance structure for a number of real-world
datasets and show that it consistently outperforms state-of-the-art estimators at
a fraction of the computational cost. Finally, we apply the proposed method to
high-resolution fMRI data (with more than 105 voxels) and show that it is capable
of extracting meaningful patterns.

1

Introduction

The ability to recover the true relationships among many variables directly from data is a holy grail in
many scientific domains, including neuroscience, computational biology, and finance. Unfortunately,
the problem is challenging in high-dimensional and undersampled regimes due to the curse of
dimensionality. Existing methods try to address the challenge by making certain assumptions about
the structure of the solution. For instance, graphical LASSO, or GLASSO [1], imposes sparsity
constraints on the inverse covariance matrix. While GLASSO perfroms well for certain undersampled
problems, its computational complexity is cubic in the number of variables, making it impractical for
even moderately sized problems. One can improve the scalability by imposing even stronger sparsity
constraints, but this approach fails for many real-world datasets that do not have ultra-sparse structure.
Other methods such as latent variable graphical LASSO (LVGLASSO) [2] and latent tree modeling
methods [3] suffer from high computational complexity as well, whereas approaches like PCA, ICA,
or factor analysis have better time complexity but perform very poorly in undersampled regimes.
In this work we introduce a novel latent factor modeling approach for estimating multivariate Gaussian
distributions. The proposed method – linear Correlation Explanation or linear CorEx – searches for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

