Learner-aware Teaching: Inverse Reinforcement
Learning with Preferences and Constraints

Sebastian Tschiatschek∗
Microsoft Research
setschia@microsoft.com

Ahana Ghosh∗
MPI-SWS
gahana@mpi-sws.org

Rati Devidze
MPI-SWS
rdevidze@mpi-sws.org

Luis Haug∗
ETH Zurich
lhaug@inf.ethz.ch

Adish Singla
MPI-SWS
adishs@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) enables an agent to learn complex behavior
by observing demonstrations from a (near-)optimal policy. The typical assumption
is that the learner’s goal is to match the teacher’s demonstrated behavior. In this
paper, we consider the setting where the learner has its own preferences that it
additionally takes into consideration. These preferences can for example capture
behavioral biases, mismatched worldviews, or physical constraints. We study
two teaching approaches: learner-agnostic teaching, where the teacher provides
demonstrations from an optimal policy ignoring the learner’s preferences, and
learner-aware teaching, where the teacher accounts for the learner’s preferences.
We design learner-aware teaching algorithms and show that significant performance
improvements can be achieved over learner-agnostic teaching.

1

Introduction

Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) enables a learning agent (learner) to acquire skills from
observations of a teacher’s demonstrations. The learner infers a reward function explaining the demonstrated behavior and optimizes its own behavior accordingly. IRL has been
studied extensively [Abbeel and Ng, 2004, Ratliff et al., 2006, Ziebart, 2010, Boularias et al., 2011,
Osa et al., 2018] under the premise that the learner can and is willing to imitate the teacher’s behavior.
In real-world settings, however, a learner typically does not blindly follow the teacher’s demonstrations, but also has its own preferences and constraints. For instance, consider demonstrating to an
auto-pilot of a self-driving car how to navigate from A to B by taking the most fuel-efficient route.
These demonstrations might conflict with the preference of the auto-pilot to drive on highways in
order to ensure maximum safety. Similarly, in robot-human interaction with the goal of teaching
people how to cook, a teaching robot might demonstrate to a human user how to cook “roast chicken”,
which could conflict with the preferences of the learner who is “vegetarian”. To give yet another
example, consider a surgical training simulator which provides virtual demonstrations of expert
behavior; a novice learner might not be confident enough to imitate a difficult procedure because of
safety concerns. In all these examples, the learner might not be able to acquire useful skills from the
teacher’s demonstrations.
In this paper, we formalize the problem of teaching a learner with preferences and constraints. First,
we are interested in understanding the suboptimality of learner-agnostic teaching, i.e., ignoring the
learner’s preferences. Second, we are interested in designing learner-aware teachers who account
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

