Double Quantization for Communication-Efficient
Distributed Optimization

Yue Yu
IIIS, Tsinghua University
yu-y14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiaxiang Wu
Tencent AI Lab
jonathanwu@tencent.com

Longbo Huang∗
IIIS, Tsinghua University
longbohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Modern distributed training of machine learning models often suffers from high
communication overhead for synchronizing stochastic gradients and model parameters. In this paper, to reduce the communication complexity, we propose
double quantization, a general scheme for quantizing both model parameters and
gradients. Three communication-efficient algorithms are proposed based on this
general scheme. Specifically, (i) we propose a low-precision algorithm AsyLPG
with asynchronous parallelism, (ii) we explore integrating gradient sparsification
with double quantization and develop Sparse-AsyLPG, (iii) we show that double
quantization can be accelerated by the momentum technique and design accelerated AsyLPG. We establish rigorous performance guarantees for the algorithms,
and conduct experiments on a multi-server test-bed with real-world datasets to
demonstrate that our algorithms can effectively save transmitted bits without performance degradation, and significantly outperform existing methods with either
model parameter or gradient quantization.

1

Introduction

The data parallel mechanism is a widely used architecture for distributed optimization, which has
received much recent attention due to data explosion and increasing model complexity. It decomposes
the time consuming gradient computations into sub-tasks, and assigns them to separate worker
machines for execution. Specifically, the training data is distributed among M workers and each
worker maintains a local copy of model parameters. At each iteration, each worker computes a
gradient from a mini-batch randomly drawn from its local data. The global stochastic gradient is
then computed by synchronously aggregating M local gradients. Model parameters are then updated
accordingly.
Two issues significantly slow down methods based on the data parallel architecture. One is the
communication cost. For example, all workers must send their entire local gradients to the master
node. If gradients are dense, the master node has to receive and send M × d floating-point numbers
per iteration (d is the size of the model vector), which scales linearly with network and model vector
sizes. With the increasing computing cluster size and model complexity, it has been observed in many
systems that such communication overhead has become the performance bottleneck [38, 35]. The
other factor is the synchronization cost, i.e., the master node has to wait for the last local gradient
arrival at each iteration. This coordination dramatically increases system’s idle time.
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

