Neural networks grown and self-organized by noise

Guruprasad Raghavan
Department of Bioengineering
Caltech
Pasadena, CA 91125
graghava@caltech.edu

Matt Thomson
Biology and Biological Engineering
Caltech
Pasadena, CA 91125
mthomson@caltech.edu

Abstract
Living neural networks emerge through a process of growth and self-organization
that begins with a single cell and results in a brain, an organized and functional
computational device. Artificial neural networks, however, rely on human-designed,
hand-programmed architectures for their remarkable performance. Can we develop
artificial computational devices that can grow and self-organize without human
intervention? In this paper, we propose a biologically inspired developmental
algorithm that can ‘grow’ a functional, layered neural network from a single initial
cell. The algorithm organizes inter-layer connections to construct retinotopic
pooling layers. Our approach is inspired by the mechanisms employed by the early
visual system to wire the retina to the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), days before
animals open their eyes. The key ingredients for robust self-organization are an
emergent spontaneous spatiotemporal activity wave in the first layer and a local
learning rule in the second layer that ‘learns’ the underlying activity pattern in the
first layer. The algorithm is adaptable to a wide-range of input-layer geometries,
robust to malfunctioning units in the first layer, and so can be used to successfully
grow and self-organize pooling architectures of different pool-sizes and shapes. The
algorithm provides a primitive procedure for constructing layered neural networks
through growth and self-organization. We also demonstrate that networks grown
from a single unit perform as well as hand-crafted networks on MNIST. Broadly,
our work shows that biologically inspired developmental algorithms can be applied
to autonomously grow functional ‘brains’ in-silico.

1

Introduction

Living neural networks in the brain perform an array of computational and information processing
tasks including sensory input processing [1, 2], storing and retrieving memory [3, 4], decision
making [5, 6], and more globally, generate the general phenomena of “intelligence”. In addition to
their information processing feats, brains are unique because they are computational devices that
actually self-organize their intelligence. In fact brains ultimately grow from single cells during
development. Engineering has yet to construct artificial computational systems that can self-organize
their intelligence. In this paper, inspired by neural development, we ask how artificial computational
devices might build themselves without human intervention.
Deep neural networks are one of the most powerful paradigms in Artificial Intelligence. Deep
neural networks have demonstrated human-like performance in tasks ranging from image and speech
recognition to game-playing [7, 8, 9]. Although the layered architecture plays an important role in the
success [10] of deep neural networks, the widely accepted state of art is to use a hand-programmed
network architecture [11] or to tune multiple architectural parameters, both requiring significant
engineering investment. Convolutional neural networks, a specific class of DNNs, employ a hand
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

