Effective End-to-end Unsupervised Outlier Detection
via Inlier Priority of Discriminative Network
Siqi Wang1∗, Yijie Zeng2∗ , Xinwang Liu1 , En Zhu1 , Jianping Yin3 , Chuanfu Xu1 , Marius Kloft4
1
2
National University of Defense Technology,
Nanyang Technological University
3
4
Dongguan University of Technology,
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern
wangsiqi10c@nudt.edu.cn, yzeng004@e.ntu.edu.sg, {xinwangliu, enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn
jpyin@dgut.edu.cn, xuchuanfu@nudt.edu.cn, kloft@cs.uni-kl.de

Abstract
Despite the wide success of deep neural networks (DNN), little progress has been
made on end-to-end unsupervised outlier detection (UOD) from high dimensional
data like raw images. In this paper, we propose a framework named E3 Outlier,
which can perform UOD in a both effective and end-to-end manner: First, instead of
the commonly-used autoencoders in previous end-to-end UOD methods, E3 Outlier
for the first time leverages a discriminative DNN for better representation learning,
by using surrogate supervision to create multiple pseudo classes from original unlabelled data. Next, unlike classic UOD that utilizes data characteristics like density
or proximity, we exploit a novel property named inlier priority to enable end-to-end
UOD by discriminative DNN. We demonstrate theoretically and empirically that
the intrinsic class imbalance of inliers/outliers will make the network prioritize
minimizing inliers’ loss when inliers/outliers are indiscriminately fed into the network for training, which enables us to differentiate outliers directly from DNN’s
outputs. Finally, based on inlier priority, we propose the negative entropy based
score as a simple and effective outlierness measure. Extensive evaluations show
that E3 Outlier significantly advances UOD performance by up to 30% AUROC
against state-of-the-art counterparts, especially on relatively difficult benchmarks.

1

Introduction

An outlier is defined as “an observation which deviates so much from the other observations as to
arouse suspicions that it was generated by a different mechanism” [1]. In some context of the literature,
outliers are also referred as anomalies, deviants, novelties or exceptions [2]. Outlier detection (OD)
has broad applications such as financial fraud detection [3], intrusion detection [4], fault detection [5],
etc. Various solutions have been proposed to tackle OD (see [6] for a comprehensive review). Based
on the availability of labels, those solutions can be accordingly divided into three categories below
[7]: 1) Supervised OD (SOD) deals with the case where a training set is provided with both labelled
inliers/outliers, but it suffers from expensive data labelling and the rarity of outliers in practice [6].
2) Semi-supervised OD (SSOD) only requires pure single-class training data that are labelled as
“inlier” or “normal”, and no outlier is involved during training. 3) Unsupervised OD (UOD) handles
completely unlabelled data mixed with outliers, and no data label is provided for training at all.
In this paper we will limit our discussion to UOD, as most data are unlabelled in practice and UOD is
the most widely applicable [7]. In particular, two clarifications of concepts must be made: First, in
some literature like [8, 9], “unsupervised outlier/anomaly detection” actually refers to SSOD rather
than UOD by our definition. Second, a recent topic is out-of-distribution sample detection, which
∗

Authors contribute equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

