Variance Reduction in Bipartite Experiments through
Correlation Clustering

Jean Pouget-Abadie
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
jeanpa@google.com

Kevin Aydin
Google Research
Mountain View, CA 94043
kaydin@google.com

Kay Brodersen
Google
Zürich, Switzerland
kbrodersen@google.com

Warren Schudy
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
wschudy@google.com

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
mirrokni@google.com

Abstract
Causal inference in randomized experiments typically assumes that the units of
randomization and the units of analysis are one and the same. In some applications, however, these two roles are played by distinct entities linked by a bipartite
graph. The key challenge in such bipartite settings is how to avoid interference
bias, which would typically arise if we simply randomized the treatment at the
level of analysis units. One effective way of minimizing interference bias in standard experiments is through cluster randomization, but this design has not been
studied in the bipartite setting where conventional clustering schemes can lead to
poorly powered experiments. This paper introduces a novel clustering objective
and a corresponding algorithm that partitions a bipartite graph so as to maximize
the statistical power of a bipartite experiment on that graph. Whereas previous
work relied on balanced partitioning, our formulation suggests the use of a correlation clustering objective. We use a publicly-available graph of Amazon useritem reviews to validate our solution and illustrate how it substantially increases
the statistical power in bipartite experiments.

1

Introduction

Whether the setting is a medical trial or an A/B test, causal inference in randomized experiments
typically assumes that the units of randomization and the units of analysis are one and the same.
One possible exception to this rule is in the context of interference, a field of growing interest to
statisticians, where experimenters will occasionally consider the indirect effect of a unit’s peers
being treated. In some cases, it is infeasible or undesirable to assign treatment to the experimental
units we care about, and we can then draw a distinction between the units that are directly treated
and the units whose outcomes we care about, a setting known as a bipartite experiment.
Bipartite experiments are critical in various settings, including pricing in online marketplaces (Fradkin et al., 2018), recommender systems (Gilotte et al., 2018), social networks (Bakshy et al., 2014),
and display ad auctions (Chawla et al., 2016). For example, consider an online retailer wishing to
determine the impact of offering a discount on certain items through a randomized experiment. The
retailer faces the choice of randomizing on users, items, or user-item pairs. Randomizing on users
or user-item pairs could result in different users seeing different prices on the same item, which is
undesirable. If the retailer decides to randomize on items, standard causal theory would suggest
using items as the unit of analysis. However, this ignores interference between substitute goods. For
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

