Modeling Uncertainty by Learning a Hierarchy of
Deep Neural Connections

Raanan Y. Rohekar
Intel AI Lab
raanan.yehezkel@intel.com

Yaniv Gurwicz
Intel AI Lab
yaniv.gurwicz@intel.com

Shami Nisimov
Intel AI Lab
shami.nisimov@intel.com

Gal Novik
Intel AI Lab
gal.novik@intel.com

Abstract
Modeling uncertainty in deep neural networks, despite recent important advances, is
still an open problem. Bayesian neural networks are a powerful solution, where the
prior over network weights is a design choice, often a normal distribution or other
distribution encouraging sparsity. However, this prior is agnostic to the generative
process of the input data, which might lead to unwarranted generalization for outof-distribution tested data. We suggest the presence of a confounder for the relation
between the input data and the discriminative function given the target label. We
propose an approach for modeling this confounder by sharing neural connectivity
patterns between the generative and discriminative networks. This approach leads
to a new deep architecture, where networks are sampled from the posterior of
local causal structures, and coupled into a compact hierarchy. We demonstrate that
sampling networks from this hierarchy, proportionally to their posterior, is efficient
and enables estimating various types of uncertainties. Empirical evaluations of
our method demonstrate significant improvement compared to state-of-the-art
calibration and out-of-distribution detection methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have become an important tool in applied machine learning, achieving state-ofthe-art regression and classification accuracy in many domains. However, quantifying and measuring
uncertainty in these discriminative models, despite recent important advances, is still an open problem.
Representation of uncertainty is crucial for many domains, such as safety-critical applications,
personalized medicine, and recommendation systems [6]. Common deep neural networks are not
designed to capture model uncertainty, hence estimating it implicitly from the prediction is often
inaccurate. Several types of uncertainties are commonly discussed [5, 19], where the two main types
are: 1) epistemic uncertainty and 2) aleatoric uncertainty. Epistemic uncertainty is caused by the lack
of knowledge, typically in cases where only a small training data exists, or for out-of-distribution
inputs. Aleatoric uncertainty is caused by noisy data, and contrary to epistemic uncertainty, does
not vanish in the large sample limit. In this work, we focus on two aspects of uncertainty, often
required addressing in practical uses of neural networks: calibration [2] and out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection.
Calibration is a notion that describes the relation between a predicted probability of an event and
the actual proportion of occurrences of that event. It is generally measured using (strictly) proper
∗

All authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

