MetaInit: Initializing learning by learning to initialize

Yann N. Dauphin
Google AI
ynd@google.com

Samuel S. Schoenholz
Google AI
schsam@google.com

Abstract
Deep learning models frequently trade handcrafted features for deep features
learned with much less human intervention using gradient descent. While this
paradigm has been enormously successful, deep networks are often difficult to
train and performance can depend crucially on the initial choice of parameters. In
this work, we introduce an algorithm called MetaInit as a step towards automating
the search for good initializations using meta-learning. Our approach is based on
a hypothesis that good initializations make gradient descent easier by starting in
regions that look locally linear with minimal second order effects. We formalize
this notion via a quantity that we call the gradient quotient, which can be computed
with any architecture or dataset. MetaInit minimizes this quantity efficiently
by using gradient descent to tune the norms of the initial weight matrices. We
conduct experiments on plain and residual networks and show that the algorithm
can automatically recover from a class of bad initializations. MetaInit allows us
to train networks and achieve performance competitive with the state-of-the-art
without batch normalization or residual connections. In particular, we find that
this approach outperforms normalization for networks without skip connections on
CIFAR-10 and can scale to Resnet-50 models on Imagenet.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has led to significant advances across a wide range of domains including translation [55], computer vision [24], and medicine [2]. This progress has frequently come alongside
architectural innovations such as convolutions [33], skip-connections [26, 22] and normalization methods [27, 4]. These components allow for the replacement of shallow models with hand-engineered
features by deeper, larger, and more expressive neural networks that learn to extract salient features
from raw data [43, 8]. While building structure into neural networks has led to state-of-the-art results
across a myriad of tasks, there are significant hindrances to this approach. Indeed, these larger and
more complicated models are often challenging to train and there are few guiding principles that can
be used to consistently train novel architectures. As such, neural network training frequently involves
large, mostly brute force, hyperparameter searches that are a significant computational burden and
obfuscate scientific approaches to deep learning. Indeed, it is often unclear whether architectural
additions - such as batch normalization or skip connections - are responsible for improved network
performance or whether they simply ameliorate training.
There are many ways in which training a neural network can fail. Gradients can vanish or explode
which makes the network either insensitive or overly sensitive to updates during stochastic gradient
descent [25]. Even if the gradients are well-behaved at initialization, curvature can cause gradients to
become poorly conditioned after some time which can derail training. This has led researchers to
try to consider natural gradient [3] or conjugate gradient [38] techniques. While some methods like
KFAC [37] are tractable, second order methods have found limited success due to the implementation
challenges and computational overhead. However, quasi-second order techniques such as Adam [30]
have become ubiquitous.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

