Machine Teaching of Active Sequential Learners

Tomi Peltola
tomi.peltola@aalto.fi

Mustafa Mert Çelikok
mustafa.celikok@aalto.fi

Pedram Daee
pedram.daee@aalto.fi

Samuel Kaski
samuel.kaski@aalto.fi
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland

Abstract
Machine teaching addresses the problem of finding the best training data that can
guide a learning algorithm to a target model with minimal effort. In conventional
settings, a teacher provides data that are consistent with the true data distribution.
However, for sequential learners which actively choose their queries, such as multiarmed bandits and active learners, the teacher can only provide responses to the
learner’s queries, not design the full data. In this setting, consistent teachers can
be sub-optimal for finite horizons. We formulate this sequential teaching problem,
which current techniques in machine teaching do not address, as a Markov decision
process, with the dynamics nesting a model of the learner and the actions being
the teacher’s responses. Furthermore, we address the complementary problem of
learning from a teacher that plans: to recognise the teaching intent of the responses,
the learner is endowed with a model of the teacher. We test the formulation
with multi-armed bandit learners in simulated experiments and a user study. The
results show that learning is improved by (i) planning teaching and (ii) the learner
having a model of the teacher. The approach gives tools to taking into account
strategic (planning) behaviour of users of interactive intelligent systems, such as
recommendation engines, by considering them as boundedly optimal teachers.

1

Introduction

Humans, casual users and domain experts alike, are increasingly interacting with artificial intelligence
or machine learning based systems. As the number of interactions in human–computer and other
types of agent–agent interaction is usually limited, these systems are often based on active sequential
machine learning methods, such as multi-armed bandits, Bayesian optimization, or active learning.
These methods explicitly optimise for the efficiency of the interaction from the system’s perspective.
On the other hand, for goal-oriented tasks, humans create mental models of the environment for
planning their actions to achieve their goals [1, 2]. In AI systems, recent research has shown that
users form mental models of the AI’s state and behaviour [3, 4]. Yet, the statistical models underlying
the active sequential machine learning methods treat the human actions as passive data, rather than
acknowledging the strategic thinking of the user.
Machine teaching studies a complementary problem to active learning: how to provide a machine
learner with data to learn a target model with minimal effort [5–7]. Apart from its fundamental
machine learning interest, machine teaching has been applied to domains such as education [8] and
adversarial attacks [9]. In this paper, we study the machine teaching problem of active sequential
machine learners: the learner sequentially chooses queries and the teacher provides responses to them.
Importantly, to steer the learner towards the teaching goal, the teacher needs to appreciate the order
of the learner’s queries and the effect of the responses on it. Current techniques in machine teaching
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

