Paraphrase Generation with Latent Bag of Words

Yao Fu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
yao.fu@columbia.edu

Yansong Feng
Institute of Computer Science and Technology
Peking University
fengyansong@pku.edu.cn

John P. Cunningham
Department of Statistics
Columbia University
jpc2181@columbia.edu

Abstract
Paraphrase generation is a longstanding important problem in natural language
processing. In addition, recent progress in deep generative models has shown
promising results on discrete latent variables for text generation. Inspired by
variational autoencoders with discrete latent structures, in this work, we propose
a latent bag of words (BOW) model for paraphrase generation. We ground the
semantics of a discrete latent variable by the BOW from the target sentences. We
use this latent variable to build a fully differentiable content planning and surface
realization model. Specifically, we use source words to predict their neighbors
and model the target BOW with a mixture of softmax. We use Gumbel top-k
reparameterization to perform differentiable subset sampling from the predicted
BOW distribution. We retrieve the sampled word embeddings and use them to
augment the decoder and guide its generation search space. Our latent BOW model
not only enhances the decoder, but also exhibits clear interpretability. We show the
model interpretability with regard to (i) unsupervised learning of word neighbors
(ii) the step-by-step generation procedure. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
transparent and effective generation process of this model.1

1

Introduction

The generation of paraphrases is a longstanding problem for learning natural language [33]. Paraphrases are defined as sentences conveying the same meaning but with different surface realization.
For example, in a question answering website, people may ask duplicated questions like How do I
improve my English v.s. What is the best way to learn English. Paraphrase generation is important,
not only because paraphrases demonstrate the diverse nature of human language, but also because the
generation system can be the key component to other important language understanding tasks, such
as question answering[5, 11], machine translation [7], and semantic parsing [43].
Traditional models are generally rule based, which find lexical substitutions from WordNet [34] style
resources, then substitute the content words accordingly [3, 36, 21]. Recent neural models primary rely
on the sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) learning framework [44, 40], achieving inspiring performance
gains over the traditional methods. Despite its effectiveness, there is no strong interpretability of
seq2seq learning. The sentence embedding encoded by the encoder is not directly associated with
any linguistic aspects of that sentence2 . On the other hand, although interpretable, many traditional
1
2

Our code can be found at https://github.com/FranxYao/dgm_latent_bow
The linguistic aspects we refer include but not limited to: words, phrases, syntax, and semantics.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

