Knowledge Extraction with No Observable Data

Jaemin Yoo
Seoul National University
jaeminyoo@snu.ac.kr

Minyong Cho
Seoul National University
chominyong@gmail.com

Taebum Kim
Seoul National University
k.taebum@snu.ac.kr

U Kang∗
Seoul National University
ukang@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is to transfer the knowledge of a large neural network into
a smaller one and has been shown to be effective especially when the amount of
training data is limited or the size of the student model is very small. To transfer
the knowledge, it is essential to observe the data that have been used to train the
network since its knowledge is concentrated on a narrow manifold rather than the
whole input space. However, the data are not accessible in many cases due to the
privacy or confidentiality issues in medical, industrial, and military domains. To the
best of our knowledge, there has been no approach that distills the knowledge of a
neural network when no data are observable. In this work, we propose K EG N ET
(Knowledge Extraction with Generative Networks), a novel approach to extract the
knowledge of a trained deep neural network and to generate artificial data points
that replace the missing training data in knowledge distillation. Experiments show
that K EG N ET outperforms all baselines for data-free knowledge distillation. We
provide the source code of our paper in https://github.com/snudatalab/KegNet.

1

Introduction

How can we distill the knowledge of a deep neural network without any observable data?
Knowledge distillation [9] is to transfer the knowledge of a large neural network or an ensemble of
neural networks into a smaller network. Given a set of trained teacher models, one feeds training
data to them and uses their predictions instead of the true labels to train the small student model. It
has been effective especially when the amount of training data is limited or the size of the student
model is very small [14, 28], because the teacher’s knowledge helps the student to learn efficiently
the hidden relationships between the target labels even with a small dataset.
However, it is essential for knowledge distillation that at least a few training examples are observable,
since the knowledge of a deep neural network does not cover the whole input space; it is focused
on a manifold px of data that the network has actually observed. The network is likely to produce
unpredictable outputs if given random inputs that are not described by px , misguiding the student
network. There are recent works for distilling a network’s knowledge by a small dataset [22] or only
metadata at each layer [23], but no approach has successfully distilled the knowledge without any
observable data. It is desirable in this case to generate artificial data by generative networks [7, 31],
but they also require a large amount of training data to estimate the true manifold px .
We propose K EG N ET (Knowledge Extraction with Generative Networks), a novel architecture that
extracts the knowledge of a trained neural network for knowledge distillation without observable data.
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

