When to Trust Your Model:
Model-Based Policy Optimization
Michael Janner

Justin Fu
Marvin Zhang
Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley
{janner, justinjfu, marvin, svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Designing effective model-based reinforcement learning algorithms is difficult
because the ease of data generation must be weighed against the bias of modelgenerated data. In this paper, we study the role of model usage in policy optimization both theoretically and empirically. We first formulate and analyze a
model-based reinforcement learning algorithm with a guarantee of monotonic improvement at each step. In practice, this analysis is overly pessimistic and suggests
that real off-policy data is always preferable to model-generated on-policy data,
but we show that an empirical estimate of model generalization can be incorporated into such analysis to justify model usage. Motivated by this analysis, we
then demonstrate that a simple procedure of using short model-generated rollouts
branched from real data has the benefits of more complicated model-based algorithms without the usual pitfalls. In particular, this approach surpasses the sample
efficiency of prior model-based methods, matches the asymptotic performance of
the best model-free algorithms, and scales to horizons that cause other model-based
methods to fail entirely.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning algorithms generally fall into one of two categories: model-based approaches,
which build a predictive model of an environment and derive a controller from it, and model-free
techniques, which learn a direct mapping from states to actions. Model-free methods have shown
promise as a general-purpose tool for learning complex policies from raw state inputs (Mnih et al.,
2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018), but their generality comes at the cost of efficiency.
When dealing with real-world physical systems, for which data collection can be an arduous process,
model-based approaches are appealing due to their comparatively fast learning. However, model
accuracy acts as a bottleneck to policy quality, often causing model-based approaches to perform
worse asymptotically than their model-free counterparts.
In this paper, we study how to most effectively use a predictive model for policy optimization.
We first formulate and analyze a class of model-based reinforcement learning algorithms with
improvement guarantees. Although there has been recent interest in monotonic improvement of
model-based reinforcement learning algorithms (Sun et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2019), most commonly
used model-based approaches lack the improvement guarantees that underpin many model-free
methods (Schulman et al., 2015). While it is possible to apply analogous techniques to the study of
model-based methods to achieve similar guarantees, it is more difficult to use such analysis to justify
model usage in the first place due to pessimistic bounds on model error. However, we show that more
realistic model error rates derived empirically allow us to modify this analysis to provide a more
reasonable tradeoff on model usage.
Our main contribution is a practical algorithm built on these insights, which we call model-based
policy optimization (MBPO), that makes limited use of a predictive model to achieve pronounced
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

