Coordinated hippocampal-entorhinal replay as
structural inference
Talfan Evans
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
University College London
talfan.evans.13@ucl.ac.uk

Neil Burgess
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
University College London
n.burgess@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Constructing and maintaining useful representations of sensory experience is essential for reasoning about ones environment. High-level associative (topological)
maps can be useful for efficient planning and are easily constructed from experience.
Conversely, embedding new experiences within a metric structure allows them to
be integrated with existing ones and novel associations to be implicitly inferred.
Neurobiologically, the synaptic associations between hippocampal place cells and
entorhinal grid cells are thought to represent associative and metric structures,
respectively. Learning the place-grid cell associations can therefore be interpreted
as learning a mapping between these two spaces. Here, we show how this map
could be constructed by probabilistic message-passing through the hippocampalentorhinal system, where messages are scheduled to reduce the propagation of
redundant information. We propose that this offline inference corresponds to coordinated hippocampal-entorhinal replay during sharp wave ripples. Our results
also suggest that the metric map will contain local distortions that reflect the inferred structure of the environment according to associative experience, explaining
observed grid deformations.

1

Introduction

Localizing in an environment relies on two sources of information. Firstly, unique sensory inputs
may indicate absolute location in space. Secondly, path integration (PI) can update previous location
on a metric map by integrating self-motion. Sensory inputs are required to correct the accumulation
of error by PI, but problems arise when their role in localization occurs simultaneously with learning
of their correspondence to locations on the metric map (SLAM) [10]. In general, computing the joint
map-location distribution requires probabilistic inference over previous sensory observations and
movements given their respective uncertainties. Associative representations can be computationally
cheaper when used to perform high-level planning [56]. However, organizing associative structure
in a metric space allows for efficient integration of new experience and the inference of metric
relationships between sensory states in the absence of physical experience. This ‘short-cutting’ ability
is crucial for efficient exploration and navigation [58; 55].
1.1

Place and grid cells

Neurobiologically, grid cells (GC) in the medial entorhinal cortex (mEC), whose firing fields are
arranged on a periodic hexagonal lattice in space, are thought to play a role in PI [17] and constitute
a metric map of space [22]. Their firing patterns are stable over time suggesting stabilization by
environmental cues [24; 12]. Conversely, place cells (PC) in the hippocampus (HPC) fire at distinct
locations [43] and are thought to respond to specific sensory stimuli such as environmental geometry
[44; 30]. PCs represent states in sensory space such that their activity most often reflects the animal’s
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

