Learning Imbalanced Datasets with
Label-Distribution-Aware Margin Loss

Kaidi Cao
Stanford University
kaidicao@stanford.edu

Colin Wei
Stanford University
colinwei@stanford.edu

Nikos Arechiga
Toyota Research Institute
nikos.arechiga@tri.global

Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute
adrien.gaidon@tri.global

Tengyu Ma
Stanford University
tengyuma@stanford.edu

Abstract
Deep learning algorithms can fare poorly when the training dataset suffers from
heavy class-imbalance but the testing criterion requires good generalization on less
frequent classes. We design two novel methods to improve performance in such
scenarios. First, we propose a theoretically-principled label-distribution-aware
margin (LDAM) loss motivated by minimizing a margin-based generalization
bound. This loss replaces the standard cross-entropy objective during training
and can be applied with prior strategies for training with class-imbalance such as
re-weighting or re-sampling. Second, we propose a simple, yet effective, training
schedule that defers re-weighting until after the initial stage, allowing the model to
learn an initial representation while avoiding some of the complications associated
with re-weighting or re-sampling. We test our methods on several benchmark
vision tasks including the real-world imbalanced dataset iNaturalist 2018. Our
experiments show that either of these methods alone can already improve over
existing techniques and their combination achieves even better performance gains1 .

1

Introduction

Modern real-world large-scale datasets often have long-tailed label distributions [51, 28, 34, 12,
15, 50, 40]. On these datasets, deep neural networks have been found to perform poorly on less
represented classes [17, 51, 5]. This is particularly detrimental if the testing criterion places more
emphasis on minority classes. For example, accuracy on a uniform label distribution or the minimum
accuracy among all classes are examples of such criteria. These are common scenarios in many
applications [7, 42, 20] due to various practical concerns such as transferability to new domains,
fairness, etc.
The two common approaches for learning long-tailed data are re-weighting the losses of the examples
and re-sampling the examples in the SGD mini-batch (see [5, 21, 10, 17, 18, 9] and the references
therein). They both devise a training loss that is in expectation closer to the test distribution, and
therefore can achieve better trade-offs between the accuracies of the frequent classes and the minority
classes. However, because we have fundamentally less information about the minority classes and
the models deployed are often huge, over-fitting to the minority classes appears to be one of the
challenges in improving these methods.
We propose to regularize the minority classes more strongly than the frequent classes so that we
can improve the generalization error of minority classes without sacrificing the model’s ability to fit
1

Code available at https://github.com/kaidic/LDAM-DRW.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

