Sparse Variational Inference:
Bayesian Coresets from Scratch

Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Boyan Beronov
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
beronov@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
The proliferation of automated inference algorithms in Bayesian statistics has provided practitioners newfound access to fast, reproducible data analysis and powerful
statistical models. Designing automated methods that are also both computationally
scalable and theoretically sound, however, remains a significant challenge. Recent
work on Bayesian coresets takes the approach of compressing the dataset before
running a standard inference algorithm, providing both scalability and guarantees
on posterior approximation error. But the automation of past coreset methods is
limited because they depend on the availability of a reasonable coarse posterior
approximation, which is difficult to specify in practice. In the present work we remove this requirement by formulating coreset construction as sparsity-constrained
variational inference within an exponential family. This perspective leads to a novel
construction via greedy optimization, and also provides a unifying informationgeometric view of present and past methods. The proposed Riemannian coreset
construction algorithm is fully automated, requiring no problem-specific inputs
aside from the probabilistic model and dataset. In addition to being significantly
easier to use than past methods, experiments demonstrate that past coreset constructions are fundamentally limited by the fixed coarse posterior approximation;
in contrast, the proposed algorithm is able to continually improve the coreset, providing state-of-the-art Bayesian dataset summarization with orders-of-magnitude
reduction in KL divergence to the exact posterior.

1

Introduction

Bayesian statistical models are powerful tools for learning from data, with the ability to encode
complex hierarchical dependence and domain expertise, as well as coherently quantify uncertainty in
latent parameters. In practice, however, exact Bayesian inference is typically intractable, and we must
use approximate inference algorithms such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [1; 2, Ch. 11,12]
and variational inference (VI) [3, 4]. Until recently, implementations of these methods were created
on a per-model basis, requiring expert input to design the MCMC transition kernels or derive VI
gradient updates. But developments in automated tools—e.g., automatic differentiation [5, 6], “blackbox” gradient estimates [7], and Hamiltonian transition kernels [8, 9]—have obviated much of this
expert input, greatly expanding the repertoire of Bayesian models accessible to practitioners.
In modern data analysis problems, automation alone is insufficient; inference algorithms must also
be computationally scalable—to handle the ever-growing size of datasets—and provide theoretical
guarantees on the quality of their output such that statistical pracitioners may confidently use them
in failure-sensitive settings. Here the standard set of tools falls short. Designing correct MCMC
schemes in the large-scale data setting is a challenging, problem-specific task [10–12]; and despite
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

