Detecting Overfitting via Adversarial Examples

Roman Werpachowski

András György
Csaba Szepesvári
DeepMind, London, UK
{romanw,agyorgy,szepi}@google.com

Abstract
The frequent reuse of test sets in popular benchmark problems raises doubts about
the credibility of reported test-error rates. Verifying whether a learned model is
overfitted to a test set is challenging as independent test sets drawn from the same
data distribution are usually unavailable, while other test sets may introduce a
distribution shift. We propose a new hypothesis test that uses only the original test
data to detect overfitting. It utilizes a new unbiased error estimate that is based
on adversarial examples generated from the test data and importance weighting.
Overfitting is detected if this error estimate is sufficiently different from the original
test error rate. We develop a specialized variant of our test for multiclass image
classification, and apply it to testing overfitting of recent models to the popular
ImageNet benchmark. Our method correctly indicates overfitting of the trained
model to the training set, but is not able to detect any overfitting to the test set, in
line with other recent work on this topic.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks achieve impressive performance on many important machine learning benchmarks, such as image classification [18, 19, 28, 27, 16], automated translation [2, 31] or speech
recognition [9, 15]. However, the benchmark datasets are used a multitude of times by researchers
worldwide. Since state-of-the-art methods are selected and published based on their performance
on the corresponding test set, it is typical to see results that continuously improve over time; see,
e.g., the discussion of Recht et al. [25] and Figure 1 for the performance improvement of classifiers
published for the popular CIFAR-10 image classification benchmark [18].

1.00
0.95

accuracy

This process may naturally lead to models overfitted to the test set, rendering test error rate
(the average error measured on the test set) an
unreliable indicator of the actual performance.
Detecting whether a model is overfitted to the
test set is challenging, since independent test
sets drawn from the same data distribution are
generally not available, while alternative test
sets often introduce a distribution shift.

0.90
0.85

0.80
To estimate the performance of a model on un2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
seen data, one may use generalization bounds
year
to get upper bounds on the expected error rate.
The generalization bounds are also applicable Figure 1: Accuracy of image classifiers on the CIFAR-10
when the model and the data are dependent (e.g., test set, by year of publication (data from [25]).
for cross validation or for error estimates based
on the training data or the reused test data), but they usually lead to loose error bounds. Therefore,
although much tighter bounds are available if the test data and the model are independent, comparing
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

