Data Parameters: A New Family of Parameters for
Learning a Differentiable Curriculum

Shreyas Saxena
Apple

Oncel Tuzel
Apple

Dennis DeCoste
Apple

shreyas_saxena@apple.com

otuzel@apple.com

ddecoste@apple.com

Abstract
Recent works have shown that learning from easier instances first can help deep
neural networks (DNNs) generalize better. However, knowing which data to present
during different stages of training is a challenging problem. In this work, we address
this problem by introducing data parameters. More specifically, we equip each
sample and class in a dataset with a learnable parameter (data parameters), which
governs their importance in the learning process. During training, at each iteration,
as we update the model parameters, we also update the data parameters.
These updates are done by gradient descent and do not require hand-crafted rules
or design. When applied to image classification task on CIFAR10, CIFAR100,
WebVision and ImageNet datasets, and object detection task on KITTI dataset,
learning a dynamic curriculum via data parameters leads to consistent gains, without any increase in model complexity or training time. When applied to a noisy
dataset, the proposed method learns to learn from clean images and improves over
the state-of-the-art methods by 14%. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the
first curriculum learning method to show gains on large scale image classification
and detection tasks. Code is available at: https://github.com/apple/
ml-data-parameters.

1

Introduction

Curriculum learning [1, 7, 12, 17, 35] has garnered lot of attention in the field of machine learning.
It draws inspiration from the learning principles underlying cognitive process of humans and animals,
which starts by learning easier concepts and then gradually transitions to learning more complex
concepts. Existing work has shown that with the help of this paradigm, DNNs can achieve better
generalization [1, 2, 15].
The key to applying curriculum learning to different problems is to come up with a ranking function
that assigns learning priorities to the training samples. A sample with a higher priority is supposed to
be learned earlier than a sample with a lower priority. For the majority of early work in curriculum
learning, the curriculum is provided by a pre-determined heuristic. For instance, for the task of
classifying shapes [1], shapes which had less variation were assigned a higher priority. In [29], authors
approached grammar induction, where short sentences were assigned higher priority. The main issues
which limit the application of this approach are: (1) for many complex problems, it is not trivial to
define what are the easy examples or subtasks, (2) in cases where humans can design a curriculum,
it is assumed that the difficulty of learning a sample for humans correlates with the difficulty of
learning the sample for a learning algorithm, and (3) even if one could define the curriculum, the
pre-determined curriculum might not be appropriate at all learning stages of the dynamically learned
model.
Learning a curriculum in an automatic manner is a hard task, since the ease or difficulty of an example
is relative to the current state of the model. In order to overcome these issues, in this work, we
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

