Deep Learning without Weight Transport

Mohamed Akrout
University of Toronto, Triage

Collin Wilson
University of Toronto

Timothy Lillicrap
DeepMind, University College London

Peter C. Humphreys
DeepMind

Douglas Tweed
University of Toronto, York University

Abstract
Current algorithms for deep learning probably cannot run in the brain because
they rely on weight transport, where forward-path neurons transmit their synaptic
weights to a feedback path, in a way that is likely impossible biologically. An algorithm called feedback alignment achieves deep learning without weight transport by
using random feedback weights, but it performs poorly on hard visual-recognition
tasks. Here we describe two mechanisms — a neural circuit called a weight mirror
and a modification of an algorithm proposed by Kolen and Pollack in 1994 — both
of which let the feedback path learn appropriate synaptic weights quickly and accurately even in large networks, without weight transport or complex wiring. Tested
on the ImageNet visual-recognition task, these mechanisms learn almost as well as
backprop (the standard algorithm of deep learning, which uses weight transport)
and they outperform feedback alignment and another, more-recent transport-free
algorithm, the sign-symmetry method.

1

Introduction

The algorithms of deep learning were devised to run on computers, yet in many ways they seem
suitable for brains as well; for instance, they use multilayer networks of processing units, each with
many inputs and a single output, like networks of neurons. But current algorithms can’t quite work
in the brain because they rely on the error-backpropagation algorithm, or backprop, which uses
weight transport: each unit multiplies its incoming signals by numbers called weights, and some
units transmit their weights to other units. In the brain, it is the synapses that perform this weighting,
but there is no known pathway by which they can transmit their weights to other neurons or to other
synapses in the same neuron [1, 2].
Lillicrap et al. [3] offered a solution in the form of feedback alignment, a mechanism that lets
deep networks learn without weight transport, and they reported good results on several tasks. But
Bartunov et al. [4] and Moskovitz et al. [5] have found that feedback alignment does not scale to
hard visual recognition problems such as ImageNet [6].
Xiao et al. [7] achieved good performance on ImageNet using a sign-symmetry algorithm in which
only the signs of the forward and feedback weights, not necessarily their values, must correspond, and
they suggested a mechanism by which that correspondence might be set up during brain development.
Krotov and Hopfield [8] and Guerguiev et al. [9] have explored other approaches to deep learning
without weight transport, but so far only in smaller networks and tasks.
Here we propose two different approaches that learn ImageNet about as well as backprop does, with
no need to initialize forward and feedback matrices so their signs agree. We describe a circuit called
a weight mirror and a version of an algorithm proposed by Kolen and Pollack in 1994 [10], both of
which let initially random feedback weights learn appropriate values without weight transport.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

