Rethinking Deep Neural Network
Ownership Verification: Embedding Passports to
Defeat Ambiguity Attacks

Lixin Fan1 Kam Woh Ng2 Chee Seng Chan2
1
WeBank AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
2
Center of Image and Signal Processing, Faculty of Comp. Sci. and Info., Tech.
University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
{lixinfan@webank.com;kamwoh@siswa.um.edu.my;cs.chan@um.edu.my}

Abstract
With substantial amount of time, resources and human (team) efforts invested to
explore and develop successful deep neural networks (DNN), there emerges an
urgent need to protect these inventions from being illegally copied, redistributed, or
abused without respecting the intellectual properties of legitimate owners. Following recent progresses along this line, we investigate a number of watermark-based
DNN ownership verification methods in the face of ambiguity attacks, which aim
to cast doubts on the ownership verification by forging counterfeit watermarks. It
is shown that ambiguity attacks pose serious threats to existing DNN watermarking
methods. As remedies to the above-mentioned loophole, this paper proposes novel
passport-based DNN ownership verification schemes which are both robust to
network modifications and resilient to ambiguity attacks. The gist of embedding
digital passports is to design and train DNN models in a way such that, the DNN
inference performance of an original task will be significantly deteriorated due to
forged passports. In other words, genuine passports are not only verified by looking
for the predefined signatures, but also reasserted by the unyielding DNN model
inference performances. Extensive experimental results justify the effectiveness
of the proposed passport-based DNN ownership verification schemes. Code and
models are available at https://github.com/kamwoh/DeepIPR

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of deep neural networks (DNN), Machine Learning as a Service (MLaaS)
has emerged as a viable and lucrative business model. However, building a successful DNN is
not a trivial task, which usually requires substantial investments on expertise, time and resources.
As a result of this, there is an urgent need to protect invented DNN models from being illegally
copied, redistributed or abused (i.e. intellectual property infringement). Recently, for instance, digital
watermarking techniques have been adopted to provide such a protection, by embedding watermarks
into DNN models during the training stage. Subsequently, ownerships of these inventions are verified
by the detection of the embedded watermarks, which are supposed to be robust to multiple types of
modifications such as model fine-tuning, model pruning and watermark overwriting [1–4].
In terms of deep learning methods to embed watermarks, existing approaches can be broadly categorized into two schools: a) the feature-based methods that embed designated watermarks into
the DNN weights by imposing additional regularization terms [1, 3, 5]; and b) the trigger-set based
methods that rely on adversarial training samples with specific labels (i.e. backdoor trigger sets)
[2, 4]. Watermarks embedded with either of these methods have successfully demonstrated robustness
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

