Near-Optimal Reinforcement Learning
in Dynamic Treatment Regimes

Junzhe Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
junzhez@cs.columbia.edu

Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
A dynamic treatment regime (DTR) consists of a sequence of decision rules, one
per stage of intervention, that dictates how to determine the treatment assignment
to patients based on evolving treatments and covariates’ history. These regimes are
particularly effective for managing chronic disorders and is arguably one of the key
aspects towards more personalized decision-making. In this paper, we investigate
the online reinforcement learning (RL) problem for selecting optimal DTRs provided that observational data is available. We develop the first adaptive algorithm
that achieves near-optimal regret in DTRs in online settings, without any access to
historical data. We further derive informative bounds on the system dynamics of
the underlying DTR from confounded, observational data. Finally, we combine
these results and develop a novel RL algorithm that efficiently learns the optimal
DTR while leveraging the abundant, yet imperfect confounded observations.

1

Introduction

In medical practice, a patient typically has to be treated at multiple stages; the physician repeatedly
adapts each treatment, tailored to the patient’s time-varying, dynamic state (e.g., level of virus, results
of diagnostic tests). Dynamic treatment regimes (DTRs) [18] provide an attractive framework of
personalized treatments in longitudinal settings. Operationally, a DTR consists of decision rules that
dictate what treatment to provide at each stage, given the patient’s evolving conditions and history.
These decision rules are alternatively known as adaptive treatment strategies [12, 13, 19, 33, 34] or
treatment policies [16, 37, 38]. DTRs offer an effective vehicle for personalized management of
chronic conditions, including cancer, diabetes, and mental illnesses [36].
Consider the DTR instance regarding the treatment of alcohol dependence [19, 6], which is graphically
represented in Fig. 1a . Based on the condition of alcohol dependant patients (S1 ), the physician
may prescribe a medication or behavioral therapy (X1 ). Patients are classified as responders or
non-responders (S2 ) based on their level of heavy drinking within the next two months. The physician
then must decide whether to continue the initial treatment or switch to an augmented plan combining
both medication and behavioral therapy (X2 ). The unobserved covariate U summarizes all the
unknown factors about the patient. We are interested in the primary outcome Y that is the percentage
of abstinent days over a 12-month period. The treatment policy π in this set-up is a sequence of
decision rules x1 ← π1 (s1 ), x2 ← π2 (s1 , s2 , x1 ) selecting the values of X1 , X2 based on the history.
Policy learning in a DTR setting is concerned with finding an optimal policy π that maximizes the
primary outcome Y . The main challenge is that since the parameters of the DTR are often unknown,
it’s not immediate how to directly compute the consequences of executing the policy do(π), i.e., the
expected value Eπ [Y ]. Most of the current work in the causal inference literature focus on trying to
identify this quantity, Eπ [Y ], from finite observational data and causal assumptions about the data33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

