Convergence of Adversarial Training in
Overparametrized Neural Networks

Ruiqi Gao1,∗ Tianle Cai1,∗ Haochuan Li2 Liwei Wang3 Cho-Jui Hsieh4 Jason D. Lee5
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
2
Department of EECS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
4
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
5
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University

Abstract
Neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples, i.e. inputs that are imperceptibly perturbed from natural data and yet incorrectly classified by the network.
Adversarial training [31], a heuristic form of robust optimization that alternates
between minimization and maximization steps, has proven to be among the most
successful methods to train networks to be robust against a pre-defined family of
perturbations. This paper provides a partial answer to the success of adversarial
training, by showing that it converges to a network where the surrogate loss with
respect to the the attack algorithm is within  of the optimal robust loss. Then we
show that the optimal robust loss is also close to zero, hence adversarial training
finds a robust classifier. The analysis technique leverages recent work on the
analysis of neural networks via Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), combined with motivation from online-learning when the maximization is solved by a heuristic, and
the expressiveness of the NTK kernel in the `∞ -norm. In addition, we also prove
that robust interpolation requires more model capacity, supporting the evidence
that adversarial training requires wider networks.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have demonstrated that neural network models, despite achieving human-level performance on many important tasks, are not robust to adversarial examples—a small and human
imperceptible input perturbation can easily change the prediction label [44, 22]. This phenomenon
brings out security concerns when deploying neural network models to real world systems [20]. In
the past few years, many defense algorithms have been developed [23, 43, 30, 28, 39] to improve the
network’s robustness, but most of them are still vulnerable under stronger attacks, as reported in [3].
Among current defense methods, adversarial training [31] has become one of the most successful
methods to train robust neural networks.
To obtain a robust network, we need to consider the “robust loss” instead of a regular loss. The robust
loss is defined as the maximal loss within a neighborhood around the input of each sample, and
minimizing the robust loss under empirical distribution leads to a min-max optimization problem.
Adversarial training [31] is a way to minimize the robust loss. At each iteration, it (approximately)
solves the inner maximization problem by an attack algorithm A to get an adversarial sample, and
then runs a (stochastic) gradient-descent update to minimize the loss on the adversarial samples.
Although adversarial training has been widely used in practice and hugely improves the robustness
of neural networks in many applications, its convergence properties are still unknown. It is unclear
∗

Joint first author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

