NeurVPS: Neural Vanishing Point Scanning
via Conic Convolution
Yichao Zhou∗
UC Berkeley

Haozhi Qi
UC Berkeley

Jingwei Huang
Standford University

Yi Ma†
UC Berkeley

zyc@berkeley.edu

hqi@berkeley.edu

jingweih@stanford.edu

yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a simple yet effective end-to-end trainable deep network with geometryinspired convolutional operators for detecting vanishing points in images. Traditional convolutional neural networks rely on aggregating edge features and do not
have mechanisms to directly exploit the geometric properties of vanishing points
as the intersections of parallel lines. In this work, we identify a canonical conic
space in which the neural network can effectively compute the global geometric
information of vanishing points locally, and we propose a novel operator named
conic convolution that can be implemented as regular convolutions in this space.
This new operator explicitly enforces feature extractions and aggregations along
the structural lines and yet has the same number of parameters as the regular 2D
convolution. Our extensive experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
show that the proposed operator significantly improves the performance of vanishing point detection over traditional methods. The code and dataset have been made
publicly available at https://github.com/zhou13/neurvps.

1

Introduction

Vanishing point detection is a classic and important problem in 3D vision. Given the camera
calibration, vanishing points give us the direction of 3D lines, and thus let us infer 3D information of
the scene from a single 2D image. A robust and accurate vanishing point detection algorithm enables
and enhances applications such as camera calibration [10], 3D reconstruction [18], photo forensics
[35], object detection [19], wireframe parsing [48, 49], and autonomous driving [28].
Although there has been a lot of work on this seemingly basic vision problem, no solution seems to
be quite satisfactory yet. Traditional methods (see [46, 27, 41] and references therein) usually first
use edge/line detectors to extract straight lines and then cluster them into multiple groups. Many
recent methods have proposed to improve the detection by training deep neural networks with labeled
data. However, such neural networks often offer only a coarse estimate for the position of vanishing
points [26] or horizontal lines [45]. The output is usually a component of a multi-stage system and
used as an initialization to remove outliers from line clustering. Arguably the main reason for neural
networks’ poor precision in vanishing point detection (compared to line clustering-based methods) is
likely because existing neural network architectures are not designed to represent or learn the special
geometric properties of vanishing points and their relations to structural lines.
To address this issue, we propose a new convolutional neural network, called Neural Vanishing Point
Scanner (NeurVPS), that explicitly encodes and hence exploits the global geometric information of
vanishing points and can be trained in an end-to-end manner to both robustly and accurately predict
vanishing points. Our method samples a sufficient number of point candidates and the network then
determines which of them are valid. A common criterion of a valid vanishing point is whether it
lies on the intersection of a sufficient number of structural lines. Therefore, the role of our network
∗

We thank Yikai Li from SJTU and Jiajun Wu from MIT for their useful suggestions.
This work is partially supported by the funding from Berkeley EECS Startup fund, Berkeley FHL Vive
Center for Enhanced Reality, research grants from Sony Research, and Bytedance Research Lab (Silicon Valley).
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

