Subspace Detours: Building Transport Plans that are
Optimal on Subspace Projections
Boris Muzellec
CREST, ENSAE
boris.muzellec@ensae.fr

Marco Cuturi
Google Brain and CREST, ENSAE
cuturi@google.com

Abstract
Computing optimal transport (OT) between measures in high dimensions is doomed
by the curse of dimensionality. A popular approach to avoid this curse is to project
input measures on lower-dimensional subspaces (1D lines in the case of sliced
Wasserstein distances), solve the OT problem between these reduced measures,
and settle for the Wasserstein distance between these reductions, rather than that
between the original measures. This approach is however difficult to extend to
the case in which one wants to compute an OT map (a Monge map) between
the original measures. Since computations are carried out on lower-dimensional
projections, classical map estimation techniques can only produce maps operating
in these reduced dimensions. We propose in this work two methods to extrapolate,
from an transport map that is optimal on a subspace, one that is nearly optimal
in the entire space. We prove that the best optimal transport plan that takes such
“subspace detours” is a generalization of the Knothe-Rosenblatt transport. We show
that these plans can be explicitly formulated when comparing Gaussian measures
(between which the Wasserstein distance is commonly referred to as the Bures or
Fréchet distance). We provide an algorithm to select optimal subspaces given pairs
of Gaussian measures, and study scenarios in which that mediating subspace can be
selected using prior information. We consider applications to semantic mediation
between elliptic word embeddings and domain adaptation with Gaussian mixture
models.

1

Introduction

Minimizing the transport cost between two probability distributions [32] results in two useful
quantities: the minimum cost itself, often cast as a loss or a metric (the Wasserstein distance), and
the minimizing solution, a function known as the Monge [20] map that pushes forward the first
measure onto the second with least expected cost. While the former has long attracted the attention
of the machine learning community, the latter is playing an increasingly important role in data
sciences. Indeed, important problems such as domain adaptation [8], generative modelling [17, 2, 16],
reconstruction of cell trajectories in biology [28] and auto-encoders [19, 30] among others can be
recast as the problem of finding a map, preferably optimal, which transforms a reference distribution
into another. However, accurately estimating an OT map from data samples is a difficult problem,
plagued by the well documented instability of OT in high-dimensional spaces [11, 13] and its high
computational cost.
Optimal Transport on Subspaces. Several approaches, both in theory and in practice, aim at
bridging this gap. Theory [33] supports the idea that sample complexity can be improved when
the measures are supported on lower-dimensional manifolds of high-dimensional spaces. Practical
insights [9] supported by theory [15] advocate using regularizations to improve both computational
and sample complexity. Some regularity in OT maps can also be encoded by looking at specific
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

