Optimal Pricing in Repeated Posted-Price Auctions
with Different Patience of the Seller and the Buyer

Arsenii Vanunts
Yandex
Moscow, Russia
avanunts@yandex.ru

Alexey Drutsa
Yandex; MSU
Moscow, Russia
adrutsa@yandex.ru

Abstract
We study revenue optimization pricing algorithms for repeated posted-price auctions where a seller interacts with a single strategic buyer that holds a fixed private
valuation. When the participants non-equally discount their cumulative utilities,
we show that the optimal constant pricing (which offers the Myerson price) is no
longer optimal. In the case of more patient seller, we propose a novel multidimensional optimization functional — a generalization of the one used to determine
Myerson’s price. This functional allows to find the optimal algorithm and to boost
revenue of the optimal static pricing by an efficient low-dimensional approximation.
Numerical experiments are provided to support our results.

1

Introduction

Auctions have been studied for decades [82] and remain the main instrument for extracting revenue
in Internet advertising for many years [36]. Revenue optimization problem in static (i.e., one-period)
auctions is well studied and has proved its great worth to the Internet industry [64, 2], while the same
problem in dynamic auctions is still understudied [57], although the major part of web advertisement
sales has repeated nature [7, 32]. Consider the following example: an RTB platform (a seller) tracks
a user and repeatedly sells impressions on the user’s screen to advertisers (buyers) until the user is
out of the RTB’s sight. This example is naturally modeled by a sequence of repeated auctions, in
which buyers have fixed valuation for a good all the way through.
For more than eleven years generalized second-price (GSP) auctions remain the leading instrument for
selling ads [79] and, as argued by [7, 8, 61, 30, 32, 33], a significant part of auctions in AdExchanges
involve only a single buyer. Single-buyer GSP auctions are known in the literature as posted-price
auctions [51]. Repeated setting of them is referred to as repeated posted-price auctions in studies on
worst-case regret minimization [8, 32] and as a fishmonger’s problem in studies on expected revenue
maximization [29]. The setting of the fishmonger’s problem relies on the assumption that the seller
knows the distribution of the buyer valuation of a good. This assumption is realistic for advertising
auctions, since most Internet companies possess rich historical bidding data [58, 67].
We study the fishmonger’s problem in which the seller repeatedly sells goods through a posted-price
mechanism to the same buyer that holds a fixed private valuation for a good. The buyer seeks to
maximize his cumulative surplus, which is a discounted sum of his instant utilities over all rounds.
The seller knows the valuation distribution and the buyer’s discount sequence; so, she applies a pricing
algorithm that sets prices in each round in order to learn the valuation and extract more revenue. The
algorithm is announced to the buyer in advance [61], thus, the buyer picks an optimal strategy w.r.t.
the announced algorithm, the valuation, and his discount sequence. The seller optimizes her expected
cumulative revenue — a discounted sum of her instant expected utilities over all rounds — w.r.t. her
discount sequence, the valuation distribution, and the buyer’s discount sequence.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

