Learning Conditional Deformable Templates
with Convolutional Networks
Adrian V. Dalca
CSAIL, MIT
MGH, HMS
adalca@mit.edu

Marianne Rakic
D-ITET, ETH
CSAIL, MIT
mrakic@mit.edu

John Guttag
CSAIL, MIT

Mert R. Sabuncu
ECE and BME, Cornell

guttag@mit.edu

msabuncu@cornell.edu

Abstract
We develop a learning framework for building deformable templates, which play
a fundamental role in many image analysis and computational anatomy tasks.
Conventional methods for template creation and image alignment to the template
have undergone decades of rich technical development. In these frameworks,
templates are constructed using an iterative process of template estimation and
alignment, which is often computationally very expensive. Due in part to this
shortcoming, most methods compute a single template for the entire population
of images, or a few templates for specific sub-groups of the data. In this work,
we present a probabilistic model and efficient learning strategy that yields either
universal or conditional templates, jointly with a neural network that provides
efficient alignment of the images to these templates. We demonstrate the usefulness
of this method on a variety of domains, with a special focus on neuroimaging.
This is particularly useful for clinical applications where a pre-existing template
does not exist, or creating a new one with traditional methods can be prohibitively
expensive. Our code and atlases are available online as part of the VoxelMorph
library at http://voxelmorph.csail.mit.edu.

1

Introduction

A deformable template is an image that can be geometrically deformed to match images in a dataset,
providing a common reference frame. Templates are a powerful tool that enables the analysis
of geometric variability. They have been used in computer vision [26, 37, 42], medical image
analysis [3, 21, 40, 50], graphics [44, 66], and time series signals [1, 73]. We are motivated by the
study of anatomical variability in neuroimaging, where collections of scans are mapped to a common
template with anatomical and/or functional landmarks. However, the methods developed here are
applicable to other domains.
Analysis with a deformable template is often done by computing a smooth deformation field that
aligns the template to another image. The deformation field can be used to derive a measure of the
differences between the two images. Rapidly obtaining this field to a given template is by itself a
challenging task and the focus of extensive research.
A template can be chosen as one of the images in a given dataset, but often these do not represent the
structural variability and complexity in the image collection, and can lead to biased and misleading
analyses [40]. If the template does not adequately represent dataset variability, such as the possible
anatomy, it becomes challenging to accurately deform the template to some images. A good template
therefore minimizes the geometric distance to all images in a dataset. There has been extensive
methodological development for finding such a central template [3, 21, 40, 50], but these methods
involve costly optimization procedures and domain-specific heuristics, requiring extensive runtimes.
For complex 3D images such as MRI, this process can consume days to weeks. In practice, this leads
to few templates being constructed, and researchers often use templates that are not optimal for their
dataset. Our work makes it easy and computationally efficient to generate deformable templates.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

