Stochastic Variance Reduced Primal Dual Algorithms
for Empirical Composition Optimization

Adithya M. Devraj∗ and

Jianshu Chen†

Abstract
We consider a generic empirical composition optimization problem, where there are
empirical averages present both outside and inside nonlinear loss functions. Such
a problem is of interest in various machine learning applications, and cannot be
directly solved by standard methods such as stochastic gradient descent. We take a
novel approach to solving this problem by reformulating the original minimization
objective into an equivalent min-max objective, which brings out all the empirical
averages that are originally inside the nonlinear loss functions. We exploit the
rich structures of the reformulated problem and develop a stochastic primal-dual
algorithm, SVRPDA-I, to solve the problem efficiently. We carry out extensive
theoretical analysis of the proposed algorithm, obtaining the convergence rate, the
computation complexity and the storage complexity. In particular, the algorithm is
shown to converge at a linear rate when the problem is strongly convex. Moreover,
we also develop an approximate version of the algorithm, named SVRPDA-II,
which further reduces the memory requirement. Finally, we evaluate our proposed
algorithms on several real-world benchmarks, and experimental results show that
the proposed algorithms significantly outperform existing techniques.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following regularized empirical composition optimization problem:
min
θ

nYi −1


nX −1
1 X
1 X
φi
fθ (xi , yij ) + g(θ),
nX i=0
nYi j=0

(1)

where (xi , yij ) ∈ Rmx × Rmy is the (i, j)-th data sample, fθ : Rmx × Rmy → R` is a function
parameterized by θ ∈ Rd , φi : R` → R+ is a convex merit function, which measures a certain loss of
the parametric function fθ , and g(θ) is a µ-strongly convex regularization term.
Problems of the form (1) widely appear in many machine learning applications such as reinforcement
learning [5, 3, 2, 13], unsupervised sequence classification [12, 21] and risk-averse learning [15, 18,
9, 10, 19] — see our detailed discussion in Section 2. Note that the cost function (1) has an empirical
average (over xi ) outside the (nonlinear) merit function φi (·) and an empirical average (over yij )
inside the merit function, which makes it different from the empirical risk minimization problems
that are common in machine learning [17]. Problem (1) can be understood as a generalized version
of the one considered in [9, 10].3 In these prior works, yij and nYi are assumed to be independent of
∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, USA. Email:
adithyamdevraj@ufl.edu. The work was done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA.
†
Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue, WA, USA. Email: jianshuchen@tencent.com.
3
In addition to the term in (2), the cost function in [10] also has another convex regularization term.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

