Learning in Generalized
Linear Contextual Bandits with Stochastic Delays
Zhengyuan Zhou1,2⇤, Renyuan Xu3⇤and Jose Blanchet4
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
2
Bytedance Inc.
3
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, UC Berkeley
4
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
1

Abstract
In this paper, we consider online learning in generalized linear contextual bandits where rewards are not immediately observed. Instead, rewards are available
to the decision maker only after some delay, which is unknown and stochastic,
even though a decision must be made at each time step for an incoming set of
contexts. We study the performance of upper confidence bound (UCB) based
algorithms adapted to this delayed setting. In particular, we design a delay-adaptive
algorithm, which we call Delayed UCB, for generalized linear contextual bandits
using UCB-style exploration and establish regret bounds under various delay assumptions. In the important special case of linear contextual bandits, we further
modify this algorithm and establish a tighter regret bound under the same delay
assumptions. Our results contribute to the broad landscape of contextual bandits literature by establishing that UCB algorithms, which are widely deployed in modern
recommendation engines, can be made robust to delays.

1

Introduction

The growing availability of user-specific data has welcomed the exciting era of personalized recommendation, a paradigm that uncovers the heterogeneity across individuals and provides tailored
service decisions that lead to improved outcomes. Such heterogeneity is ubiquitous across a variety of application domains (including online advertising, medical treatment assignment, product/news recommendation (Li et al. (2010), Bubeck et al. (2012),Chapelle (2014),Bastani and Bayati
(2015),Schwartz et al. (2017))) and manifests itself as different individuals responding differently
to the recommended items. Rising to this opportunity, contextual bandits have emerged to be the
predominant mathematical formalism that provides an elegant and powerful formulation: its three
core components, the features (representing individual characteristics), the actions (representing the
recommendation), and the rewards (representing the observed feedback), capture the salient aspects
of the problem and provide fertile ground for developing algorithms that balance exploring and
exploiting users’ heterogeneity.
As such, the last decade has witnessed extensive research efforts in developing effective and efficient
contextual bandits algorithms. In particular, two types of algorithms–upper confidence bounds (UCB)
based algorithms (Li et al. (2010); Filippi et al. (2010); Chu et al. (2011); Jun et al. (2017); Li et al.
(2017)) and Thompson sampling (TS) based algorithms (Agrawal and Goyal (2013a,b); Russo and
Van Roy (2014, 2016); Abeille et al. (2017))–stand out from this flourishing and fruitful line of work:
their theoretical guarantees have been analyzed in many settings, often yielding (near-)optimal regret
bounds; their empirical performance have been thoroughly validated, often providing insights into
⇤

These two authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

