Fast Structured Decoding for Sequence Models

Zhiqing Sun1,∗ Zhuohan Li2,∗ Haoqing Wang3 Di He3 Zi Lin3 Zhi-Hong Deng3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 Peking University
zhiqings@cs.cmu.edu zhuohan@cs.berkeley.edu
{wanghaoqing,di_he,zi.lin,zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Autoregressive sequence models achieve state-of-the-art performance in domains
like machine translation. However, due to the autoregressive factorization nature, these models suffer from heavy latency during inference. Recently, nonautoregressive sequence models were proposed to reduce the inference time. However, these models assume that the decoding process of each token is conditionally
independent of others. Such a generation process sometimes makes the output
sentence inconsistent, and thus the learned non-autoregressive models could only
achieve inferior accuracy compared to their autoregressive counterparts. To improve the decoding consistency and reduce the inference cost at the same time, we
propose to incorporate a structured inference module into the non-autoregressive
models. Specifically, we design an efficient approximation for Conditional Random Fields (CRF) for non-autoregressive sequence models, and further propose a
dynamic transition technique to model positional contexts in the CRF. Experiments
in machine translation show that while increasing little latency (8∼14ms), our
model could achieve significantly better translation performance than previous
non-autoregressive models on different translation datasets. In particular, for the
WMT14 En-De dataset, our model obtains a BLEU score of 26.80, which largely
outperforms the previous non-autoregressive baselines and is only 0.61 lower in
BLEU than purely autoregressive models.1

1

Introduction

Autoregressive sequence models achieve great success in domains like machine translation and have
been deployed in real applications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. However, these models suffer from high inference
latency [1, 2], which is sometimes unaffordable for real-time industrial applications. This is mainly
attributed to the autoregressive factorization nature of the models: Considering a general conditional
sequence generation framework, given a context sequence x = (x1 , ..., xT ) and a target sequence
y = (y1 , ..., yT 0 ), autoregressive sequence models are based on a chain of conditional probabilities
with a left-to-right causal structure:
0

p(y|x) =

T
Y

p(yi |y<i , x),

(1)

i=1

where y<i represents the tokens before the i-th token of target y. See Figure 1(a) for the illustration
of a state-of-the-art autoregressive sequence model, Transformer [1]. The autoregressive factorization
makes the inference process hard to be parallelized as the results are generated token by token
sequentially.
∗

Equal contribution. Work was done while visiting Microsoft Research Asia.
The reproducible code can be found at https://github.com/Edward-Sun/structured-nart

1

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

