Defending Neural Backdoors via Generative
Distribution Modeling

Ximing Qiao*
ECE Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
ximing.qiao@duke.edu

Yukun Yang*
ECE Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
yukun.yang@duke.edu

Hai Li
ECE Department
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
hai.li@duke.edu

Abstract
Neural backdoor attack is emerging as a severe security threat to deep learning,
while the capability of existing defense methods is limited, especially for complex
backdoor triggers. In the work, we explore the space formed by the pixel values of
all possible backdoor triggers. An original trigger used by an attacker to build the
backdoored model represents only a point in the space. It then will be generalized
into a distribution of valid triggers, all of which can influence the backdoored model.
Thus, previous methods that model only one point of the trigger distribution is
not sufficient. Getting the entire trigger distribution, e.g., via generative modeling,
is a key of effective defense. However, existing generative modeling techniques
for image generation are not applicable to the backdoor scenario as the trigger
distribution is completely unknown. In this work, we propose max-entropy staircase
approximator (MESA) for high-dimensional sampling-free generative modeling
and use it to recover the trigger distribution. We also develop a defense technique to
remove the triggers from the backdoored model. Our experiments on Cifar10/100
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of MESA in modeling the trigger distribution
and the robustness of the proposed defense method.

1

Introduction

Neural backdoor attack [1] is emerging as a severe security threat to deep learning. As illustrated in
Figure 1(a), such an attack consists of two stages: (1) Backdoor injection: through data poisoning,
attackers train a backdoored model with a predefined backdoor trigger; (2) Backdoor triggering:
when applying the trigger on input images, the backdoored model outputs the target class identified
by the trigger. Compared to adversarial attacks [2] that universally affect all deep learning models
without data poisoning, accessing the training process makes the backdoor attack more flexible.
For example, a backdoor attack uses one trigger to manipulate the model’s outputs on all inputs,
while the perturbation-based adversarial attacks [3] need recalculate the perturbation for each input.
Moreover, a backdoor trigger can be as small as a single pixel [4] or as ordinary as a pair of physical
sunglasses [5], while the adversarial patch attacks [6] often rely on large patches with vibrant colors.
Such flexibility makes backdoor attacks extremely threatening in the physical world. Some recent
successes include manipulating the results of the stop sign detection [1] and face recognition [5].
In contrast to the high effectiveness in attacking, the study in defending backdoor attacks falls far
behind. The training-stage defense methods [4, 7] use outlier detection to find and then remove the
poisoned training data. But neither of them can fix a backdoored model. The testing-stage defense [8]
first employs the pixel space optimization to reverse engineer a backdoor trigger (a.k.a. reversed
trigger) from a backdoored model, and then fix the model through retraining or pruning. The method
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
*: These authors contributed equally to this work

