Which Algorithmic Choices Matter at Which Batch
Sizes? Insights From a Noisy Quadratic Model
Guodong Zhang1,2,3⇤, Lala Li3 , Zachary Nado3 , James Martens4 ,
Sushant Sachdeva1 , George E. Dahl3 , Christopher J. Shallue3 , Roger Grosse1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Google Research, Brain Team, 4 DeepMind

Abstract
Increasing the batch size is a popular way to speed up neural network training,
but beyond some critical batch size, larger batch sizes yield diminishing returns.
In this work, we study how the critical batch size changes based on properties of
the optimization algorithm, including acceleration, preconditioning and averaging,
through two different lenses: large scale experiments, and analysis of a simple
noisy quadratic model (NQM). We experimentally demonstrate that optimization
algorithms that employ preconditioning, specifically Adam and K-FAC, result in
much larger critical batch sizes than stochastic gradient descent with momentum.
We also demonstrate that the NQM captures many of the essential features of
real neural network training, despite being drastically simpler to work with. The
NQM predicts our results with preconditioned optimizers and exponential moving
average, previous results with accelerated gradient descent, and other results around
optimal learning rates and large batch training, making it a useful tool to generate
testable predictions about neural network optimization.

1

Introduction

Increasing the batch size is one of the most appealing ways to accelerate neural network training
on data parallel hardware. Larger batch sizes yield better gradient estimates and, up to a point,
reduce the number of steps required for training, which reduces the training time. The importance of
understanding the benefits of modern parallel hardware has motivated a lot of recent work on training
neural networks with larger batch sizes [Goyal et al., 2017, Osawa et al., 2018, McCandlish et al.,
2018, Shallue et al., 2018]. To date, the most comprehensive empirical study of the effects of batch
size on neural network training is Shallue et al. [2018], who confirmed that increasing the batch size
initially achieves perfect scaling (i.e. doubling the batch size halves the number of steps needed) up
to a problem-dependent critical batch size, beyond which it yields diminishing returns [Balles et al.,
2017, Goyal et al., 2017, Jastrz˛ebski et al., 2018, McCandlish et al., 2018]. Shallue et al. [2018] also
provided experimental evidence that the critical batch size depends on the optimization algorithm,
the network architecture, and the data set. However, their experiments only covered plain SGD,
SGD with (heavy-ball) momentum, and SGD with Nesterov momentum, leaving open the enticing
possibility that other optimizers might extend perfect scaling to even larger batch sizes.
Empirical scaling curves like those in Shallue et al. [2018] are essential for understanding the effects
of batch size, but generating such curves, even for a single optimizer on a single task, can be very
expensive. On the other hand, existing theoretical analyses that attempt to analytically derive critical
batch sizes (e.g. Ma et al. [2018], Yin et al. [2018], Jain et al. [2018]) do not answer our questions
about which optimizers scale the best with batch size. They tend to make strong assumptions, produce
parameter-dependent results that are difficult to apply, or are restricted to plain SGD. It would be
⇤

Work done as part of the Google Student Researcher Program. Email: gdzhang@cs.toronto.edu

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

