Scalable Structure Learning of Continuous-Time
Bayesian Networks from Incomplete Data

Dominik Linzner1 Michael Schmidt1 Heinz Koeppl1,2
Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology
2
Department of Biology
Technische Universität Darmstadt
{dominik.linzner, michael.schmidt, heinz.koeppl}@bcs.tu-darmstadt.de
1

Abstract
Continuous-time Bayesian Networks (CTBNs) represent a compact yet powerful
framework for understanding multivariate time-series data. Given complete data,
parameters and structure can be estimated efficiently in closed-form. However, if
data is incomplete, the latent states of the CTBN have to be estimated by laboriously
simulating the intractable dynamics of the assumed CTBN. This is a problem,
especially for structure learning tasks, where this has to be done for each element
of a super-exponentially growing set of possible structures. In order to circumvent
this notorious bottleneck, we develop a novel gradient-based approach to structure
learning. Instead of sampling and scoring all possible structures individually, we
assume the generator of the CTBN to be composed as a mixture of generators
stemming from different structures. In this framework, structure learning can be
performed via a gradient-based optimization of mixture weights. We combine this
approach with a new variational method that allows for a closed-form calculation
of this mixture marginal likelihood. We show the scalability of our method by
learning structures of previously inaccessible sizes from synthetic and real-world
data.

1

Introduction

Learning correlative or causative dependencies in multivariate data is a fundamental problem in
science and has application across many disciplines such as natural and social sciences, finance and
engineering [1, 20]. Most statistical approaches consider the case of snapshot or static data, where
one assumes that the data is drawn from an unknown probability distribution. For that case several
methods for learning the directed or undirected dependency structure have been proposed, e.g., the PC
algorithm [21, 13] or the graphical LASSO [8, 12], respectively. Causality for such models can only
partially be recovered up to an equivalence class that relates to the preservation of v-structures [21] in
the graphical model corresponding to the distribution. If longitudinal and especially temporal data
is available, structure learning methods need to exploit the temporal ordering of cause and effect
that is implicit in the data for determining the causal dependency structure. One assumes that the
data are drawn from an unknown stochastic process. Classical approaches such as Granger causality
or transfer entropy methods usually require large sample sizes [23]. Dynamic Bayesian networks
offer an appealing framework to formulate structure learning for temporal data within the graphical
model framework [10]. The fact that the time granularity of the data can often be very different
from the actual granularity of the underlying process motivates the extension to continuous-time
Bayesian networks (CTBN) [14], where no time granularity of the unknown process has to be
assumed. Learning the structure within the CTBN framework involves a combinatorial search over
structures and is hence generally limited to low-dimensional problems even if one considers variational
approaches [11] and/or greedy hill-climbing strategies in structure space [15, 16]. Reminiscent of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

