Stochastic Frank-Wolfe for
Composite Convex Minimization
Francesco Locatello?

Alp Yurtsever†

Olivier Fercoq‡

Volkan Cevher†

francesco.locatello@inf.ethz.ch
{alp.yurtsever,volkan.cevher}@epfl.ch
olivier.fercoq@telecom-paristech.fr
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
LIONS, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
‡
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Université Paris-Saclay, France
?

†

Abstract
A broad class of convex optimization problems can be formulated as a semidefinite
program (SDP), minimization of a convex function over the positive-semidefinite
cone subject to some affine constraints. The majority of classical SDP solvers
are designed for the deterministic setting where problem data is readily available.
In this setting, generalized conditional gradient methods (aka Frank-Wolfe-type
methods) provide scalable solutions by leveraging the so-called linear minimization oracle instead of the projection onto the semidefinite cone. Most problems
in machine learning and modern engineering applications, however, contain some
degree of stochasticity. In this work, we propose the first conditional-gradienttype method for solving stochastic optimization problems under affine constraints.
Our method guarantees O(k 1/3 ) convergence rate in expectation on the objective
residual and O(k 5/12 ) on the feasibility gap.

1

Introduction

We focus on the following stochastic convex composite optimization template, which covers finite
sum and online learning problems:
minimize E⌦ f (x, !) + g(Ax) := F (x).
(P)
x2X

In this optimization template, we consider the following setting:
. X ⇢ Rn is a convex and compact set,
. ! is a realization of the random variable ⌦ drawn from the distribution P,
. E⌦ f ( · , !) : X ! R is a smooth (see Section 1.2 for the definition) convex function,
. A 2 Rn ! Rd is a given linear map,
. g : Rd ! R [ {+1} is a convex function (possibly non-smooth).

We consider two distinct specific cases for g:
(i) g is a Lipschitz-continuous function, for which the proximal-operator is easy to compute:
1
proxg (y) = arg min g(z) + kz yk2
d
2
z2R
(ii) g is the indicator function of a convex set K ⇢ Rd :
⇢
0 if z 2 K,
g(z) =
+1 otherwise.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

(2)

