On Adversarial Mixup Resynthesis

Christopher Beckham1,3 , Sina Honari1,3 , Vikas Verma1,6,† , Alex Lamb1,2 , Farnoosh Ghadiri1,3 ,
R Devon Hjelm1,2,5 , Yoshua Bengio1,2,∗ & Christopher Pal1,3,4,‡,∗
1
Mila - Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal, Canada
2
Université de Montréal, Canada
3
Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
4
Element AI, Montréal, Canada
5
Microsoft Research, Montréal, Canada
6
Aalto University, Finland
firstname.lastname@mila.quebec
†
vikas.verma@aalto.fi, ‡ christopher.pal@polymtl.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we explore new approaches to combining information encoded within
the learned representations of auto-encoders. We explore models that are capable
of combining the attributes of multiple inputs such that a resynthesised output
is trained to fool an adversarial discriminator for real versus synthesised data.
Furthermore, we explore the use of such an architecture in the context of semisupervised learning, where we learn a mixing function whose objective is to produce
interpolations of hidden states, or masked combinations of latent representations
that are consistent with a conditioned class label. We show quantitative and
qualitative evidence that such a formulation is an interesting avenue of research.1

1

Introduction

The auto-encoder is a fundamental building block in unsupervised learning. Auto-encoders are trained
to reconstruct their inputs after being processed by two neural networks: an encoder which encodes
the input to a high-level representation or bottleneck, and a decoder which performs the reconstruction
using that representation as input. One primary goal of the auto-encoder is to learn representations
of the input data which are useful (Bengio, 2012), which may help in downstream tasks such as
classification (Zhang et al., 2017; Hsu et al., 2019) or reinforcement learning (van den Oord et al.,
2017; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). The representations of auto-encoders can be encouraged to contain
more ‘useful’ information by restricting the size of the bottleneck, through the use of input noise (e.g.,
in denoising auto-encoders, Vincent et al., 2008), through regularisation of the encoder function
(Rifai et al., 2011), or by introducing a prior (Kingma & Welling, 2013). Other goals include learning
interpretable representations (Chen et al., 2016; Jang et al., 2016), disentanglement of latent variables
(Liu et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017) or maximisation of mutual information (Chen et al., 2016;
Belghazi et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2019) between the input and the code.
We know that data augmentation greatly helps when it comes to increasing generalisation performance
of models. A practical intuition for why this is the case is that by generating additional samples,
we are training our model on a set of examples that better covers those in the test set. In the case
of images, we are already afforded a variety of transformation techniques at our disposal, such as
random flipping, crops, rotations, and colour jitter. While indispensible, there are other regularisation
techniques one can also consider.
1

Code provided here: https://github.com/christopher-beckham/amr
* Author is a Canada CIFAR AI Chair

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

