Differentiable Convex Optimization Layers
Akshay Agrawal
Stanford University
akshayka@cs.stanford.edu
Stephen Boyd
Stanford University
boyd@stanford.edu

Brandon Amos
Facebook AI
bda@fb.com

Steven Diamond
Stanford University
diamond@cs.stanford.edu

Shane Barratt
Stanford University
sbarratt@stanford.edu
J. Zico Kolter⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Center for AI
zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent work has shown how to embed differentiable optimization problems (that is,
problems whose solutions can be backpropagated through) as layers within deep
learning architectures. This method provides a useful inductive bias for certain
problems, but existing software for differentiable optimization layers is rigid and
difficult to apply to new settings. In this paper, we propose an approach to differentiating through disciplined convex programs, a subclass of convex optimization
problems used by domain-specific languages (DSLs) for convex optimization. We
introduce disciplined parametrized programming, a subset of disciplined convex
programming, and we show that every disciplined parametrized program can be
represented as the composition of an affine map from parameters to problem data,
a solver, and an affine map from the solver’s solution to a solution of the original
problem (a new form we refer to as affine-solver-affine form). We then demonstrate
how to efficiently differentiate through each of these components, allowing for
end-to-end analytical differentiation through the entire convex program. We implement our methodology in version 1.1 of CVXPY, a popular Python-embedded
DSL for convex optimization, and additionally implement differentiable layers for
disciplined convex programs in PyTorch and TensorFlow 2.0. Our implementation
significantly lowers the barrier to using convex optimization problems in differentiable programs. We present applications in linear machine learning models and in
stochastic control, and we show that our layer is competitive (in execution time)
compared to specialized differentiable solvers from past work.

1

Introduction

Recent work has shown how to differentiate through specific subclasses of convex optimization
problems, which can be viewed as functions mapping problem data to solutions [6, 31, 10, 1,
4]. These layers have found several applications [40, 6, 35, 27, 5, 53, 75, 52, 12, 11], but many
applications remain relatively unexplored (see, e.g., [4, §8]).
While convex optimization layers can provide useful inductive bias in end-to-end models, their
adoption has been slowed by how difficult they are to use. Existing layers (e.g., [6, 1]) require users
to transform their problems into rigid canonical forms by hand. This process is tedious, error-prone,
and time-consuming, and often requires familiarity with convex analysis. Domain-specific languages
(DSLs) for convex optimization abstract away the process of converting problems to canonical forms,
letting users specify problems in a natural syntax; programs are then lowered to canonical forms and
⇤

Authors listed in alphabetical order.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

