Learn, Imagine and Create: Text-to-Image
Generation from Prior Knowledge

Tingting Qiao1,2∗ Jing Zhang2∗ Duanqing Xu1† Dacheng Tao2
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
1

{qiaott,xdq}@zju.edu.cn, {jing.zhang1,dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Text-to-image generation, i.e. generating an image given a text description, is a
very challenging task due to the significant semantic gap between the two domains.
Humans, however, tackle this problem intelligently. We learn from diverse objects
to form a solid prior about semantics, textures, colors, shapes, and layouts. Given
a text description, we immediately imagine an overall visual impression using
this prior and, based on this, we draw a picture by progressively adding more
and more details. In this paper, and inspired by this process, we propose a novel
text-to-image method called LeicaGAN to combine the above three phases in a
unified framework. First, we formulate the multiple priors learning phase as a
textual-visual co-embedding (TVE) comprising a text-image encoder for learning
semantic, texture, and color priors and a text-mask encoder for learning shape
and layout priors. Then, we formulate the imagination phase as multiple priors
aggregation (MPA) by combining these complementary priors and adding noise for
diversity. Lastly, we formulate the creation phase by using a cascaded attentive
generator (CAG) to progressively draw a picture from coarse to fine. We leverage
adversarial learning for LeicaGAN to enforce semantic consistency and visual
realism. Thorough experiments on two public benchmark datasets demonstrate
LeicaGAN’s superiority over the baseline method. Code has been made available
at https://github.com/qiaott/LeicaGAN.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image (T2I) generation aims to generate a semantically consistent and visually realistic image
conditioned on a textual description. This task has recently gained a lot of attention in the deep
learning community due to both its significant relevance in a number of applications (such as photo
editing, art generation, and computer-aided design) and its challenging nature, mainly due to the
semantic gap between the domains and the high dimensionality of the structured output space.
Prior methods addressed this problem by first using a pre-trained text encoder to obtain a text feature
representation conveying the relevant visual information of a given text description. Then, this text
feature representation was served as input to generative neural networks (GANs) [5] to create an
image which visually matches the semantic content of the input text [23, 44, 37, 20]. Reed et al.
proposed using a deep convolutional and a recurrent text encoder together with generative networks
[23] for this purpose. In [44], the same text encoder was used and several GANs were stacked to
progressively generate more detailed images. Similar text encoders were also utilized in [37, 20],
∗
†

indicates equal contribution.
corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

