RUDDER: Return Decomposition for Delayed
Rewards
Jose A. Arjona-Medina∗ Michael Gillhofer∗ Michael Widrich∗
Thomas Unterthiner Johannes Brandstetter Sepp Hochreiter†
LIT AI Lab
Institute for Machine Learning
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria
†
also at Institute of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)

Abstract
We propose RUDDER, a novel reinforcement learning approach for delayed rewards in finite Markov decision processes (MDPs). In MDPs the Q-values are
equal to the expected immediate reward plus the expected future rewards. The
latter are related to bias problems in temporal difference (TD) learning and to
high variance problems in Monte Carlo (MC) learning. Both problems are even
more severe when rewards are delayed. RUDDER aims at making the expected
future rewards zero, which simplifies Q-value estimation to computing the mean
of the immediate reward. We propose the following two new concepts to push
the expected future rewards toward zero. (i) Reward redistribution that leads to
return-equivalent decision processes with the same optimal policies and, when
optimal, zero expected future rewards. (ii) Return decomposition via contribution
analysis which transforms the reinforcement learning task into a regression task
at which deep learning excels. On artificial tasks with delayed rewards, RUDDER is significantly faster than MC and exponentially faster than Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS), TD(λ), and reward shaping approaches. At Atari games,
RUDDER on top of a Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) baseline improves the
scores, which is most prominent at games with delayed rewards. Source code is
available at https://github.com/ml-jku/rudder and demonstration videos
at https://goo.gl/EQerZV.

1

Introduction

Assigning credit for a received reward to past actions is central to reinforcement learning [47]. A
great challenge is to learn long-term credit assignment for delayed rewards [23, 20, 18, 33]. Delayed
rewards are often episodic or sparse and common in real-world problems [30, 25]. For Markov
decision processes (MDPs), the Q-value is equal to the expected immediate reward plus the expected
future reward. For Q-value estimation, the expected future reward leads to biases in temporal
difference (TD) and high variance in Monte Carlo (MC) learning. For delayed rewards, TD requires
exponentially many updates to correct the bias, where the number of updates is exponential in the
number of delay steps. For MC learning, the number of states affected by a delayed reward can
grow exponentially with the number of delay steps. (Both statements are proved after Supplements
theorems S8 and S10.) An MC estimate of the expected future reward has to average over all possible
future trajectories, if rewards, state transitions, or policies are probabilistic. Delayed rewards make an
MC estimate much harder.
∗

authors contributed equally

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

