Combinatorial Inference against Label Noise

Paul Hongsuck Seo†‡
Computer Vision Lab.
POSTECH
hsseo@postech.ac.kr
†

Geeho Kim‡
Bohyung Han‡
‡
Computer Vision Lab. & ASRI
Seoul National University
{snow1234, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Label noise is one of the critical sources that degrade generalization performance of
deep neural networks significantly. To handle the label noise issue in a principled
way, we propose a unique classification framework of constructing multiple models
in heterogeneous coarse-grained meta-class spaces and making joint inference of
the trained models for the final predictions in the original (base) class space. Our
approach reduces noise level by simply constructing meta-classes and improves
accuracy via combinatorial inferences over multiple constituent classifiers. Since
the proposed framework has distinct and complementary properties for the given
problem, we can even incorporate additional off-the-shelf learning algorithms
to improve accuracy further. We also introduce techniques to organize multiple
heterogeneous meta-class sets using k-means clustering and identify a desirable
subset leading to learn compact models. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
outstanding performance in terms of accuracy and efficiency compared to the stateof-the-art methods under various synthetic noise configurations and in a real-world
noisy dataset.

1

Introduction

Construction of a large-scale dataset is labor-intensive and time-consuming, which makes it inevitable
to introduce a substantial level of label noise and inconsistency. This issue is aggravated if the
data collection relies on crowd-sourcing [1, 2] or internet search engines [3, 4] without proper
curation. More importantly, many real-world problems inherently involve a significant amount of
noise and it is extremely important to train machine learning models that can handle such a challenge
effectively. Figure 1 presents several noisy examples in WebVision benchmark [4], where training
examples are collected from Google and Flickr by feeding queries corresponding to the ImageNet
class labels. Although a moderate level of noise is sometimes useful for regularization, label noise is
a critical source of underfitting or overfitting. In the case of deep neural networks, models can easily
memorize a large number of noisy labels and, consequently, are prone to degrade their generalization
performance [5].
To tackle various kinds of label noise, existing mainstream approaches either attempt to filter noisy
examples out [6–11] or correct noisy labels based on the network predictions [12–15]. However,
these methods are similar to solving the chicken-and-egg problem and their unstable on-the-fly noise
recognition process may result in poor generalization performance. On the other hand, [16–21]
assume the correct labels to be latent and learn the networks inferring the latent correct labels by
estimating noise transition matrices. Although these methods estimate the noise injection process
directly, they are also suboptimal when the network is capable of adapting to label noise as discussed
in [10].
While the prior approaches typically focus on developing noise-resistant training algorithms given
noise levels, our algorithm takes a totally different perspective of reducing noise level and learning a
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

