Bridging Machine Learning and Logical Reasoning
by Abductive Learning∗

Wang-Zhou Dai†
Qiuling Xu†
Yang Yu†
Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{daiwz, xuql, yuy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Perception and reasoning are two representative abilities of intelligence that are
integrated seamlessly during human problem-solving processes. In the area of
artificial intelligence (AI), the two abilities are usually realised by machine learning
and logic programming, respectively. However, the two categories of techniques
were developed separately throughout most of the history of AI. In this paper,
we present the abductive learning targeted at unifying the two AI paradigms in
a mutually beneficial way, where the machine learning model learns to perceive
primitive logic facts from data, while logical reasoning can exploit symbolic domain
knowledge and correct the wrongly perceived facts for improving the machine
learning models. Furthermore, we propose a novel approach to optimise the
machine learning model and the logical reasoning model jointly. We demonstrate
that by using abductive learning, machines can learn to recognise numbers and
resolve unknown mathematical operations simultaneously from images of simple
hand-written equations. Moreover, the learned models can be generalised to longer
equations and adapted to different tasks, which is beyond the capability of state-ofthe-art deep learning models.

1

Introduction

Human cognition [34] consists of two remarkable capabilities: perception and reasoning, where the
former one processes sensory information, and the latter one majorly works symbolically. These two
abilities function at the same time and affect each other, and they are often joined subconsciously by
humans, which is essential in many real-life learning and problem-solving procedures [34].
Modern artificial intelligence (AI) systems exhibit both these abilities. Machine learning techniques such as deep neural networks have achieved extraordinary performance in solving perception
tasks [19]; meanwhile, logic-based AI systems have succeeded in human-level reasoning abilities in
proving mathematical theorems [27] and in performing inductive reasoning concerning relations [25].
However, popular machine learning techniques can hardly exploit sophisticated domain knowledge
in symbolic forms, and perceived information is hard to include in reasoning systems. Even in recent
neural networks with the ability to focus on relations [31], enhanced memories and differentiable
knowledge representations [13], full logical reasoning ability is still missing—as an example, consider
the difficulties of understanding natural language [17]. On the other hand, Probabilistic Logic Program
(PLP) [5] and Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) [12] are aiming at integrating learning and logical
reasoning by preserving the symbolic representation. However, they usually require semantic-level
input, which involves pre-processing sub-symbolic data into logic facts [30].
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
W.-Z. Dai (w.dai@imperial.ac.uk) and Q. Xu (simpleword2014@gmail.com) are now at Imperial
College London and Purdue University, respectively.
∗

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

