Correlation in Extensive-Form Games:
Saddle-Point Formulation and Benchmarks∗
Chun Kai Ling
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
chunkail@cs.cmu.edu

Gabriele Farina
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu
Fei Fang
Institute for Software Research
Carnegie Mellon University
feif@cs.cmu.edu

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department, CMU
Strategic Machine, Inc.
Strategy Robot, Inc.
Optimized Markets, Inc.
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
While Nash equilibrium in extensive-form games is well understood, very little
is known about the properties of extensive-form correlated equilibrium (EFCE),
both from a behavioral and from a computational point of view. In this setting, the
strategic behavior of players is complemented by an external device that privately
recommends moves to agents as the game progresses; players are free to deviate
at any time, but will then not receive future recommendations. Our contributions
are threefold. First, we show that an EFCE can be formulated as the solution to a
bilinear saddle-point problem. To showcase how this novel formulation can inspire
new algorithms to compute EFCEs, we propose a simple subgradient descent
method which exploits this formulation and structural properties of EFCEs. Our
method has better scalability than the prior approach based on linear programming.
Second, we propose two benchmark games, which we hope will serve as the basis
for future evaluation of EFCE solvers. These games were chosen so as to cover
two natural application domains for EFCE: conflict resolution via a mediator, and
bargaining and negotiation. Third, we document the qualitative behavior of EFCE
in our proposed games. We show that the social-welfare-maximizing equilibria
in these games are highly nontrivial and exhibit surprisingly subtle sequential
behavior that so far has not received attention in the literature.

1

Introduction

Nash equilibrium (NE) [Nash, 1950], the most seminal concept in non-cooperative game theory,
captures a multi-agent setting where each agent is selfishly motivated to maximize their own payoff.
The assumption underpinning NE is that the interaction is completely decentralized: the behavior of
each agent is not regulated by any external orchestrator. Contrasted with the other—often utopian—
extreme of a fully managed interaction, where an external dictator controls the behavior of each agent
so that the whole system moves to a desired state, the social welfare that can be achieved by NE is
generally lower, sometimes dramatically so [Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou, 1999; Roughgarden and
Tardos, 2002]. Yet, in many realistic interactions, some intermediate form of centralized control can
be achieved. In particular, in his landmark paper, Aumann [1974] proposed the concept of correlated
∗

The full version of this paper is available on arXiv.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

