On Relating Explanations and Adversarial Examples

Alexey Ignatiev
Monash University, Australia
alexey.ignatiev@monash.edu

Nina Narodytska
VMWare Research, CA, USA
nnarodytska@vmware.com

Joao Marques-Silva
ANITI, Toulouse, France
joao.marques-silva@univ-toulouse.fr

Abstract
The importance of explanations (XP’s) of machine learning (ML) model predictions
and of adversarial examples (AE’s) cannot be overstated, with both arguably being
essential for the practical success of ML in different settings. There has been
recent work on understanding and assessing the relationship between XP’s and
AE’s. However, such work has been mostly experimental and a sound theoretical
relationship has been elusive. This paper demonstrates that explanations and
adversarial examples are related by a generalized form of hitting set duality, which
extends earlier work on hitting set duality observed in model-based diagnosis and
knowledge compilation. Furthermore, the paper proposes algorithms, which enable
computing adversarial examples from explanations and vice-versa.

1

Introduction

Adversarial examples (AE’s) [54] illustrate the brittleness of machine learning (ML) models, and
have been the subject of growing interest in recent years. Explanations (XP’s) of (black-box) ML
models provide trust in ML models, and exemplify the increasing importance of eXplainable AI
(XAI) [17, 12, 13]. Over the last few years, a number of works realized the existence of some
connection between AE’s and XP’s [34, 55, 48, 56, 59, 41, 8]. However, past work has been
experimental, and a deeper theoretical connection between AE’s and XP’s has been elusive. This
paper demonstrates the existence of such a theoretical connection between AE’s and XP’s.
In this work we take a formal logic point of view on the analysis of ML models. Namely, we employ
first order logic (FOL) as a framework to specify an ML model, define notions of an explanation and a
counterexample to that explanation, which can be viewed as a generalization of an adversarial example.
We then demonstrate that these notions possess well-known counterparts in the FOL terminology,
like prime implicants and implicates, respectively. Such formalization allows us to obtain our main
result that reveals a duality relation between explanations and counterexamples. Based on this
connection, we show how explanations and counterexample interact. For example, explanations can
be used to generate counterexamples. Dually, we can generate explanations given counterexamples.
Furthermore, we also show how to compute adversarial examples from counterexamples. The ideas
in the paper build on tightly related work in model-based diagnosis [45], namely the hitting set
duality between diagnoses and conflicts, but also builds on related work in knowledge compilation,
concretely in the use of prime implicants and implicates to compile knowledge [51, 36].
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces concepts used in the remainder of the
paper. Section 3 investigates the connections between adversarial examples and explanations, and
proposes algorithms for the enumeration of explanations and adversarial examples. Experimental
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

