A Regularized Approach to Sparse Optimal Policy in
Reinforcement Learning

Xiang Li∗
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, China
lx10077@pku.edu.cn

Wenhao Yang∗
Center for Data Science
Peking University
Beijing, China
yangwenhaosms@pku.edu.cn

Zhihua Zhang
National Engineering Lab for Big Data Analysis and Applications
School of Mathematical Sciences
Peking University
Beijing, China
zhzhang@math.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose and study a general framework for regularized Markov decision processes (MDPs) where the goal is to find an optimal policy that maximizes the
expected discounted total reward plus a policy regularization term. The extant
entropy-regularized MDPs can be cast into our framework. Moreover, under our
framework, many regularization terms can bring multi-modality and sparsity, which
are potentially useful in reinforcement learning. In particular, we present sufficient
and necessary conditions that induce a sparse optimal policy. We also conduct a full
mathematical analysis of the proposed regularized MDPs, including the optimality
condition, performance error, and sparseness control. We provide a generic method
to devise regularization forms and propose off-policy actor critic algorithms in
complex environment settings. We empirically analyze the numerical properties of
optimal policies and compare the performance of different sparse regularization
forms in discrete and continuous environments.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) aims to find an optimal policy that maximizes the expected discounted
total reward in an MDP [4, 36]. It’s not an easy task to solve the nonlinear Bellman equation [2]
greedily in a high-dimension action space or when function approximation (such as neural networks)
is used. Even if the optimal policy is obtained precisely, it is often the case the optimal policy is
deterministic. Deterministic policies are bad to cope with unexpected situations when its suggested
action is suddenly unavailable or forbidden. By contrast, a multi-modal policy assigns positive
probability mass to both optimal and near optimal actions and hence has multiple alternatives to
handle this case. For example, an autonomous vehicle aims to do path planning with a pair of departure
and destination as the state. When a suggested routine is unfortunately congested, an alternative
routine could be provided by a multi-modal policy, which can’t be provided by a deterministic policy
without evoking a new computation. Therefore, in a real-life application, we hope the optimal policy
to possess thee property of multi-modality.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

