Learning to Infer Implicit Surfaces
without 3D Supervision
Shichen Liu†,§ , Shunsuke Saito†,§ , Weikai Chen (B)† , and Hao Li†,§,‡
†
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
§
University of Southern California
‡
Pinscreen
{liushichen95, shunsuke.saito16, chenwk891}@gmail.com

hao@hao-li.com

Abstract
Recent advances in 3D deep learning have shown that it is possible to train highly
effective deep models for 3D shape generation, directly from 2D images. This is
particularly interesting since the availability of 3D models is still limited compared
to the massive amount of accessible 2D images, which is invaluable for training.
The representation of 3D surfaces itself is a key factor for the quality and resolution
of the 3D output. While explicit representations, such as point clouds and voxels,
can span a wide range of shape variations, their resolutions are often limited.
Mesh-based representations are more efficient but are limited by their ability to
handle varying topologies. Implicit surfaces, however, can robustly handle complex
shapes, topologies, and also provide flexible resolution control. We address the
fundamental problem of learning implicit surfaces for shape inference without
the need of 3D supervision. Despite their advantages, it remains nontrivial to
(1) formulate a differentiable connection between implicit surfaces and their 2D
renderings, which is needed for image-based supervision; and (2) ensure precise
geometric properties and control, such as local smoothness. In particular, sampling
implicit surfaces densely is also known to be a computationally demanding and very
slow operation. To this end, we propose a novel ray-based field probing technique
for efficient image-to-field supervision, as well as a general geometric regularizer
for implicit surfaces, which provides natural shape priors in unconstrained regions.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework on the task of single-view
image-based 3D shape digitization and show how we outperform state-of-the-art
techniques both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1

Introduction

The efficient learning of 3D deep generative models is the key to achieving high-quality shape
reconstruction and inference algorithms. While supervised learning with direct 3D supervision has
shown promising results, its modeling capabilities are constrained by the quantity and variations
of available 3D datasets. In contrast, far more 2D photographs are being taken and shared over the
Internet, than can ever be watched. To exploit the abundance of image datasets, various differentiable
rendering techniques [1, 2, 3, 4] were introduced recently, to learn 3D generative models directly from
massive amounts of 2D pictures. While several types of shape representations have been adopted,
most techniques are based on explicit surfaces, which often leads to poor visual quality due to limited
resolutions (e.g., point clouds, voxels) or fail to handle arbitrary topologies (e.g., polygonal meshes).
Implicit surfaces, on the other hand, describe a 3D shape using an iso-surface of an implicit field
and can therefore handle arbitrary topologies, as well as support multi-resolution control to ensure
high-fidelity modeling. As demonstrated by several recent 3D supervised learning methods [5, 6, 7, 8],
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

