MetaQuant: Learning to Quantize by Learning to
Penetrate Non-differentiable Quantization

Shangyu Chen
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
schen025@e.ntu.edu.sg

Wenya Wang
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wangwy@ntu.edu.sg

Sinno Jialin Pan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
sinnopan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Tremendous amount of parameters make deep neural networks impractical to be
deployed for edge-device-based real-world applications due to the limit of computational power and storage space. Existing studies have made progress on learning
quantized deep models to reduce model size and energy consumption, i.e. converting full-precision weights (r’s) into discrete values (q’s) in a supervised training
manner. However, the training process for quantization is non-differentiable, which
leads to either infinite or zero gradients (gr ) w.r.t. r. To address this problem, most
training-based quantization methods use the gradient w.r.t. q (gq ) with clipping
to approximate gr by Straight-Through-Estimator (STE) or manually design their
computation. However, these methods only heuristically make training-based
quantization applicable, without further analysis on how the approximated gradients can assist training of a quantized network. In this paper, we propose to
learn gr by a neural network. Specifically, a meta network is trained using gq
and r as inputs, and outputs gr for subsequent weight updates. The meta network
is updated together with the original quantized network. Our proposed method
alleviates the problem of non-differentiability, and can be trained in an end-to-end
manner. Extensive experiments are conducted with CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet
on various deep networks to demonstrate the advantage of our proposed method in
terms of a faster convergence rate and better performance. Codes are released at:
https://github.com/csyhhu/MetaQuant

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have shown promising results in various computer vision tasks. However,
modern deep learning models usually contain many layers and enormous amount of parameters [9],
which limits their applications on edge devices. To reduce parameters redundancy, continuous effects
in architecture refinement have been made, such as using small kernel convolutions [14] and reusing
features [6]. Consider a very deep model which is fully-trained. To use it for making predictions,
most of the computations involve multiplications of a real-valued weight by a real-valued activation
in a forward pass. These multiplications are expensive as they are all float-point to float-point
multiplication operations. To alleviate this problem, a number of approaches have been proposed to
quantize deep models. Courbariaux et al. [4] and Hubara et al. [7] proposed to binarize weights of the
deep model to be in {±1}. To provide more flexibility for quantized values in each layer, Rastegari et
al. [13] introduced a float value αl known as the scaling factor for layer l to turn binarized weights
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

