Plan Arithmetic: Compositional Plan Vectors for
Multi-Task Control
Coline Devin

Daniel Geng

Pieter Abbeel

Trevor Darrell

Sergey Levine

University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
Autonomous agents situated in real-world environments must be able to master
large repertoires of skills. While a single short skill can be learned quickly, it
would be impractical to learn every task independently. Instead, the agent should
share knowledge across behaviors such that each task can be learned efficiently,
and such that the resulting model can generalize to new tasks, especially ones
that are compositions or subsets of tasks seen previously. A policy conditioned
on a goal or demonstration has the potential to share knowledge between tasks if
it sees enough diversity of inputs. However, these methods may not generalize
to a more complex task at test time. We introduce compositional plan vectors
(CPVs) to enable a policy to perform compositions of tasks without additional
supervision. CPVs represent trajectories as the sum of the subtasks within them.
We show that CPVs can be learned within a one-shot imitation learning framework
without any additional supervision or information about task hierarchy, and enable
a demonstration-conditioned policy to generalize to tasks that sequence twice as
many skills as the tasks seen during training. Analogously to embeddings such
as word2vec in NLP, CPVs can also support simple arithmetic operations – for
example, we can add the CPVs for two different tasks to command an agent to
compose both tasks, without any additional training.

1

Introduction

A major challenge in current machine learning is to not only interpolate within the distribution of
inputs seen during training, but also to generalize to a wider distribution. While we cannot expect
arbitrary generalization, models should be able to compose concepts seen during training into new
combinations. With deep learning, agents learn high level representations of the data they perceive. If
the data is drawn from a compositional environment, then agents that model the data accurately and
efficiently would represent that compositionality without needing specific priors or regularization.
In fact, prior work has shown that compositional representations can emerge automatically from
simple objectives, most notably a highly structured distribution such as language. These techniques
do not explicitly train for compositionality, but employ simple structural constraints that lead to
compositional representations. For example, Mikolov et al. found that a language model trained to
predict nearby words represented words in a vector space that supported arithmetic analogies: “king”
-“man" + “woman" = “queen" [29]. In this work, we aim to learn a compositional feature space to
represent robotic skills, such that the addition of multiple skills results in a plan to accomplish all of
these skills.
Many tasks can be expressed as compositions of skills, where the same set of skills is shared across
many tasks. For example, assembling a chair may require the subtask of picking up a hammer,
which is also found in the table assembly task. We posit that a task representation that leverages this
compositional structure can generalize more easily to more complex tasks. We propose learning an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

