SySCD: A System-Aware Parallel
Coordinate Descent Algorithm

Nikolas Ioannou∗
IBM Research
Zurich, Switzerland
nio@zurich.ibm.com

Celestine Mendler-Dünner∗†
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, California
mendler@berkeley.edu

Thomas Parnell
IBM Research
Zurich, Switzerland
tpa@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel parallel stochastic coordinate descent (SCD)
algorithm with convergence guarantees that exhibits strong scalability. We start by
studying a state-of-the-art parallel implementation of SCD and identify scalability
as well as system-level performance bottlenecks of the respective implementation.
We then take a principled approach to develop a new SCD variant which is designed
to avoid the identified system bottlenecks, such as limited scaling due to coherence
traffic of model sharing across threads, and inefficient CPU cache accesses. Our
proposed system-aware parallel coordinate descent algorithm (SySCD) scales to
many cores and across numa nodes, and offers a consistent bottom line speedup
in training time of up to ×12 compared to an optimized asynchronous parallel
SCD algorithm and up to ×42, compared to state-of-the-art GLM solvers (scikitlearn, Vowpal Wabbit, and H2O) on a range of datasets and multi-core CPU
architectures.

1

Introduction

Today’s individual machines offer dozens of cores and hundreds of gigabytes of RAM that can, if used
efficiently, significantly improve the training performance of machine learning models. In this respect
parallel versions of popular machine learning algorithms such as stochastic gradient descent (Recht
et al., 2011) and stochastic coordinate descent (Liu et al., 2015; Hsieh et al., 2015a; Richtarik &
Takac, 2016b) have been developed. These methods either introduce asynchronicity to the sequential
algorithms, or they use a mini-batch approach, in order to enable parallelization and better utilization
of compute resources. However, all of these methods treat machines as a simple, uniform, collection
of cores. This is far from reality. While modern machines offer ample computation and memory
resources, they are also elaborate systems with complex topologies, memory hierarchies, and CPU
pipelines. As a result, maximizing the performance of parallel training requires algorithms and
implementations that are aware of these system-level characteristics and respect their bottlenecks.
Setup. In this work we focus on the training of generalized linear models (GLMs). Our goal is to
efficiently solve the following partially separable convex optimization problem using the full compute
power available in modern CPUs:
X
minn F (α) where F (α) := f (Aα) +
gi (αi ).
(1)
α∈R

i

n

The model vector α ∈ R is learned from the training data A ∈ Rd×n , the function f is convex
and smooth, and gi are general convex functions. The objective (1) covers primal as well as dual
formulations of many popular machine learning models which are widely deployed in industry
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work conducted while at IBM Research, Zurich.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

