Hierarchical Optimal Transport for
Multimodal Distribution Alignment
John Lee†⇤, Max Dabagia† , Eva L. Dyer†‡§, Christopher J. Rozell†§
†
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
‡
Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332 USA
{john.lee, maxdabagia, evadyer, crozell}@gatech.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, it is necessary to meaningfully aggregate,
through alignment, different but related datasets. Optimal transport (OT)-based
approaches pose alignment as a divergence minimization problem: the aim is to
transform a source dataset to match a target dataset using the Wasserstein distance
as a divergence measure under alignment constraints. We introduce a hierarchical
formulation of OT which leverages clustered structure in data to improve alignment
in noisy, ambiguous, or multimodal settings. To solve this numerically, we propose
a distributed ADMM algorithm that exploits the Sinkhorn distance, thus it has an
efficient computational complexity that scales quadratically with the size of the
largest cluster. When the transformation between two datasets is unitary, we provide
performance guarantees that describe when and how well cluster correspondences
can be recovered with our formulation, and then describe the worst-case dataset
geometry for such a strategy. We apply this method to synthetic datasets that
model data as mixtures of low-rank Gaussians and study the impact that different
geometric properties of the data have on alignment. Next, we applied our approach
to a neural decoding application where the goal is to predict movement directions
and instantaneous velocities from populations of neurons in the macaque primary
motor cortex. Our results demonstrate that when clustered structure exists in
datasets, and is consistent across trials or time points, a hierarchical alignment
strategy that leverages such structure can provide significant improvements in
cross-domain alignment.

1

Introduction

In many machine learning applications, it is necessary to meaningfully aggregate, through alignment,
different but related datasets (e.g., data across time points or under different conditions or contexts).
Alignment is an important problem at the heart of transfer learning [1, 2], point set registration [3, 4, 5],
and shape analysis [6, 7, 8], but is generally NP hard. In recent years, distribution alignment methods
that use optimal transport (OT) to quantify similarity between two distributions have increased in
popularity due to their attractive mathematical properties and impressive performance in a variety of
tasks [9, 10]. However, using OT to solve unsupervised distribution alignment problems that must
simultaneously match two datasets’ distributions (using OT) while also learning a transformation
between their latent spaces, is extremely challenging, especially when the data has complicated
multi-modal structure. Leveraging additional structure in the problem is thus necessary to regularize
OT and constrain the solution space.
Here, we leverage the fact that heterogeneous datasets often admit clustered or multi-subspace structure to improve OT-based distribution alignment. Our solution to this problem is to simultaneously
⇤
§

JL is currently with DSO National Laboratories of Singapore.
Equal contributing senior authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

