Specific and Shared Causal Relation Modeling and
Mechanism-Based Clustering

Biwei Huang 1 ∗, Kun Zhang1 , Pengtao Xie2 , Mingming Gong3 , Eric Xing2,4 , Clark Glymour1
1
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
2
Petuum Inc., USA.
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
4
Department of Machine Learning, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Abstract
State-of-the-art approaches to causal discovery usually assume a fixed underlying causal model. However, it is often the case that causal models vary across
domains or subjects, due to possibly omitted factors that affect the quantitative
causal effects. As a typical example, causal connectivity in the brain network
has been reported to vary across individuals, with significant differences across
groups of people, such as autistics and typical controls. In this paper, we develop
a unified framework for causal discovery and mechanism-based group identification. In particular, we propose a specific and shared causal model (SSCM), which
takes into account the variabilities of causal relations across individuals/groups
and leverages their commonalities to achieve statistically reliable estimation. The
learned SSCM gives the specific causal knowledge for each individual as well as
the general trend over the population. In addition, the estimated model directly
provides the group information of each individual. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world data demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Learning causal relations from observational data automatically, known as causal discovery, has
shown its increasing importance and efficacy. State-of-the-art approaches to causal discovery usually assume a fixed causal model [34, 2, 13, 32, 14, 40, 16]; that is, causal mechanisms are invariant
across instances in the data set. Under this assumption, causal relations can be identified by leveraging the conditional independence between observed variables [34] or the asymmetrical independence between estimated noise term and hypothetical causes, implied by suitable functional causal
models [32, 38, 14, 40].
In real-world scenarios, it is often the case that causal relations over the considered set of variables
may vary across individuals or individual groups, and meanwhile they also share many commonalities. For example, in healthcare, individuals may show different responses to the same treatment.
The varying responses may be due to some (unmeasured) factors, such as nutrition and health status.
At the same time, although the effect may be different for different individuals, a large proportion
may still show a similar trend, while others may show very distinct effects. This suggests that to
understand causal effects, it is helpful to properly divide these subjects into different groups: within
groups, the variation of the treatment effect should be small, while it may be large across groups.
When examining whether a treatment is effective and should be adopted as standard practice, one
should not only care about its effect in the general population, but also account for the response to
the treatment of each individual or each properly divided group. The brain network is another example. There is ample evidence that heterogeneity in brain processes exists across individuals [35].
∗

Correspondence to: Biwei Huang, email: biweih@andrew.cmu.edu.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

