A Meta-MDP Approach to Exploration
for Lifelong Reinforcement Learning
Francisco M. Garcia and Philip S. Thomas
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA, USA
{fmgarcia,pthomas}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of how a reinforcement learning agent that
is tasked with solving a sequence of reinforcement learning problems (a sequence
of Markov decision processes) can use knowledge acquired early in its lifetime to
improve its ability to solve new problems. We argue that previous experience with
similar problems can provide an agent with information about how it should explore
when facing a new but related problem. We show that the search for an optimal
exploration strategy can be formulated as a reinforcement learning problem itself
and demonstrate that such strategy can leverage patterns found in the structure
of related problems. We conclude with experiments that show the benefits of
optimizing an exploration strategy using our proposed framework.

1

Introduction

One hallmark of human intelligence is our ability to leverage knowledge collected over our lifetimes
when we face a new problem. When dealing with a new problem related to one we already know how
to address, we leverage the experience obtained from solving the former problem. For example, upon
buying a new car, we do not re-learn from scratch how to drive a car, instead we use the experience
we had driving a previous car to quickly adapt to the new control and dynamics.
Standard reinforcement learning (RL) methods lack this ability. When faced with a new problem—a
new Markov decision process (MDP)—they typically start learning from scratch, initially making
uninformed decisions in order to explore and learn about the current problem they face. The problem
of creating agents that can leverage previous experiences to solve new problems is called lifelong
learning or continual learning, and is related to the problem of transfer learning.
Although the idea of how an agent can learn to learn has been explored for quite some time [14, 15],
in this paper we focus on one aspect of lifelong learning: when faced with a sequence of MDPs
sampled from a distribution over MDPs, how can a reinforcement learning agent learn an optimal
policy for exploration? Specifically, we do not consider the question of when an agent should explore
or how much an agent should explore, which is a well studied area of reinforcement learning research,
[20, 10, 1, 5, 18]. Instead, we study the question of, given that an agent decides to explore, which
action should it take? In this work we formally define the problem of searching for an optimal
exploration policy and show that this problem can itself be modeled as an MDP. This means that
the task of finding an optimal exploration strategy for a learning agent can be solved by another
reinforcement learning agent that is solving a new meta-MDP, which operates at a different timescale
from the RL agent solving a specific task—one episode of the meta-MDP corresponds to an entire
lifetime of the RL agent. This difference of timescales distinguishes our approach from previous
meta-MDP methods for optimizing components of reinforcement learning algorithms, [21, 9, 22, 8, 3].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

