Disentangled behavioral representations

Amir Dezfouli1∗ Hassan Ashtiani2 Omar Ghattas13
Richard Nock145 Peter Dayan6# Cheng Soon Ong14
1
Data61, CSIRO 2 McMaster University 3 University of Chicago
Australian National University 5 University of Sydney 6 Max Planck Institute
Corresponding authors ∗ amir.dezfouli@data61.csiro.au # dayan@tue.mpg.de

4

Abstract
Individual characteristics in human decision-making are often quantified by fitting
a parametric cognitive model to subjects’ behavior and then studying differences
between them in the associated parameter space. However, these models often fit
behavior more poorly than recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which are more flexible and make fewer assumptions about the underlying decision-making processes.
Unfortunately, the parameter and latent activity spaces of RNNs are generally highdimensional and uninterpretable, making it hard to use them to study individual
differences. Here, we show how to benefit from the flexibility of RNNs while
representing individual differences in a low-dimensional and interpretable space.
To achieve this, we propose a novel end-to-end learning framework in which an
encoder is trained to map the behavior of subjects into a low-dimensional latent
space. These low-dimensional representations are used to generate the parameters
of individual RNNs corresponding to the decision-making process of each subject.
We introduce terms into the loss function that ensure that the latent dimensions are
informative and disentangled, i.e., encouraged to have distinct effects on behavior. This allows them to align with separate facets of individual differences. We
illustrate the performance of our framework on synthetic data as well as a dataset
including the behavior of patients with psychiatric disorders.

1

Introduction

There is substantial commonality among humans (and other animals) in the way that they learn from
experience in order to make decisions. However, there is often also considerable variability in the
choices of different subjects in the same task [Carroll and Maxwell, 1979]. Such variability is rooted
in the structure of the underlying processes; for example, subjects can differ in their tendencies to
explore new actions [e.g., Frank et al., 2009] or in the weights they give to past experiences [e.g.,
den Ouden et al., 2013]. If meaningfully disentangled, these factors would crisply characterise
the decision-making processes of the subjects, and would provide a low-dimensional latent space
that could be used for many other tasks including studying the behavioral heterogeneity of subjects
endowed with the same psychiatric labels. However, extracting such representations from behavioral
data is challenging, as choices emerge from a complex set of interactions between latent variables
and past experiences, making disentanglement difficult.
One promising approach proposed for learning low-dimensional representations of behavioral data is
through the use of cognitive modelling [e.g., Navarro et al., 2006, Busemeyer and Stout, 2002]; for
example using a reinforcement learning framework [e.g., Daw, 2011]. In this approach, a parametrised
computational model is assumed to underlie the decision-making process, and the parameters of this
model – such as the tendency to explore and the learning rate – are found by fitting each subject’s
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

