Comparing distributions: `1 geometry improves
kernel two-sample testing
Meyer Scetbon
CREST, ENSAE & Inria, Université Paris-Saclay

Gaël Varoquaux
Inria, Université Paris-Saclay

Abstract
Are two sets of observations drawn from the same distribution? This problem is
a two-sample test. Kernel methods lead to many appealing properties. Indeed
state-of-the-art approaches use the L2 distance between kernel-based distribution
representatives to derive their test statistics. Here, we show that Lp distances
(with p 1) between these distribution representatives give metrics on the space
of distributions that are well-behaved to detect differences between distributions
as they metrize the weak convergence. Moreover, for analytic kernels, we show
that the L1 geometry gives improved testing power for scalable computational
procedures. Specifically, we derive a finite dimensional approximation of the
metric given as the `1 norm of a vector which captures differences of expectations
of analytic functions evaluated at spatial locations or frequencies (i.e, features).
The features can be chosen to maximize the differences of the distributions and
give interpretable indications of how they differs. Using an `1 norm gives better
detection because differences between representatives are dense as we use analytic
kernels (non-zero almost everywhere). The tests are consistent, while much faster
than state-of-the-art quadratic-time kernel-based tests. Experiments on artificial
and real-world problems demonstrate improved power/time tradeoff than the state
of the art, based on `2 norms, and in some cases, better outright power than even
the most expensive quadratic-time tests.
We consider two sample tests: testing whether two random variables are identically distributed without
assumption on their distributions. This problem has many applications such as data integration [4] or
automated model checking [22]. Distances between distributions underlie progress in unsupervised
learning with generative adversarial networks [20, 1]. A kernel on the sample space can be used to
build the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [11, 12, 13, 26], a metric on distribution which has the
strong propriety of metrizing the weak convergence of probability measures. It leads to non-parametric
two-sample tests using the reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) distance [15, 9], or energy
distance [32, 3]. The MMD has a quadratic computational cost, which may force to use of subsampled
estimates [33, 14]. [5] approximate the L2 distance between distribution representatives in the RKHS,
to compute in linear time a pseudo metric over the space of distributions. Such approximations are
related to random (Fourier) features, used in kernels algorithms [24, 19]. Distribution representatives
can be mean embeddings [29, 30] or smooth characteristic functions [5, 17].
We first introduce the state of the art on Kernel-based two-sample testing built from the L2 distance
between mean embeddings in the RKHS. In fact, a wider family of distance is well suited for the
two-sample problem: we show that for any p 1, the Lp distance between these distribution representatives is a metric on the space of Borel probability measures that metrizes their weak convergence.
We then define our `1 -based statistic derived from the L1 geometry and study its asymptotic behavior.
We consider the general case where the number of samples of the two distributions may differ. We
show that using the `1 norm provides a better testing power. Indeed, test statistics approximate such
metrics and are defined as the norm of a J-dimensional vector which is the difference between the
two distribution representatives at J locations. Under the alternative hypothesis H1 : P 6= Q, the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

