Meta-Inverse Reinforcement Learning with
Probabilistic Context Variables
Lantao Yu∗ , Tianhe Yu∗ , Chelsea Finn, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
{lantaoyu,tianheyu,cbfinn,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Providing a suitable reward function to reinforcement learning can be difficult in
many real world applications. While inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) holds
promise for automatically learning reward functions from demonstrations, several
major challenges remain. First, existing IRL methods learn reward functions from
scratch, requiring large numbers of demonstrations to correctly infer the reward for
each task the agent may need to perform. Second, existing methods typically assume homogeneous demonstrations for a single behavior or task, while in practice,
it might be easier to collect datasets of heterogeneous but related behaviors. To this
end, we propose a deep latent variable model that is capable of learning rewards
from demonstrations of distinct but related tasks in an unsupervised way. Critically, our model can infer rewards for new, structurally-similar tasks from a single
demonstration. Our experiments on multiple continuous control tasks demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach compared to state-of-the-art imitation and inverse
reinforcement learning methods.

1

Introduction

While reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied to a range of decision-making
and control tasks in the real world, it relies on a key assumption: having access to a well-defined
reward function that measures progress towards the completion of the task. Although it can be
straightforward to provide a high-level description of success conditions for a task, existing RL
algorithms usually require a more informative signal to expedite exploration and learn complex
behaviors in a reasonable time. While reward functions can be hand-specified, reward engineering
can require significant human effort. Moreover, for many real-world tasks, it can be challenging to
manually design reward functions that actually benefit RL training, and reward mis-specification can
hamper autonomous learning [2].
Learning from demonstrations [31] sidesteps the reward specification problem by instead learning
directly from expert demonstrations, which can be obtained through teleoperation [39] or from
humans experts [38]. Demonstrations can often be easier to provide than rewards, as humans
can complete many real-world tasks quite efficiently. Two major methodologies of learning from
demonstrations include imitation learning and inverse reinforcement learning. Imitation learning
is simple and often exhibits good performance [39, 16]. However, it lacks the ability to transfer
learned policies to new settings where the task specification remains the same but the underlying
environment dynamics change. As the reward function is often considered as the most succinct,
robust and transferable representation of a task [1, 11], the problem of inferring reward functions
from expert demonstrations, i.e. inverse RL (IRL) [23], is important to consider.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

