Leveraging Labeled and Unlabeled Data for
Consistent Fair Binary Classification

Evgenii Chzhen1,2 , Christophe Denis1 , Mohamed Hebiri1 ,
Luca Oneto3 , Massimiliano Pontil4,5
1
Université Paris-Est, 2 Université Paris-Sud, 3 University of Pisa,
4
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 5 University College London
evgenii.chzhen@math.u-psud.fr, {mohamed.hebiri,christophe.denis}@u-pem.fr,
luca.oneto@unipi.it, massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
We study the problem of fair binary classification using the notion of Equal Opportunity. It requires the true positive rate to distribute equally across the sensitive
groups. Within this setting we show that the fair optimal classifier is obtained
by recalibrating the Bayes classifier by a group-dependent threshold. We provide
a constructive expression for the threshold. This result motivates us to devise
a plug-in classification procedure based on both unlabeled and labeled datasets.
While the latter is used to learn the output conditional probability, the former is
used for calibration. The overall procedure can be computed in polynomial time
and it is shown to be statistically consistent both in terms of the classification error
and fairness measure. Finally, we present numerical experiments which indicate
that our method is often superior or competitive with the state-of-the-art methods
on benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning becomes more and more spread in our society, the potential risk of using
algorithms that behave unfairly is rising. As a result there is growing interest to design learning
methods that meet “fairness” requirements, see [5, 9, 10, 17, 19, 22–24, 28, 31, 33, 47, 48, 50, 52]
and references therein. A central goal is to make sure that sensitive information does not “unfairly”
influence the outcomes of learning methods. For instance, if we wish to predict whether a university
student applicant should be offered a scholarship based on curriculum, we would like our model to
not unfairly use additional sensitive information such as gender or race.
Several measures of fairness of a classifier have been studied in the literature [49], ranging from
Demographic Parity [8], Equal Odds and Equal Opportunity [22], Disparate Treatment, Impact, and
Mistreatment [48], among others. In this paper, we study the problem of learning a binary classifier
which satisfies the Equal Opportunity fairness constraint. It requires that the true positive rate of
the classifier is the same across the sensitive groups. This notion has been used extensively in the
literature either as a postprocessing step [22] on a learned classifier or directly during training, see for
example [17] and references therein.
We address the important problem of devising statistically consistent and computationally efficient
learning procedures that meet the fairness constraint. Specifically, we make four contributions. First,
we derive in Proposition 2.3 the expression for the optimal equal opportunity classifier, derived
via thresholding of the Bayes regressor. Second, inspired by the above result we proposed a semisupervised plug-in type method, which first estimates the regression function on labeled data and
then estimates the unknown threshold using unlabeled data. Consequently, we establish in Theorem
4.5 that the proposed procedure is consistent, that is, it asymptotically satisfies the equal opportunity
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

