Random Quadratic Forms with Dependence:
Applications to Restricted Isometry and Beyond

Arindam Banerjee
Qilong Gu
Vidyashankar Sivakumar
Zhiwei Steven Wu
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

Abstract
Several important families of computational and statistical results in machine
learning and randomized algorithms rely on uniform bounds on quadratic forms
of random vectors or matrices. Such results include the Johnson-Lindenstrauss
(J-L) Lemma, the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP), randomized sketching algorithms, and approximate linear algebra. The existing results critically depend
on statistical independence, e.g., independent entries for random vectors, independent rows for random matrices, etc., which prevent their usage in dependent
or adaptive modeling settings. In this paper, we show that such independence
is in fact not needed for such results which continue to hold under fairly general dependence structures. In particular, we present uniform bounds on random
quadratic forms of stochastic processes which are conditionally independent and
sub-Gaussian given another (latent) process. Our setup allows general dependencies of the stochastic process on the history of the latent process and the latent
process to be influenced by realizations of the stochastic process. The results are
thus applicable to adaptive modeling settings and also allows for sequential design
of random vectors and matrices. We also discuss stochastic process based forms
of J-L, RIP, and sketching, to illustrate the generality of the results. 1

1

Introduction

Over the past few decades, a set of key developments in machine learning and randomized algorithms have been relying on uniform large deviation bounds on quadratic forms involving random
vectors or matrices. The Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) is a well known and widely studied
result of this type, which has had a major impact in high-dimensional statistics [35, 5, 45, 46]. The
Johnson-Lindenstrauss (J-L) Lemma is another well known result of this type, which has led to major statistical and algorithmic advances in the context of random projections [25, 2, 23]. Similar
substantial developments have been made in several other contexts, including sketching algorithms
based on random matrices [49, 26], advances in approximate linear algebra [32, 20], among others.
Such existing developments in one way or another rely on uniform bounds on quadratic forms of
random vectors or matrices. Let A be a set of (m × n) matrices and ξ ∈ Rn be a sub-Gaussian
random vector [45, 46]. The existing results stem from large deviation bounds of the following
random variable [28]:
CA (ξ) = sup kAξk22 − EkAξk22 .
(1)
A∈A

Results such as RIP and J-L can then be obtained in a straightforward manner from such bounds by
converting the matrix A into a vector θ = vec(A) and converting ξ into a suitable random matrix X
to get bounds on
CΘ (X) = sup kXθk22 − EkXθk22 ,
(2)
θ∈Θ

1

The full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.04930 [6].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

