ANODEV2: A Coupled Neural ODE Framework
Tianjun Zhang1⇤ Zhewei Yao1⇤ Amir Gholami1⇤
Kurt Keutzer1 Joseph Gonzalez1 George Biros2 Michael W. Mahoney1,3
1
University of California at Berkeley, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 ICSI
{tianjunz, zheweiy, amirgh, keutzer, jegonzal, and mahoneymw}@berkeley.edu, biros@ices.utexas.edu

Abstract
It has been observed that residual networks can be viewed as the explicit Euler discretization of an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE). This observation motivated
the introduction of so-called Neural ODEs, which allow more general discretization
schemes with adaptive time stepping. Here, we propose ANODEV2, which is an
extension of this approach that allows evolution of the neural network parameters,
in a coupled ODE-based formulation. The Neural ODE method introduced earlier
is in fact a special case of this new framework. We present the formulation of
ANODEV2, derive optimality conditions, and implement the coupled framework
in PyTorch. We present empirical results using several different configurations of
ANODEV2, testing them on multiple models on CIFAR-10. We report results
showing that this coupled ODE-based framework is indeed trainable, and that
it achieves higher accuracy, as compared to the baseline models as well as the
recently-proposed Neural ODE approach.

1

Introduction

Residual networks [1, 2] have enabled training of very deep neural networks (DNNs). Recent work
has shown an interesting connection between residual blocks and ODEs, showing that a residual
network can be viewed as a discretization to a continuous ODE operator [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. These
formulations are commonly called Neural ODEs and here we follow the same convention. Neural
ODEs provide a general framework that connects discrete DNNs to continuous dynamical systems
theory as well as discretization and optimal control of ODEs, all subjects with very rich theory.
A basic Neural ODE formulation and its connection to residual networks (for a single block in a
network) is the following:
z1 = z0 + f (z0 , ✓)
Z 1
z(1) = z(0) +
f (z(t), ✓)dt

ResNet,

(1a)

ODE,

(1b)

ODE forward Euler.

(1c)

0

z(1) = z(0) + f (z0 , ✓)

Here, z0 is the input to the network and z1 is the output activation; ✓ is the vector of network weights
(independent of time); and f (z, ✓) is the nonlinear operator defined by this block. (Here we have
written the ODE dz/dt = f (z, ✓) in terms of its solution at t = 1.) We can see that a single-step of
forward Euler discretization of the ODE is identical to a traditional residual block. Alternatively, we
could use a different time-stepping scheme or, more interestingly, use more time steps. Once the
connection to ODEs was identified, several groups have incorporated the Neural ODE structure in
neural networks and evaluated their performance on several different learning tasks.
A major challenge with training Neural ODEs is that backpropogating through ODE layers requires
storage of all the intermediate activations (i.e., z) in time. In principle, the memory footprint of
⇤

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

