Deep Active Learning with a Neural Architecture
Search
Yonatan Geifman
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
yonatan.g@cs.technion.ac.il

Ran El-Yaniv
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
We consider active learning of deep neural networks. Most active learning works
in this context have focused on studying effective querying mechanisms and assumed that an appropriate network architecture is a priori known for the problem at
hand. We challenge this assumption and propose a novel active strategy whereby
the learning algorithm searches for effective architectures on the fly, while actively
learning. We apply our strategy using three known querying techniques (softmax
response, MC-dropout, and coresets) and show that the proposed approach overwhelmingly outperforms active learning using fixed architectures.

1

Introduction

Active learning allows a learning algorithm to control the learning process, by actively selecting
the labeled training sample from a large pool of unlabeled instances. Theoretically, active learning
has a huge potential, especially in cases where exponential speedup in sample complexity can be
achieved [10, 25, 9]. Active learning becomes particularly important when considering supervised
deep neural models, which are hungry for large and costly labeled training samples. For example,
when considering supervised learning of medical diagnoses for radiology images, the labeling of
images must be performed by professional radiologists whose availability is scarce and consultation
time is costly.
In this paper, we focus on active learning of image classification with deep neural models. There are
only a few works on this topic and, for the most part, they concentrate on one issue: How to select
the subsequent instances to be queried. They are also mostly based on the uncertainty sampling
principle in which querying uncertain instances tends to expedite the learning process. For example,
[6] employ a Monte-Carlo dropout (MC-dropout) technique for estimating uncertainty of unlabeled
instances. [24] applied the well-known softmax response (SR) to estimate uncertainty. [21] and
[7] proposed to use coresets on the neural embedding space and then exploit the coreset loss of
unlabeled points as a proxy for their uncertainty. A drawback of most of these works is their heavy
use of prior knowledge regarding the neural architecture. That is, they utilize an architecture already
known to be useful for the classification problem at hand.
When considering active learning of a new learning task, e.g., involving medical images or remote
sensing, there is no known off-the-shelf working architecture. Moreover, even if one receives from
an oracle the “correct” architecture for the passive learning problem (an architecture that induces the
best performance if trained over a very large labeled training sample), it is unlikely that this architecture will be effective in the early stages of an active learning session. The reason is that a large
and expressive architecture will tend to overfit when trained over a small sample and, consequently,
its generalization performance and the induced querying function (from the overfit model) can be
poor (we demonstrate this phenomenon in Section 5).
To overcome this challenge, we propose to perform a neural architecture search (NAS) in every
active learning round. We present a new algorithm, the incremental neural architecture search
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

