Complexity of Highly Parallel
Non-Smooth Convex Optimization
Sébastien Bubeck
Microsoft Research
sebubeck@microsoft.com

Qijia Jiang
Stanford University
qjiang2@stanford.edu

Yuanzhi Li
Stanford University
yuanzhil@stanford.edu

Yin Tat Lee
University of Washington
& Microsoft Research
yintat@uw.edu

Aaron Sidford
Stanford University
sidford@stanford.edu

Abstract
A landmark result of non-smooth convex optimization is that gradient descent is
an optimal algorithm whenever the number of computed gradients is smaller than
the dimension d. In this paper we study the extension of this result to the parallel
optimization setting. Namely we consider optimization algorithms interacting
with a highly parallel gradient oracle, that is one that can answer poly(d) gradient
queries in
pparallel. We show that in this case gradient descent is optimal only
up to e
O( d) rounds of interactions with the oracle. The lower bound improves
upon a decades old construction by Nemirovski which proves optimality only up to
d1/3 rounds (as recently observed
by Balkanski and Singer), and the suboptimality
p
of gradient descent after d rounds was already observed by Duchi, Bartlett
and Wainwright. In the latter regime we propose a new method with improved
complexity, which we conjecture to be optimal. The analysis of this new method is
based upon a generalized version of the recent results on optimal acceleration for
highly smooth convex optimization.

1

Introduction

Much of the research in convex optimization has focused on the oracle model, where an algorithm
optimizing some objective function f : Rd ! R does so by sequential interaction with, e.g., a
gradient oracle (given a query x 2 Rd , the oracle returns rf (x)), [Nemirovski and Yudin, 1983,
Nesterov, 2004, Bubeck, 2015].1 In the early 1990s, Arkadi Nemirovski introduced the parallel
version of this problem [Nemirovski, 1994]: instead of submitting queries one by one sequentially,
the algorithm can submit in parallel up to Q 1 queries. We refer to the depth of such a parallel
algorithm as the number of rounds of interaction with the oracle, and the work as the total number of
queries (in particular work  Q⇥ depth). In this paper we study the optimal depth achievable for
highly parallel algorithms, namely we consider the regime Q = poly(d). We focus on non-smooth
convex optimization, that is we want to optimize a Lipschitz, convex function f on the unit Euclidean
ball.
1

Throughout we assume that f is differentiable, though our results carry over to the case where f is nondifferentiable and given by a sub-gradient oracle. This generalization is immediate as our analysis and algorithms
are stable under finite-precision arithmetic and convex functions are almost everywhere differentiable.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

