Neural Shuffle-Exchange Networks − Sequence
Processing in O(n log n) Time

Kārlis Freivalds, Emı̄ls Ozolin, š, Agris Šostaks
Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science
University of Latvia
Raina bulvaris 29, Riga, LV-1459, Latvia
{Karlis.Freivalds, Emils.Ozolins, Agris.Sostaks}@lumii.lv

Abstract
A key requirement in sequence to sequence processing is the modeling of long
range dependencies. To this end, a vast majority of the state-of-the-art models use
attention mechanism which is of O(n2 ) complexity that leads to slow execution for
long sequences.
We introduce a new Shuffle-Exchange neural network model for sequence to
sequence tasks which have O(log n) depth and O(n log n) total complexity. We
show that this model is powerful enough to infer efficient algorithms for common
algorithmic benchmarks including sorting, addition and multiplication. We evaluate
our architecture on the challenging LAMBADA question answering dataset and
compare it with the state-of-the-art models which use attention. Our model achieves
competitive accuracy and scales to sequences with more than a hundred thousand
of elements.
We are confident that the proposed model has the potential for building more
efficient architectures for processing large interrelated data in language modeling,
music generation and other application domains.

1

Introduction

A key requirement in sequence to sequence processing is the modeling of long range dependencies.
Such dependencies occur in natural language when the meaning of some word depends on other
words in the same or some previous sentence. There are important cases, e.g., to resolve coreferences,
when such distant information may not be disregarded. A similar phenomenon occurs in music,
where a common motif may reappear throughout the entire piece and it should be kept coherent
by any applied transformation (Huang et al., 2019). Dealing with long range dependencies require
processing very long sequences (several pages of text or the entire musical composition) in a manner
that aggregates information from their distant parts.
Aggregation of distant information is even more important for algorithmic tasks where each output
symbol typically depends on every input symbol. The goal for algorithm synthesis is to derive
an algorithm from given input-output examples which are often given as sequences. Algorithmic
tasks are especially challenging due to the need for processing sequences of unlimited length. Also,
generalization plays an important role since training is often performed on short sequences but testing
on long ones.
Currently the best neural network architectures do not scale well with the sequence length. A large
fraction of them uses the attention mechanism which has quadratic complexity depending on the
sequence length. These models can be easily trained on length 512 or so but become very slow and
memory hungry on longer sequences.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

