BatchBALD: Efficient and Diverse Batch Acquisition
for Deep Bayesian Active Learning

Andreas Kirsch∗

Joost van Amersfoort∗
Yarin Gal
OATML
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{andreas.kirsch, joost.van.amersfoort, yarin}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We develop BatchBALD, a tractable approximation to the mutual information
between a batch of points and model parameters, which we use as an acquisition
function to select multiple informative points jointly for the task of deep Bayesian
active learning. BatchBALD is a greedy linear-time 1 − 1e -approximate algorithm
amenable to dynamic programming and efficient caching. We compare BatchBALD
to the commonly used approach for batch data acquisition and find that the current
approach acquires similar and redundant points, sometimes performing worse
than randomly acquiring data. We finish by showing that, using BatchBALD to
consider dependencies within an acquisition batch, we achieve new state of the
art performance on standard benchmarks, providing substantial data efficiency
improvements in batch acquisition.

1

Introduction

A key problem in deep learning is data efficiency. While excellent performance can be obtained
with modern tools, these are often data-hungry, rendering the deployment of deep learning in the
real-world challenging for many tasks. Active learning (AL) [7] is a powerful technique for attaining
data efficiency. Instead of a-priori collecting and labelling a large dataset, which often comes at a
significant expense, in AL we iteratively acquire labels from an expert only for the most informative
data points from a pool of available unlabelled data. After each acquisition step, the newly labelled
points are added to the training set, and the model is retrained. This process is repeated until a suitable
level of accuracy is achieved. The goal of AL is to minimise the amount of data that needs to be
labelled. AL has already made real-world impact in manufacturing [34], robotics [5], recommender
systems [1], medical imaging [18], and NLP [31], motivating the need for pushing AL even further.
In AL, the informativeness of new points is assessed by an acquisition function. There are a number
of intuitive choices, such as model uncertainty and mutual information, and, in this paper, we focus
on BALD [19], which has proven itself in the context of deep learning [13, 30, 20]. BALD is based
on mutual information and scores points based on how well their label would inform us about the true
model parameter distribution. In deep learning models [16, 32], we generally treat the parameters
as point estimates instead of distributions. However, Bayesian neural networks have become a
powerful alternative to traditional neural networks and do provide a distribution over their parameters.
Improvements in approximate inference [4, 12] have enabled their usage for high dimensional data
such as images and in conjunction with BALD for Bayesian AL of images [13].
In practical AL applications, instead of single data points, batches of data points are acquired
during each acquisition step to reduce the number of times the model is retrained and expert-time is
∗

joint first authors

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

