On Robustness to Adversarial Examples and
Polynomial Optimization
Pranjal Awasthi
Department of Computer Science
Rutgers University
pranjal.awasthi@rutgers.edu

Abhratanu Dutta
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
abhratanudutta2020@u.northwestern.edu

Aravindan Vijayaraghavan
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
aravindv@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We study the design of computationally efficient algorithms with provable
guarantees, that are robust to adversarial (test time) perturbations. While
there has been an explosion of recent work on this topic due to its connections to test time robustness of deep networks, there is limited theoretical
understanding of several basic questions like (i) when and how can one design provably robust learning algorithms? (ii) what is the price of achieving
robustness to adversarial examples in a computationally efficient manner?
The main contribution of this work is to exhibit a strong connection between
achieving robustness to adversarial examples, and a rich class of polynomial
optimization problems, thereby making progress on the above questions.
In particular, we leverage this connection to (a) design computationally
efficient robust algorithms with provable guarantees for a large class of
hypothesis, namely linear classifiers and degree-2 polynomial threshold
functions (PTFs), (b) give a precise characterization of the price of achieving
robustness in a computationally efficient manner for these classes, (c) design
efficient algorithms to certify robustness and generate adversarial attacks in
a principled manner for 2-layer neural networks. We empirically demonstrate
the effectiveness of these attacks on real data.

1

Introduction

The empirical success of deep learning has led to numerous unexplained phenomena about
which our current theoretical understanding is limited. Examples include the ability of
complex models to generalize well and effectiveness of first order methods on optimizing
training loss. The focus of this paper is on the phenomenon of adversarial robustness, that
was first pointed out by Szegedy et al. [33]. On many benchmark data sets, deep networks
optimized on the training set can often be fooled into misclassifying a test example by making
a small adversarial perturbation that is imperceptible to a human labeler. This has led to a
proliferation of work on designing robust algorithms that defend against such adversarial
perturbations, as well as attacks that aim to break these defenses.
In this work we choose to focus on perturbation defense, the most widely studied formulation
of adversarial robustness [24]. In the perturbation defense model, given a classifier f , an
adversary can take a test example x generated from the data distribution and perturb it to x̃
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

