The Option Keyboard
Combining Skills in Reinforcement Learning

André Barreto, Diana Borsa, Shaobo Hou, Gheorghe Comanici, Eser Aygün,
Philippe Hamel, Daniel Toyama, Jonathan Hunt, Shibl Mourad, David Silver, Doina Precup
{andrebarreto,borsa,shaobohou,gcomanici,eser}@google.com
{hamelphi,kenjitoyama,jjhunt,shibl,davidsilver,doinap}@google.com

DeepMind

Abstract
The ability to combine known skills to create new ones may be crucial in the
solution of complex reinforcement learning problems that unfold over extended
periods. We argue that a robust way of combining skills is to define and manipulate
them in the space of pseudo-rewards (or “cumulants”). Based on this premise, we
propose a framework for combining skills using the formalism of options. We show
that every deterministic option can be unambiguously represented as a cumulant
defined in an extended domain. Building on this insight and on previous results
on transfer learning, we show how to approximate options whose cumulants are
linear combinations of the cumulants of known options. This means that, once we
have learned options associated with a set of cumulants, we can instantaneously
synthesise options induced by any linear combination of them, without any learning
involved. We describe how this framework provides a hierarchical interface to the
environment whose abstract actions correspond to combinations of basic skills.
We demonstrate the practical benefits of our approach in a resource management
problem and a navigation task involving a quadrupedal simulated robot.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL) an agent takes actions in an environment in order to maximise the
amount of reward received in the long run [25]. This textbook definition of RL treats actions as
atomic decisions made by the agent at every time step. Recently, Sutton [23] proposed a new view
on action selection. In order to illustrate the potential benefits of his proposal Sutton resorts to the
following analogy. Imagine that the interface between agent and environment is a piano keyboard,
with each key corresponding to a possible action. Conventionally the agent plays one key at a time
and each note lasts exactly one unit of time. If we expect our agents to do something akin to playing
music, we must generalise this interface in two ways. First, we ought to allow notes to be arbitrarily
long—that is, we must replace actions with skills. Second, we should be able to also play chords.
The argument in favour of temporally-extended courses of actions has repeatedly been made in the
literature: in fact, the notion that agents should be able to reason at multiple temporal scales is one of
the pillars of hierarchical RL [7, 18, 26, 8, 17]. The insight that the agent should have the ability to
combine the resulting skills is a far less explored idea. This is the focus of the current work.
The possibility of combining skills replaces a monolithic action set with a combinatorial counterpart:
by learning a small set of basic skills (“keys”) the agent should be able to perform a potentially very
large number of combined skills (“chords”). For example, an agent that can both walk and grasp an
object should be able to walk while grasping an object without having to learn a new skill. According
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

