Meta-Reinforced Synthetic Data for One-Shot
Fine-Grained Visual Recognition
Satoshi Tsutsui
Indiana University
USA
stsutsui@indiana.edu

Yanwei Fu⇤
Fudan University
China
yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

David Crandall
Indiana University
USA
djcran@indiana.edu

Abstract
One-shot fine-grained visual recognition often suffers from the problem of training
data scarcity for new fine-grained classes. To alleviate this problem, an off-the-shelf
image generator can be applied to synthesize additional training images, but these
synthesized images are often not helpful for actually improving the accuracy of
one-shot fine-grained recognition. This paper proposes a meta-learning framework
to combine generated images with original images, so that the resulting “hybrid”
training images can improve one-shot learning. Specifically, the generic image
generator is updated by a few training instances of novel classes, and a Meta Image
Reinforcing Network (MetaIRNet) is proposed to conduct one-shot fine-grained
recognition as well as image reinforcement. The model is trained in an end-to-end
manner, and our experiments demonstrate consistent improvement over baselines
on one-shot fine-grained image classification benchmarks.

1

Introduction

The availability of vast labeled datasets has been crucial for the recent success of deep learning.
However, there will always be learning tasks for which labeled data is sparse. Fine-grained visual
recognition is one typical example: when images are to be classified into many very specific categories
(such as species of birds), it may be difficult to obtain training examples for rare classes, and producing
the ground truth labels may require significant expertise (e.g., ornithologists). One-shot learning is
thus very desirable for fine-grained visual recognition.
A recent approach to address data scarcity is meta-learning [7,10,24,35], which trains a parameterized
function called a meta-learner that maps labeled training sets to classifiers. The meta-learner is trained
by sampling small training and test sets from a large dataset of a base class. Such a meta-learned
model can be adapted to recognize novel categories with a single training instance per class. Another
way to address data scarcity is to synthesize additional training examples, for example by using
off-the-shelf Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3, 13]. However, classifiers trained from
GAN-generated images are typically inferior to those trained with real images, possibly because the
distribution of generated images may be biased towards frequent patterns (modes) of the original
image distribution [26]. This is especially true in one-shot fine-grained recognition where a tiny
difference (e.g., beak of a bird) can make a large difference in class.
To address these issues, we develop an approach to apply off-the-shelf generative models to synthesize
training data in a way that improves one-shot fine-grained classifiers. We begin by conducting a
pilot study to transfer a generator pre-trained on ImageNet in a one-shot scenario. We show that
the generated images can indeed improve the performance of a one-shot classifier when used with
⇤
Y. Fu is with School of Data Science, and MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Key Lab of
Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

