DFNets: Spectral CNNs for Graphs with
Feedback-Looped Filters

Asiri Wijesinghe
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
asiri.wijesinghe@anu.edu.au

Qing Wang
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University
qing.wang@anu.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a novel spectral convolutional neural network (CNN) model on graph
structured data, namely Distributed Feedback-Looped Networks (DFNets). This
model is incorporated with a robust class of spectral graph filters, called feedbacklooped filters, to provide better localization on vertices, while still attaining fast
convergence and linear memory requirements. Theoretically, feedback-looped
filters can guarantee convergence w.r.t. a specified error bound, and be applied
universally to any graph without knowing its structure. Furthermore, the propagation rule of this model can diversify features from the preceding layers to produce
strong gradient flows. We have evaluated our model using two benchmark tasks:
semi-supervised document classification on citation networks and semi-supervised
entity classification on a knowledge graph. The experimental results show that our
model considerably outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in both benchmark
tasks over all datasets.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20] are a powerful deep learning approach which has been
widely applied in various fields, e.g., object recognition [29], image classification [14], and semantic
segmentation [22]. Traditionally, CNNs only deal with data that has a regular Euclidean structure,
such as images, videos and text. In recent years, due to the rising trends in network analysis and
prediction, generalizing CNNs to graphs has attracted considerable interest [3, 7, 11, 26]. However,
since graphs are in irregular non-Euclidean domains, this brings up the challenge of how to enhance
CNNs for effectively extracting useful features (e.g. topological structure) from arbitrary graphs.
To address this challenge, a number of studies have been devoted to enhancing CNNs by developing
filters over graphs. In general, there are two categories of graph filters: (a) spatial graph filters, and
(b) spectral graph filters. Spatial graph filters are defined as convolutions directly on graphs, which
consider neighbors that are spatially close to a current vertex [1, 9, 11]. In contrast, spectral graph
filters are convolutions indirectly defined on graphs, through their spectral representations [3, 5, 7].
In this paper, we follow the line of previous studies in developing spectral graph filters and tackle the
problem of designing an effective, yet efficient CNNs with spectral graph filters.
Previously, Bruna et al. [3] proposed convolution operations on graphs via a spectral decomposition
of the graph Laplacian. To reduce learning complexity in the setting where the graph structure is
not known a priori, Henaff et al. [13] developed a spectral filter with smooth coefficients. Then,
Defferrard et al. [7] introduced Chebyshev filters to stabilize convolution operations under coefficient
perturbation and these filters can be exactly localized in k-hop neighborhood. Later, Kipf et al. [19]
proposed a simple layer-wise propagation model using Chebyshev filters on 1-hop neighborhood.
Very recently, some works attempted to develop rational polynomial filters, such as Cayley filters [21]
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

