Image Captioning: Transforming Objects into Words

Simao Herdade, Armin Kappeler, Kofi Boakye, Joao Soares
Yahoo Research
San Francisco, CA, 94103
{sherdade,kaboakye,jvbsoares}@verizonmedia.com, akappeler@apple.com

Abstract
Image captioning models typically follow an encoder-decoder architecture which
uses abstract image feature vectors as input to the encoder. One of the most
successful algorithms uses feature vectors extracted from the region proposals
obtained from an object detector. In this work we introduce the Object Relation
Transformer, that builds upon this approach by explicitly incorporating information
about the spatial relationship between input detected objects through geometric
attention. Quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate the importance of such
geometric attention for image captioning, leading to improvements on all common
captioning metrics on the MS-COCO dataset. Code is available at https://
github.com/yahoo/object_relation_transformer.

1

Introduction

Image captioning—the task of providing a natural language description of the content within an
image—lies at the intersection of computer vision and natural language processing. As both of
these research areas are highly active and have experienced many recent advances, progress in
image captioning has naturally followed suit. On the computer vision side, improved convolutional
neural network and object detection architectures have contributed to improved image captioning
systems. On the natural language processing side, more sophisticated sequential models, such as
attention-based recurrent neural networks, have similarly resulted in more accurate caption generation.
Inspired by neural machine translation, most conventional image captioning systems utilize an
encoder-decoder framework, in which an input image is encoded into an intermediate representation
of the information contained within the image, and subsequently decoded into a descriptive text
sequence. This encoding can consist of a single feature vector output of a CNN (as in [25]), or
multiple visual features obtained from different regions within the image. In the latter case, the
regions can be uniformly sampled (e.g., [26]), or guided by an object detector (e.g., [2]) which has
been shown to yield improved performance.
While these detection based encoders represent the state-of-the art, at present they do not utilize
information about the spatial relationships between the detected objects, such as relative position and
size. This information can often be critical to understanding the content within an image, however,
and is used by humans when reasoning about the physical world. Relative position, for example,
can aid in distinguishing “a girl riding a horse” from “a girl standing beside a horse”. Similarly,
relative size can help differentiate between “a woman playing the guitar” and “a woman playing the
ukelele”. Incorporating spatial relationships has been shown to improve the performance of object
detection itself, as demonstrated in [9]. Furthermore, in machine translation encoders, positional
relationships are often encoded, in particular in the case of the Transformer [23], an attention-based
encoder architecture. The use of relative positions and sizes of detected objects, then, should be of
benefit to image captioning visual encoders as well, as evidenced in Figure 1.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

