Provably Powerful Graph Networks

Haggai Maron∗ Heli Ben-Hamu∗ Hadar Serviansky∗ Yaron Lipman
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

Abstract
Recently, the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph isomorphism test was used to measure the expressive power of graph neural networks (GNN). It was shown that the
popular message passing GNN cannot distinguish between graphs that are indistinguishable by the 1-WL test (Morris et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2019). Unfortunately,
many simple instances of graphs are indistinguishable by the 1-WL test.
In search for more expressive graph learning models we build upon the recent
k-order invariant and equivariant graph neural networks (Maron et al., 2019a,b)
and present two results:
First, we show that such k-order networks can distinguish between non-isomorphic
graphs as good as the k-WL tests, which are provably stronger than the 1-WL
test for k > 2. This makes these models strictly stronger than message passing
models. Unfortunately, the higher expressiveness of these models comes with a
computational cost of processing high order tensors.
Second, setting our goal at building a provably stronger, simple and scalable
model we show that a reduced 2-order network containing just scaled identity
operator, augmented with a single quadratic operation (matrix multiplication) has a
provable 3-WL expressive power. Differently put, we suggest a simple model that
interleaves applications of standard Multilayer-Perceptron (MLP) applied to the
feature dimension and matrix multiplication. We validate this model by presenting
state of the art results on popular graph classification and regression tasks. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first practical invariant/equivariant model with
guaranteed 3-WL expressiveness, strictly stronger than message passing models.

1

Introduction

Graphs are an important data modality which is frequently used in many fields of science and
engineering. Among other things, graphs are used to model social networks, chemical compounds,
biological structures and high-level image content information. One of the major tasks in graph
data analysis is learning from graph data. As classical approaches often use hand-crafted graph
features that are not necessarily suitable to all datasets and/or tasks (e.g., Kriege et al. (2019)), a
significant research effort in recent years is to develop deep models that are able to learn new graph
representations from raw features (e.g., Gori et al. (2005); Duvenaud et al. (2015); Niepert et al.
(2016); Kipf and Welling (2016); Veličković et al. (2017); Monti et al. (2017); Hamilton et al. (2017a);
Morris et al. (2018); Xu et al. (2019)).
Currently, the most popular methods for deep learning on graphs are message passing neural networks
in which the node features are propagated through the graph according to its connectivity structure
(Gilmer et al., 2017). In a successful attempt to quantify the expressive power of message passing
models, Morris et al. (2018); Xu et al. (2019) suggest to compare the model’s ability to distinguish
between two given graphs to that of the hierarchy of the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph isomorphism
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

