Efficient characterization of electrically evoked
responses for neural interfaces

Nishal P. Shah ∗
Stanford University

Sasidhar Madugula
Stanford University

Alexander Sher
University of California, Santa Cruz

Pawel Hottowy
AGH University of Science and Technology
Alan Litke
University of California, Santa Cruz

Liam Paninski
Columbia University

E.J. Chichilnisky
Stanford University

Abstract
Future neural interfaces will read and write population neural activity with high
spatial and temporal resolution, for diverse applications. For example, an artificial
retina may restore vision to the blind by electrically stimulating retinal ganglion
cells. Such devices must tune their function, based on stimulating and recording, to
match the function of the circuit. However, existing methods for characterizing the
neural interface scale poorly with the number of electrodes, limiting their practical
applicability. This work tests the idea that using prior information from previous
experiments and closed-loop measurements may greatly increase the efficiency of
the neural interface. Large-scale, high-density electrical recording and stimulation
in primate retina were used as a lab prototype for an artificial retina. Three key
calibration steps were optimized: spike sorting in the presence of stimulation artifacts, response modeling, and adaptive stimulation. For spike sorting, exploiting
the similarity of electrical artifact across electrodes and experiments substantially
reduced the number of required measurements. For response modeling, a joint
model that captures the inverse relationship between recorded spike amplitude and
electrical stimulation threshold from previously recorded retinas resulted in greater
consistency and efficiency. For adaptive stimulation, choosing which electrodes to
stimulate based on probability estimates from previous measurements improved efficiency. Similar improvements resulted from using either non-adaptive stimulation
with a joint model across cells, or adaptive stimulation with an independent model
for each cell. Finally, image reconstruction revealed that these improvements may
translate to improved performance of an artificial retina.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in large-scale electrical and optical recording have made it possible to record and
stimulate neural circuits at unprecedented scale and resolution [Jun et al., 2017, Kipke et al., 2008,
Kerr and Denk, 2008, Stosiek et al., 2003]. These advances suggest the possibility of using electronic
devices to restore functions lost to disease, or to augment human capacities [Wilson et al., 1991,
Schwartz, 2004]. One such application is an artificial retina, which can provide a treatment for
incurable blindness by electrically stimulating retinal ganglion cells, the output neurons of the retina
[Stingl et al., 2013, Humayun et al., 2012, Lorach et al., 2015]. A high-fidelity device must encode a
visual scene by electrically stimulating retinal neurons in a way that produces accurate and useful
visual perception (Figure 1A).
∗

Code: https://github.com/Chichilnisky-Lab/shah-neurips-2019

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

