Towards a Zero-One Law for Column Subset
Selection
Zhao Song∗
University of Washington
magic.linuxkde@gmail.com

David P. Woodruff∗
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Peilin Zhong∗
Columbia University
pz2225@columbia.edu

Abstract
There are a number of approximation algorithms for NP-hard versions of low
rank approximation, such as finding a rank-k matrix B minimizing the sum of
absolute values of differences to a given n-by-n matrix A, minrank-k B kA − Bk1 ,
or more generally finding a rank-k matrix B which minimizes the sum of p-th
powers of absolute values of differences, minrank-k B kA − Bkpp . Many of these
algorithms are linear time columns subset selection algorithms, returning a subset
of poly(k log n) columns whose cost is no more than a poly(k) factor larger
than the cost of the best rank-k matrix. The above error measures are special
cases of the following general entrywise low rank approximation problem: given
an arbitrary function
g : R → R≥0 , find a rank-k matrix B which minimizes
P
kA − Bkg = i,j g(Ai,j − Bi,j ). A natural question is which functions g admit
efficient approximation algorithms? Indeed, this is a central question of recent
work studying generalized low rank models. In this work we give approximation
algorithms for every function g which is approximately monotone and satisfies an
approximate triangle inequality, and we show both of these conditions are necessary.
Further, our algorithm is efficient if the function g admits an efficient approximate
regression algorithm. Our approximation algorithms handle functions which are
not even scale-invariant, such as the Huber loss function, which we show have
very different structural properties than `p -norms, e.g., one can show the lack of
scale-invariance causes any column subset selection algorithm to provably require
√
a log n factor larger number of columns than `p -norms; nevertheless we design
the first efficient column subset selection algorithms for such error measures.

1

Introduction

A well-studied problem in machine learning and numerical linear algebra, with applications to recommendation systems, text mining, and computer vision, is that of computing a low-rank approximation
of a matrix. Such approximations reveal low-dimensional structure, provide a compact way of storing
a matrix, and can quickly be applied to a vector.
A commonly used version of the problem is to compute a near optimal low-rank approximation with
respect to the Frobenius norm. That is, given an n×n input matrix A and an accuracy parameter  > 0,
output a rank-k matrixP
B with large probability so that kA − Bk2F ≤ (1 + )kA − Ak k2F , where for
2
a matrix C, kCk2F = i,j Ci,j
is its squared Frobenius norm, and Ak = argminrank-k B kA − BkF .
Ak can be computed exactly using the singular value decomposition (SVD), but takes O(n3 ) time in
practice and nω time in theory, where ω ≈ 2.373 is the exponent of matrix multiplication [1, 2, 3, 4].

Sárlos [5] showed how to achieve the above guarantee with constant probability in e
O(nnz(A) · k/) +
n · poly(k/) time, where nnz(A) denotes the number of non-zero entries of A. This was improved
∗

equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

