CondConv: Conditionally Parameterized
Convolutions for Efficient Inference
Brandon Yang∗
Google Brain
bcyang@google.com

Gabriel Bender
Google Brain
gbender@google.com

Quoc V. Le
Google Brain
qvl@google.com

Jiquan Ngiam
Google Brain
jngiam@google.com

Abstract
Convolutional layers are one of the basic building blocks of modern deep neural networks. One fundamental assumption is that convolutional kernels should
be shared for all examples in a dataset. We propose conditionally parameterized convolutions (CondConv), which learn specialized convolutional kernels
for each example. Replacing normal convolutions with CondConv enables us
to increase the size and capacity of a network, while maintaining efficient inference. We demonstrate that scaling networks with CondConv improves the
performance and inference cost trade-off of several existing convolutional neural
network architectures on both classification and detection tasks. On ImageNet
classification, our CondConv approach applied to EfficientNet-B0 achieves state-ofthe-art performance of 78.3% accuracy with only 413M multiply-adds. Code and
checkpoints for the CondConv Tensorflow layer and CondConv-EfficientNet models are available at: https://github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/
models/official/efficientnet/condconv.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many
tasks in computer vision [23, 22]. Improvements in performance have largely come from increasing
model size and capacity to scale to larger and larger datasets [29, 17, 33]. However, current approaches to increasing model capacity are computationally expensive. Deploying the best-performing
models for inference can consume significant datacenter capacity [19] and are often not feasible for
applications with strict latency constraints.
One fundamental assumption in the design of convolutional layers is that the same convolutional
kernels are applied to every example in a dataset. To increase the capacity of a model, model
developers usually add more convolutional layers or increase the size of existing convolutions (kernel
height/width, number of input/output channels). In either case, the computational cost of additional
capacity increases proportionally to the size of the input to the convolution, which can be large.
Due to this assumption and focus on mobile deployment, current computationally efficient models
have very few parameters [15, 36, 41]. However, there is a growing class of computer vision
applications that are not constrained by parameter count, but have strict latency requirements at
inference, such as real-time server-side video processing and perception for self-driving cars. In this
paper, we aim to design models to better serve these applications.
∗

Work done as part of the Google AI Residency.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

