Approximating the Permanent by
Sampling from Adaptive Partitions
Jonathan Kuck1 , Tri Dao1 , Hamid Rezatofighi1 , Ashish Sabharwal2 , and Stefano Ermon1
1
Stanford University 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
{kuck,trid,hamidrt,ermon}@stanford.edu, ashishs@allenai.org

Abstract
Computing the permanent of a non-negative matrix is a core problem with practical
applications ranging from target tracking to statistical thermodynamics. However,
this problem is also #P-complete, which leaves little hope for finding an exact solution that can be computed efficiently. While the problem admits a fully polynomial
randomized approximation scheme, this method has seen little use because it is
both inefficient in practice and difficult to implement. We present A DA PART, a
simple and efficient method for drawing exact samples from an unnormalized distribution. Using A DA PART, we show how to construct tight bounds on the permanent
which hold with high probability, with guaranteed polynomial runtime for dense
matrices. We find that A DA PART can provide empirical speedups exceeding 30x
over prior sampling methods on matrices that are challenging for variational based
approaches. Finally, in the context of multi-target tracking, exact sampling from the
distribution defined by the matrix permanent allows us to use the optimal proposal
distribution during particle filtering. Using A DA PART, we show that this leads to
improved tracking performance using an order of magnitude fewer samples.

1

Introduction

The permanent of a square, non-negative matrix A is a quantity with natural graph theoretic interpretations. If A is interpreted as the adjacency matrix of a directed graph, the permanent corresponds to
the sum of weights of its cycle covers. If the graph is bipartite, it corresponds to the sum of weights
of its perfect matchings. The permanent has many applications in computer science and beyond.
In target tracking applications [47, 37, 38, 40], it is used to calculate the marginal probability of
measurements-target associations. In general computer science, it is widely used in graph theory and
network science. The permanent also arises in statistical thermodynamics [7].
Unfortunately, computing the permanent of a matrix is believed to be intractable in the worst-case,
as the problem has been formally shown to be #P-complete [48]. Surprisingly, a fully polynomial
randomized approximation scheme (FPRAS) exists, meaning that it is theoretically possible to
accurately approximate the permanent in polynomial time. However, this algorithm is not practical:
it is difficult to implement and it scales as O(n7 log4 n). Ignoring coefficients, this is no better than
exact calculation until matrices of size 40x40, which takes days to compute on a modern laptop.
The problems of sampling from an unnormalized distribution and calculating the distribution’s
normalization constant (or partition function) are closely related and interreducible. An efficient
solution to one problem leads to an efficient solution to the other [30, 28]. Computing the permanent of
a matrix is a special instance of computing the partition function of an unnormalized distribution [51].
In this case the distribution is over n! permutations, the matrix defines a weight for each permutation,
and the permanent is the sum of these weights.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

