Meta Architecture Search
Albert Shaw1∗ Wei Wei2 Weiyang Liu1 Le Song1,3 Bo Dai1,2
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Google Research 3 Ant Financial

1

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been quite successful in constructing stateof-the-art models on a variety of tasks. Unfortunately, the computational cost can
make it difficult to scale. In this paper, we make the first attempt to study Meta
Architecture Search which aims at learning a task-agnostic representation that
can be used to speed up the process of architecture search on a large number of
tasks. We propose the Bayesian Meta Architecture SEarch (BASE) framework
which takes advantage of a Bayesian formulation of the architecture search problem
to learn over an entire set of tasks simultaneously. We show that on Imagenet
classification, we can find a model that achieves 25.7% top-1 error and 8.1%
top-5 error by adapting the architecture in less than an hour from an 8 GPU
days pretrained meta-network. By learning a good prior for NAS, our method
dramatically decreases the required computation cost while achieving comparable
performance to current state-of-the-art methods - even finding competitive models
for unseen datasets with very quick adaptation. We believe our framework will
open up new possibilities for efficient and massively scalable architecture search
research across multiple tasks.

1

Introduction

For deep neural networks, the particular structure often plays a vital role in achieving state-of-the-art
performance in many practical applications, and there has been much work [16, 11, 13, 41, 23, 22,
21, 32, 31, 36] exploring the space of neural network designs. Due to the combinatorial nature of the
design space, hand-designing architectures is time-consuming and inevitably sub-optimal. Automated
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has had great success in finding high-performance architectures.
However, people may need optimal architectures for several similar tasks at once, such as solving
different classification tasks or even optimizing task networks for both high accuracy and efficient
inference on multiple hardware platforms [35]. Although there has been success in transferring
architectures across tasks [43], recent work has increasingly shown that the optimal architectures can
vary between even similar tasks; to achieve the best results, NAS would need to be repeatedly run for
each task [5] which can be quite costly.
In this work, we present a first effort towards Meta Architecture Search, which aims at learning a
task-agnostic representation that can be used to search over multiple tasks efficiently. The overall
graphical illustration of the model can be found in Figure 1, where the meta-network represents the
collective knowledge of architecture search across tasks. Meta Architecture Search takes advantage of
the similarities among tasks and the corresponding similarities in their optimal networks, reducing the
overall training time significantly and allowing fast adaptation to new tasks. We formulate the Meta
Architecture Search problem from a Bayesian perspective and propose Bayesian Meta Architecture
SEarch (BASE), a novel framework to derive a variational inference method to learn optimal weights
and architectures for a task distribution. To parameterize the architecture search space, we use
a stochastic neural network which contains all the possible architectures within our architecture
∗

Corresponding author: ashaw596@gatech.edu
The code repository is available at https://github.com/ashaw596/meta_architecture_search.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

