Sampled Softmax with Random Fourier Features
Ankit Singh Rawat, Jiecao Chen, Felix Yu, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research, New York
{ankitsrawat, chenjiecao, felixyu, theertha, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
The computational cost of training with softmax cross entropy loss grows linearly
with the number of classes. For the settings where a large number of classes
are involved, a common method to speed up training is to sample a subset of
classes and utilize an estimate of the loss gradient based on these classes, known
as the sampled softmax method. However, the sampled softmax provides a biased
estimate of the gradient unless the samples are drawn from the exact softmax
distribution, which is again expensive to compute. Therefore, a widely employed
practical approach involves sampling from a simpler distribution in the hope of
approximating the exact softmax distribution. In this paper, we develop the first
theoretical understanding of the role that different sampling distributions play in
determining the quality of sampled softmax. Motivated by our analysis and the
work on kernel-based sampling, we propose the Random Fourier Softmax (RFsoftmax) method that utilizes the powerful Random Fourier Features to enable
more efficient and accurate sampling from an approximate softmax distribution.
We show that RF-softmax leads to low bias in estimation in terms of both the
full softmax distribution and the full softmax gradient. Furthermore, the cost of
RF-softmax scales only logarithmically with the number of classes.

1

Introduction

The cross entropy loss based on softmax function is widely used in multi-class classification tasks
such as natural language processing [1], image classification [2], and recommendation systems [3].
In multi-class classification, given an input x 2 X , the goal is to predict its class t 2 {1, 2, . . . , n},
where n is the number of classes. Given an input feature x, the model (often a neural network) first
computes an input embedding h 2 Rd and then the raw scores or logits for classes o = (o1 , . . . , on )
as the product of the input embedding h and the class embeddings c1 , . . . , cn 2 Rd ,
o i = ⌧ h T ci .

(1)

Here, ⌧ is often referred to as the (inverse) temperature parameter of softmax. Given the logits, the
probability that the model assigns to the i-th class is computed using the full softmax function
pi = eoi /Z,

Pn

(2)

where Z = i=1 eoi is called the partition function. The distribution in (2) is commonly referred to
as the softmax distribution. Given a training set, the model parameters are estimated by minimizing
an empirical risk over the training set, where the empirical risk is defined by the cross-entropy loss
based on softmax function or the full softmax loss. Let t 2 [n] denote the true class for the input x,
then the full softmax loss is defined as1
L(x, t) :=
1

log pt =

ot + log Z.

(3)

The results of this paper generalize to a multi-label setting by using multi-label to multi-class reductions [4].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

