Superset Technique for Approximate Recovery in
One-Bit Compressed Sensing
Larkin Flodin
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
lflodin@cs.umass.edu

Venkata Gandikota
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
gandikota.venkata@gmail.com

Arya Mazumdar
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
arya@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
One-bit compressed sensing (1bCS) is a method of signal acquisition under extreme measurement quantization that gives important insights on the limits of
signal compression and analog-to-digital conversion. The setting is also equivalent to the problem of learning a sparse hyperplane-classifier. In this paper, we
propose a generic approach for signal recovery in nonadaptive 1bCS that leads
to improved sample complexity for approximate recovery for a variety of signal
models, including nonnegative signals and binary signals. We construct 1bCS
matrices that are universal - i.e. work for all signals under a model - and at the
same time recover very general random sparse signals with high probability. In
our approach, we divide the set of samples (measurements) into two parts, and
use the first part to recover the superset of the support of a sparse vector. The
second set of measurements is then used to approximate the signal within the
superset. While support recovery in 1bCS is well-studied, recovery of superset
of the support requires fewer samples, which then leads to an overall reduction in
sample complexity for approximate recovery.

1

Introduction

Sparsity is a natural property of many real-world signals. For example, image and speech signals
are sparse in the Fourier basis, which led to the theory of compressed sensing, and more broadly,
sampling theory [12, 7]. In some important multivariate optimization problems with many optimal
points, sparsity of the solution is also a measure of ‘simplicity’ and insisting on sparsity is a common
method of regularization [19]. While recovering sparse vectors from linear measurements is a
well-studied topic, technological advances and increasing data size raises new questions. These
include quantized and nonlinear signal acquisition models, such as 1-bit compressed sensing [4]. In
1-bit compressed sensing, linear measurements of a sparse vector are quantized to only 1 bit, e.g.
indicating whether the measurement outcome is positive or not, and the task is to recover the vector
up to a prescribed Euclidean error with minimum number of measurements. Like compressed sensing,
the overwhelming majority of the literature, including this paper, focuses on the nonadaptive setting
for the problem.
One of the ways to approximately recover a sparse vector from 1-bit measurements is to use a subset
of all the measurements to identify the support of the vector. Next, the remainder of the measurements
can be used to approximate the vector within the support. Note that this second set of measurements
is also predefined, and therefore the entire scheme is still nonadaptive. Such a method appears in the
Preprint. Under review.

