Hamiltonian descent for composite objectives

Brendan O’Donoghue
DeepMind
❜♦❞♦♥♦❣❤✉❡❅❣♦♦❣❧❡✳❝♦♠

Chris J. Maddison
DeepMind / University of Oxford
❝♠❛❞❞✐s❅❣♦♦❣❧❡✳❝♦♠

Abstract
In optimization the duality gap between the primal and the dual problems is a
measure of the suboptimality of any primal-dual point. In classical mechanics the
equations of motion of a system can be derived from the Hamiltonian function,
which is a quantity that describes the total energy of the system. In this paper
we consider a convex optimization problem consisting of the sum of two convex
functions, sometimes referred to as a composite objective, and we identify the
duality gap to be the ‘energy’ of the system. In the Hamiltonian formalism the
energy is conserved, so we add a contractive term to the standard equations of
motion so that this energy decreases linearly (i.e., geometrically) with time. This
yields a continuous-time ordinary differential equation (ODE) in the primal and
dual variables which converges to zero duality gap, i.e., optimality. This ODE has
several useful properties: it induces a natural operator splitting; at convergence it
yields both the primal and dual solutions; and it is invariant to affine transformation
despite only using first order information. We provide several discretizations of
this ODE, some of which are new algorithms and others correspond to known
techniques, such as the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM). We
conclude with some numerical examples that show the promise of our approach.
We give an example where our technique can solve a convex quadratic minimization
problem orders of magnitude faster than several commonly-used gradient methods,
including conjugate gradient, when the conditioning of the problem is poor. Our
framework provides new insights into previously known algorithms in the literature
as well as providing a technique to generate new primal-dual algorithms.

1

Introduction and prior work

In physics the Hamiltonian function represents the total energy of a system in some set of coordinates
(loosely speaking). In the most typical case the coordinates are the position x ∈ Rn and momentum
p ∈ Rn , and the Hamiltonian is the sum of the potential energy, a function of the position, and the
kinetic energy, a function of the momentum. The equations of motion for the system can be derived
from the Hamiltonian. Let us denote the Hamiltonian as H : Rn × Rn → R, which we assume is
differentiable, then the equations of motion [1] are given by
ẋt = ∇p H(xt , pt ),

ṗt = −∇x H(xt , pt ),

where we use the notation ẋt := dxt /dt. For ease of notation we shall sometimes use z := (x, p) ∈
R2n to denote the concatenation of the position and momentum into a single quantity, in which case
we can write the Hamiltonian flow as


0 I
,
(1)
żt = J∇H(zt ), J =
−I 0
and note that J T J = I and that J is skew symmetric, that is J = −J T , and so v T Jv = 0 for
any v. It is easy to show that these equations of motion conserve the Hamiltonian since Ḣ(zt ) =
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

