Multi-marginal Wasserstein GAN

Jiezhang Cao∗ , Langyuan Mo∗ , Yifan Zhang, Kui Jia, Chunhua Shen, Mingkui Tan∗†
South China University of Technology, Peng Cheng Laboratory, The University of Adelaide
{secaojiezhang, selymo, sezyifan}@mail.scut.edu.cn
{mingkuitan, kuijia}@scut.edu.cn, chunhua.shen@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Multiple marginal matching problem aims at learning mappings to match a source
domain to multiple target domains and it has attracted great attention in many
applications, such as multi-domain image translation. However, addressing this
problem has two critical challenges: (i) Measuring the multi-marginal distance
among different domains is very intractable; (ii) It is very difficult to exploit
cross-domain correlations to match the target domain distributions. In this paper,
we propose a novel Multi-marginal Wasserstein GAN (MWGAN) to minimize
Wasserstein distance among domains. Specifically, with the help of multi-marginal
optimal transport theory, we develop a new adversarial objective function with innerand inter-domain constraints to exploit cross-domain correlations. Moreover, we
theoretically analyze the generalization performance of MWGAN, and empirically
evaluate it on the balanced and imbalanced translation tasks. Extensive experiments
on toy and real-world datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of MWGAN.

1

Introduction

Multiple marginal matching (M3 ) problem aims to map an input image (source domain) to multiple
target domains (see Figure 1(a)), and it has been applied in computer vision, e.g., multi-domain image
translation [10, 23, 25]. In practice, the unsupervised image translation [30] gains particular interest
because of its label-free property. However, due to the lack of corresponding images, this task is
extremely hard to learn stable mappings to match a source distribution to multiple target distributions.
Recently, some methods [10, 30] address M3 problem, which, however, face two main challenges.
First, existing methods often neglect to jointly optimize the multi-marginal distance among domains,
which cannot guarantee the generalization performance of methods and may lead to distribution
mismatching issue. Recently, CycleGAN [51] and UNIT [32] repeatedly optimize every pair of two
different domains separately (see Figure 1(b)). In this sense, they are computationally expensive and
may have poor generalization performance. Moreover, UFDN [30] and StarGAN [10] essentially
measure the distance between an input distribution and a mixture of all target distributions (see Figure
1(b)). As a result, they may suffer from distribution mismatching issue. Therefore, it is necessary to
explore a new method to measure and optimize the multi-marginal distance.
Second, it is very challenging to exploit the cross-domain correlations to match target domains.
Existing methods [51, 30] only focus on the correlations between the source and target domains, since
they measure the distance between two distributions (see Figure 1(b)). However, these methods often
ignore the correlations among target domains, and thus they are hard to fully capture information to
improve the performance. Moreover, when the source and target domains are significantly different,
or the number of target domains is large, the translation task turns to be difficult for existing methods
to exploit the cross-domain correlations.
∗
†

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

