Spatial-Aware Feature Aggregation for
Cross-View Image based Geo-Localization

Yujiao Shi, Liu Liu, Xin Yu, Hongdong Li
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Australia.
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Recent works show that it is possible to train a deep network to determine the
geographic location of a ground-level image (e.g., a Google street-view panorama)
by matching it against a satellite map covering the wide geographic area of interest.
Conventional deep networks, which often cast the problem as a metric embedding
task, however, suffer from poor performance in terms of low recall rates. One
of the key reasons is the vast differences between the two view modalities, i.e.,
ground view versus aerial/satellite view. They not only exhibit very different visual
appearances, but also have distinctive geometric configurations. Existing deep
methods overlook those appearance and geometric differences, and instead use
a brute force training procedure, leading to inferior performance. In this paper,
we develop a new deep network to explicitly address these inherent differences
between ground and aerial views. We observe that pixels lying on the same azimuth
direction in an aerial image approximately correspond to a vertical image column
in the ground view image. Thus, we propose a two-step approach to exploit this
prior. The first step is to apply a regular polar transform to warp an aerial image
such that its domain is closer to that of a ground-view panorama. Note that polar
transform as a pure geometric transformation is agnostic to scene content, hence
cannot bring the two domains into full alignment. Then, we add a subsequent
spatial-attention mechanism which brings corresponding deep features closer in
the embedding space. To improve the robustness of feature representation, we introduce a feature aggregation strategy via learning multiple spatial embeddings. By
the above two-step approach, we achieve more discriminative deep representations,
facilitating cross-view Geo-localization more accurate. Our experiments on standard benchmark datasets show significant performance boosting, achieving more
than doubled recall rate compared with the previous state of the art. Remarkably,
the recall rate@top-1 improves from 22.5% in [5] (or 40.7% in [11]) to 89.8% on
CVUSA benchmark, and from 20.1% [5] to 81.0% on the new CVACT dataset.

1

Introduction

Image based Geo-localization is referred to the task of determining the location of an image (known
as a query image) by comparing it with a large set of Geo-tagged database images. It has important
computer vision applications such as for robot navigation, autonomous driving, as well as way-finding
in AR/VR applications.
In this paper, we study ground-to-aerial cross-view image based Geo-localization problem. To be
specific, the query image is a normal ground-level image (e.g., a street view image taken by a tourist)
whereas the database images are collections of aerial/satellite images covering the same (though
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

