Large Scale Markov Decision Processes with
Changing Rewards

Adrian Rivera Cardoso, He Wang
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
adrian.riv@gatech.edu, he.wang@isye.gatech.edu
Huan Xu
Alibaba Group
huan.xu@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We consider Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) where the rewards are unknown
and may change in an
p adversarial manner. We provide an algorithm that achieves a
regret bound of O( τ (ln |S| + ln |A|)T ln(T )), where S is the state space, A is
the action space, τ is the mixing time of the MDP, and T is the number of periods.
The algorithm’s computational complexity is polynomial in |S| and |A|. We then
consider a setting often encountered in practice, where the state space of the MDP is
too large to allow for exact solutions. By approximating the state-action occupancy
measures with a linear architecture of dimension d  |S|, we propose a modified
algorithm with a computational complexity polynomial in d and independent of
|S|. We also prove a regret bound
√ for this modified algorithm, which to the best
of our knowledge, is the first Õ( T ) regret bound in the large-scale MDP setting
with adversarially changing rewards.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study Markov Decision Processes (hereafter MDPs) with arbitrarily varying rewards.
MDP provides a general mathematical framework for modeling sequential decision making under
uncertainty [8, 24, 35]. In the standard MDP setting, if the process is in some state s, the decision
maker takes an action a and receives an expected reward of r(s, a). The process then randomly enters
a new state according to some known transition probability. In particular, the standard MDP model
assumes that the decision maker has complete knowledge of the reward function r(s, a), which does
not change over time.
Over the past two decades, there has been much interest in sequential learning and decision making
in an unknown and possibly adversarial environment. A wide range of sequential learning problems
can be modeled using the framework of Online Convex Optimization (OCO) [45, 20]. In the OCO
setting, the decision maker plays a repeated game against an adversary for a given number of rounds.
At the beginning of each round indexed by t, the decision maker chooses an action at from a convex
compact set A and the adversary chooses a concave reward function rt (·), hence a reward of rt (at )
is received. After observing the realized reward function, the decision maker chooses its next action
at+1 and so on. Since the decision maker does not know the future reward functions, its goal is to
achieve a small regret; that is, the cumulative reward earned throughout the game should be close to
the cumulative reward if the decision maker had been given the benefit of hindsight to choose a fixed
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

