Value Propagation for Decentralized Networked Deep
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning
Chao Qu ∗1 , Shie Mannor2 , Huan Xu3,4 , Yuan Qi1 , Le Song1,4 , and Junwu Xiong1
1

Ant Financial Services Group
2
Technion
3
Alibaba Group
4
Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
We consider the networked multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) problem
in a fully decentralized setting, where agents learn to coordinate to achieve joint
success. This problem is widely encountered in many areas including traffic control,
distributed control, and smart grids. We assume each agent is located at a node
of a communication network and can exchange information only with its neighbors. Using softmax temporal consistency, we derive a primal-dual decentralized
optimization method and obtain a principled and data-efficient iterative algorithm
named value propagation. We prove a non-asymptotic convergence rate of O(1/T )
with nonlinear function approximation. To the best of our knowledge, it is the
first MARL algorithm with a convergence guarantee in the control, off-policy,
non-linear function approximation, fully decentralized setting.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent systems have applications in a wide range of areas such as robotics, traffic control,
distributed control, telecommunications, and economics. For these areas, it is often difficult or
simply impossible to predefine agents’ behaviour to achieve satisfactory results, and multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) naturally arises [Bu et al., 2008, Tan, 1993]. For example, ElTantawy et al. [2013] model a traffic signal control problem as a multi-player stochastic game and
solve it with MARL. MARL generalizes reinforcement learning by considering a set of agents
(decision makers) sharing a common environment. However, multi-agent reinforcement learning
is a challenging problem since the agents interact with both the environment and each other. For
instance, independent Q-learning—treating other agents as a part of the environment—often fails
as the multi-agent setting breaks the theoretical convergence guarantee of Q-learning and makes
the learning process unstable [Tan, 1993]. Rashid et al. [2018], Foerster et al. [2018], Lowe et al.
[2017] alleviate such a problem using a centralized network (i.e., being centralized for training, but
decentralized during execution.). Its communication pattern is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 1.
Despite the great success of (partially) centralized MARL approaches, there are various scenarios,
such as sensor networks [Rabbat and Nowak, 2004] and intelligent transportation systems [Adler
and Blue, 2002] , where a central agent does not exist or may be too expensive to use. In addition,
privacy and security are requirements of many real world problems in multi-agent system (also in
many modern machine learning problems) [Abadi et al., 2016, Kurakin et al., 2016] . For instance,
in Federated learning [McMahan et al., 2016], the learning task is solved by a lose federation of
participating devices (agents) without the need to centrally store the data, which significantly reduces
∗

luoji.qc@antfin.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

