DM2C: Deep Mixed-Modal Clustering

Yangbangyan Jiang1,2
Qianqian Xu3
Zhiyong Yang1,2
1,2,6
Xiaochun Cao
Qingming Huang3,4,5,6∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Key Lab. of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
4
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, CAS
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
jiangyangbangyan@iie.ac.cn, xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn, yangzhiyong@iie.ac.cn
caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn, qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Data exhibited with multiple modalities are ubiquitous in real-world clustering
tasks. Most existing methods, however, pose a strong assumption that the pairing
information for modalities is available for all instances. In this paper, we consider
a more challenging task where each instance is represented in only one modality,
which we call mixed-modal data. Without any extra pairing supervision across
modalities, it is difficult to find a universal semantic space for all of them. To tackle
this problem, we present an adversarial learning framework for clustering with
mixed-modal data. Instead of transforming all the samples into a joint modalityindependent space, our framework learns the mappings across individual modality
spaces by virtue of cycle-consistency. Through these mappings, we could easily
unify all the samples into a single modality space and perform the clustering.
Evaluations on several real-world mixed-modal datasets could demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed framework.

1

Introduction

Recently supervised classification tasks have achieved impressive performance with the development
of deep learning. However, such improvement often relies on a large number of manual annotations
which are very expensive and laborious. On the contrary, unsupervised clustering remains an
appealing direction for deep learning since it works in the absence of data labels.
Various efforts have been devoted to addressing the problem of partitioning data in a single modal
form [32, 14, 17, 18]. Yet real-world data are often characterized by multiple modalities. For example,
a data object (say a web page or a node in the social network) can be exhibited by both visual images
and text tags/captions. Learning with multiple modalities offers us a chance to reach a thorough
comprehension on the data by means of integrating modality-specific information coming from
each modality. Therefore, clustering multi-modal data has become an active research area in recent
years [5, 12, 7]. The key problem of this task is how to learn a joint representation for each sample
against the semantic gap across modalities. Most existing work tries to find a solution under an ideal
assumption that each modality is available for all the samples. This, however, requires gross human
efforts on data collection since real-world data often suffer from some missing information for each
modality. In the worst case, when the semantic connection across modalities is completely missing,
we come to find our samples represented in one modality, e.g., a twitter post may only include either
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

