Cross-Modal Learning with Adversarial Samples

Chao Li1,2
Cheng Deng1,∗ Shangqian Gao2
De Xie1
Wei Liu3,∗
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, Shaanxi, China
2
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
3
Tencent AI Lab, China
{chaolee.xd, chdeng.xd, xiede.xd}@gmail.com, shg84@pitt.edu, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
With the rapid developments of deep neural networks, numerous deep cross-modal
analysis methods have been presented and are being applied in widespread realworld applications, including healthcare and safety-critical environments. However,
the recent studies on robustness and stability of deep neural networks show that a
microscopic modification, known as adversarial sample, which is even imperceptible to humans, can easily fool a well-performed deep neural network and brings
a new obstacle to deep cross-modal correlation exploring. In this paper, we propose a novel Cross-Modal correlation Learning with Adversarial samples, namely
CMLA, which for the first time presents the existence of adversarial samples in
cross-modal data. Moreover, we provide a simple yet effective adversarial sample
learning method, where inter- and intra- modality similarity regularizations across
different modalities are simultaneously integrated into the learning of adversarial
samples. Finally, our proposed CMLA is demonstrated to be highly effective in
cross-modal hashing based retrieval. Extensive experiments on two cross-modal
benchmark datasets show that the adversarial examples produced by our CMLA
are efficient in fooling a target deep cross-modal hashing network. On the other
hand, such adversarial examples can significantly strengthen the robustness of the
target network by conducting an adversarial training.

1

Introduction

Cross-modal learning, such as cross-modal retrieval, enables a user to achieve what he/she prefers in
one modality (e.g., image) that is relevant to a given query in another (e.g., text). However, due to
the drastic growth of multimedia, learning in such tremendous amounts of multimedia data has been
a new challenge. The recent success of deep learning and its role in cross-modal learning seem to
obviate concerns about the performance in both accuracy and speed: exploiting deep neural networks
to map data samples of different modalities into compact hash codes and using fast bitwise XOR
operations to perform retrieval. Extensive efforts [31, 32, 30, 29, 39, 28, 44, 33, 23, 47, 5, 18, 21, 24,
27, 40, 12, 13, 49] have been made and achieved remarkable retrieval accuracy.
The current studies [17, 20, 37] show that deep networks are vulnerable against purposeful input
samples, namely adversarial samples. These samples can easily fool a well-performed deep learning
model by only adding a little perturbation which is even imperceptible to humans. Besides, adversarial
samples have been observed in wide areas, such as image classification [36], object recognition [9],
object detection [45], speech recognition [2], etc. However, the potential risks of deep neural networks
being vulnerable to adversarial samples in cross-modal learning have not been delineated.
In this paper, we take cross-modal hashing retrieval as a representative case of cross-modal learning,
where search space can roughly be divided into four parts: T2T, I2I, I2T/T2I, and NR, as shown in
∗

Corresponding authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

