High-Dimensional Multivariate Forecasting with
Low-Rank Gaussian Copula Processes

David Salinas
Naverlabs ∗
david.salinas@naverlabs.com

Michael Bohlke-Schneider
Amazon Research
bohlkem@amazon.com

Roberto Medico
Ghent University ∗
roberto.medico91@gmail.com

Laurent Callot
Amazon Research
lcallot@amazon.com

Jan Gasthaus
Amazon Research
gasthaus@amazon.com

Abstract
Predicting the dependencies between observations from multiple time series is
critical for applications such as anomaly detection, financial risk management,
causal analysis, or demand forecasting. However, the computational and numerical difficulties of estimating time-varying and high-dimensional covariance matrices often limits existing methods to handling at most a few hundred dimensions or
requires making strong assumptions on the dependence between series. We propose to combine an RNN-based time series model with a Gaussian copula process
output model with a low-rank covariance structure to reduce the computational
complexity and handle non-Gaussian marginal distributions. This permits to drastically reduce the number of parameters and consequently allows the modeling of
time-varying correlations of thousands of time series. We show on several realworld datasets that our method provides significant accuracy improvements over
state-of-the-art baselines and perform an ablation study analyzing the contributions of the different components of our model.

1

Introduction

The goal of forecasting is to predict the distribution of future time series values. Forecasting tasks
frequently require predicting several related time series, such as multiple metrics for a compute
fleet or multiple products of the same category in demand forecasting. While these time series are
often dependent, they are commonly assumed to be (conditionally) independent in high-dimensional
settings because of the hurdle of estimating large covariance matrices.
Assuming independence, however, makes such methods unsuited for applications in which the correlations between time series play an important role. This is the case in finance, where risk minimizing
portfolios cannot be constructed without a forecast of the covariance of assets. In retail, a method
providing a probabilistic forecast for different sellers should take competition relationships and cannibalization effects into account. In anomaly detection, observing several nodes deviating from their
expected behavior can be cause for alarm even if no single node exhibits clear signs of anomalous
behavior.
Multivariate forecasting has been an important topic in the statistics and econometrics literature.
Several multivariate extensions of classical univariate methods are widely used, such as vector autoregressions (VAR) extending autoregressive models [19], multivariate state-space models [7], or
∗

Work done while being at Amazon Research

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

