Efficient Deep Approximation of GMMs

Shirin Jalali, Carl Nuzman, Iraj Saniee
Bell Labs, Nokia
600-700 Mountain Avenue
Murray Hill, NJ 07974
{shirin.jalali,carl.nuzman,iraj.saniee}@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
The universal approximation theorem states that any regular function can be approximated closely using a single hidden layer neural network. Some recent work
has shown that, for some special functions, the number of nodes in such an approximation could be exponentially reduced with multi-layer neural networks. In
this work, we extend this idea to a rich class of functions, namely the discriminant
functions that arise in optimal Bayesian classification of Gaussian mixture models
(GMMs) in Rn . We show that such functions can be approximated with arbitrary
precision using O(n) nodes in a neural network with two hidden layers (deep
neural network), while in contrast, a neural network with a single hidden layer
(shallow neural network) would require at least O(exp(n)) nodes or exponentially
large coefficients. Given the universality of the Gaussian distribution in the feature
spaces of data, e.g., in speech, image and text, our results shed light on the observed
efficiency of deep neural networks in practical classification problems.

1

Introduction

There is a rapidly growing literature which demonstrates the effectiveness of deep neural networks
in classification problems that arise in practice; e.g., in audio, image or text classification. The
universal approximation theorem, UAT, see [1, 2, 3, 4], states that any regular function, which for
example separates in the (high dimensional) feature space a collection of points corresponding to
images of dogs from those of cats, can be approximated by a neural network. But UAT is proven for
shallow, i.e., single hidden-layer, neural networks and in fact the number of nodes needed may be
exponentially or super exponentially large in the ambient dimension of feature space. Yet, practical
deep neural networks are able to solve such classification problems effectively and efficiently, i.e.,
using what amounts to a small number of nodes in terms of the size of the feature space of the data.
There is no theory yet as to why deep neural networks (DNNs from here on) are as effective and
efficient in practice as they evidently are. There are essentially two possibilities for this observed
outcome: 1) DNNs are always significantly more efficient in terms of the number of nodes used for
approximation of any relevant function than shallow networks, or 2) DNNs are particularly suited to
discriminant functions that arise in practice, e.g., those that separate in the feature space of images,
points representing dogs from points representing cats. If the latter proposition is true, then the
observed efficiency of DNNs is essentially due to the special form of the discriminant functions
encountered in practice and not to the universal efficiency of DNNs, which the former proposition
would imply.
The first alternative proposed above is a general question about function approximation given neural
networks as the collection of basis functions. As of today, there are no general results that show DNNs
(those with two or more hidden layers) require fundamentally fewer nodes for approximation of
general functions than shallow neural networks (or SNNs from here on, i.e., those with a single hidden
layer). In this paper, we focus on the second alternative and provide an answer in the affirmative; that
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

