Learning to Confuse: Generating Training Time
Adversarial Data with Auto-Encoder∗
Ji Feng1,2 , Qi-Zhi Cai2 , Zhi-Hua Zhou1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
Sinovation Ventures AI Institute
{fengj, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, caiqizhi@chuangxin.com
1

Abstract
In this work, we consider one challenging training time attack by modifying training
data with bounded perturbation, hoping to manipulate the behavior (both targeted
or non-targeted) of any corresponding trained classifier during test time when
facing clean samples. To achieve this, we proposed to use an auto-encoder-like
network to generate such adversarial perturbations on the training data together
with one imaginary victim differentiable classifier. The perturbation generator will
learn to update its weights so as to produce the most harmful noise, aiming to
cause the lowest performance for the victim classifier during test time. This can be
formulated into a non-linear equality constrained optimization problem. Unlike
GANs, solving such problem is computationally challenging, we then proposed
a simple yet effective procedure to decouple the alternating updates for the two
networks for stability. By teaching the perturbation generator to hijacking the
training trajectory of the victim classifier, the generator can thus learn to move
against the victim classifier step by step. The method proposed in this paper can
be easily extended to the label specific setting where the attacker can manipulate
the predictions of the victim classifier according to some predefined rules rather
than only making wrong predictions. Experiments on various datasets including
CIFAR-10 and a reduced version of ImageNet confirmed the effectiveness of the
proposed method and empirical results showed that, such bounded perturbations
have good transferability across different types of victim classifiers.

1

Introduction

How to modify the training data with bounded transferable perturbation that can lead to the largest
generalization gap? In other words, we consider the task of adding imperceivable noises to the training
data, hoping to maximally confuse any corresponding classifier so as to make wrong predictions as
much as possible when facing clean test data. In this paper, we refer such perturbed training samples
as training time adversarial training data.
To achieve the above goal, we defined a deep encoder-decoder-like network to generate such perturbations. Meanwhile, we used an imaginary neural network acting as the victim classifier, and the
goal here is to train both networks simultaneously that can cause the lowest accuracy for the victim
classifier on clean test set. We can thus formulate such problem into a non-linear equality constrained
optimization problem. Unlike GANs [9], such optimization problem is much harder to solve, and a
direct implementation of alternating updates will lead to unstable result. Inspired by some common
techniques in reinforcement learning such as introducing a separate record tracking network like
target-nets to stabilize Q-learning [19], we proposed a similar approach by decoupling the training
∗

The first two authors contributed equally to the work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

