SCAN: A Scalable Neural Networks Framework
Towards Compact and Efficient Models

Linfeng Zhang1 , Zhanhong Tan1 , Jiebo Song2 , Jingwei Chen3
Chenglong Bao∗4 , Kaisheng Ma∗1
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
4
Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University
2
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Core Technology, 3 HiSilicon
{zhang-lf19, tanzh19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{kaisheng, clbao}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
songjb@iiisct.com, jean.chenjingwei@hisilicon.com

Abstract
Remarkable achievements have been attained by deep neural networks in various applications. However, the increasing depth and width of such models also
lead to explosive growth in both storage and computation, which has restricted
the deployment of deep neural networks on resource-limited edge devices. To
address this problem, we propose the so-called SCAN framework for networks
training and inference, which is orthogonal and complementary to existing acceleration and compression methods. The proposed SCAN firstly divides neural
networks into multiple sections according to their depth and constructs shallow
classifiers upon the intermediate features of different sections. Moreover, attention modules and knowledge distillation are utilized to enhance the accuracy of
shallow classifiers. Based on this architecture, we further propose a threshold
controlled scalable inference mechanism to approach human-like sample-specific
inference. Experimental results show that SCAN can be easily equipped on various
neural networks without any adjustment on hyper-parameters or neural networks
architectures, yielding significant performance gain on CIFAR100 and ImageNet.
Codes are be released on https://github.com/ArchipLab-LinfengZhang/
pytorch-scalable-neural-networks.

1

Introduction

Recently deep learning has evolved to become one of the dominant techniques in areas like natural language processing [6, 2] and computer vision [23, 22]. To achieve higher accuracy, over-parameterized
models [26, 32] have been proposed at the expense of explosive growth in storage and computation, which is not available for certain application scenes such as self-driving cars and mobile
phones. Various techniques have been utilized to address this problem, including pruning [8, 9],
quantization [4, 24], lightweight neural networks [12] design and knowledge distillation [11, 25, 1].
Another rising star in this domain named scalable neural networks has attracted increasing attention
due to its effectiveness and flexibility [37, 20, 17]. The scalability of neural networks refers to its
ability to adjust the trade-offs between response time and accuracy on the fly. As a result, scalable
neural networks can always accomplish inference in budgeted and limited time, which is important
for real-world applications. Researchers have explored scalability through the lens of depth (layers)
and width (channels). Built upon DenseNet [14], MSDNet [13] directly trains multiple classifiers
∗

Corresponding Authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

