Scene Representation Networks: Continuous
3D-Structure-Aware Neural Scene Representations

Vincent Sitzmann
Michael Zollhöfer
Gordon Wetzstein
{sitzmann, zollhoefer}@cs.stanford.edu, gordon.wetzstein@stanford.edu
Stanford University
vsitzmann.github.io/srns/

Abstract
Unsupervised learning with generative models has the potential of discovering rich
representations of 3D scenes. While geometric deep learning has explored 3Dstructure-aware representations of scene geometry, these models typically require
explicit 3D supervision. Emerging neural scene representations can be trained only
with posed 2D images, but existing methods ignore the three-dimensional structure
of scenes. We propose Scene Representation Networks (SRNs), a continuous, 3Dstructure-aware scene representation that encodes both geometry and appearance.
SRNs represent scenes as continuous functions that map world coordinates to
a feature representation of local scene properties. By formulating the image
formation as a differentiable ray-marching algorithm, SRNs can be trained end-toend from only 2D images and their camera poses, without access to depth or shape.
This formulation naturally generalizes across scenes, learning powerful geometry
and appearance priors in the process. We demonstrate the potential of SRNs by
evaluating them for novel view synthesis, few-shot reconstruction, joint shape and
appearance interpolation, and unsupervised discovery of a non-rigid face model.1

1

Introduction

A major driver behind recent work on generative models has been the promise of unsupervised
discovery of powerful neural scene representations, enabling downstream tasks ranging from robotic
manipulation and few-shot 3D reconstruction to navigation. A key aspect of solving these tasks is
understanding the three-dimensional structure of an environment. However, prior work on neural
scene representations either does not or only weakly enforces 3D structure [1–4]. Multi-view
geometry and projection operations are performed by a black-box neural renderer, which is expected
to learn these operations from data. As a result, such approaches fail to discover 3D structure under
limited training data (see Sec. 4), lack guarantees on multi-view consistency of the rendered images,
and learned representations are generally not interpretable. Furthermore, these approaches lack an
intuitive interface to multi-view and projective geometry important in computer graphics, and cannot
easily generalize to camera intrinsic matrices and transformations that were completely unseen at
training time.
In geometric deep learning, many classic 3D scene representations, such as voxel grids [5–10], point
clouds [11–14], or meshes [15] have been integrated with end-to-end deep learning models and
have led to significant progress in 3D scene understanding. However, these scene representations
are discrete, limiting achievable spatial resolution, only sparsely sampling the underlying smooth
surfaces of a scene, and often require explicit 3D supervision.
1

Please see supplemental video for additional results.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

