On Fenchel Mini-Max Learning

Chenyang Tao1 , Liqun Chen1 , Shuyang Dai1 , Junya Chen1,2 , Ke Bai1 , Dong Wang1 ,
Jianfeng Feng3 , Wenlian Lu2 , Georgiy Bobashev4 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Electrical & Computer Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
3
ISTBI, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
4
RTI International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
{chenyang.tao, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
Inference, estimation, sampling and likelihood evaluation are four primary goals of
probabilistic modeling. Practical considerations often force modeling approaches
to make compromises between these objectives. We present a novel probabilistic
learning framework, called Fenchel Mini-Max Learning (FML), that accommodates all four desiderata in a flexible and scalable manner. Our derivation is rooted
in classical maximum likelihood estimation, and it overcomes a longstanding challenge that prevents unbiased estimation of unnormalized statistical models. By
reformulating MLE as a mini-max game, FML enjoys an unbiased training objective that (i) does not explicitly involve the intractable normalizing constant and (ii)
is directly amendable to stochastic gradient descent optimization. To demonstrate
the utility of the proposed approach, we consider learning unnormalized statistical
models, nonparametric density estimation and training generative models, with
encouraging empirical results presented.

1

Introduction

When learning a probabilistic model, we are typically interested in one or more of the following
operations:
• Inference: Represent observation x ∈ Rp with an informative feature vector z ∈ Rd , ideally
with d  p; z is often a latent variable in a model of x.
• Estimation: Given a statistical model pθ (x) for data x, learn model parameters θ that best
describe the observed (training) data.
• Sampling: Efficiently synthesize samples from pθ (x) given learned θ, with drawn x ∼ pθ (x)
faithful to the training data.
• Likelihood evaluation: With learned θ for model pθ (x), calculate the likelihood of new x.
One often makes trade-offs between these goals, as a result of practical considerations (e.g.,
computational efficiency); see Table S1 in the Supplementary Material (SUPP) for a brief summary.
We are particularly interested in the case for which the model p̃θ (x) is unnormalized; i.e.,
R
p̃θ (x)dx = Z(θ) 6= 1, with Z(θ) difficult to compute [49].
Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is widely employed in the training of probabilistic models
[11, 22], in which the expected log-likelihood log pθ (x) is optimized wrt θ, based on the training
examples. For unnormalized model density function p̃θ (x) = exp(−ψθ (x)), where ψθ (x) is the
1
potential function and θ are the model parameters, the likelihood is pθ (x) = Z(θ)
p̃θ (x). The partition
function Z(θ) is typically not represented in closed-form when considering a flexible choice of
ψθ (x), such as a deep neural network. This makes the learning of unnormalized models particularly
challenging, as the gradient computation requires an evaluation of the integral. In practice, this
integral is approximated with averaging over a finite number of Monte Carlo samples. However,
using the existing finite-sample Monte Carlo estimate of Zθ will lead to a biased approximation of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

