A Latent Variational Framework for Stochastic
Optimization
Philippe Casgrain
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON, Canada
p.casgrain@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
This paper provides a unifying theoretical framework for stochastic optimization
algorithms by means of a latent stochastic variational problem. Using techniques
from stochastic control, the solution to the variational problem is shown to be equivalent to that of a Forward Backward Stochastic Differential Equation (FBSDE).
By solving these equations, we recover a variety of existing adaptive stochastic
gradient descent methods. This framework establishes a direct connection between
stochastic optimization algorithms and a secondary latent inference problem on
gradients, where a prior measure on gradient observations determines the resulting
algorithm.

1

Introduction

Stochastic optimization algorithms are tools which are crucial to solving optimization problems
arising in machine learning. The initial motivation for these algorithms comes from the fact that
computing the gradients of a target loss function becomes increasingly difficult as the scale and
dimension of an optimization problem grows larger. In these large-scale optimization problems,
deterministic gradient-based optimization algorithms perform poorly due to the computational load
of repeatedly computing gradients. Stochastic optimization algorithms remedy this issue by replacing
exact gradients of the target loss with a computationally cheap gradient estimator, trading off noise in
gradient estimates for computational efficiency at each step.
To illustrate this idea, consider the problem of minimizing a generic risk function f : Rd ! R, taking
the form
1
f (x) =
(1)
Â `(x; z) ,
|N| z2N

where ` : Rd ⇥ Z ! R, and where we define the set N := {zi 2 Z , i = 1, . . . , N} to be a set of
training points. In this definition, we interpret `(x; z) as the model loss at a single training point z 2 N
for the parameters x 2 Rd .

When N and d are typically large, computing the gradients of f can be time-consuming. Knowing
this, let us consider the path of an optimization algorithm as given by {xt }t2N . Rather than computing
— f (xt ) directly at each point of the optimization process, we may instead collect noisy samples of
gradients as
1
gt = m Â —x `(xt ; z) ,
(2)
|Nt | z2Nm
t

where for each t, Ntm ✓ N is an independent sample of size m from the set of training points. We
assume that m ⌧ N is chosen small enough so that gt can be computed at a significantly lower cost
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

