Guided Meta-Policy Search

Russell Mendonca, Abhishek Gupta, Rosen Kralev, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
{russellm, cbfinn}@berkeley.edu
{abhigupta, pabbeel, svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu
rdkralev@gmail.com

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have demonstrated promising results on
complex tasks, yet often require impractical numbers of samples since they learn
from scratch. Meta-RL aims to address this challenge by leveraging experience
from previous tasks so as to more quickly solve new tasks. However, in practice,
these algorithms generally also require large amounts of on-policy experience during the meta-training process, making them impractical for use in many problems.
To this end, we propose to learn a reinforcement learning procedure in a federated
way, where individual off-policy learners can solve the individual meta-training
tasks, and then consolidate these solutions into a single meta-learner. Since the
central meta-learner learns by imitating the solutions to the individual tasks, it can
accommodate either the standard meta-RL problem setting, or a hybrid setting
where some or all tasks are provided with example demonstrations. The former
results in an approach that can leverage policies learned for previous tasks without
significant amounts of on-policy data during meta-training, whereas the latter is
particularly useful in cases where demonstrations are easy for a person to provide.
Across a number of continuous control meta-RL problems, we demonstrate significant improvements in meta-RL sample efficiency in comparison to prior work as
well as the ability to scale to domains with visual observations.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning is a promising approach for using previous experience across a breadth of tasks to
significantly accelerate learning of new tasks. Meta-reinforcement learning considers this problem
specifically in the context of learning new behaviors through trial and error with only a few interactions
with the environment by building on previous experience. Building effective meta-RL algorithms
is critical towards building agents that are flexible, such as an agent being able to manipulate new
objects in new ways without learning from scratch for each new object and goal. Being able to reuse
prior experience in such a way is arguably a fundamental aspect of intelligence.
Enabling agents to adapt via meta-RL is particularly useful for acquiring behaviors in real-world
situations with diverse and dynamic environments. However, despite recent advances [7, 8, 17],
current meta-RL methods are often limited to simpler domains, such as relatively low-dimensional
continuous control tasks [8, 44] and navigation with discrete action commands [7, 24]. Optimization
stability and sample complexity are major challenges for the meta-training phase of these methods,
with some recent techniques requiring upto 250 million transitions for meta-learning in tabular
MDPs [7], which typically require a fraction of a second to solve in isolation.
We make the following observation in this work: while the goal of meta-reinforcement learning is
to acquire fast and efficient reinforcement learning procedures, those procedures themselves do not
need to be acquired through reinforcement learning directly. Instead, we can use a significantly more
stable and efficient algorithm for providing supervision at the meta-level. In this work we show that a
practical choice is to use supervised imitation learning. A meta-reinforcement learning algorithm
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

