Variational Bayesian Optimal Experimental Design

Adam Foster†∗ Martin Jankowiak‡ Eli Bingham‡ Paul Horsfall‡
Yee Whye Teh† Tom Rainforth† Noah Goodman‡§
†
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
‡
Uber AI Labs, Uber Technologies Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA
§
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
adam.foster@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian optimal experimental design (BOED) is a principled framework for making efficient use of limited experimental resources. Unfortunately, its applicability
is hampered by the difficulty of obtaining accurate estimates of the expected information gain (EIG) of an experiment. To address this, we introduce several classes
of fast EIG estimators by building on ideas from amortized variational inference.
We show theoretically and empirically that these estimators can provide significant
gains in speed and accuracy over previous approaches. We further demonstrate the
practicality of our approach on a number of end-to-end experiments.

1

Introduction

Tasks as seemingly diverse as designing a study to elucidate human cognition, selecting the next
query point in an active learning loop, and designing online feedback surveys all constitute the same
underlying problem: designing an experiment to maximize the information gathered. Bayesian
optimal experimental design (BOED) forms a powerful mathematical abstraction for tackling such
problems [8, 23, 37, 43] and has been successfully applied in numerous settings, including psychology
[30], Bayesian optimization [16], active learning [15], bioinformatics [42], and neuroscience [38].
In the BOED framework, we construct a predictive model p(y|θ, d) for possible experimental
outcomes y, given a design d and a particular value of the parameters of interest θ. We then choose
the design that optimizes the expected information gain (EIG) in θ from running the experiment,


EIG(d) , Ep(y|d) H[p(θ)] − H[p(θ|y, d)] ,
(1)
where H[·] represents the entropy and p(θ|y, d) ∝ p(θ)p(y|θ, d) is the posterior resulting from
running the experiment with design d and observing outcome y. In other words, we seek the design
that, in expectation over possible experimental outcomes, most reduces the entropy of the posterior
over our target latent variables. If the predictive model is correct, this forms a design strategy that is
(one-step) optimal from an information-theoretic viewpoint [24, 37].
The BOED framework is particularly powerful in sequential contexts, where it allows the results of
previous experiments to be used in guiding the designs for future experiments. For example, as we
ask a participant a series of questions in a psychology trial, we can use the information gathered
from previous responses to ask more pertinent questions in the future, that will, in turn, return more
information. This ability to design experiments that are self-adaptive can substantially increase their
efficiency: fewer iterations are required to uncover the same level of information.
In practice, however, the BOED approach is often hampered by the difficulty of obtaining fast and
high-quality estimates of the EIG: due to the intractability of the posterior p(θ|y, d), it constitutes
∗

Part of this work was completed by AF during an internship with Uber AI Labs.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

