Hierarchical Decision Making by Generating and
Following Natural Language Instructions

Hengyuan Hu∗
Facebook AI Research
hengyuan@fb.com
Qucheng Gong
Facebook AI Research
qucheng@fb.com

Denis Yarats∗
New York University & Facebook AI Research
denisyarats@cs.nyu.edu
Yuandong Tian
Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Mike Lewis
Facebook AI Research
mikelewis@fb.com

Abstract
We explore using natural language instructions as an expressive and compositional
representation of complex actions for hierarchical decision making. Rather than
directly selecting micro-actions, our agent first generates a plan in natural language,
which is then executed by a separate model. We introduce a challenging real-time
strategy game environment in which the actions of a large number of units must
be coordinated across long time scales. We gather a dataset of 76 thousand pairs
of instructions and executions from human play, and train instructor and executor
models. Experiments show that models generate intermediate plans in natural
langauge significantly outperform models that directly imitate human actions. The
compositional structure of language is conducive to learning generalizable action
representations. We also release our code, models and data23 .

1

Introduction

Many complex problems can be naturally decomposed into steps of high level planning and low level
control. However, plan representation is challenging—manually specifying macro-actions requires
significant domain expertise, limiting generality and scalability [18, 22], but learning composite
actions from only end-task supervision can result in the hierarchy collapsing to a single action [3].
We explore representing complex actions as natural language instructions. Language can express
arbitrary goals, and has compositional structure that allows generalization across commands [14, 1].
Our agent has a two-level hierarchy, where a high-level instructor model communicates a sub-goal in
natural language to a low-level executor model, which then interacts with the environment (Fig. 1).
Both models are trained to imitate humans playing the roles. This approach decomposes decision
making into planning and execution modules, with a natural language interface between them.
We gather example instructions and executions from two humans collaborating in a complex game.
Both players have access to the same partial information about the game state. One player acts as the
instructor, and periodically issues instructions to the other player (the executor), but has no direct
control on the environment. The executor acts to complete the instruction. This setup forces the
instructor to focus on high-level planning, while the executor concentrates on low-level control.
∗

Equal Contribution.
A demo is available at www.minirts.net
3
Our code is open-sourced at www.github.com/facebookresearch/minirts
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

