Improved Precision and Recall Metric for Assessing
Generative Models
Tuomas Kynkäänniemi∗
Aalto University
NVIDIA
tuomas.kynkaanniemi@aalto.fi

Tero Karras
NVIDIA
tkarras@nvidia.com

Jaakko Lehtinen
Aalto University
NVIDIA
jlehtinen@nvidia.com

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA
slaine@nvidia.com

Timo Aila
NVIDIA
taila@nvidia.com

Abstract
The ability to automatically estimate the quality and coverage of the samples
produced by a generative model is a vital requirement for driving algorithm research.
We present an evaluation metric that can separately and reliably measure both
of these aspects in image generation tasks by forming explicit, non-parametric
representations of the manifolds of real and generated data. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our metric in StyleGAN and BigGAN by providing several
illustrative examples where existing metrics yield uninformative or contradictory
results. Furthermore, we analyze multiple design variants of StyleGAN to better
understand the relationships between the model architecture, training methods,
and the properties of the resulting sample distribution. In the process, we identify
new variants that improve the state-of-the-art. We also perform the first principled
analysis of truncation methods and identify an improved method. Finally, we
extend our metric to estimate the perceptual quality of individual samples, and use
this to study latent space interpolations.

1

Introduction

The goal of generative methods is to learn the manifold of the training data so that we can subsequently
generate novel samples that are indistinguishable from the training set. While the quality of results
from generative adversarial networks (GAN) [7], variational autoencoders (VAE) [14], autoregressive
models [29, 30], and likelihood-based models [6, 13] have seen rapid improvement recently [11, 8,
28, 20, 4, 12], the automatic evaluation of these results continues to be challenging.
When modeling a complex manifold for sampling purposes, two separate goals emerge: individual
samples drawn from the model should be faithful to the examples (they should be of “high quality”),
and their variation should match that observed in the training set. The most widely used metrics, such
as Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [9], Inception Score (IS) [25], and Kernel Inception Distance
(KID) [2], group these two aspects to a single value without a clear tradeoff. We illustrate by examples
that this makes diagnosis of model performance difficult. For instance, it is interesting that while
recent state-of-the-art generative methods [4, 13, 12] claim to optimize FID, in the end the (uncurated)
results are almost always produced using another model that explicitly sacrifices variation, and often
FID, in favor of higher quality samples from a truncated subset of the domain [17].
∗

This work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

