Rates of Convergence for Large-scale Nearest
Neighbor Classification

Xingye Qiao
Department of Mathematical Sciences
Binghamton University
New York, USA
qiao@math.binghamton.edu

Jiexin Duan
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
duan32@purdue.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
Nearest neighbor is a popular class of classification methods with many desirable
properties. For a large data set which cannot be loaded into the memory of a single
machine due to computation, communication, privacy, or ownership limitations,
we consider the divide and conquer scheme: the entire data set is divided into
small subsamples, on which nearest neighbor predictions are made, and then a
final decision is reached by aggregating the predictions on subsamples by majority
voting. We name this method the big Nearest Neighbor (bigNN) classifier, and
provide its rates of convergence under minimal assumptions, in terms of both the
excess risk and the classification instability, which are proven to be the same rates
as the oracle nearest neighbor classifier and cannot be improved. To significantly
reduce the prediction time that is required for achieving the optimal rate, we also
consider the pre-training acceleration technique applied to the bigNN method, with
proven convergence rate. We find that in the distributed setting, the optimal choice
of the neighbor k should scale with both the total sample size and the number of
partitions, and there is a theoretical upper limit for the latter. Numerical studies
have verified the theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

In this article, we study binary classification for large-scale data sets. Nearest neighbor (NN) is a very
popular class of classification methods. The kNN method searches for the k nearest neighbors of a
query point x and classify it to the majority class among the k neighbors. NN methods do not require
sophisticated training that involves optimization but are memory-based (all the data are loaded into
the memory when predictions are made.) In the era of big data, the volume of data is growing at an
unprecedented rate. Yet, the computing power is limited by space and time and it may not keep pace
with the growth of the data volume. For many applications, one of the main challenges of NN is that
it is impossible to load the data into the memory of a single machine [36]. In addition to the memory
limitation, there are other important concerns. For example, if the data are collected and stored at
several distant locations, it is challenging to transmit the data to a central location. Moreover, privacy
and ownership issues may prohibit sharing local data with other locations. Therefore, a distributed
approach which avoids transmitting or sharing the local raw data is appealing.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

