Fast and Accurate Stochastic Gradient Estimation
Beidi Chen
Rice University
Houston, Texas
beidi.chen@rice.edu

Yingchen Xu
Rice University
Houston, Texas
yx26@rice.edu

Anshumali Shrivastava
Rice University
Houston, Texas
anshumali@rice.edu

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Descent or SGD is the most popular optimization algorithm
for large-scale problems. SGD estimates the gradient by uniform sampling with
sample size one. There have been several other works that suggest faster epoch-wise
convergence by using weighted non-uniform sampling for better gradient estimates.
Unfortunately, the per-iteration cost of maintaining this adaptive distribution for
gradient estimation is more than calculating the full gradient itself, which we
call the chicken-and-the-egg loop. As a result, the false impression of faster
convergence in iterations, in reality, leads to slower convergence in time. In this
paper, we break this barrier by providing the first demonstration of a scheme,
Locality sensitive hashing (LSH) sampled Stochastic Gradient Descent (LGD),
which leads to superior gradient estimation while keeping the sampling cost per
iteration similar to that of the uniform sampling. Such an algorithm is possible due
to the sampling view of LSH, which came to light recently. As a consequence of
superior and fast estimation, we reduce the running time of all existing gradient
descent algorithms, that relies on gradient estimates including Adam, Ada-grad,
etc. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal with experiments on linear
models as well as the non-linear BERT, which is a recent popular deep learning
based language representation model.

1

Motivation

Stochastic gradient descent or commonly known as SGD is the most popular choice of optimization
algorithm in large-scale setting for its computational efficiency. A typical interest in Machine Learning
is to minimize the average loss function f over the training data, with respect to the parameters θ, i.e.,
the objective function of interest is
N
1 X
θ∗ = arg min F (θ) = arg min
f (xi , θ).
(1)
θ
θ N
i=1
Throughout the paper, our training data D = {xi , yi }N
i=1 will have N instances with d dimensional
features xi ∈ Rd and labels yi . The labels can be continuous real valued for regression problems. For
classification problem, they will take value in a discrete set, i.e., yi ∈ {1, 2, · · · , K}. Typically, the
function f is convex, thus a Gradient Descent (GD) algorithm can achieve the global optimum. The
objective function for least squares, f (xi , θ) = (θ · xi − yi )2 , used in regression setting is a classical
example of f .
SGD [4] samples an instance xj uniformly from N instances, and performs the gradient descent
update:
θt = θt−1 − η t ∇f (xj , θt−1 ),
(2)
where η t is the step size at the tth iteration. The gradient ∇f (xj , θt−1 ) is only evaluated on xj ,
using the current θt−1 . It should be noted that a full gradient of the objective is given by the average
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

