Unsupervised Learning of Object Structure and
Dynamics from Videos

Matthias Minderer∗ Chen Sun Ruben Villegas Forrester Cole
Kevin Murphy Honglak Lee
Google Research
{mjlm, chensun, rubville, fcole, kpmurphy, honglak}@google.com

Abstract
Extracting and predicting object structure and dynamics from videos without
supervision is a major challenge in machine learning. To address this challenge,
we adopt a keypoint-based image representation and learn a stochastic dynamics
model of the keypoints. Future frames are reconstructed from the keypoints and
a reference frame. By modeling dynamics in the keypoint coordinate space, we
achieve stable learning and avoid compounding of errors in pixel space. Our
method improves upon unstructured representations both for pixel-level video
prediction and for downstream tasks requiring object-level understanding of motion
dynamics. We evaluate our model on diverse datasets: a multi-agent sports dataset,
the Human3.6M dataset, and datasets based on continuous control tasks from
the DeepMind Control Suite. The spatially structured representation outperforms
unstructured representations on a range of motion-related tasks such as object
tracking, action recognition and reward prediction.

1

Introduction

Videos provide rich visual information to understand the dynamics of the world. However, extracting
a useful representation from videos (e.g. detection and tracking of objects) remains challenging and
typically requires expensive human annotations. In this work, we focus on unsupervised learning of
object structure and dynamics from videos.
One approach for unsupervised video understanding is to learn to predict future frames [17, 16, 9, 15,
24, 30, 8, 3, 14]. Based on this body of work, we identify two main challenges: First, it is hard to
make pixel-level predictions because motion in videos becomes highly stochastic for horizons beyond
about a second. Since semantically insignificant deviations can lead to large error in pixel space, it is
often difficult to distinguish good from bad predictions based on pixel losses. Second, even if good
pixel-level prediction is achieved, this is rarely the desired final task. The representations of a model
trained for pixel-level reconstruction are not guaranteed to be useful for downstream tasks such as
tracking, motion prediction and control.
Here, we address both of these challenges by using an explicit, interpretable keypoint-based representation of object structure as the core of our model. Keypoints are a natural representation of dynamic
objects, commonly used for face and pose tracking. Training keypoint detectors, however, generally
requires supervision. We learn the keypoint-based representation directly from video, without any
supervision beyond the pixel data, in two steps: first encode individual frames to keypoints, then
model the dynamics of those points. As a result, the representation of the dynamics model is spatially
structured, though the model is trained only with a pixel reconstruction loss. We show that enforcing
spatial structure significantly improves video prediction quality and performance for tasks such as
action recognition and reward prediction.
∗

Google AI Resident

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

