Quantum Embedding of Knowledge for Reasoning

Dinesh Garg1∗ , Shajith Ikbal1∗, Santosh K. Srivastava1 , Harit Vishwakarma2†,
Hima Karanam1 , L Venkata Subramaniam1
1
IBM Research AI, India
2
Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
garg.dinesh, shajmoha, sasriva5@in.ibm.com, hvishwakarma@cs.wisc.edu, hkaranam, lvsubram@in.ibm.com

Abstract
Statistical Relational Learning (SRL) methods are the most widely used techniques
to generate distributional representations of the symbolic Knowledge Bases (KBs).
These methods embed any given KB into a vector space by exploiting statistical
similarities among its entities and predicates but without any guarantee of preserving the underlying logical structure of the KB. This, in turn, results in poor
performance of logical reasoning tasks that are solved using such distributional
representations. We present a novel approach called Embed2Reason (E2R) that
embeds a symbolic KB into a vector space in a logical structure preserving
manner. This approach is inspired by the theory of Quantum Logic. Such an
embedding allows answering membership based complex logical reasoning queries
with impressive accuracy improvements over popular SRL baselines.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of embedding a given symbolic Knowledge Base (KB) into a vector
space that preserves the logical structure. Such embeddings are popularly known as distributional
representation (e.g., Word2Vec [1] and GLOVE [2]) and are aimed to be leveraged by several nonsymbolic (e.g. neural and vector) methods to accomplish various tasks (e.g. KB completion/ link
prediction and logical reasoning under noisy/incomplete KB) on which symbolic methods struggle.
Figure 1 (best viewed in color) depicts a toy example of the kind of symbolic KBs that we wish to
embed into a vector space. The red-colored oval-shaped nodes of the left tree denote a hierarchy
(aka ontology) of the unary predicates (aka concepts), and the blue-colored rectangle-shaped nodes
denote the memberships of entities to various concepts. Similarly, the right tree denotes an ontology
of binary predicated (aka relations) and the ordered pair of entities as their members. In the right tree,
having (Bob, Alice) as a child node of the relation Father_of means Bob is Father_of Alice.
In such ontologies, a predicate node logically implies (aka entails) any of its ancestral predicate node.
For example, cardiologist ⇒ physician ⇒ doctor, and similarly, Mother_of ⇒ Parent_of
⇒ Blood_relation. In the framework of mathematical logic, such a logical structure can be
expressed via a subset of Description Logic (DL) statements. In the DL parlance, logical structure
among predicates (red oval nodes) is commonly known as T-box, whereas logical structure connecting
entities (or entity tuples) to the predicates is commonly known as A-box [3].
As far as vector embeddings of symbolic KBs is concerned, last couple of years have witnessed a
surge in the newer methods with an end goal of KB completion or logical inferencing to answer
reasoning queries [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. While details being different, a high level idea behind
all these methods is as follows – Ingest a given symbolic KB and embed it into a vector space by using
a neural network; followed by conversion of logical queries into score based algebraic operations
∗
†

The first two authors contributed equally.
This work was done when the author was with IBM Research, New Delhi, India.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

