A Kernel Loss for Solving the Bellman
Equation
Yihao Feng
UT Austin
yihao@cs.utexas.edu

Lihong Li
Google Research
lihong@google.com

Qiang Liu
UT Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Value function learning plays a central role in many state-of-the-art reinforcementlearning algorithms. Many popular algorithms like Q-learning do not optimize
any objective function, but are fixed-point iterations of some variants of Bellman
operator that are not necessarily a contraction. As a result, they may easily lose
convergence guarantees, as can be observed in practice. In this paper, we propose a
novel loss function, which can be optimized using standard gradient-based methods
with guaranteed convergence. The key advantage is that its gradient can be easily
approximated using sampled transitions, avoiding the need for double samples
required by prior algorithms like residual gradient. Our approach may be combined
with general function classes such as neural networks, using either on- or off-policy
data, and is shown to work reliably and effectively in several benchmarks, including
classic problems where standard algorithms are known to diverge.

1

Introduction

The goal of a reinforcement learning (RL) agent is to optimize its policy to maximize the long-term
return through repeated interaction with an external environment. The interaction is often modeled as
a Markov decision process, whose value functions are the unique fixed points of their corresponding
Bellman operators. Many state-of-the-art algorithms, including TD(λ), Q-learning and actor-critic,
have value function learning as a key component (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Szepesvári, 2010).
A fundamental property of the Bellman operator is that it is a contraction in the value function
space in the ℓ∞ -norm (Puterman, 1994). Therefore, starting from any bounded initial function, with
repeated applications of the operator, the value function converges to the true value function. A
number of algorithms are directly inspired by this property, such as temporal difference (Sutton,
1988) and its many variants (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1996; Sutton & Barto, 2018; Szepesvári, 2010).
Unfortunately, when function approximation such as neural networks is used to represent the value
function in large-scale problems, the critical property of contraction is generally lost (e.g., Boyan &
Moore, 1995; Baird, 1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997), except in rather restricted cases (e.g., Gordon,
1995; Tsitsiklis & Van Roy, 1997). Not only is this instability one of the core theoretical challenges
in RL, but it also has broad practical significance, given the growing popularity of algorithms like
DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) and their many variants (e.g., Gu et al., 2016;
Schulman et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2017), whose stability largely depends on the
contraction property. The instability becomes even harder to avoid, when training data (transitions)
are sampled from an off-policy distribution, a situation known as the deadly triad (Sutton & Barto,
2018, Sec. 11.3).
The brittleness of Bellman operator’s contraction property has inspired a number of works that aim
to reformulate value function learning as an optimization problem, where standard algorithms like
stochastic gradient descent can be used to minimize the objective, without the risk of divergence
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

