Splitting Steepest Descent for Growing Neural
Architectures
Qiang Liu
UT Austin
lqiang@cs.utexas.edu

Lemeng Wu *
UT Austin
lmwu@cs.utexas.edu

Dilin Wang ⇤
UT Austin
dilin@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We develop a progressive training approach for neural networks which adaptively
grows the network structure by splitting existing neurons to multiple off-springs.
By leveraging a functional steepest descent idea, we derive a simple criterion for
deciding the best subset of neurons to split and a splitting gradient for optimally
updating the off-springs. Theoretically, our splitting strategy is a second-order
functional steepest descent for escaping saddle points in an 1-Wasserstein metric
space, on which the standard parametric gradient descent is a first-order steepest
descent. Our method provides a new practical approach for optimizing neural
network structures, especially for learning lightweight neural architectures in
resource-constrained settings.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable empirical successes recently. However,
efficient and automatic optimization of model architectures remains to be a key challenge. Compared
with parameter optimization which has been well addressed by gradient-based methods (a.k.a.
back-propagation), optimizing model structures involves significantly more challenging discrete
optimization with large search spaces and high evaluation cost. Although there have been rapid
progresses recently, designing the best architectures still requires a lot of expert knowledge and
trial-and-errors for most practical tasks.
This work targets extending the power of gradient descent to the domain of model structure optimization of neural networks. In particular, we consider the problem of progressively growing a neural
network by “splitting” existing neurons into several “off-springs”, and develop a simple and practical
approach for deciding the best subset of neurons to split and how to split them, adaptively based on
the existing model structure. We derive the optimal splitting strategies by considering the steepest
descent of the loss when the off-springs are infinitesimally close to the original neurons, yielding a
splitting steepest descent that monotonically decrease the loss in the space of model structures.
Our main method, shown in Algorithm 1, alternates between a standard parametric descent phase
which updates the parameters to minimize the loss with a fixed model structure, and a splitting phase
which updates the model structures by splitting neurons. The splitting phase is triggered when no
further improvement can be made by only updating parameters, and allow us to escape the parametric
local optima by augmenting the neural network in a locally optimal fashion. Theoretically, these two
phases can be viewed as performing functional steepest descent on an 1-Wasserstein metric space, in
which the splitting phase is a second-order descent for escaping saddle points in the functional space,
while the parametric gradient descent corresponds to a first-order descent. Empirically, our algorithm
is simple and practical, and provides a promising tool for many challenging problems, including
progressive training of interpretable neural networks, learning lightweight and energy-efficient neural
architectures for resource-constrained settings, and transfer learning, etc.
⇤

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

