Integrating Bayesian and Discriminative Sparse
Kernel Machines for Multi-class Active Learning

Weishi Shi
Rochester Institute of Technology
ws7586@rit.edu

Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
qi.yu@rit.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel active learning (AL) model that integrates Bayesian and
discriminative kernel machines for fast and accurate multi-class data sampling.
By joining a sparse Bayesian model and a maximum margin machine under a
unified kernel machine committee (KMC), the proposed model is able to identify
a small number of data samples that best represent the overall data space while
accurately capturing the decision boundaries. The integration is conducted using
the maximum entropy discrimination framework, resulting in a joint objective
function that contains generalized entropy as a regularizer. Such a property allows
the proposed AL model to choose data samples that more effectively handle
non-separable classification problems. Parameter learning is achieved through
a principled optimization framework that leverages convex duality and sparse
structure of KMC to efficiently optimize the joint objective function. Key model
parameters are used to design a novel sampling function to choose data samples that
can simultaneously improve multiple decision boundaries, making it an effective
sampler for problems with a large number of classes. Experiments conducted
over both synthetic and real data and comparison with competitive AL methods
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model.

1

Introduction

While more labeled data tends to improve the performance of supervised learning, labeling a large
number of data samples is labor intensive and time consuming. Furthermore, obtaining accurate
labels may be highly challenging for many specialized domains, such as medicine and biology, where
expert knowledge is required for understanding and extracting the underlying semantics of data.
Active Learning (AL) provides a promising direction to use a small subset of labeled data samples to
train high-quality supervised learning models in a cost-effective way. Consequently, AL has been
successfully applied to various applications [1, 2, 3].
A large number of AL models have been developed for different types of supervised learning models.
However, the design of the data sampling strategy is usually limited by the learning models, which
are not designed specifically for AL purpose. For example, max-margin based classifiers, such as
support vector machines (SVMs), are widely used for sampling purpose in AL. However, as they are
essentially designed for the classification task, using them directly for sampling might lead to a slow
convergence. Figure 1a illustrates such behavior in existing models. Assume that the two middle
clusters contain 80% of data samples. Hence, it is highly likely that the initially labeled samples are
from these two clusters, which give the initial decision boundary as shown by the dashed line. Then,
samples in the middle clusters will continue to be sampled as they are close to the current decision
boundary. This will cause a very slow convergence to the true decision boundary shown as the solid
line. Furthermore, since the model performance over iterations stays roughly the same, it may cause
AL to terminate. This is undesirable, because the true decision boundary is never discovered. Such
behavior is intrinsic to the classifier, which primarily focuses on exploiting the current decision
boundary rather than exploring the entire data distribution for more effective data sampling.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

