Symmetry-adapted generation of 3d point sets for the
targeted discovery of molecules

Niklas W. A. Gebauer
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany
n.wa.gebauer@gmail.com

Michael Gastegger
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany
michael.gastegger@tu-berlin.de

Kristof T. Schütt
Machine Learning Group
Technische Universität Berlin
10587 Berlin, Germany
kristof.schuett@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Deep learning has proven to yield fast and accurate predictions of quantumchemical properties to accelerate the discovery of novel molecules and materials. As an exhaustive exploration of the vast chemical space is still infeasible,
we require generative models that guide our search towards systems with desired
properties. While graph-based models have previously been proposed, they are
restricted by a lack of spatial information such that they are unable to recognize spatial isomerism and non-bonded interactions. Here, we introduce a generative neural
network for 3d point sets that respects the rotational invariance of the targeted
structures. We apply it to the generation of molecules and demonstrate its ability to
approximate the distribution of equilibrium structures using spatial metrics as well
as established measures from chemoinformatics. As our model is able to capture
the complex relationship between 3d geometry and electronic properties, we bias
the distribution of the generator towards molecules with a small HOMO-LUMO
gap – an important property for the design of organic solar cells.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning enabled a significant acceleration of molecular dynamics simulations [1–7] as well as the prediction of chemical properties across chemical compound space [8–13].
Still, the discovery of novel molecules and materials with desired properties remains a major challenge in chemistry and materials science. Accurate geometry-based models require the atom types
and positions of candidate molecules in equilibrium, i.e. local minima of the potential energy surface. These have to be obtained by geometry optimization, either using computationally expensive
quantum chemistry calculations or a neural network trained on both compositional (chemical) and
configurational (structural) degrees of freedom [13–16]. On the other hand, bond-based methods
that predict chemical properties using only the molecular graph [17–20] do not reach the accuracy of
geometry-based methods [11, 21]. In particular, they lack crucial information to distinguish spatial
isomers, i.e. molecules that exhibit the same bonding graph, but different 3d structures and chemical
properties. As an exhaustive search of chemical space is infeasible, several methods have been
proposed to generate molecular graphs [22, 23] and to bias the distribution of the generative model
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

