Copula-like Variational Inference

Marcel Hirt
Department of Statistical Science
University College of London, UK
marcel.hirt.16@ucl.ac.uk

Petros Dellaportas
Department of Statistical Science
University College of London, UK
Department of Statistics
Athens University of Economics and Business, Greece
and The Alan Turing Institute, UK

Alain Durmus
CMLA
École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay,
CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 94235 Cachan, France.
alain.durmus@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
This paper considers a new family of variational distributions motivated by Sklar’s
theorem. This family is based on new copula-like densities on the hypercube with
non-uniform marginals which can be sampled efficiently, i.e. with a complexity
linear in the dimension d of the state space. Then, the proposed variational densities that we suggest can be seen as arising from these copula-like densities used as
base distributions on the hypercube with Gaussian quantile functions and sparse
rotation matrices as normalizing flows. The latter correspond to a rotation of the
marginals with complexity O(d log d). We provide some empirical evidence that
such a variational family can also approximate non-Gaussian posteriors and can
be beneficial compared to Gaussian approximations. Our method performs largely
comparably to state-of-the-art variational approximations on standard regression
and classification benchmarks for Bayesian Neural Networks.

1

Introduction

Variational inference [29, 68, 4] aims at performing Bayesian inference by approximating an intractable posterior density π with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Rd , based on a family of
distributions which can be easily sampled from. More precisely, this kind of inference posits some
variational family Q of densities (qξ )ξ∈Ξ with respect to the Lebesgue measure and intends to find a
good approximation qξ? belonging to Q by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL) with respect to π
over Q, i.e. ξ ? ≈ arg minξ∈Ξ KL(qξ |π). Further, suppose that π(x) = e−U (x) /Z with U : Rd → R
R
measurable and Z = Rd e−U (x) dx < ∞ is an unknown normalising constant. Then, for any ξ ∈ Ξ,
Z
π(x)
KL(qξ |π) = −
qξ (x) log
dx = −Eqξ (x) [−U (x) − log qξ (x)] + log Z .
(1)
q
d
ξ (x)
R
Since Z does not depend on qξ , minimizing ξ 7→ KL(qξ |π) is equivalent to maximizing ξ 7→ log Z −
KL(qξ |π). A standard example is Bayesian inference over latent variables x having a prior density
π0 for a given likelihood function L(y 1:n |x) and n observations y 1:n = (y 1 , . . . , y n ). The target
density is the posterior p(x|y 1:n ) with U (x) = − log π0 (x) − log L(y 1:n |x) and the objective that
is commonly maximized,


L(ξ) = Eqξ (x) log π0 (x) + log L(y 1:n |x) − log qξ (x)
(2)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

