Channel Gating Neural Networks

Weizhe Hua
wh399@cornell.edu

Yuan Zhou
yz882@cornell.edu

Zhiru Zhang
zhiruz@cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
cdesa@cornell.edu

G. Edward Suh
gs272@cornell.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces channel gating, a dynamic, fine-grained, and hardwareefficient pruning scheme to reduce the computation cost for convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). Channel gating identifies regions in the features that contribute
less to the classification result, and skips the computation on a subset of the input
channels for these ineffective regions. Unlike static network pruning, channel
gating optimizes CNN inference at run-time by exploiting input-specific characteristics, which allows substantially reducing the compute cost with almost no
accuracy loss. We experimentally show that applying channel gating in state-ofthe-art networks achieves 2.7-8.0× reduction in floating-point operations (FLOPs)
and 2.0-4.4× reduction in off-chip memory accesses with a minimal accuracy loss
on CIFAR-10. Combining our method with knowledge distillation reduces the
compute cost of ResNet-18 by 2.6× without accuracy drop on ImageNet. We
further demonstrate that channel gating can be realized in hardware efficiently. Our
approach exhibits sparsity patterns that are well-suited to dense systolic arrays with
minimal additional hardware. We have designed an accelerator for channel gating
networks, which can be implemented using either FPGAs or ASICs. Running a
quantized ResNet-18 model for ImageNet, our accelerator achieves an encouraging
speedup of 2.4× on average, with a theoretical FLOP reduction of 2.8×.

1

Introduction

The past half-decade has seen unprecedented growth in the use of machine learning with convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). CNNs represent the state-of-the-art in large scale computer vision, natural
language processing, and data mining tasks. However, CNNs have substantial computation and
memory requirements, greatly limiting their deployment in constrained mobile and embedded
devices [1, 23]. There are many lines of work on reducing CNN inference costs, including lowprecision quantization [3, 21], efficient architectures [14, 30], and static pruning [9, 12, 19, 22].
However, most of these techniques optimize a network statically, and are agnostic of the input
data at run time. Several recent efforts propose to use additional fully-connected layers [6, 8, 28]
or recurrent networks [20, 29] to predict if a fraction of the computation can be skipped based on
certain intermediate results produced by the CNN at run time. These approaches typically perform
coarse-grained pruning where an entire output channel or layer is skipped dynamically.
In this paper, we propose channel gating, a dynamic, fine-grained, and hardware-efficient pruning
scheme, which exploits the spatial structure of features to reduce CNN computation at the granularity
of individual output activation. As illustrated in Figure 1, the essential idea is to divide a CNN layer
into a base path and a conditional path. For each output activation, the base path obtains a partial sum
of the output activation by performing convolution on a subset of input channels. The activation-wise
gate function then predicts whether the output activations are effective given the partial sum. Only
the effective activations take the conditional path which continues computing on the rest of the input
channels. For example, an output activation is ineffective if the activation is clipped to zero by ReLU
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

