A Primal-Dual link between GANs and Autoencoders
Hisham Husain‡,†
‡

Richard Nock†,‡,♣

Robert C. Williamson‡,†

The Australian National University, † Data61, ♣ The University of Sydney

firstname.lastname@{data61.csiro.au,anu.edu.au}

Abstract
Since the introduction of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and Variational
Autoencoders (VAE), the literature on generative modelling has witnessed an
overwhelming resurgence. The impressive, yet elusive empirical performance of
GANs has lead to the rise of many GAN-VAE hybrids, with the hopes of GAN
level performance and additional benefits of VAE, such as an encoder for feature
reduction, which is not offered by GANs. Recently, the Wasserstein Autoencoder
(WAE) was proposed, achieving performance similar to that of GANs, yet it is still
unclear whether the two are fundamentally different or can be further improved
into a unified model. In this work, we study the f -GAN and WAE models and
make two main discoveries. First, we find that the f -GAN and WAE objectives
partake in a primal-dual relationship and are equivalent under some assumptions,
which then allows us to explicate the success of WAE. Second, the equivalence
result allows us to, for the first time, prove generalization bounds for Autoencoder
models, which is a pertinent problem when it comes to theoretical analyses of
generative models. Furthermore, we show that the WAE objective is related
to other statistical quantities such as the f -divergence and in particular, upper
bounded by the Wasserstein distance, which then allows us to tap into existing
efficient (regularized) optimal transport solvers. Our findings thus present the first
primal-dual relationship between GANs and Autoencoder models, comment on
generalization abilities and make a step towards unifying these models.

1

Introduction

Implicit probabilistic models [1] are defined to be the pushforward of a simple distribution PZ
over a latent space Z through a map G : Z → X, where X is the space of the input data. Such
models allow easy sampling, but the computation of the corresponding probability density function is
intractable. The goal of these methods is to match G#PZ to a target distribution PX by minimizing
D(PX , G#PZ ), for some discrepancy D(·, ·) between distributions. An overwhelming number
of methods have emerged after the introduction of Generative Adversarial Networks [2, 3] and
Variational Autoencoders [4] (GANs and VAEs), which have established two distinct paradigms:
Adversarial (networks) training and Autoencoders respectively. Adversarial training involves a set of
functions D, referred to as discriminators, with an objective of the form
D(PX , G#PZ ) = max {Ex∼PX [a(d(x))] − Ex∼G#PZ [b(d(x))]} ,
d∈D

(1)

for some functions a : R → R and b : R → R. Autoencoder methods are concerned with finding a
function E : X → Z, referred to as an encoder, whose goal is to reverse G, and learn a feature space
with the objective
D(PX , G#PZ ) = min {R(G, E) + Ω(E)} ,
E

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

