PasteGAN: A Semi-Parametric Method to Generate
Image from Scene Graph

Yikang Li1∗ , Tao Ma2∗ , Yeqi Bai3 , Nan Duan4 , Sining Wei4 , Xiaogang Wang1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Nanyang Technological University, 4 Microsoft
{ykli, xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, taoma@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
baiyeqi@gmail.com, {sinwei, nanduan}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite some exciting progress on high-quality image generation from structured (scene graphs) or free-form (sentences) descriptions, most of them only
guarantee the image-level semantical consistency, i.e. the generated image matching the semantic meaning of the description. They still lack the investigations on
synthesizing the images in a more controllable way, like finely manipulating the
visual appearance of every object. Therefore, to generate the images with preferred
objects and rich interactions, we propose a semi-parametric method, PasteGAN,
for generating the image from the scene graph and the image crops, where spatial
arrangements of the objects and their pair-wise relationships are defined by the
scene graph and the object appearances are determined by the given object crops.
To enhance the interactions of the objects in the output, we design a Crop Refining
Network and an Object-Image Fuser to embed the objects as well as their relationships into one map. Multiple losses work collaboratively to guarantee the generated
images highly respecting the crops and complying with the scene graphs while
maintaining excellent image quality. A crop selector is also proposed to pick the
most-compatible crops from our external object tank by encoding the interactions
around the objects in the scene graph if the crops are not provided. Evaluated
on Visual Genome and COCO-Stuff dataset, our proposed method significantly
outperforms the SOTA methods on Inception Score, Diversity Score and Fréchet
Inception Distance. Extensive experiments also demonstrate our method’s ability
to generate complex and diverse images with given objects. The code is available
at https://github.com/yikang-li/PasteGAN.

1

Introduction

Image generation from a scene description with multiple objects and complicated interactions between
them is a frontier and pivotal task. With such algorithms, everyone can become an artist: you just
need to define the objects and how they interact with each other, and then the machine will produce
the image following your descriptions. However, it is a challenging problem as it requires the model
to have a deep visual understanding of the objects as well as how they interact with each other.
There have been some excellent works on generating the images conditioned on the textual description [1, 2], semantic segmentations [3] and scene graphs [4]. Among these forms, scene graphs
are powerful structured representations of the images that encode objects and their interactions.
Nevertheless, nearly all the existing methods focus on the semantical compliance with the description
on the image level but lack the object-level control. To truly paint the images in our mind, we need
∗

Equally contributed to the work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

