Dichotomize and Generalize: PAC-Bayesian Binary
Activated Deep Neural Networks
Gaël Letarte
Université Laval
Canada
gael.letarte.1@ulaval.ca
Benjamin Guedj
Inria and University College London
France and United Kingdom
benjamin.guedj@inria.fr

Pascal Germain
Inria
France
pascal.germain@inria.fr
François Laviolette
Université Laval
Canada
francois.laviolette@ift.ulaval.ca

Abstract
We present a comprehensive study of multilayer neural networks with binary
activation, relying on the PAC-Bayesian theory. Our contributions are twofold:
(i) we develop an end-to-end framework to train a binary activated deep neural
network, (ii) we provide nonvacuous PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for
binary activated deep neural networks. Our results are obtained by minimizing the
expected loss of an architecture-dependent aggregation of binary activated deep
neural networks. Our analysis inherently overcomes the fact that binary activation
function is non-differentiable. The performance of our approach is assessed on a
thorough numerical experiment protocol on real-life datasets.

1

Introduction

The remarkable practical successes of deep learning make the need for better theoretical understanding
all the more pressing. The PAC-Bayesian theory has recently emerged as a fruitful framework to
analyze generalization abilities of deep neural network. Inspired by precursor work of Langford and
Caruana [2001], nonvacuous risk bounds for multilayer architectures have been obtained by Dziugaite
and Roy [2017], Zhou et al. [2019]. Although informative, these results do not explicitly take into
account the network architecture (number of layers, neurons per layer, type of activation function). A
notable exception is the work of Neyshabur et al. [2018] which provides a PAC-Bayesian analysis
relying on the network architecture and the choice of ReLU activation function. The latter bound
arguably gives insights on the generalization mechanism of neural networks (namely in terms of the
spectral norms of the learned weight matrices), but their validity hold for some margin assumptions,
and they are likely to be numerically vacuous.
We focus our study on deep neural networks with a sign activation function. We call such networks
binary activated multilayer (BAM) networks. This specialization leads to nonvacuous generalization
bounds which hold under the sole assumption that training samples are iid. We provide a PACBayesian bound holding on the generalization error of a continuous aggregation of BAM networks.
This leads to an original approach to train BAM networks, named PBGNet. The building block of
PBGNet arises from the specialization of PAC-Bayesian bounds to linear classifiers [Germain et al.,
2009], that we adapt to deep neural networks. The term binary neural networks has been coined by
Bengio [2009], and further studied in Hubara et al. [2016, 2017], Soudry et al. [2014]: it refers to
neural networks for which both the activation functions and the weights are binarized (in contrast
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

