Accelerating Rescaled Gradient Descent:
Fast Optimization of Smooth Functions

Ashia C. Wilson
Microsoft Research
ashia.wilson@microsoft.com

Lester Mackey
Microsoft Research
lmackey@microsoft.com

Andre Wibisono
Georgia Tech
wibisono@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a family of algorithms, called descent algorithms, for optimizing
convex and non-convex functions. We also introduce a new first-order algorithm,
called rescaled gradient descent (RGD), and show that RGD achieves a faster
convergence rate than gradient descent over the class of strongly smooth functions –
a natural generalization of the standard smoothness assumption on the objective
function. When the objective function is convex, we present two frameworks
for accelerating descent algorithms, one in the style of Nesterov and the other in
the style of Monteiro and Svaiter, using a single Lyapunov function. Rescaled
gradient descent can be accelerated under the same strong smoothness assumption
using both frameworks. We provide several examples of strongly smooth loss
functions in machine learning and numerical experiments that verify our theoretical
findings. We also present several extensions of our novel Lyapunov framework
including deriving optimal universal higher-order tensor methods and extending
our framework to the coordinate descent setting.

1

Introduction

We consider the optimization problem
min f (x)

(1)

x∈X

where f : X → R is a continuouslyp
differentiable function, on a finite-dimensional
real vector space
p
X with inner product norm kvk := hv, Bvi and a dual norm ksk∗ := hs, B −1 si for s in the dual
space X ∗ . Here, B : X → X ∗ is a positive definite self-adjoint operator. We assume the minimum
of f is attainable and let x∗ represent a point in arg minx∈X f (x).
We study the performance of a family of discrete-time algorithms parameterized by δ > 0 and an
integer scalar 1 < p ≤ ∞, called δ-descent algorithms of order p. These algorithms meet a progress
condition that allows us to derive fast non-asymptotic convergence rate upper bounds, parameterized
by p, for both nonconvex and convex instances of (1). For example, descent algorithms of order
1 < p < ∞ satisfy the upper bound f (xk ) − f (x∗ ) = O(1/(δk)p−1 ) for convex functions.
Using this framework we introduce a new method for smooth optimization called rescaled gradient
descent (RGD),
1

xk+1 = xk − η p−1

B −1 ∇f (xk )
p−2

,

η > 0, p > 1.

k∇f (xk )k∗p−1
We show that if (1) is sufficiently smooth, rescaled gradient descent is a δ-descent algorithm of
order p, and subsequently converges quickly to solutions of (1). RGD can be viewed as a natural
generalization of gradient descent (p = 2) and normalized gradient descent (p = ∞), whose
non-asymptotic behavior for quasi-convex functions has been well-studied ([11]).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

