Multivariate Distributionally Robust Convex
Regression under Absolute Error Loss

Jose Blanchet
Stanford MS&E
jose.blanchet@stanford.edu

Peter W. Glynn
Stanford MS&E
glynn@stanford.edu

Jun Yan
Stanford Statistics
junyan65@stanford.edu

Zhengqing Zhou
Stanford Mathematics
zqzhou@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel non-parametric multidimensional convex regression
estimator which is designed to be robust to adversarial perturbations in the empirical
measure. We minimize over convex functions the maximum (over Wasserstein
perturbations of the empirical measure) of the absolute regression errors. The
inner maximization is solved in closed form resulting in a regularization penalty
involves the norm of the gradient. We
 show consistency of our estimator and a rate
e n−1/d , matching the bounds of alternative estimators
of convergence of order O
based on square-loss minimization. Contrary to all of the existing results, our
convergence rates hold without imposing compactness on the underlying domain
and with no a priori bounds on the underlying convex function or its gradient
norm.

1

Introduction

Convex regression estimation arises in a wide range of learning applications, for example, when
fitting demand functions, production curves or utility functions, see [14, 22, 23]. Economic theory
often dictates that demand functions are concave, [2]. In financial engineering, stock option prices
often exhibit convexity restrictions [1]. This paper introduces a novel convex regression estimator
which, by design, enjoys enhanced robustness properties. This estimator requires no a priori uniform
bounds on the underlying convex function or its Lipschitz constant, nor does our estimator require
that the domain of the convex function be compact, in contrast to existing convex function estimators
that have known convergence rate guarantees. Furthermore, our numerical experiments show that
our estimator exhibits good empirical performance, in comparison with existing estimators, and is a
promising alternative to existing methods.
Let X be a d-dimensional random vector and let Y be a scalar random variable. Given a sample
(X1 , Y1 ), · · · , (Xn , Yn ) of i.i.d. copies of (X, Y ), we adopt the convex regression model
Yi = f∗ (Xi ) + Ei ,

(1)

where f∗ : Rd → R is a (unknown) convex function and Ei is a zero-median random variable
independent of Xi , satisfying mild regularity conditions indicated in the sequel. Unlike the existing
literature on convex regression (or, more generally, shape-based regression), we base our estimation
methodology not on minimizing the squared error loss, but on minimizing mean absolute error loss.
We adopt this viewpoint as a means of reducing the sensitivity of our regression estimator to outliers
in the data.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

