R2D2: Repeatable and Reliable Detector and Descriptor

Jerome Revaud

Philippe Weinzaepfel
César De Souza
NAVER LABS Europe

Martin Humenberger

firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Interest point detection and local feature description are fundamental steps in many
computer vision applications. Classical approaches are based on a detect-thendescribe paradigm where separate handcrafted methods are used to first identify
repeatable keypoints and then represent them with a local descriptor. Neural
networks trained with metric learning losses have recently caught up with these
techniques, focusing on learning repeatable saliency maps for keypoint detection
or learning descriptors at the detected keypoint locations. In this work, we argue
that repeatable regions are not necessarily discriminative and can therefore lead
to select suboptimal keypoints. Furthermore, we claim that descriptors should be
learned only in regions for which matching can be performed with high confidence.
We thus propose to jointly learn keypoint detection and description together with
a predictor of the local descriptor discriminativeness. This allows to avoid ambiguous areas, thus leading to reliable keypoint detection and description. Our
detection-and-description approach simultaneously outputs sparse, repeatable and
reliable keypoints that outperforms state-of-the-art detectors and descriptors on the
HPatches dataset and on the recent Aachen Day-Night localization benchmark.

1

Introduction

Accurately finding and describing similar points of interest (keypoints) across images is crucial
in many applications such as large-scale visual localization [46, 56], object detection [7], pose
estimation [32], Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [50] and 3D reconstruction [22]. In these applications,
extracted keypoints should be sparse, repeatable and discriminative in order to maximize the matching
accuracy with a low memory footprint.
Classical approaches are based on a two-stage pipeline that first detects keypoints [18, 27, 28, 29]
and then computes a local descriptor for each keypoint [4, 25]. Specifically, the role of the keypoint
detector is to find scale-space locations with covariance with respect to camera viewpoint changes
and invariance with respect to photometric transformations. A large number of handcrafted keypoints
have shown to work well in practice, such as corners [18] or blobs [25, 27, 28]. As for the description,
various schemes based on histograms of local gradients [4, 6, 24, 43], whose most well known
instance is SIFT [25], were proposed and are still widely used.
Despite this apparent success, this paradigm was recently challenged by several data-driven approaches willing to replace the handcrafted parts [14, 17, 26, 30, 33, 35, 49, 58, 59, 60, 63, 65].
Arguably, handcrafted methods are limited by the a priori knowledge researchers have about the
tasks at hand. The point is thus to let a deep network automatically discover which feature extraction
process and representation are most suited to the data. The few attempts for learning keypoint detectors [9, 11, 14, 35, 49, 63] have only focused on the repeatability. On the other hand, metric learning
techniques applied to learning local robust descriptors [26, 33, 58, 59] have recently outperformed
traditional descriptors, including SIFT [21]. They are trained on the repeatable locations provided
by the detector, which may harm the performance in regions that are repeatable but where accurate
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

