Unsupervised Meta-Learning for Few-Shot Image
Classification
Siavash Khodadadeh, Ladislau Bölöni
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Central Florida
siavash.khodadadeh@knights.ucf.edu, lboloni@cs.ucf.edu

Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Few-shot or one-shot learning of classifiers requires a significant inductive bias
towards the type of task to be learned. One way to acquire this is by meta-learning
on tasks similar to the target task. In this paper, we propose UMTRA, an algorithm
that performs unsupervised, model-agnostic meta-learning for classification tasks.
The meta-learning step of UMTRA is performed on a flat collection of unlabeled
images. While we assume that these images can be grouped into a diverse set of
classes and are relevant to the target task, no explicit information about the classes
or any labels are needed. UMTRA uses random sampling and augmentation to
create synthetic training tasks for meta-learning phase. Labels are only needed at
the final target task learning step, and they can be as little as one sample per class.
On the Omniglot and Mini-Imagenet few-shot learning benchmarks, UMTRA
outperforms every tested approach based on unsupervised learning of representations, while alternating for the best performance with the recent CACTUs algorithm.
Compared to supervised model-agnostic meta-learning approaches, UMTRA trades
off some classification accuracy for a reduction in the required labels of several
orders of magnitude.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning or “learning-to-learn” approaches have been proposed in the neural networks literature
since the 1980s [29, 4]. The general idea is to prepare the network through several learning tasks
T1 . . . Tn , in a meta-learning phase such that when presented with the target task Tn+1 , the network
will be ready to learn it as efficiently as possible.
Recently proposed model-agnostic meta-learning approaches [11, 23] can be applied to any differentiable network. When used for classification, the target learning phase consists of several gradient
descent steps on a backpropagated supervised classification loss. Unfortunately, these approaches
require the learning tasks Ti to have the same supervised learning format as the target task. Acquiring
labeled data for a large number of tasks is not only a problem of cost and convenience but also puts
conceptual limits on the type of problems that can be solved through meta-learning. If we need to
have labeled training data for tasks T1 . . . Tn in order to learn task Tn+1 , this limits us to task types
that are variations of tasks known and solved (at least by humans).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

