On Learning Over-parameterized Neural Networks:
A Functional Approximation Perspective
Lili Su
CSAIL, MIT
lilisu@mit.edu

Pengkun Yang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University
pengkuny@princeton.edu

Abstract
We consider training over-parameterized two-layer neural networks with Rectified
Linear Unit (ReLU) using gradient descent (GD) method. Inspired by a recent
line of work, we study the evolutions of network prediction errors across GD
iterations, which can be neatly described in a matrix form. When the network
is sufficiently over-parameterized, these matrices individually approximate an
integral operator which is determined by the feature vector distribution ⇢ only.
Consequently, GD method can be viewed as approximately applying the powers of
this integral operator on the underlying function f ⇤ that generates the responses.
We show that if f ⇤ admits a low-rank approximation with respect to the eigenspaces
of this integral operator, then the empirical risk decreases to this low-rank approximation error at a linear rate which is determined by f ⇤ and ⇢ only, i.e., the rate is
independent of the sample size n. Furthermore, if f ⇤ has zero low-rank approximation error, then, as long as the
p width of the neural network is ⌦(n log n), the
empirical risk decreases to ⇥(1/ n). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
result showing the sufficiency of nearly-linear network over-parameterization. We
provide an application of our general results to the setting where ⇢ is the uniform
distribution on the spheres and f ⇤ is a polynomial. Throughout this paper, we
consider the scenario where the input dimension d is fixed.

1

Introduction

Neural networks have been successfully applied in many real-world machine learning applications.
However, a thorough understanding of the theory behind their practical success, even for two-layer
neural networks, is still lacking. For example, despite learning optimal neural networks is provably
NP-complete [BG17, BR89], in practice, even the neural networks found by the simple first-order
methods perform well [KSH12]. Additionally, in sharp contrast to traditional learning theory, overparameterized neural networks (more parameters than the size of the training dataset) are observed
to enjoy smaller training and even smaller generalization errors [ZBH+ 16]. In this paper, we focus
on training over-parameterized two-layer neural networks with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) using
gradient descent (GD) method. Our results can be extended to other activation functions that satisfy
some regularity conditions; see [GMMM19, Theorem 2] for an example. The techniques derived and
insights obtained in this paper might be applied to deep neural networks as well, for which similar
matrix representation exists [DZPS18].
Significant progress has been made in understanding the role of over-parameterization in training
neural networks with first-order methods [AZLL18, DZPS18, ADH+ 19, OS19, MMN18, LL18,
ZCZG18, DLL+ 18, AZLS18, CG19]; with proper random network initialization, (stochastic) GD
converges to a (nearly) global minimum provided that the width of the network m is polynomially
large in the size of the training dataset n. However, neural networks seem to interpolate the training
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

