Blocking Bandits
Soumya Basu
UT Austin

Rajat Sen
Amazon

Sujay Sanghavi
UT Austin, Amazon

Sanjay Shakkottai
UT Austin

Abstract
We consider a novel stochastic multi-armed bandit setting, where playing an arm
makes it unavailable for a fixed number of time slots thereafter. This models
situations where reusing an arm too often is undesirable (e.g. making the same
product recommendation repeatedly) or infeasible (e.g. compute job scheduling
on machines). We show that with prior knowledge of the rewards and delays of
all the arms, the problem of optimizing cumulative reward does not admit any
pseudo-polynomial time algorithm (in the number of arms) unless randomized
exponential time hypothesis is false, by mapping to the PINWHEEL scheduling
problem. Subsequently, we show that a simple greedy algorithm that plays the
available arm with the highest reward is asymptotically (1 1/e) optimal. When
the rewards are unknown, we design a UCB based algorithm which is shown to
have c log T + o(log T ) cumulative regret against the greedy algorithm, leveraging
the free exploration of arms due to the unavailability. Finally, when all the delays
are equal the problem reduces to Combinatorial Semi-bandits providing us with a
lower bound of c0 log T + !(log T ).

1

Introduction

We propose Blocking Bandits a novel stochastic multi armed bandits (MAB) problem where there are
multiple arms with i.i.d. stochastic rewards and, additionally, each arm is blocked for a deterministic
number of rounds. In online systems, such blocking constraints arise naturally when repeating an
action within a time frame may be detrimental, or even be infeasible. In data processing systems, a
resource (e.g. a compute node, a GPU) may become unavailable for a certain amount of time when a
job is allocated to it. The detrimental effect is evident in recommendation systems, where it is highly
unlikely to make an individual attracted to a certain product (e.g. book, movie or song) through
incessant recommendations of it. A resting time between recommendations of identical products can
be effective as it maintains diversity.
Surprisingly, this simple yet powerful extension of stochastic MAB problem remains unexplored
despite the plethora of research surrounding the bandits literature [7, 1, 4, 8, 10] from its onset in [25].
Given the extensive research in this field, it is of no surprise that there are multiple existing ways to
model this phenomenon. However, as we discuss such connections next, we observe that none of
these approaches are direct, resulting in either large regret bounds or huge time complexity or both.
We briefly present the problem. There are K arms, where mean reward µi is the reward and Di is the
delay of arm i, for each i = 1 to K. When arm i is played it is blocked for (Di 1) time slots and
becomes available on the Di -th time slot after it’s most recent play. The objective is to collect the
maximum reward in a given time horizon T .
Illustrative Example: Consider three arms: arm 1 with delay 1 and mean reward 1/2, arm 2 with
delay 4 and mean reward 1, and arm 3 with delay 4 and mean reward 1. The reward maximization
objective is met when the arms are played cyclically as 31213121 . . . . There are two observations:
First, due to blocking constraints we are forced to play multiple arms over time. Second, we note that
the order in which arms are played is crucial. To illustrate, an alternate schedule 321 321 . . .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

