Categorized Bandits

Matthieu Jedor
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay & Cdiscount
jedor@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Jonathan Louëdec
Cdiscount
jonathan.louedec@cdiscount.com

Vianney Perchet
CMLA, ENS Paris-Saclay & Criteo AI Lab
perchet@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
We introduce a new stochastic multi-armed bandit setting where arms are grouped
inside “ordered” categories. The motivating example comes from e-commerce,
where a customer typically has a greater appetence for items of a specific wellidentified but unknown category than any other one. We introduce three concepts
of ordering between categories, inspired by stochastic dominance between random
variables, which are gradually weaker so that more and more bandit scenarios
satisfy at least one of them. We first prove instance-dependent lower bounds on the
cumulative regret for each of these models, indicating how the complexity of the
bandit problems increases with the generality of the ordering concept considered.
We also provide algorithms that fully leverage the structure of the model with their
associated theoretical guarantees. Finally, we have conducted an analysis on real
data to highlight that those ordered categories actually exist in practice.

1

Introduction

In the multi-armed bandit problem, an agent has several possible decisions, usually referred to
as “arms”, and chooses or “pulls” sequentially one of them at each time step. This generates a
sequence of rewards and the objective is to maximize their cumulative sum. The performance of
a learning algorithm is then evaluated through the “regret”, which is the difference between the
cumulative reward of an oracle (that knows the best arm in expectation) and the cumulative reward of
the algorithm. There is a clear trade-off arising between gathering information on uncertain arms
(by pulling them more often) and using this information (by choosing greedily the best decision so
far). This tradeoff is usually called “exploration vs exploitation”. Although originally introduced
for adaptive clinical trials [37], multi-armed bandits now play an important role in recommender
systems [30]. However, the traditional bandit model (see Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi [6] for more
details and variants) must be adapted to specific applications to unleash its full power.
Consider for instance e-commerce. One of the core optimization problem is to decide which products
to recommend, or display, to a user landing on a website, in the objective of maximizing the clickthrough-rate or the conversion rate. Arms of recommender systems are the different products that
can be displayed. The number of products, even if finite, is prohibitively huge as the regret, i.e. the
learning cost, typically scale linearly with the number of arms. So agnostic bandit algorithms take
too much time to complete their learning phase. Thankfully, there is an inherent structure behind
a typical catalogue: products are gathered into well defined categories. As customers are generally
interested in only one or a few of them, it seems possible and profitable to gather information across
products to speed up the learning phase and, ultimately, to make more refined recommendations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

