Learning Multiple Markov Chains
via Adaptive Allocation

Mohammad Sadegh Talebi
SequeL Team, Inria Lille – Nord Europe
sadegh.talebi@inria.fr

Odalric-Ambrym Maillard
SequeL Team, Inria Lille – Nord Europe
odalric.maillard@inria.fr

Abstract
We study the problem of learning the transition matrices of a set of Markov chains
from a single stream of observations on each chain. We assume that the Markov
chains are ergodic but otherwise unknown. The learner can sample Markov chains
sequentially to observe their states. The goal of the learner is to sequentially select
various chains to learn transition matrices uniformly well with respect to some
loss function. We introduce a notion of loss that naturally extends the squared loss
for learning distributions to the case of Markov chains, and further characterize
the notion of being uniformly good in all problem instances. We present a novel
learning algorithm that efficiently balances exploration and exploitation intrinsic to
this problem, without any prior knowledge of the chains. We provide finite-sample
PAC-type guarantees on the performance of the algorithm. Further, we show that
our algorithm asymptotically attains an optimal loss.

1

Introduction

We study a variant of the following sequential adaptive allocation problem: A learner is given a
set of K arms, where to each arm k ∈ [K], an unknown real-valued distributions νk with mean µk
and variance σk2 > 0 is associated. At each round t ∈ N, the learner must select an arm kt ∈ [K],
and receives a sample drawn from νk . Given a total budget of n pulls, the objective is to estimate
the expected values (µk )k∈[K] of all distributions uniformly well. The quality of estimation in this
problem is classically measured through the expected
estimation error E[(µk−µ̂k,n )2 ] for the
Pquadratic
n
empirical mean estimate µ̂k,n built with the Tk,n = t=1 I{k = kt } many samples received from νk at
time n, and the performance of an allocation strategy is the maximal error, maxk∈[K] E[(µk −µ̂k,n )2 ].
Using ideas from the Multi-Armed Bandit (MAB) literature, previous works (e.g., [1, 2]) have
provided optimistic sampling strategies with near-optimal performance guarantees for this setup.
This generic adaptive allocation problem is related to several application problems arising in optimal
experiment design [3, 4], active learning [5], or Monte-Carlo methods [6]; we refer to [1, 7, 2, 8] and
references therein for further motivation. We extend this line of work to the case where each process
is a discrete Markov chain, hence introducing the problem of active bandit learning of Markov chains.
More precisely, we no longer assume that (νk )k are real-valued distributions, but we study the case
where each νk is a discrete Markov process over a state space S ⊂ N. TheQ
law of the observations
n
(Xk,i )i∈N on arm (or chain) k is given by νk (Xk,1 , . . . Xk,n ) = pk (Xk,1 ) i=2 Pk (Xk,i−1 , Xk,i ),
where pk denotes the initial distribution of states, and Pk is the transition function of the Markov
chain. The goal of the learner is to learn the transition matrices (Pk )k∈[K] uniformly well on the
chains. Note that the chains are not controlled (we only decide which chain to advance, not the states
it transits to).
Before discussing the challenges of the extension to Markov chains, let us give further comments
on the performance measure considered in bandit allocation for real-valued distributions: Using
the expected quadratic estimation error on each arm k makes sense since when Tk,n , k ∈ [K] are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

