Equal Opportunity in Online Classification with
Partial Feedback
Yahav Bechavod
Hebrew University
yahav.bechavod@cs.huji.ac.il
Aaron Roth
University of Pennsylvania
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Katrina Ligett
Hebrew University
katrina@cs.huji.ac.il

Bo Waggoner
University of Colorado
bwag@colorado.edu

Zhiwei Steven Wu
University of Minnesota
zsw@umn.edu

Abstract
We study an online classification problem with partial feedback in which individuals arrive one at a time from a fixed but unknown distribution, and must be
classified as positive or negative. Our algorithm only observes the true label of an
individual if they are given a positive classification. This setting captures many
classification problems for which fairness is a concern: for example, in criminal
recidivism prediction, recidivism is only observed if the inmate is released; in
lending applications, loan repayment is only observed if the loan is granted. We
require that our algorithms satisfy common statistical fairness constraints (such as
equalizing false positive or negative rates — introduced as “equal opportunity” in
[18]) at every round, with respect to the underlying distribution. We give upper
and lower bounds characterizing the cost of this constraint in terms of the regret
rate (and show that it is mild), and give an oracle efficient algorithm that achieves
the upper bound.1

1

Introduction

Many real-world prediction tasks in which fairness concerns arise — such as online advertising,
short-term hiring, lending micro-loans, and predictive policing — are naturally modeled as online
binary classification problems, but with an important twist: feedback is only received for one of the
two classification outcomes. Clickthrough is only observed if the advertisement is shown; worker
performance is only observed for candidates who were actually hired; those who are denied a loan
never have an opportunity to demonstrate that they would have repaid; only if police troops were
dispatched to a precinct they able to detect unreported crimes. Applying standard techniques for
enforcing statistical fairness constraints on the gathered data can thus lead to pernicious feedback
loops that can lead to classifiers that badly violate these constraints on the underlying distribution.
This kind of failure to “explore” has been highlighted as an important source of algorithmic unfairness
— for example, in predictive policing settings [26, 13, 14].
To avoid this problem, it is important to explicitly manage the exploration/exploitation tradeoff that
characterizes learning in partial feedback settings, which is what we study in this paper. We ask for
algorithms that enforce well-studied statistical fairness constraints across two protected populations
(we focus on the “equal opportunity” constraint of [18], which enforces equalized false positive
rates or false negative rates, but our techniques also apply to other statistical fairness constraints
like “statistical parity” [12]). In particular, we ask for algorithms that satisfy these constraints (with
1

The full version of this paper is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.02242.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

