Prediction of Spatial Point Processes:
Regularized Method with Out-of-Sample Guarantees

Muhammad Osama˚
muhammad.osama@it.uu.se

Dave Zachariah˚
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Peter Stoica˚
peter.stoica@it.uu.se
*Division of System and Control, Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University

Abstract
A spatial point process can be characterized by an intensity function which predicts
the number of events that occur across space. In this paper, we develop a method to
infer predictive intensity intervals by learning a spatial model using a regularized
criterion. We prove that the proposed method exhibits out-of-sample prediction
performance guarantees which, unlike standard estimators, are valid even when the
spatial model is misspecified. The method is demonstrated using synthetic as well
as real spatial data.

1

Introduction

Spatial point processes can be found in a range of applications from astronomy and biology to ecology
and criminology. These processes can be characterized by a nonnegative intensity function λpxq
which predicts the number of events that occur across space parameterized by x P X [8, 4].
A standard approach to estimate the intensity function of a process is to use nonparametric kernel
density-based methods [6, 7]. These smoothing techniques require, however, careful tuning of kernel
bandwidth parameters and are, more importantly, subject to selection biases. That is, in regions
where no events have been observed, the intensity is inferred to be zero and no measure is readily
available for a user to assess the uncertainty of such predictions. More advanced methods infer the
intensity by assuming a parameterized model of the data-generating process, such as inhomogeneous
Poisson point process models. One popular model is the log-Gaussian Cox process (LGCP) model [9]
where the intensity function is modeled as a Gaussian process [22] via a logarithmic link function
to ensure non-negativity. However, the infinite dimensionality of the intensity function makes this
model computationally prohibitive and substantial effort has been devoted to develop more tractable
approximation methods based on gridding [9, 13], variational inference [15, 12], Markov chain
Monte Carlo [2] and Laplace approximations [20] for the log and other link functions. A more
fundamental problem remains in that their resulting uncertainty measures are not calibrated to the
actual out-of-sample variability of the number of events across space. Poor calibration consequently
leads to unreliable inferences of the process.
In this paper, we develop a spatially varying intensity interval with provable out-of-sample performance guarantees. Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• the interval reliably covers out-of-sample events with a specified probability by building on
the conformal prediction framework [19],
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

