Reflection Separation using a Pair of
Unpolarized and Polarized Images

Youwei Lyu1] † Zhaopeng Cui2] Si Li1∗ Marc Pollefeys2 Boxin Shi3,4∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology, Peking University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{youweilv, zhpcui}@gmail.com, lisi@bupt.edu.cn,
marc.pollefeys@inf.ethz.ch, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
When we take photos through glass windows or doors, the transmitted background
scene is often blended with undesirable reflection. Separating two layers apart
to enhance the image quality is of vital importance for both human and machine
perception. In this paper, we propose to exploit physical constraints from a pair of
unpolarized and polarized images to separate reflection and transmission layers.
Due to the simplified capturing setup, the system becomes more underdetermined
compared with existing polarization based solutions that take three or more images
as input. We propose to solve semireflector orientation estimation first to make the
physical image formation well-posed and then learn to reliably separate two layers
using a refinement network with gradient loss. Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show our approach performs favorably over existing polarization
and single image based solutions.

1

Introduction

Taking photos of a scene behind semireflectors (e.g., glass windows and doors) without reflection
contamination is not an easy task for photographers, because the captured image often contains two
layers of the scene: the layer transmitting through the surface and the other layer reflected by the
surface. To separate the reflection and transmission layers is not an easy task for computer vision
researchers either, because recovering two images from a single mixture image is highly ill-posed
and the number of unknowns is twice as many as that of given measurements. Strong priors crafted
from natural image statistics (e.g., gradient sparsity [14]) or learned from deep neural networks
(e.g., [6]) can solve the problem if the assumed priors are well observed in the input. The problem
naturally becomes less ill-posed if multiple images are captured from different viewpoints (e.g., five
images in [15]) or different polarization angles (e.g., at least three images in [12]). The motions
between the layers present in multiple images provide a strong and effective constraint, but aligning
multiple-view images contaminated by reflections is not a trivial task [15]. Rotating a polarizer to
capture multiple images doesn’t suffer from the alignment issue [12], but it requires skillful operations
and the polarized images always filter part of the incoming light.
In this paper, we propose to separate reflection and transmission layers using a pair of unpolarized
and polarized images. Such a setup takes fewer images than existing polarization based solutions
]

Authors contributed equally to this work.
Part of this work was finished as a visiting student at Peking University.
∗
Corresponding authors.
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

