On Making Stochastic Classifiers Deterministic
Andrew Cotter, Harikrishna Narasimhan, Maya Gupta
Google Research
1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy, Mountain View, CA 94043
{acotter,hnarasimhan,mayagupta}@google.com

Abstract
Stochastic classifiers arise in a number of machine learning problems, and have
become especially prominent of late, as they often result from constrained optimization problems, e.g. for fairness, churn, or custom losses. Despite their utility,
the inherent randomness of stochastic classifiers may cause them to be problematic
to use in practice for a variety of practical reasons. In this paper, we attempt to
answer the theoretical question of how well a stochastic classifier can be approximated by a deterministic one, and compare several different approaches, proving
lower and upper bounds. We also experimentally investigate the pros and cons of
these methods, not only in regard to how successfully each deterministic classifier
approximates the original stochastic classifier, but also in terms of how well each
addresses the other issues that can make stochastic classifiers undesirable.

1

Introduction

Stochastic classifiers arise in a variety of machine learning problems. For example, they are produced
by constrained training problems [1–5], where one seeks to optimize a classification objective subject
to goals such as fairness, recall and churn. The use of stochastic classifiers turns out to be crucial in
making such constrained optimization problems tractable, due to the potentially non-convex nature of
the constraints [4]. For similar reasons, stochastic classifiers are important for optimizing custom
evaluation metrics such as robust optimization [6], or the G-mean or the H-mean metrics popular
in class-imbalanced classification tasks [7–12]. Stochastic classifiers also arise in the PAC-Bayes
literature [e.g. 13–16], in ensemble learning [17].
Despite their utility in theory, the inherent randomness of stochastic classifiers may be problematic
in practice. In some cases, practitioners may object to stochastic classifiers on ethical grounds, or
because they are difficult to debug, test, and visualize, or they will cite the added complexity that
they can bring to a real-world production system. Worse, in some settings, it might simply not make
sense to use a stochastic classifier. For example, suppose that a classifier is trained to filter spam from
emails, and if applied once to an email it accurately rejects spam 99% of the time. If a stochastic
classifier is used, then the spammer could simply send hundreds of copies, confident that some will
randomly pass through the stochastic classifier.
Similarly, although stochastic classifiers often arise from optimizing for statistical fairness measures,
they may seem unfair because their randomness may make them fail at another popular fairness
principle, that similar individuals should receive similar outcomes [18]. Indeed, when using a
stochastic classifier, even the same example may receive different outcomes, if it is classified twice.
For all of these reasons, stochastic classifiers can be undesirable, but they are often difficult to avoid.
For example, when solving constrained optimization problems subject to non-convex constraints,

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

