A Step Toward Quantifying Independently
Reproducible Machine Learning Research

Edward Raff
Booz Allen Hamilton
raff_edward@bah.com
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
raff.edward@umbc.edu

Abstract
What makes a paper independently reproducible? Debates on reproducibility center around intuition or assumptions but lack empirical results. Our field focuses
on releasing code, which is important, but is not sufficient for determining reproducibility. We take the first step toward a quantifiable answer by manually attempting to implement 255 papers published from 1984 until 2017, recording features
of each paper, and performing statistical analysis of the results. For each paper,
we did not look at the authors code, if released, in order to prevent bias toward
discrepancies between code and paper.

1

Introduction

As the fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) have grown in recent years,
so too have calls that we are currently in an AI/ML reproducibility crisis [1]. Conferences, such as
NeurIPS, have added reproducibility as a factor in the reviewing cycle or implemented policies to
encourage code sharing. Many are pursing work centered around code and data availability as one
of the more direct methods of enhancing reproducibility. For example, Dror et al. [2] developed a
proposal to standardize the description and release of datasets. Others have proposed taxonomies
and ontologies over reproducibility based on the availability of algorithm description, code, and
data [3, 4]. Others have focused on building frameworks for sharing code and automation of hyper
parameter selection in order to enable easier reconstruction of results [5].
While the ability to replicate the results of papers through open sourced code and data is valuable
and should be lauded, it has been argued that releasing code is insufficient [6]. The inability to
reproduce results without code availability may suggest problems with the paper. This may be due to
the following: insufficient explanation of the approach, failure to describe important minute details,
or a discrepancy between the code and description. We will call the act of reproducing the results of a
paper without use of code from the paper’s authors, independent reproducibility. We argue that for a
paper to be scientifically sound and complete, it should be independently reproducible.
The question we wish to answer in this work is what makes a paper independently reproducible?
Many have argued fiercely for different aspects of writing and publishing as critical factors of
reproducability. Quantifiable study of these efforts is needed to advance the conversation. Otherwise,
we as a community will not have scientific understanding that our work is addressing aspects of
reproducibility. Gundersen and Kjensmo [7] defined several paper-properties of interest in regard to
reproducibility. However, they defined a paper as reproducible purely as a function of the features
without knowing if the selected features (e.g., method is described, data is available) actually impact
a paper’s reproducibility.
As a first step toward answering this question, we performed a study of 255 papers that we have
attempted to implement independently. We developed the first empirical quantification about indepen33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

