Calibration tests in multi-class classification:
A unifying framework

David Widmann
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
david.widmann@it.uu.se

Fredrik Lindsten
Division of Statistics and Machine Learning
Linköping University, Sweden
fredrik.lindsten@liu.se

Dave Zachariah
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University, Sweden
dave.zachariah@it.uu.se

Abstract
In safety-critical applications a probabilistic model is usually required to be calibrated, i.e., to capture the uncertainty of its predictions accurately. In multi-class
classification, calibration of the most confident predictions only is often not sufficient. We propose and study calibration measures for multi-class classification that
generalize existing measures such as the expected calibration error, the maximum
calibration error, and the maximum mean calibration error. We propose and evaluate empirically different consistent and unbiased estimators for a specific class of
measures based on matrix-valued kernels. Importantly, these estimators can be interpreted as test statistics associated with well-defined bounds and approximations
of the p-value under the null hypothesis that the model is calibrated, significantly
improving the interpretability of calibration measures, which otherwise lack any
meaningful unit or scale.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of analyzing microscopic images of tissue samples and reporting a tumour grade,
i.e., a score that indicates whether cancer cells are well-differentiated or not, affecting both prognosis
and treatment of patients. Since for some pathological images not even experienced pathologists
might all agree on one classification, this task contains an inherent component of uncertainty. This
type of uncertainty that can not be removed by increasing the size of the training data set is typically
called aleatoric uncertainty (Kiureghian and Ditlevsen, 2009). Unfortunately, even if the ideal model
is among the class of models we consider, with a finite training data set we will never obtain the
ideal model but we can only hope to learn a model that is, in some sense, close to it. Worse still, our
model might not even be close to the ideal model if the model class is too restrictive or the number of
training data is small—which is not unlikely given the fact that annotating pathological images is
expensive. Thus ideally our model should be able to express not only aleatoric uncertainty but also
the uncertainty about the model itself. In contrast to aleatoric uncertainty this so-called epistemic
uncertainty can be reduced by additional training data.
Dealing with these different types of uncertainty is one of the major problems in machine learning.
The application of our model in clinical practice demands “meaningful” uncertainties to avoid doing
harm to patients. Being too certain about high tumour grades might cause harm due to unneeded
aggressive therapies and overly pessimistic prognoses, whereas being too certain about low tumour
grades might result in insufficient therapies. “Proper” uncertainty estimates are also crucial if the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

