Surfing: Iterative Optimization Over
Incrementally Trained Deep Networks

Ganlin Song
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
ganlin.song@yale.edu

Zhou Fan
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
zhou.fan@yale.edu

John Lafferty
Department of Statistics and Data Science
Yale University
john.lafferty@yale.edu

Abstract
We investigate a sequential optimization procedure to minimize the empirical
risk functional fθb(x) = 21 kGθb(x) − yk2 for certain families of deep networks
Gθ (x). The approach is to optimize a sequence of objective functions that use
network parameters obtained during different stages of the training process. When
initialized with random parameters θ0 , we show that the objective fθ0 (x) is “nice”
and easy to optimize with gradient descent. As learning is carried out, we obtain a
sequence of generative networks x 7→ Gθt (x) and associated risk functions fθt (x),
where t indicates a stage of stochastic gradient descent during training. Since the
parameters of the network do not change by very much in each step, the surface
evolves slowly and can be incrementally optimized. The algorithm is formalized
and analyzed for a family of expansive networks. We call the procedure surfing
since it rides along the peak of the evolving (negative) empirical risk function,
starting from a smooth surface at the beginning of learning and ending with a wavy
nonconvex surface after learning is complete. Experiments show how surfing can
be used to find the global optimum and for compressed sensing even when direct
gradient descent on the final learned network fails.

1

Introduction

Intensive recent research has provided insight into the performance and mathematical properties of
deep neural networks, improving understanding of their strong empirical performance on different
types of data. Some of this work has investigated gradient descent algorithms that optimize the
weights of deep networks during learning (Du et al., 2018b,a; Davis et al., 2018; Li and Yuan, 2017;
Li and Liang, 2018). In this paper we focus on optimization over the inputs to an already trained deep
network in order to best approximate a target data point. Specifically, we consider the least squares
objective function
1
kG b(x) − yk2
2 θ
where Gθ (x) denotes a multi-layer feed-forward network and θb denotes the parameters of the network
after training. The network is considered to be a mapping from a latent input x ∈ Rk to an output
Gθ (x) ∈ Rn with k ≪ n. A closely related objective is to minimize fθ,A (x) = 21 kAGθ (x) − Ayk2
where A is a random matrix.
fθb(x) =

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

