Modeling Tabular Data using Conditional GAN

Lei Xu
MIT LIDS
Cambridge, MA
leix@mit.edu

Maria Skoularidou
MRC-BSU, University of Cambridge
Cambridge, UK
ms2407@cam.ac.uk

Alfredo Cuesta-Infante
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
Móstoles, Spain
alfredo.cuesta@urjc.es

Kalyan Veeramachaneni
MIT LIDS
Cambridge, MA
kalyanv@mit.edu

Abstract
Modeling the probability distribution of rows in tabular data and generating realistic
synthetic data is a non-trivial task. Tabular data usually contains a mix of discrete
and continuous columns. Continuous columns may have multiple modes whereas
discrete columns are sometimes imbalanced making the modeling difficult. Existing
statistical and deep neural network models fail to properly model this type of data.
We design CTGAN, which uses a conditional generator to address these challenges.
To aid in a fair and thorough comparison, we design a benchmark with 7 simulated
and 8 real datasets and several Bayesian network baselines. CTGAN outperforms
Bayesian methods on most of the real datasets whereas other deep learning methods
could not.

1

Introduction

Recent developments in deep generative models have led to a wealth of possibilities. Us- Table 1: The number of wins of a particular method
ing images and text, these models can learn compared with the corresponding Bayesian network
probability distributions and draw high-quality against an appropriate metric on 8 real datasets.
realistic samples. Over the past two years,
the promise of such models has encouraged
outperform
the development of generative adversarial netMethod CLBN [7] PrivBN [28]
works (GANs) [10] for tabular data generaMedGAN, 2017 [6]
1
1
tion. GANs offer greater flexibility in modelVeeGAN, 2017 [21]
0
2
ing distributions than their statistical counterTableGAN, 2018 [18]
3
3
parts. This proliferation of new GANs necessitates an evaluation mechanism. To evaluate
CTGAN
7
8
these GANs, we used a group of real datasets
to set-up a benchmarking system and implemented three of the most recent techniques. For comparison purposes, we created two baseline
methods using Bayesian networks. After testing these models using both simulated and real datasets,
we found that modeling tabular data poses unique challenges for GANs, causing them to fall short
of the baseline methods on a number of metrics such as likelihood fitness and machine learning
efficacy of the synthetically generated data. These challenges include the need to simultaneously
model discrete and continuous columns, the multi-modal non-Gaussian values within each continuous
column, and the severe imbalance of categorical columns (described in Section 3).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

