Incremental Few-Shot Learning with Attention
Attractor Networks
Mengye Ren1,2,3 , Renjie Liao1,2,3 , Ethan Fetaya1,2 , Richard S. Zemel1,2
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Uber ATG
{mren, rjliao, ethanf, zemel}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Machine learning classifiers are often trained to recognize a set of pre-defined
classes. However, in many applications, it is often desirable to have the flexibility
of learning additional concepts, with limited data and without re-training on the
full training set. This paper addresses this problem, incremental few-shot learning,
where a regular classification network has already been trained to recognize a
set of base classes, and several extra novel classes are being considered, each
with only a few labeled examples. After learning the novel classes, the model is
then evaluated on the overall classification performance on both base and novel
classes. To this end, we propose a meta-learning model, the Attention Attractor
Network, which regularizes the learning of novel classes. In each episode, we
train a set of new weights to recognize novel classes until they converge, and
we show that the technique of recurrent back-propagation can back-propagate
through the optimization process and facilitate the learning of these parameters.
We demonstrate that the learned attractor network can help recognize novel classes
while remembering old classes without the need to review the original training set,
outperforming various baselines.

1

Introduction

The availability of large scale datasets with detailed annotation, such as ImageNet [30], played a
significant role in the recent success of deep learning. The need for such a large dataset is however a
limitation, since its collection requires intensive human labor. This is also strikingly different from
human learning, where new concepts can be learned from very few examples. One line of work
that attempts to bridge this gap is few-shot learning [16, 36, 33], where a model learns to output a
classifier given only a few labeled examples of the unseen classes. While this is a promising line
of work, its practical usability is a concern, because few-shot models only focus on learning novel
classes, ignoring the fact that many common classes are readily available in large datasets.
An approach that aims to enjoy the best of both worlds, the ability to learn from large datasets for
common classes with the flexibility of few-shot learning for others, is incremental few-shot learning
[9]. This combines incremental learning where we want to add new classes without catastrophic
forgetting [20], with few-shot learning when the new classes, unlike the base classes, only have a
small amount of examples. One use case to illustrate the problem is a visual aid system. Most objects
of interest are common to all users, e.g., cars, pedestrian signals; however, users would also like to
augment the system with additional personalized items or important landmarks in their area. Such a
system needs to be able to learn new classes from few examples, without harming the performance
on the original classes and typically without access to the dataset used to train the original classes.
In this work we present a novel method for incremental few-shot learning where during meta-learning
we optimize a regularizer that reduces catastrophic forgetting from the incremental few-shot learning.
Our proposed regularizer is inspired by attractor networks [42] and can be thought of as a memory of
the base classes, adapted to the new classes. We also show how this regularizer can be optimized,
using recurrent back-propagation [18, 1, 25] to back-propagate through the few-shot optimization
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

