Adaptive Sequence Submodularity

Marko Mitrovic
Yale University
marko.mitrovic@yale.edu
Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Ehsan Kazemi
Yale University
ehsan.kazemi@yale.edu

Moran Feldman
University of Haifa
moranfe@openu.ac.il

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, one needs to interactively select a sequence
of items (e.g., recommending movies based on a user’s feedback) or make sequential decisions in a certain order (e.g., guiding an agent through a series of
states). Not only do sequences already pose a dauntingly large search space, but we
must also take into account past observations, as well as the uncertainty of future
outcomes. Without further structure, finding an optimal sequence is notoriously
challenging, if not completely intractable. In this paper, we view the problem of
adaptive and sequential decision making through the lens of submodularity and
propose an adaptive greedy policy with strong theoretical guarantees. Additionally,
to demonstrate the practical utility of our results, we run experiments on Amazon
product recommendation and Wikipedia link prediction tasks.

1

Introduction

The machine learning community has long recognized the importance of both sequential and adaptive
decision making. The study of sequences has led to novel neural architectures such as LSTMs [26],
which have been used in a variety of applications ranging from machine translation [52] to image
captioning [56]. Similarly, the study of adaptivity has led to the establishment of some of the most
popular subfields of machine learning including active learning [48] and reinforcement learning [53].
In this paper, we consider the optimization of problems where both sequences and adaptivity are
integral part of the process. More specifically, we focus on problems that can be modeled as selecting
a sequence of items, where each of these items takes on some (initially unknown) state. The idea is
that the value of any sequence depends not only on the items selected and the order of these items but
also on the states of these items.
Consider recommender systems as a running example. To start, the order in which we recommend
items can be just as important as the items themselves. For instance, if we believe that a user will
enjoy the Lord of the Rings franchise, it is vital that we recommend the movies in the proper order. If
we suggest that the user watches the final installment first, she may end up completely unsatisfied with
an otherwise excellent recommendation. Furthermore, whether it is explicit feedback (such as rating
a movie on Netflix) or implicit feedback (such as clicking/not clicking on an advertisement), most
recommender systems are constantly interacting with and adapting to each user. It is this feedback
that allows us to learn about the states of items we have already selected, as well as make inferences
about the states of items we have not selected yet.
Unfortunately, the expressive modeling power of sequences and adaptivity comes at a cost. Not
only does optimizing over sequences instead of sets exponentially increase the size of the search
space, but adaptivity also necessitates a probabilistic approach that further complicates the problem.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

