STREETS: A Novel Camera Network Dataset for Traffic Flow

Corey Snyder
University of Illinois
cesnyde2@illinois.edu

Minh N. Do
University of Illinois
minhdo@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce STREETS, a novel traffic flow dataset from publicly
available web cameras in the suburbs of Chicago, IL. We seek to address the
limitations of existing datasets in this area. Many such datasets lack a coherent
traffic network graph to describe the relationship between sensors. The datasets
that do provide a graph depict traffic flow in urban population centers or highway
systems and use costly sensors like induction loops. These contexts differ from
that of a suburban traffic body. Our dataset provides over 4 million still images
across 2.5 months and one hundred web cameras in suburban Lake County, IL. We
divide the cameras into two distinct communities described by directed graphs and
count vehicles to track traffic statistics. Our goal is to give researchers a benchmark
dataset for exploring the capabilities of inexpensive and non-invasive sensors like
web cameras to understand complex traffic bodies in communities of any size. We
present benchmarking tasks and baseline results for one such task to guide how
future work may use our dataset.

1

Introduction

Intelligent transportation systems and smart cities have recently become active areas of research
with a wide variety of applications. Tasks like pedestrian tracking, traffic forecasting, and vehicle
re-identification have attracted interest from researchers in network science, computer vision, graph
signal processing, and many other fields. In this paper, we focus on problems associated with
vehicular traffic flow in a road network and the data sources that enable this work.
Data for traffic forecasting can come from multiple different perspectives. Third party applications
like Google Maps track floating car data [1] to extrapolate the traffic state from probe vehicles.
These probe vehicles are seen as being representative of the current traffic flow. While effective,
there are concerns regarding privacy when floating data is used [2]. Furthermore, there is not
necessarily effective information sharing with local transportation authorities where it could be
beneficial. Automotive manufacturers have begun producing internet-connected vehicles known as
connected vehicles. These connected vehicles communicate within the Internet of Things at junctions
like traffic signals and provide information for understanding traffic, similar to probe vehicles [3].
The distinct advantage here is that the vehicle information can be communicated directly to local
authorities through the traffic signals. However, connected vehicle technology is still rather new
and concerns about adequate connected vehicle penetration show that it may be a while before
enough vehicles are equipped with this technology to leverage this data source [4]. Cities and transit
authorities employ a wide array of sensing technology between in-roadway and over-roadway sensors
to monitor traffic. The most popular in-roadway sensor is the inductive loop detector while cameras
and radar systems provide over-roadway sensing [5]. In-roadway sensors, while typically accurate
and well-controlled, are both expensive and invasive upon installation and maintenance as the road
must be physically taken apart. Web cameras are appealing since they are relatively inexpensive, can
be deployed noninvasively, and may capture more than just vehicular traffic, e.g. pedestrians and
background information such as accidents, construction, and poor road conditions.
We believe that camera networks and their inherent graph-based structure have been under-utilized
as a data source for monitoring traffic bodies. In brief, previous work using camera networks has
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

