Divide and Couple: Using Monte Carlo Variational
Objectives for Posterior Approximation

1

Justin Domke1 and Daniel Sheldon1,2
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
2
Department of Computer Science, Mount Holyoke College

Abstract
Recent work in variational inference (VI) uses ideas from Monte Carlo estimation to
tighten the lower bounds on the log-likelihood that are used as objectives. However,
there is no systematic understanding of how optimizing different objectives relates
to approximating the posterior distribution. Developing such a connection is
important if the ideas are to be applied to inference—i.e., applications that require
an approximate posterior and not just an approximation of the log-likelihood. Given
a VI objective defined by a Monte Carlo estimator of the likelihood, we use a "divide
and couple" procedure to identify augmented proposal and target distributions. The
divergence between these is equal to the gap between the VI objective and the
log-likelihood. Thus, after maximizing the VI objective, the augmented variational
distribution may be used to approximate the posterior distribution.

1

Introduction

Variational inference (VI) is a leading approximate inference method in which a posterior distribution
p(z|x) is approximated by a simpler distribution q(z) from some approximating family. The procedure
to select q is based on the decomposition that [29]

p(z, x)
log p(x) = E log
+ KL[q(z)kp(z|x)].
(1)
q(z)
q(z)
The first term is the evidence lower bound (ELBO) [4]. Selecting q to maximize the ELBO tightens
the lower bound on log p(x) and simultaneously minimizes the KL-divergence in the second term.
This dual view is important because minimizing the KL-divergence justifies using q to approximate
the posterior for making predictions.
Recent work has investigated tighter objectives [6, 20, 18, 17, 23, 25], based on the following
principle: Let R be an estimator of the likelihood—i.e., a nonnegative random variable with E R =
p(x). By Jensen’s inequality, log p(x)
E log R, so log R is a stochastic lower bound on the
log-likelihood. Parameters of the estimator can be optimized to tighten the bound. Standard VI is the
case when R = p(z, x)/q(z) and z ⇠ q, which is parameterized in terms of q. Importance-weighted
PM
1
autoencoders [IWAEs; 6] essentially use R = M
m=1 p(zm , x)/q(zm ) where z1 . . . zM ⇠ q are
iid. Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) also gives a variational objective [20, 18, 17]. The principle
underlying these works is that likelihood estimators that are more concentrated lead to tighter bounds,
because the gap in Jensen’s inequality is smaller. To date, the main application has been for learning
parameters of the generative model p.
Our key question is: what are the implications of modified variational objectives for probabilistic inference? Eq. (1) relates the standard ELBO to KL[qkp], which justifies using q for posterior inference.
If we optimize a variational objective obtained from a different estimator, does this still correspond to
minimizing some KL-divergence? It has been shown [10, 20, 11] that maximizing the IWAE objective
corresponds to minimizing (an upper bound to) KL[q IS (z)kp(z|x)], where q IS is a version of q that is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

