Making AI Forget You:
Data Deletion in Machine Learning
Antonio A. Ginart1 , Melody Y. Guan2 , Gregory Valiant2 , and James Zou3
1

Dept. of Electrical Engineering
2
Dept. of Computer Science
3
Dept. of Biomedial Data Science
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA 94305
{tginart, mguan, valiant, jamesz}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Intense recent discussions have focused on how to provide individuals with control
over when their data can and cannot be used — the EU’s Right To Be Forgotten
regulation is an example of this effort. In this paper we initiate a framework studying
what to do when it is no longer permissible to deploy models derivative from specific
user data. In particular, we formulate the problem of efficiently deleting individual
data points from trained machine learning models. For many standard ML models,
the only way to completely remove an individual’s data is to retrain the whole model
from scratch on the remaining data, which is often not computationally practical.
We investigate algorithmic principles that enable efficient data deletion in ML.
For the specific setting of k-means clustering, we propose two provably efficient
deletion algorithms which achieve an average of over 100× improvement in deletion
efficiency across 6 datasets, while producing clusters of comparable statistical
quality to a canonical k-means++ baseline.

1

Introduction

Recently, one of the authors received the redacted email below, informing us that an individual’s data
cannot be used any longer. The UK Biobank [79] is one of the most valuable collections of genetic
and medical records with half a million participants. Thousands of machine learning classifiers are
trained on this data, and thousands of papers have been published using this data.
EMAIL –– UK BIOBANK ––
Subject: UK Biobank Application [REDACTED], Participant Withdrawal Notification [REDACTED]
Dear Researcher,
As you are aware, participants are free to withdraw form the UK Biobank at any time and request that their
data no longer be used. Since our last review, some participants involved with Application [REDACTED]
have requested that their data should longer be used.

The email request from the UK Biobank illustrates a fundamental challenge the broad data science
and policy community is grappling with: how should we provide individuals with flexible control
over how corporations, governments, and researchers use their data? Individuals could decide at
any time that they do not wish for their personal data to be used for a particular purpose by a particular
entity. This ability is sometimes legally enforced. For example, the European Union’s General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and former Right to Be Forgotten [24, 23] both require that
companies and organizations enable users to withdraw consent to their data at any time under certain
circumstances. These regulations broadly affect international companies and technology platforms
with EU customers and users. Legal scholars have pointed out that the continued use of AI systems
directly trained on deleted data could be considered illegal under certain interpretations and ultimately
concluded that: it may be impossible to fulfill the legal aims of the Right to be Forgotten in artificial
intelligence environments [86]. Furthermore, so-called model-inversion attacks have demonstrated
the capability of adversaries to extract user information from trained ML models [85].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

