MarginGAN: Adversarial Training in
Semi-Supervised Learning

Jinhao Dong
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Xidian University
Xi’an 710126, China
jhdong@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Tong Lin∗
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE
School of EECS, Peking University, Beijing,
& Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen
lintong@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A Margin Generative Adversarial Network (MarginGAN) is proposed for semisupervised learning problems. Like Triple-GAN, the proposed MarginGAN consists of three components—a generator, a discriminator and a classifier, among
which two forms of adversarial training arise. The discriminator is trained as usual
to distinguish real examples from fake examples produced by the generator. The
new feature is that the classifier attempts to increase the margin of real examples
and to decrease the margin of fake examples. On the contrary, the purpose of
the generator is yielding realistic and large-margin examples in order to fool the
discriminator and the classifier simultaneously. Pseudo labels are used for generated and unlabeled examples in training. Our method is motivated by the success
of large-margin classifiers and the recent viewpoint that good semi-supervised
learning requires a “bad” GAN. Experiments on benchmark datasets testify that
MarginGAN is orthogonal to several state-of-the-art methods, offering improved
error rates and shorter training time as well.

1

Introduction

In the real world, unlabeled data can usually be obtained relatively easily, while manually labeled
data costs a lot. Therefore, semi-supervised learning (SSL), which learns by using large amounts of
unlabeled data with limited labeled data, meets a variety of practical needs.
Pseudo labels are artificial labels of unlabeled data to play the same role as labels of manually
annotated data, which is a simple and effective method in semi-supervised learning. Several traditional
SSL methods, such as self-training [1–3] and co-training [4], are based on pseudo labels. In the past
few years, deep neural network has made a great advancement in SSL, and hence the idea of pseudo
labels is incorporated into deep learning to leverage unlabeled data. In [5] the class with the maximum
predicted probability is picked as the pseudo label. Temporal Ensembling proposed in [6] uses a
ensemble prediction as the pseudo label, which is an exponential moving average of label predictions
on different epochs, under different regularization and input augmentation conditions. In contrast
to [6] where label predictions are averaged, in the Mean Teacher approach [7] model weights are
averaged instead. The role pseudo labels play in [5] and [6, 7] is not exactly the same. Pseudo labels
in [5] have the identical effect with ground-truth labels to minimize the cross-entropy loss, whereas
pseudo labels in [6, 7] serve as targets for the prediction to achieve consistency regularization, which
can make the classifier give consistent outputs for similar data points.
Recently, generative adversarial networks (GANs) has been applied to SSL and obtained amazing
results. The method of Feature Matching (FM) GANs proposed in [8] substitutes the original binary
∗

T. Lin is the corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

