arXiv:1809.03113v6 [cs.LG] 10 Nov 2019

Certiﬁed Adversarial Robustness
with Additive Noise
Bai Li
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
bai.li@duke.edu

Changyou Chen
Department of CSE
University at Buffalo, SUNY
cchangyou@gmail.com
Lawrence Carin
Department of ECE
Duke University
lcarin@duke.edu

Wenlin Wang
Department of ECE
Duke University
wenlin.wang@duke.edu

Abstract
The existence of adversarial data examples has drawn signiﬁcant attention in the
deep-learning community; such data are seemingly minimally perturbed relative to
the original data, but lead to very different outputs from a deep-learning algorithm.
Although a signiﬁcant body of work on developing defensive models has been
considered, most such models are heuristic and are often vulnerable to adaptive
attacks. Defensive methods that provide theoretical robustness guarantees have
been studied intensively, yet most fail to obtain non-trivial robustness when a
large-scale model and data are present. To address these limitations, we introduce
a framework that is scalable and provides certiﬁed bounds on the norm of the input
manipulation for constructing adversarial examples. We establish a connection
between robustness against adversarial perturbation and additive random noise, and
propose a training strategy that can signiﬁcantly improve the certiﬁed bounds. Our
evaluation on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and ImageNet suggests that the proposed method
is scalable to complicated models and large data sets, while providing competitive
robustness to state-of-the-art provable defense methods.

1

Introduction

Although deep neural networks have achieved signiﬁcant success on a variety of challenging machine
learning tasks, including state-of-the-art accuracy on large-scale image classiﬁcation [1, 2], the
discovery of adversarial examples [3] has drawn attention and raised concerns. Adversarial examples
are carefully perturbed versions of the original data that successfully fool a classiﬁer. In the image
domain, for example, adversarial examples are images that have no visual difference from natural
images, but that lead to different classiﬁcation results [4].
A large body of work has been developed on defensive methods to tackle adversarial examples, yet
most remain vulnerable to adaptive attacks [3–10]. A major drawback of many defensive models is
that they are heuristic and fail to obtain a theoretically justiﬁed guarantee of robustness. On the other
hand, many works have focused on providing provable/certiﬁed robustness of deep neural networks
[11–17].
Recently, [18] provided theoretical insight on certiﬁed robust prediction, building a connection
between differential privacy and model robustness. It was shown that adding properly chosen noise
to the classiﬁer will lead to certiﬁed robust prediction. Building on ideas in [18], we conduct an
analysis of model robustness based on Rényi divergence [19] between the outputs of models for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

