Deep imitation learning for
molecular inverse problems

Eric Jonas
Department of Computer Science
University of Chicago
ericj@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Many measurement modalities arise from well-understood physical processes and
result in information-rich but difficult-to-interpret data. Much of this data still
requires laborious human interpretation. This is the case in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, where the observed spectrum of a molecule provides a
distinguishing fingerprint of its bond structure. Here we solve the resulting inverse
problem: given a molecular formula and a spectrum, can we infer the chemical
structure? We show for a wide variety of molecules we can quickly compute the
correct molecular structure, and can detect with reasonable certainty when our
method fails. We treat this as a problem of graph-structured prediction where,
armed with per-vertex information on a subset of the vertices, we infer the edges
and edge types. We frame the problem as a Markov decision process (MDP) and incrementally construct molecules one bond at a time, training a deep neural network
via imitation learning, where we learn to imitate a subisomorphic oracle which
knows which remaining bonds are correct. Our method is fast, accurate, and is
the first among recent chemical-graph generation approaches to exploit per-vertex
information and generate graphs with vertex constraints. Our method points the
way towards automation of molecular structure identification and active learning
for spectroscopy.

1

Introduction

Understanding the molecular structure of unknown and novel substances is a long-standing problem
in chemistry, and is frequently addressed via spectroscopic techniques, which measure how materials
interact with electromagnetic radiation. One type of spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) measures properties about individual nuclei in the molecule. This information
can be used to determine the molecular structure, and indeed this is a common, if laborious, exercise
taught to organic chemistry students.
Although not usually conceived of as such, this is actually an inverse problem. Inverse problems
are problems where we attempt to invert a known forward model y = f (x) to make inferences
about the unobserved x from measurements y. Inverse problems are at the heart of many important
measurement modalities, including computational photography [31], medical imaging [5], and
microscopy [22]. In these cases, the measurement model is often linear, that is f (x) = Ax, and the
recovered x is a vector in a high-dimensional vector space (see [24] for a review ). Crucially, A is
both linear and well-known, as a result of extensive hardware engineering and calibration.
Nonlinear inverse problems have a non-linear forward model f , and structured inverse problems
impose additional structural constraints on the recovered x, like being a graph or a permutation matrix.
Spectroscopy is an example of this sort of problem, where we wish to recover the graph structure of
a given molecule from its spectroscopic measurements. Yet we still know f very well, in the case
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

