Learning New Tricks From Old Dogs: Multi-Source
Transfer Learning From Pre-Trained Networks

Joshua Ka-Wing Lee
Dept. EECS, MIT
jk_lee@mit.edu

Prasanna Sattigeri
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research
psattig@us.ibm.com

Gregory W. Wornell
Dept. EECS, MIT
gww@mit.edu

Abstract
The advent of deep learning algorithms for mobile devices and sensors has led to
a dramatic expansion in the availability and number of systems trained on a wide
range of machine learning tasks, creating a host of opportunities and challenges in
the realm of transfer learning. Currently, most transfer learning methods require
some kind of control over the systems learned, either by enforcing constraints during the source training, or through the use of a joint optimization objective between
tasks that requires all data be co-located for training. However, for practical, privacy, or other reasons, in a variety of applications we may have no control over the
individual source task training, nor access to source training samples. Instead we
only have access to features pre-trained on such data as the output of “black-boxes.”
For such scenarios, we consider the multi-source learning problem of training a
classifier using an ensemble of pre-trained neural networks for a set of classes that
have not been observed by any of the source networks, and for which we have
very few training samples. We show that by using these distributed networks as
feature extractors, we can train an effective classifier in a computationally-efficient
manner using tools from (nonlinear) maximal correlation analysis. In particular,
we develop a method we refer to as maximal correlation weighting (MCW) to build
the required target classifier from an appropriate weighting of the feature functions
from the source networks. We illustrate the effectiveness of the resulting classifier on datasets derived from the CIFAR-100, Stanford Dogs, and Tiny ImageNet
datasets, and, in addition, use the methodology to characterize the relative value of
different source tasks in learning a target task.

1

Introduction

Recently, the development of efficient algorithms for training deep neural networks on diverse
platforms with limited interaction has created both opportunities and challenges for deep learning.
An emerging example involves training networks on mobile devices [8, 23, 14]. In such cases, while
each user’s device may be training on a different set of data with a different classification objective,
multi-task learning techniques can be used to leverage these separate datasets in order to transfer to
new tasks for which we observe few samples.
However, most existing methods require some aspect of control over the training on the source
datasets. Either all the datasets must be located on the same device for training based on some joint
optimization criterion, or the overall architecture requires some level of control over the training
for each individual source dataset. In the case of, e.g., object classification in images collected by
users, sending this data to a central location for processing may be impractical, or even a violation of
privacy rights. Alternatively, it is possible that one might wish to use older, pre-trained classifiers for
which the original training data is no longer available, and to transfer them for use in a new task. In
either case, it could be acceptable to transmit the neural network features learned by the device in an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

