Structured Prediction with Projection Oracles
Mathieu Blondel
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
Kyoto, Japan
mathieu@mblondel.org

Abstract
We propose in this paper a general framework for deriving loss functions for
structured prediction. In our framework, the user chooses a convex set including
the output space and provides an oracle for projecting onto that set. Given that
oracle, our framework automatically generates a corresponding convex and smooth
loss function. As we show, adding a projection as output layer provably makes the
loss smaller. We identify the marginal polytope, the output space’s convex hull,
as the best convex set on which to project. However, because the projection onto
the marginal polytope can sometimes be expensive to compute, we allow to use
any convex superset instead, with potentially cheaper-to-compute projection. Since
efficient projection algorithms are available for numerous convex sets, this allows
us to construct loss functions for a variety of tasks. On the theoretical side, when
combined with calibrated decoding, we prove that our loss functions can be used as
a consistent surrogate for a (potentially non-convex) target loss function of interest.
We demonstrate our losses on label ranking, ordinal regression and multilabel
classification, confirming the improved accuracy enabled by projections.

1

Introduction

The goal of supervised learning is to learn a mapping that links an input to an output, using examples
of such pairs. This task is noticeably more difficult when the output objects have a structure, i.e., when
they are not mere vectors. This is the so-called structured prediction setting [4] and has numerous
applications in natural language processing, computer vision and computational biology.
We focus in this paper on the surrogate loss framework, in which a convex loss is used as a proxy for
a (potentially non-convex) target loss of interest. Existing convex losses for structured prediction
come with different trade-offs. On one hand, the structured perceptron [16] and hinge [52] losses
only require access to a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) oracle for finding the highest-scoring structure,
while the conditional random field (CRF) [29] loss requires access to a marginal inference oracle,
for evaluating the expectation under a Gibbs distribution. Since marginal inference is generally
considered harder than MAP inference, for instance containing #P-complete counting problems, this
makes the CRF loss less widely applicable. On the other hand, unlike the structured perceptron
and hinge losses, the CRF loss is smooth, which is crucial for fast convergence, and comes with a
probabilistic model, which is important for dealing with uncertainty. Unfortunately, when combined
with MAP decoding, these losses are typically inconsistent, meaning that their optimal estimator does
not converge to the target loss function’s optimal estimator. Recently, several works [15, 26, 39, 31]
showed good results and obtained consistency guarantees by combining a simple squared loss with
calibrated decoding. Since these approaches only require a decoding oracle at test time and no
oracle at train time, this questions whether structural information is even beneficial during training.
In this paper, we propose loss functions for structured prediction using a different kind of oracle:
projections. Kullback-Leibler projections onto various polytopes have been used to derive online
algorithms [24, 56, 49, 1] but it is not obvious how to extract a loss from these works. In our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

