Multiview Aggregation for Learning
Category-Specific Shape Reconstruction

Srinath Sridhar1 Davis Rempe1 Julien Valentin2 Sofien Bouaziz2 Leonidas J. Guibas1,3
1
Stanford University 2 Google Inc. 3 Facebook AI Research
R ssrinath@cs.stanford.edu
Œ geometry.stanford.edu/projects/xnocs

Abstract
We investigate the problem of learning category-specific 3D shape reconstruction
from a variable number of RGB views of previously unobserved object instances.
Most approaches for multiview shape reconstruction operate on sparse shape
representations, or assume a fixed number of views. We present a method that
can estimate dense 3D shape, and aggregate shape across multiple and varying
number of input views. Given a single input view of an object instance, we propose
a representation that encodes the dense shape of the visible object surface as well
as the surface behind line of sight occluded by the visible surface. When multiple
input views are available, the shape representation is designed to be aggregated
into a single 3D shape using an inexpensive union operation. We train a 2D CNN
to learn to predict this representation from a variable number of views (1 or more).
We further aggregate multiview information by using permutation equivariant
layers that promote order-agnostic view information exchange at the feature level.
Experiments show that our approach is able to produce dense 3D reconstructions
of objects that improve in quality as more views are added.

1

Introduction

Learning to estimate the 3D shape of objects observed from one or more views is an important
problem in 3D computer vision with applications in robotics, 3D scene understanding, and augmented
reality. Humans and many animals perform well at this task, especially for known object categories,
even when observed object instances have never been encountered before [27]. We are able to infer
the 3D surface shape of both object parts that are directly visible, and of parts that are occluded
by the visible surface. When provided with more views of the instance, our confidence about its
shape increases. Endowing machines with this ability would allow us to operate and reason in
new environments and enable a wide range of applications. We study this problem of learning
category-specific 3D surface shape reconstruction given a variable number of RGB views (1 or more)
of an object instance.
There are several challenges in developing a learning-based solution for this problem. First, we need
a representation that can encode the 3D geometry of both the visible and occluded parts of an object
while still being able to aggregate shape information across multiple views. Second, for a given
object category, we need to learn to predict the shape of new instances from a variable number of
views at test time. We address these challenges by introducing a new representation for encoding
category-specific 3D surface shape, and a method for learning to predict shape from a variable number
of views in an order-agnostic manner.
Representations such as voxel grids [6], point clouds [9, 17], and meshes [11, 40] have previously
been used for learning 3D shape. These representations can be computationally expensive to operate
on, often produce only sparse or smoothed-out reconstructions, or decouple 3D shape from 2D
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

