Approximate Inference Turns Deep Networks into
Gaussian Processes
Alexander Immer* †
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
alexander.immer@epfl.ch

Mohammad Emtiyaz Khan
RIKEN Center for AI Project
Tokyo, Japan
emtiyaz.khan@riken.jp
Ehsan Abedi* †
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
ehsan.abedi@epfl.ch

Maciej Korzepa* †
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
mjko@dtu.dk

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNN) and Gaussian processes (GP) are two powerful
models with several theoretical connections relating them, but the relationship
between their training methods is not well understood. In this paper, we show that
certain Gaussian posterior approximations for Bayesian DNNs are equivalent to
GP posteriors. This enables us to relate solutions and iterations of a deep-learning
algorithm to GP inference. As a result, we can obtain a GP kernel and a nonlinear
feature map while training a DNN. Surprisingly, the resulting kernel is the neural
tangent kernel. We show kernels obtained on real datasets and demonstrate the use
of the GP marginal likelihood to tune hyperparameters of DNNs. Our work aims
to facilitate further research on combining DNNs and GPs in practical settings.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNN) and Gaussian processes (GP) models are both powerful models with
complementary strengths and weaknesses. DNNs achieve state-of-the-art results on many real-world
problems providing scalable end-to-end learning, but they can overfit on small datasets and be
overconfident. In contrast, GPs are suitable for small datasets and compute confidence estimates,
but they are not scalable and choosing a good kernel in practice is challenging [3]. Combining their
strengths to solve real-world problems is an important problem.
Theoretically, the two models are closely related to each other. Previous work has shown that as the
width of a DNN increases to infinity, the DNN converges to a GP [4, 5, 13, 16, 22]. This relationship
is surprising and gives us hope that a practical combination could be possible. Unfortunately, it is not
clear how one can use such connections in practice, e.g., to perform fast inference in GPs by using
training methods of DNNs, or to reduce overfitting in DNNs by using GP inference. We argue that, to
solve such practical problems, we need the relationship not only between the models but also between
their training procedures. The purpose of this paper is to provide such a theoretical relationship.
We present theoretical results aimed at connecting the training methods of deep learning and GP
models. We show that the Gaussian posterior approximations for Bayesian DNNs, such as those
obtained by Laplace approximation and variational inference (VI), are equivalent to posterior distributions of GP regression models. This result enables us to relate the solutions and iterations of a
deep-learning algorithm to GP inference. See Fig. 1 for our approach called DNN2GP. In addition,
†

Equal contribution. * This work is performed during an internship at the RIKEN Center for AI project.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

