Gradient Dynamics of Shallow Univariate
ReLU Networks
Francis Williams∗
Claudio Silva

Matthew Trager∗

Daniele Panozzo

Denis Zorin

Joan Bruna

New York University

Abstract
We present a theoretical and empirical study of the gradient dynamics of overparameterized shallow ReLU networks with one-dimensional input, solving least-squares
interpolation. We show that the gradient dynamics of such networks are determined
by the gradient flow in a non-redundant parameterization of the network function.
We examine the principal qualitative features of this gradient flow. In particular, we
determine conditions for two learning regimes: kernel and adaptive, which depend
both on the relative magnitude of initialization of weights in different layers and
the asymptotic behavior of initialization coefficients in the limit of large network
widths. We show that learning in the kernel regime yields smooth interpolants,
minimizing curvature, and reduces to cubic splines for uniform initializations.
Learning in the adaptive regime favors instead linear splines, where knots cluster
adaptively at the sample points.

1

Introduction

An important open problem in the theoretical study of neural networks is to describe the dynamical
behavior of the parameters during training and, in particular, the influence of the dynamics on the
generalization error. To make progress on these issues, a number of studies have focused on a
tractable class of architectures, namely single hidden-layer neural networks. For a fixed number of
neurons, negative results establish that, even with random initialization, gradient descent may be
trapped in arbitrarily bad local minima [27, 31], which motivates an asymptotic analysis that studies
the optimization and generalization properties of these models as the number of neurons m grows.
Recently, several works [13, 2, 6, 12, 23] explained the success of gradient descent at optimizing
the loss in the over-parameterized regime, i.e., when the number of neurons in significantly higher
than the number of training samples. In parallel, another line of work established global convergence
of gradient descent using tools from optimal transport and mean-field theory [8, 26, 22, 29]. The
essential difference between these two approaches was pointed out in [7], and is related to the use of a
different scaling parameter as the number of neurons tends to infinity: in one case, the neural network
behaves asymptotically as a kernel machine [19], which in turn implies that as over-parameterization
increases, the parameters stay close to their initial value; in contrast, in the mean field setting,
parameters asymptotitically evolve following a PDE based on a continuity equation.
Although both scaling regimes explain the success of gradient descent optimization on overparametrized networks, they paint a different picture when it comes to generalization. The generalization properties in the kernel regime borrow from the well established theory of kernel regression in
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces (RKHS), which has been applied to kernels arising from neural
networks in [17, 14, 20, 24, 10], and provide a somehow underwhelming answer to the benefit of neural networks compared to kernel methods. However, in practice, large neural networks do not exhibit
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

