Block Coordinate Regularization by Denoising

Yu Sun
Washington University in St. Louis
sun.yu@wustl.edu

Jiaming Liu
Washington University in St. Louis
jiaming.liu@wustl.edu

Ulugbek S. Kamilov
Washington University in St. Louis
kamilov@wustl.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of estimating a vector from its noisy measurements
using a prior specified only through a denoising function. Recent work on plugand-play priors (PnP) and regularization-by-denoising (RED) has shown the stateof-the-art performance of estimators under such priors in a range of imaging
tasks. In this work, we develop a new block coordinate RED algorithm that
decomposes a large-scale estimation problem into a sequence of updates over a
small subset of the unknown variables. We theoretically analyze the convergence of
the algorithm and discuss its relationship to the traditional proximal optimization.
Our analysis complements and extends recent theoretical results for RED-based
estimation methods. We numerically validate our method using several denoiser
priors, including those based on convolutional neural network (CNN) denoisers.

1

Introduction

Problems involving estimation of an unknown vector x ∈ Rn from a set of noisy measurements
y ∈ Rm are important in many areas, including machine learning, image processing, and compressive
sensing. Consider the scenario in Fig. 1, where a vector x ∼ px passes through the measurement
channel py|x to produce the measurement vector y. When the estimation problem is ill-posed, it
becomes essential to include the prior px in the estimation process. However, in high-dimensional
settings, it is difficult to directly obtain the true prior px for certain signals (such as natural images)
and one is hence restricted to various indirect sources of prior information on x. This paper considers
the cases where the prior information on x is specified only via a denoising function, D : Rn → Rn ,
designed for the removal of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).
There has been considerable recent interest in leveraging denoisers as priors for the recovery of
x. One popular strategy, known as plug-and-play priors (PnP) [1], extends traditional proximal
optimization [2] by replacing the proximal operator with a general off-the-shelf denoiser. It has been
shown that the combination of proximal algorithms with advanced denoisers, such as BM3D [3]
or DnCNN [4], leads to the state-of-the-art performance for various imaging problems [5–15]. A
similar strategy has also been adopted in the context of a related class of algorithms known as
approximate message passing (AMP) [16–19]. Regularization-by-denoising (RED) [20], and the
closely related deep mean-shift priors [21], represent an alternative, in which the denoiser is used to
specify an explicit regularizer that has a simple gradient. More recent work has clarified the existence
of explicit RED regularizers [22], demonstrated its excellent performance on phase retrieval [23],
and further boosted its performance in combination with a deep image prior [24]. In short, the use
of advanced denoisers has proven to be essential for achieving the state-of-the-art results in many
contexts. However, solving the corresponding estimation problem is still a significant computational
challenge, especially in the context of high-dimensional vectors x, typical in modern applications.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

