Manipulating a Learning Defender and
Ways to Counteract

Jiarui Gan
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
jiarui.gan@cs.ox.ac.uk
Long Tran-Thanh
University of Southampton
Southampton, UK
l.tran-thanh@soton.ac.uk

Qingyu Guo
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
qguo005@e.ntu.edu.sg

Bo An
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
boan@ntu.edu.sg

Michael Wooldridge
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
mjw@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In Stackelberg security games when information about the attacker’s payoffs is uncertain, algorithms have been proposed to learn the optimal defender commitment
by interacting with the attacker and observing their best responses. In this paper,
we show that, however, these algorithms can be easily manipulated if the attacker
responds untruthfully. As a key finding, attacker manipulation normally leads to
the defender learning a maximin strategy, which effectively renders the learning
attempt meaningless as to compute a maximin strategy requires no additional information about the other player at all. We then apply a game-theoretic framework at
a higher level to counteract such manipulation, in which the defender commits to a
policy that specifies her strategy commitment according to the learned information.
We provide a polynomial-time algorithm to compute the optimal such policy, and
in addition, a heuristic approach that applies even when the attacker’s payoff space
is infinite or completely unknown. Empirical evaluation shows that our approaches
can improve the defender’s utility significantly as compared to the situation when
attacker manipulation is ignored.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg security games (SSGs) are Stackelberg game models developed for deriving optimal
security resource allocation in strategic scenarios. In the AI community, a line of work applying
SSG models forms the algorithmic basis of resource scheduling systems, that are in use by the Los
Angeles Airport, the US Cost Guard, the Federal Air Marshal Service, etc, to assist in protecting
high-profile infrastructures, and public and natural resources [21].
The standard solution concept of SSG, the strong Stackelberg equilibrium (SSE) captures the situation
where a defender (the leader) commits to her optimal strategy, assuming that an attacker (the follower)
will respond optimally to her commitment. There are many algorithms designed to compute SSEs in
different SSG models when complete information about the attacker’s type (i.e., his payoff parameters)
is provided. While payoff information may be incomplete in many real environments, algorithms were
also designed for the defender to learn the optimal commitment through interacting with the attacker:
by committing to a series of carefully chosen defender strategies and observing the attacker’s best
responses to these strategies [11, 4, 8, 19, 17]. The optimality of the learned commitment thus relies
crucially on the assumption of a truthful attacker, one who responds to the defender’s commitment
optimally according to their actual payoffs. Unfortunately, when there is no guarantee that the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

