Fast Parallel Algorithms for Statistical Subset
Selection Problems
Sharon Qian
Harvard University
sharonqian@g.harvard.edu

Yaron Singer
Harvard University
yaron@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new framework for designing fast parallel algorithms
for fundamental statistical subset selection tasks that include feature selection and
experimental design. Such tasks are known to be weakly submodular and are
amenable to optimization via the standard greedy algorithm. Despite its desirable
approximation guarantees, the greedy algorithm is inherently sequential and in
the worst case, its parallel runtime is linear in the size of the data. Recently, there
has been a surge of interest in a parallel optimization technique called adaptive
sampling which produces solutions with desirable approximation guarantees for
submodular maximization in exponentially faster parallel runtime. Unfortunately,
we show that for general weakly submodular functions such accelerations are
impossible. The major contribution in this paper is a novel relaxation of submodularity which we call differential submodularity. We first prove that differential
submodularity characterizes objectives like feature selection and experimental design. We then design an adaptive sampling algorithm for differentially submodular
functions whose parallel runtime is logarithmic in the size of the data and achieves
strong approximation guarantees. Through experiments, we show the algorithm’s
performance is competitive with state-of-the-art methods and obtains dramatic
speedups for feature selection and experimental design problems.

1

Introduction

In fundamental statistics applications such as regression, classification and maximum likelihood
estimation, we are often interested in selecting a subset of elements to optimize an objective function.
In a series of recent works, both feature selection (selecting k out of n features) and experimental
design (choosing k out of n samples) were shown to be weakly submodular [DK11, EKD+ 18,
BBKT17]. The notion of weak submodularity was defined by Das and Kempe in [DK11] and
quantifies the deviance of an objective function from submodularity. Characterizations of weak
submodularity are important as they allow proving guarantees of greedy algorithms in terms of
the deviance of the objective function from submodularity. More precisely, for objectives that are
-weakly submodular (for that depends on the objective, see preliminaries Section 2), the greedy
algorithm is shown to return a 1 1/e approximation to the optimal subset.
Greedy is sequential and cannot be parallelized. For large data sets where one wishes to take advantage of parallelization, greedy algorithms are impractical. Greedy algorithms for feature selection
such as forward stepwise regression iteratively add the feature with the largest marginal contribution
to the objective which requires computing the contribution of each feature in every iteration. Thus,
the parallel runtime of the forward stepwise algorithm and greedy algorithms in general, scale linearly
with the number of features we want to select. In cases where the computation of the objective
function across all elements is expensive or the dataset is large, this can be computationally infeasible.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

