A Linearly Convergent Proximal Gradient Algorithm
for Decentralized Optimization

Sulaiman A. Alghunaim, Kun Yuan
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of California Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, 90095
{salghunaim,kunyuan}@ucla.edu

Ali H. Sayed
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
ali.sayed@epfl.ch

Abstract
Decentralized optimization is a powerful paradigm that finds applications in engineering and learning design. This work studies decentralized composite optimization problems with non-smooth regularization terms. Most existing gradient-based
proximal decentralized methods are known to converge to the optimal solution
with sublinear rates, and it remains unclear whether this family of methods can
achieve global linear convergence. To tackle this problem, this work assumes the
non-smooth regularization term is common across all networked agents, which is
the case for many machine learning problems. Under this condition, we design a
proximal gradient decentralized algorithm whose fixed point coincides with the
desired minimizer. We then provide a concise proof that establishes its linear
convergence. In the absence of the non-smooth term, our analysis technique covers
the well known EXTRA algorithm and provides useful bounds on the convergence
rate and step-size.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning problems can be cast as composite optimization problems of the form
N

min J(w) + R(w),

w∈RM

where J(w) =

1 X
Q(w; xn )
N n=1

(1)

where w is the optimization variable, xn is the n-th data, and N is the size of the dataset. The loss
function Q(w; xn ) is assumed to be smooth, and R(w) is a regularization term possibly non-smooth.
Typical examples of R(w) can be the `1 -norm, the elastic-net norm, and indicator functions of convex
sets (e.g., non-negative orthants). Problems of the form (1) arise in different settings including, among
others, in model fitting [1] and economic dispatch problems in power systems [2].
When the data size N is very large, it becomes intractable or inefficient to solve problem (1) with
a single machine. To relieve this difficulty, one solution is to divide the N data samples across
multiple machines and solve problem (1) in a cooperative manner. Many useful distributed algorithms
exist that solve problem (1) across multiple computing agents such as the distributed alternating
direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [1, 3], parallel SGD methods [4, 5], distributed second-order
methods [6–8], and parallel dual coordinate methods [9, 10]. All these methods are designed for a
centralized network topology, e.g., parameter servers [11], where there is a central node connected to
all computing agents that is responsible for aggregating local variables and updating model parameters.
The potential bottleneck of the centralized network is the communication traffic jam on the central
node [12–14]. The performance of these non-decentralized methods can be significantly degraded
when the bandwidth around the central node is low.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

