Learning Dynamics of Attention:
Human Prior for Interpretable Machine Reasoning

Wonjae Kim
Kakao Corporation
Pangyo, Republic of Korea
dandelin.kim@kakaocorp.com

Yoonho Lee
Kakao Corporation
Pangyo, Republic of Korea
eddy.l@kakaocorp.com

Abstract
Without relevant human priors, neural networks may learn uninterpretable features.
We propose Dynamics of Attention for Focus Transition (DAFT) as a human
prior for machine reasoning. DAFT is a novel method that regularizes attentionbased reasoning by modelling it as a continuous dynamical system using neural
ordinary differential equations. As a proof of concept, we augment a state-of-the-art
visual reasoning model with DAFT. Our experiments reveal that applying DAFT
yields similar performance to the original model while using fewer reasoning steps,
showing that it implicitly learns to skip unnecessary steps. We also propose a new
metric, Total Length of Transition (TLT), which represents the effective reasoning
step size by quantifying how much a given model’s focus drifts while reasoning
about a question. We show that adding DAFT results in lower TLT, demonstrating
that our method indeed obeys the human prior towards shorter reasoning paths in
addition to producing more interpretable attention maps. Our code is available at
https://github.com/kakao/DAFT.

1

Introduction

We focus on the task of visual question answering (VQA)
[Agrawal et al., 2015], which tests visual reasoning capability by measuring how well a model can answer a question by
composing supporting facts from a given image. An example of
such a question-image pair from the CLEVR dataset [Johnson
et al., 2017a] is shown in Figure 1. One strategy for solving
this example is to first find the cube that the question is referring to, and then reporting its color. However, the first step
would be unnecessary since all cubes in the image are brown.
Questions with such redundancy can be pruned using the complete scene graph. While complete scene graphs are provided
in CLEVR, this process is not applicable to real-world images
since obtaining their scene graphs is notoriously hard.

Figure 1: "What color is the cube
nearest to the cylinder?" can be answered without knowing the relative location of objects.

The motivation behind training visual reasoning models on the VQA task is to obtain a model that
reasons about images similarly to humans. We prefer human-like reasoning because such reasoning
is believed to be concise and effective. Conversely, we can say that a model’s reasoning is ineffective
if it retains and references facts that are irrelevant to the given question, even if its answers are correct.
This work is motivated by the question: "How can we measure the degree to which a given model
only uses necessary information?"
To this end, we adopt the minimum description length (MDL) principle [Rissanen, 1978], which
formalizes Occam’s razor and is also a relaxation of Kolmogorov complexity [Kolmogorov, 1963].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

