Dimensionality reduction: theoretical perspective on
practical measures

Yair Bartal∗
Department of Computer Science
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
yair@cs.huji.ac.il

Nova Fandina
Department of Computer Science
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem, Israel
fandina@cs.huji.ac.il

Ofer Neiman
Department of Computer Science
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel
neimano@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction plays a central role in real world applications for Machine
Learning, among many fields. In particular, metric dimensionality reduction, where
data from a general metric is mapped into low dimensional space, is often used
as a first step before applying machine learning algorithms. In almost all these
applications the quality of the embedding is measured by various average case
criteria. Metric dimensionality reduction has also been studied in Math and TCS,
within the extremely fruitful and influential field of metric embedding. Yet, the
vast majority of theoretical research has been devoted to analyzing the worst case
behavior of embeddings, and therefore has little relevance to practical settings. The
goal of this paper is to bridge the gap between theory and practice view-points of
metric dimensionality reduction, laying the foundation for a theoretical study of
more practically oriented analysis.
This paper can be viewed as providing a comprehensive theoretical framework for
analyzing different distortion measurement criteria, with the lens of practical applicability, and in particular for Machine Learning. The need for this line of research
was recently raised by Chennuru Vankadara and von Luxburg in (13)[NeurIPS’ 18],
who emphasized the importance of pursuing it from both theoretical and practical
perspectives.
We consider some important and vastly used average case criteria, some of which
originated within the well-known Multi-Dimensional Scaling framework. While
often studied in practice, no theoretical studies have thus far attempted at providing
rigorous analysis of these criteria. In this paper we provide the first analysis of these,
as well as the new distortion measure developed in (13) designed to posses Machine
Learning desired properties. Moreover, we show that all measures considered can
be adapted to posses similar qualities. The main consequences of our work are
nearly tight bounds on the absolute values of all distortion criteria, as well as first
approximation algorithms with provable guarantees.
All our theoretical results are backed by empirical experiments.
∗

Author names are ordered alphabetically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

