Beyond the Single Neuron Convex Barrier
for Neural Network Certification
Gagandeep Singh1 , Rupanshu Ganvir2 , Markus Püschel1 , Martin Vechev1
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
1
{gsingh,pueschel,martin.vechev}@inf.ethz.ch
2
rganvir@student.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a new parametric framework, called k-ReLU, for computing precise
and scalable convex relaxations used to certify neural networks. The key idea is to
approximate the output of multiple ReLUs in a layer jointly instead of separately.
This joint relaxation captures dependencies between the inputs to different ReLUs
in a layer and thus overcomes the convex barrier imposed by the single neuron
triangle relaxation and its approximations. The framework is parametric in the
number of k ReLUs it considers jointly and can be combined with existing verifiers
in order to improve their precision. Our experimental results show that k-ReLU enables significantly more precise certification than existing state-of-the-art verifiers
while maintaining scalability.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are being increasingly used in many safety critical domains including autonomous
driving, medical devices, and face recognition. Thus, it is important to ensure they are provably
robust and cannot be fooled by adversarial examples [1]: small changes to a given image that can
fool the network into making a wrong classification. To address this challenge, a range of verification
techniques were introduced recently ranging from exact but expensive methods based on SMT solvers
[2–4], mixed integer linear programming [5], and Lipschitz optimization [6] to approximate and
incomplete, but more scalable methods based on abstract interpretation [7–9], duality [10, 11], semi
definite [12, 13] and linear relaxations [14–17]. Recently, combinations of approximate methods with
solvers have been used for producing more precise results than approximate methods alone while
also being more scalable than exact methods [18, 19].
The key challenge any verification method must address is computing the output of ReLU assignments
where the input can take both positive and negative values. Exact computation must consider two paths
per neuron, which quickly becomes infeasible due to a combinatorial explosion while approximate
methods trade precision for scalability via a convex relaxation of ReLU outputs.
The most precise convex relaxation of ReLU output is based on the convex hull of Polyhedra [20]
which is practically infeasible as it requires an exponential number of convex hull computations,
each with a worst-case exponential complexity in the number of neurons. The most common convex
relaxation of y1 :=ReLU(x1 ) used in practice [17, 5] is the triangle relaxation from [3]. We note
that other works such as [8, 9, 14–16, 11] approximate this relaxation. The triangle relaxation
creates constraints only between y1 and x1 and is optimal in the x1 y1 -plane. Because of this
optimality, recent work [17] refers to the triangle relaxation as the convex barrier, meaning the best
convex approximation one can obtain when processing each ReLU separately. However, the triangle
relaxation is not optimal when one considers multiple neurons at a time as it ignores all dependencies
between x1 and any other neuron x2 in the same layer, and thus loses precision.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

