Beyond Vector Spaces: Compact Data Representation
as Differentiable Weighted Graphs

Denis Mazur∗
Yandex
denismazur@yandex-team.ru

Vage Egiazarian∗
Skoltech
Vage.egiazarian@skoltech.ru

Stanislav Morozov∗
Yandex
Lomonosov Moscow State University
stanis-morozov@yandex.ru

Artem Babenko
Yandex
National Research University
Higher School of Economics
artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
Learning useful representations is a key ingredient to the success of modern machine learning. Currently, representation learning mostly relies on embedding data
into Euclidean space. However, recent work has shown that data in some domains
is better modeled by non-euclidean metric spaces, and inappropriate geometry can
result in inferior performance. In this paper, we aim to eliminate the inductive
bias imposed by the embedding space geometry. Namely, we propose to map
data into more general non-vector metric spaces: a weighted graph with a shortest
path distance. By design, such graphs can model arbitrary geometry with a proper
configuration of edges and weights. Our main contribution is PRODIGE: a method
that learns a weighted graph representation of data end-to-end by gradient descent.
Greater generality and fewer model assumptions make PRODIGE more powerful
than existing embedding-based approaches. We confirm the superiority of our
method via extensive experiments on a wide range of tasks, including classification,
compression, and collaborative filtering.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, representation learning is a major component of most data analysis systems; this component aims to capture the essential information in the data and represent it in a form that is useful for the
task at hand. Typical examples include word embeddings [1, 2, 3], image embeddings [4, 5], user/item
representations in recommender systems [6] and others. To be useful in practice, representation
learning methods should meet two main requirements. Firstly, they should be effective, i.e., they
should not lose the information needed to achieve high performance in the specific task. Secondly,
the constructed representations should be efficient, e.g., have small dimensionality, sparsity, or other
structural constraints, imposed by the particular machine learning pipeline. In this paper, we focus
on compact data representations, i.e., we aim to achieve the highest performance with the smallest
memory consumption.
Most existing methods represent data items as points in some vector space, with the Euclidean space
Rn being a "default" choice. However, several recent works [7, 8, 9] have demonstrated that the
quality of representation is heavily influenced by the geometry of the embedding space. In particular,
different space curvature can be more appropriate for different types of data [8]. While some prior
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

