Learning nonlinear level sets for dimensionality
reduction in function approximation

Guannan Zhang
Computer Science and Mathematics Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
zhangg@ornl.gov

Jiaxin Zhang
National Center for Computational Sciences
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
zhangj@ornl.gov

Jacob Hinkle
Computational Science and Engineering Division
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
hinklejd@ornl.gov

Abstract
We developed a Nonlinear Level-set Learning (NLL) method for dimensionality
reduction in high-dimensional function approximation with small data. This work
is motivated by a variety of design tasks in real-world engineering applications,
where practitioners would replace their computationally intensive physical models
(e.g., high-resolution fluid simulators) with fast-to-evaluate predictive machine
learning models, so as to accelerate the engineering design processes. There are
two major challenges in constructing such predictive models: (a) high-dimensional
inputs (e.g., many independent design parameters) and (b) small training data,
generated by running extremely time-consuming simulations. Thus, reducing
the input dimension is critical to alleviate the over-fitting issue caused by data
insufficiency. Existing methods, including sliced inverse regression and active
subspace approaches, reduce the input dimension by learning a linear coordinate
transformation; our main contribution is to extend the transformation approach to a
nonlinear regime. Specifically, we exploit reversible networks (RevNets) to learn
nonlinear level sets of a high-dimensional function and parameterize its level sets
in low-dimensional spaces. A new loss function was designed to utilize samples of
the target functions’ gradient to encourage the transformed function to be sensitive
to only a few transformed coordinates. The NLL approach is demonstrated by
applying it to three 2D functions and two 20D functions for showing the improved
approximation accuracy with the use of nonlinear transformation, as well as to
an 8D composite material design problem for optimizing the buckling-resistance
performance of composite shells of rocket inter-stages.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional function approximation arises in a variety of engineering applications where
scientists or engineers rely on accurate and fast-to-evaluate approximators to replace complex and
time-consuming physical models (e.g. multiscale fluid models), so as to accelerate scientific discovery
or engineering design/manufacture. In most of those applications, training and validation data need
to be generated by running expensive simulations, that the amount of training data is often limited
due to high cost of data generation (see §4.3 for an example). Thus, this effort is motivated by the
challenge imposed by high dimensionality and small data in the context of function approximation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

