Structured Variational Inference in
Continuous Cox Process Models
Virginia Aglietti
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
V.Aglietti@warwick.ac.uk

Edwin V. Bonilla
CSIRO’s Data61
Edwin.Bonilla@data61.csiro.au

Theodoros Damoulas
University of Warwick
The Alan Turing Institute
T.Damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Sally Cripps
Centre for Translational Data Science
The University of Sydney
Sally.Cripps@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a scalable framework for inference in a continuous sigmoidal Cox
process that assumes the corresponding intensity function is given by a Gaussian
process (GP) prior transformed with a scaled logistic sigmoid function. We present a
tractable representation of the likelihood through augmentation with a superposition
of Poisson processes. This view enables a structured variational approximation
capturing dependencies across variables in the model. Our framework avoids
discretization of the domain, does not require accurate numerical integration over
the input space and is not limited to GPs with squared exponential kernels. We
evaluate our approach on synthetic and real-world data showing that its benefits
are particularly pronounced on multivariate input settings where it overcomes the
limitations of mean-field methods and sampling schemes. We provide the state
of-the-art in terms of speed, accuracy and uncertainty quantification trade-offs.

1

Introduction

Point processes have been used effectively to model a variety of event data such as occurrences of
diseases [9, 19], location of earthquakes [21] or crime events [2, 11] . The most commonly adopted
class of models for such discrete data are non-homogenous Poisson processes and in particular Cox
processes [6]. In these, the observed events are assumed to be generated from a Poisson point process
(PPP) whose intensity is stochastic, enabling non-parametric inference and uncertainty quantification.
Gaussian processes [GPs; 25] form a flexible prior over functions and, therefore, have been used
to model the intensity of a Cox process via a non-linear positive link function. Typical mappings
are the exponential [9, 22], the square [17, 19] and the sigmoidal [1, 10, 12] transformations. In
general, inferring the intensity function over a continuous input space X is highly problematic as it
requires integrating an infinite-dimensional random function. This integral is generally intractable
and, depending on the transformation used, different algorithms have been proposed to deal with this
issue. For example, under the exponential transformation, a regular computational grid is commonly
introduced [9]. While this significantly simplifies inference, it leads to poor approximations, especially
in high dimensional settings. Increasing the resolution of the grid to improve the approximation
yields computationally prohibitive algorithms that do not scale, highlighting the well-known trade-off
between statistical performance and computational cost.
Other algorithms have been proposed to deal with a continuous X but they are computationally
expensive [1, 12], are limited to simple covariance functions [19], require accurate numerical integra33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

