Spatially Aggregated Gaussian Processes
with Multivariate Areal Outputs
Yusuke Tanaka1,3 , Toshiyuki Tanaka3 , Tomoharu Iwata2 , Takeshi Kurashima1 ,
Maya Okawa1 , Yasunori Akagi1 , Hiroyuki Toda1
1
NTT Service Evolution Labs., 2 NTT Communication Science Labs., 3 Kyoto University
{yusuke.tanaka.rh,tomoharu.iwata.gy,takeshi.kurashima.uf, maya.ookawa.af,
yasunori.akagi.cu,hiroyuki.toda.xb}@hco.ntt.co.jp, tt@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic model for inferring the multivariate function from
multiple areal data sets with various granularities. Here, the areal data are observed
not at location points but at regions. Existing regression-based models can only
utilize the sufficiently fine-grained auxiliary data sets on the same domain (e.g.,
a city). With the proposed model, the functions for respective areal data sets are
assumed to be a multivariate dependent Gaussian process (GP) that is modeled as
a linear mixing of independent latent GPs. Sharing of latent GPs across multiple
areal data sets allows us to effectively estimate the spatial correlation for each areal
data set; moreover it can easily be extended to transfer learning across multiple
domains. To handle the multivariate areal data, we design an observation model
with a spatial aggregation process for each areal data set, which is an integral of
the mixed GP over the corresponding region. By deriving the posterior GP, we can
predict the data value at any location point by considering the spatial correlations
and the dependences between areal data sets, simultaneously. Our experiments on
real-world data sets demonstrate that our model can 1) accurately refine coarsegrained areal data, and 2) offer performance improvements by using the areal data
sets from multiple domains.

1

Introduction

Governments and other organizations are now collecting data from cities on items such as poverty
rate, air pollution, crime, energy consumption, and traffic flow. These data play a crucial role in
improving the life quality of citizens in many aspects including socio-economics [23, 24], public
security [2, 32], public health [12], and urban planning [38]. For instance, the spatial distribution of
poverty is helpful in identifying key regions that require intervention in a city; it makes it easier to
optimize resource allocation for remedial action.
In practice, the data collected from cities are often spatially aggregated, e.g.,
averaged over a region; thus only areal data are available; observations are not
associated with location points but with regions. Figure 1 shows an example
of areal data, which is the distribution of poverty rate in New York City, where
darker hues represent regions with higher rates. This poverty rate data set was
actually obtained via household surveys taken over the whole city. The survey
results are aggregated over predefined regions [24]. The problem addressed
herein is to infer the function from the areal data; once we have the function
we can predict data values at any location point. Solving this problem allows Figure 1: Areal data
us to obtain spatially-specific information about cities; it is useful for finding
key pin-point regions efficiently.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

