Hybrid 8-bit Floating Point (HFP8) Training and
Inference for Deep Neural Networks

Xiao Sun

Jungwook Choi∗

Swagath Venkataramani

Chia-Yu Chen

Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan

Naigang Wang

Xiaodong Cui

Wei Zhang

Kailash Gopalakrishnan
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{xsun, * ,cchen,nwang,swagath.venkataramani,viji,cuix,weiz,kailash}@us.ibm.com

Abstract
Reducing the numerical precision of data and computation is extremely effective
in accelerating deep learning training workloads. Towards this end, 8-bit floating
point representations (FP8) were recently proposed for DNN training. However,
its applicability was only demonstrated on a few selected models and significant
degradation is observed when popular networks such as MobileNet and Transformer are trained using FP8. This degradation is due to the inherent precision
requirement difference in the forward and backward passes of DNN training. Using
theoretical insights, we propose a hybrid FP8 (HFP8) format and DNN end-to-end
distributed training procedure. We demonstrate, using HFP8, the successful training of deep learning models across a whole spectrum of applications including
Image Classification, Object Detection, Language and Speech without accuracy
degradation. Finally, we demonstrate that, by using the new 8 bit format, we can
directly quantize a pre-trained model down to 8-bits without losing accuracy by
simply fine-tuning batch normalization statistics. These novel techniques enable a
new generations of 8-bit hardware that are robust for building and deploying neural
network models.

1

Introduction

As Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) evolve rapidly and as models get more complex, training times
have increased significantly. To mitigate this challenge, efficient training through reduced precision
exploitation has become increasingly important. Using reduced precision for data representations
and general matrix multiplications (GEMM) can accelerate DNN training dramatically and save
significant computing time and power. Indeed, GPUs can already perform mixed-precision training
with 16-bit IEEE Half-Precision floating point formats for deep learning tasks [1]. Recently, a new (15-2) (sign-exponent-mantissa) floating-point 8-bit format (FP8), was used to successfully train popular
ImageNet models [2] without much accuracy loss. In addition, 8-bit Fixed point formats (INT8) have
also been explored to train ResNet50 successfully although 1 of the 3 GEMM computations was
performed in higher precision [3]. In addition to DNN training, efficient low-precision deployment
is critical in a wide range of edge inference use cases where cost and energy constraints can limit
∗

contributed to this work while at IBM, is currently with the Electrical Engineering Department, Hanyang
University, South Korea, email: choij@hanyang.ac.kr

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

