Shallow RNNs: A Method for Accurate Time-series
Classification on Tiny Devices

Don Kurian Dennis˚
Carnegie Mellon University

Durmus Alp Emre Acar
Boston University

Vinu Sankar Sadasivan:
IIT Gandhinagar

Harsha Vardhan Simhadri
Microsoft Research India

Vikram Mandikal:
University of Texas at Austin
Venkatesh Saligrama
Boston University

Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research India

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) capture long dependencies and context, and
hence are the key component of typical sequential data based tasks. However, the
sequential nature of RNNs dictates a large inference cost for long sequences even if
the hardware supports parallelization. To induce long-term dependencies, and yet
admit parallelization, we introduce novel shallow RNNs. In this architecture, the
first layer splits the input sequence and runs several independent RNNs. The second
layer consumes the output of the first layer using a second RNN thus capturing
long dependencies. We provide theoretical justification for our architecture under
weak assumptions that we verify on real-world benchmarks. Furthermore, we show
that for time-series classification, our technique leads to substantially improved
inference time over standard RNNs without compromising accuracy. For example,
we can deploy audio-keyword classification on tiny Cortex M4 devices (100MHz
processor, 256KB RAM, no DSP available) which was not possible using standard
RNN models. Similarly, using ShaRNN in the popular Listen-Attend-Spell (LAS)
architecture for phoneme classification [4], we can reduce the lag in phoneme
classification by 10-12x while maintaining state-of-the-art accuracy.

1

Introduction

We focus on the challenging task of time-series classification on tiny devices, a problem arising in
several industrial and consumer applications [25, 22, 30], where tiny edge-devices perform sensing,
monitoring and prediction in a limited time and resource budget. A prototypical example is an
interactive cane for people with visual impairment, capable of recognizing gestures that are observed
as time-traces on a sensor embedded onto the cane [24].
Time series or sequential data naturally exhibit temporal dependencies. Sequential models such as
RNNs are particularly well-suited in this context because they can account for temporal dependencies
by attempting to derive relations from the previous inputs. Nevertheless, directly leveraging RNNs
for prediction in constrained scenarios mentioned above is challenging. As observed by several
authors [28, 14, 29, 9], the sequential nature by which RNNs process data fundamentally limits
parallelization leading to large training and inference costs. In particular, in time-series classification,
at inference time, the processing time scales with the size, T , of the receptive window, which is
unacceptable in resource constrained settings.
˚
:

Work done as a Research Fellow at Microsoft Research India.
Work done during internships at Microsoft Research India.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

