On the Value of Target Data in Transfer Learning
Steve Hanneke
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Samory Kpotufe
Columbia University, Statistics
skk2175@columbia.edu

Abstract
We aim to understand the value of additional labeled or unlabeled target data in
transfer learning, for any given amount of source data; this is motivated by practical questions around minimizing sampling costs, whereby, target data is usually
harder or costlier to acquire than source data, but can yield better accuracy.
To this aim, we establish the first minimax-rates in terms of both source and target
sample sizes, and show that performance limits are captured by new notions of
discrepancy between source and target, which we refer to as transfer exponents.
Interestingly, we find that attaining minimax performance is akin to ignoring one
of the source or target samples, provided distributional parameters were known a
priori. Moreover, we show that practical decisions – w.r.t. minimizing sampling
costs – can be made in a minimax-optimal way without knowledge or estimation
of distributional parameters nor of the discrepancy between source and target.

1

Introduction

The practice of transfer-learning often involves acquiring some amount of target data, and involves
various practical decisions as to how to best combine source and target data; however much of the
theoretical literature on transfer only addresses the setting where no target labeled data is available.
We aim to understand the value of target labels, that is, given nP labeled data from some source
distribution P , and nQ labeled target labels from a target Q, what is the best Q error achievable by
any classifier in terms of both nQ and nP , and which classifiers achieve such optimal transfer. In
this first analysis, we mostly restrict ourselves to a setting, similar to the traditional covariate-shift
assumption, where the best classifier – from a fixed VC class H – is the same under P and Q.

We establish the first minimax-rates, for bounded-VC classes, in terms of both source and target
sample sizes nP and nQ , and show that performance limits are captured by new notions of discrepancy between source and target, which we refer to as transfer exponents.
The first notion of transfer-exponent, called ⇢, is defined in terms of discrepancies in excess risk,
and is most refined. Already here, our analysis reveals a surprising fact: the best possible rate
(matching upper and lower-bounds) in terms of ⇢ and both sample sizes nP , nQ is - up to constants
- achievable by an oracle which simply ignores the least informative of the source or target datasets.
In other words, if ĥP and ĥQ denote the ERM on data from P , resp. from Q, one of the two achieves
the optimal Q rate over any classifier having access to both P and Q datasets. However, which of
ĥP or ĥQ is optimal is not easily decided without prior knowledge: for instance, cross-validating on
1/2
a holdout target-sample would naively result in a rate of nQ which can be far from optimal given
large nP . Interestingly, we show that the optimal (nP , nQ )-rate is achieved by a generic approach,
akin to so-called hypothesis-transfer [1, 2], which optimizes Q-error under the constraint of low
P -error, and does so without knowledge of distributional parameters such as ⇢.
We then consider a related notion of marginal transfer-exponent, called , defined w.r.t. marginals
PX , QX . This is motivated by the fact that practical decisions in transfer often involve the use of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

