The Parameterized Complexity of
Cascading Portfolio Scheduling
Eduard Eiben
Royal Holloway
University of London
Department of CS
UK

Robert Ganian
TU Wien
Algorithms and
Complexity Group
Austria

Iyad Kanj
DePaul University
School of Computing
Chicago
USA

Stefan Szeider
TU Wien
Algorithms and
Complexity Group
Austria

Abstract
Cascading portfolio scheduling is a static algorithm selection strategy which uses a
sample of test instances to compute an optimal ordering (a cascading schedule) of
a portfolio of available algorithms. The algorithms are then applied to each future
instance according to this cascading schedule, until some algorithm in the schedule
succeeds. Cascading scheduling has proven to be effective in several applications,
including QBF solving and generation of ImageNet classification models.
It is known that the computation of an optimal cascading schedule in the offline
phase is NP-hard. In this paper we study the parameterized complexity of this
problem and establish its fixed-parameter tractability by utilizing structural properties of the success relation between algorithms and test instances. Our findings
are significant as they reveal that in spite of the intractability of the problem in its
general form, one can indeed exploit sparseness or density of the success relation
to obtain non-trivial runtime guarantees for finding an optimal cascading schedule.

1

Introduction

When dealing with hard computational problems, one often has access to a portfolio of different
algorithms that can be applied to solve the given problem, with each of the algorithms having
complementary strengths. There are various ways of how this performance complementarity can be
exploited. Algorithm selection, a line of research initiated by Rice [19], studies various approaches
one can use to select algorithms from the portfolio. Algorithm selection has proven to be an extremely
powerful tool with many success stories in Propositional Satisfiability, Constraint Satisfaction,
Planning, QBF Solving, Machine Learning and other domains [12, 13, 14, 20]. A common approach
to algorithm selection is per-instance-based algorithm selection, where an algorithm is chosen for
each instance independently, based on some features of the instance (see, e.g., [15, 10]). However,
sometimes information about the individual instances is not available or difficult to use. Then, one
can instead make use of information about the distribution of the set of instances, e.g., in terms of
a representative sample of instances which can be used as a training set. In such cases, one can
compute in an offline phase a suitable linear ordering of the algorithms, optimizing the ordering for
the training set of instances. This ordering is then applied uniformly to any given problem instance in
an online fashion—in particular, if the first algorithm in our ordering fails to solve a given instance
(due to timeout, memory overflow, or due to not reaching a desired accuracy), then the second
algorithm is called, and this continues until we solve the instance. Such a static algorithm selection,
“cascading portfolio scheduling”, is simpler to implement than per-instance selection methods and
can be very effective [22]. One prominent recent application of cascading portfolio scheduling lies in
state-of-the-art ImageNet classification models, where it resulted in a significant speedup by reducing
the number of floating-point operations [23]. Cascading portfolio scheduling is also related to online
portfolio scheduling [11, 16].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

