Untangling in Invariant Speech Recognition

Cory Stephenson
Intel AI Lab
cory.stephenson@intel.com

Jenelle Feather
MIT
jfeather@mit.edu

Suchismita Padhy
Intel AI Lab
suchismita.padhy@intel.com

Hanlin Tang
Intel AI Lab
hanlin.tang@intel.com

Oguz Elibol
Intel AI Lab
oguz.h.elibol@intel.com
Josh McDermott
MIT/ Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines
jhm@mit.edu

SueYeon Chung
Columbia University/ MIT
sueyeon@mit.edu

Abstract
Encouraged by the success of deep neural networks on a variety of visual tasks,
much theoretical and experimental work has been aimed at understanding and interpreting how vision networks operate. Meanwhile, deep neural networks have
also achieved impressive performance in audio processing applications, both as
sub-components of larger systems and as complete end-to-end systems by themselves. Despite their empirical successes, comparatively little is understood about
how these audio models accomplish these tasks. In this work, we employ a recently developed statistical mechanical theory that connects geometric properties
of network representations and the separability of classes to probe how information is untangled within neural networks trained to recognize speech. We observe
that speaker-specific nuisance variations are discarded by the network’s hierarchy,
whereas task-relevant properties such as words and phonemes are untangled in
later layers. Higher level concepts such as parts-of-speech and context dependence also emerge in the later layers of the network. Finally, we find that the deep
representations carry out significant temporal untangling by efficiently extracting
task-relevant features at each time step of the computation. Taken together, these
findings shed light on how deep auditory models process time dependent input
signals to achieve invariant speech recognition, and show how different concepts
emerge through the layers of the network.

1

Introduction

Understanding invariant object recognition is one of the key challenges in cognitive neuroscience
and artificial intelligence[1]. An accurate recognition system will predict the same class regardless
of stimulus variations, such as the changes in viewing angle of an object or the differences in pronunciations of a spoken word. Although the class predicted by such a system is unchanged, the internal
representations of individual objects within the class may differ. The set of representations corresponding to the same object class can then be thought of as an object manifold. In vision systems,
it has been hypothesized that these "object manifolds", which are hopelessly entangled in the input,
become "untangled" across the visual hierarchy, enabling the separation of different categories both
in the brain [2] and in deep artificial neural networks [3]. Auditory recognition also requires the
separation of highly variable inputs according to class, and could involve the untangling of ‘auditory
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

