Implicit Posterior Variational Inference for
Deep Gaussian Processes

Haibin Yu∗ , Yizhou Chen∗ , Zhongxiang Dai, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Patrick Jaillet†
Dept. of Computer Science, National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore
Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, USA†
{haibin,ychen041,daiz,lowkh}@comp.nus.edu.sg, jaillet@mit.edu†

Abstract
A multi-layer deep Gaussian process (DGP) model is a hierarchical composition
of GP models with a greater expressive power. Exact DGP inference is intractable,
which has motivated the recent development of deterministic and stochastic approximation methods. Unfortunately, the deterministic approximation methods
yield a biased posterior belief while the stochastic one is computationally costly.
This paper presents an implicit posterior variational inference (IPVI) framework
for DGPs that can ideally recover an unbiased posterior belief and still preserve
time efficiency. Inspired by generative adversarial networks, our IPVI framework
achieves this by casting the DGP inference problem as a two-player game in which
a Nash equilibrium, interestingly, coincides with an unbiased posterior belief. This
consequently inspires us to devise a best-response dynamics algorithm to search for
a Nash equilibrium (i.e., an unbiased posterior belief). Empirical evaluation shows
that IPVI outperforms the state-of-the-art approximation methods for DGPs.

1

Introduction

The expressive power of the Bayesian non-parametric Gaussian process (GP) [46] models can be
significantly boosted by composing them hierarchically into a multi-layer deep GP (DGP) model,
as shown in the seminal work of [12]. Though the DGP model can likewise exploit the notion
of inducing variables [5, 24, 25, 36, 40, 45, 55, 57] to improve its scalability, doing so does not
immediately entail tractable inference, unlike the GP model. This has motivated the development
of deterministic and stochastic approximation methods, the former of which have imposed varying
structural assumptions across the DGP hidden layers and assumed a Gaussian posterior belief of
the inducing variables [3, 10, 12, 20, 48]. However, the work of [18] has demonstrated that with at
least one DGP hidden layer, the posterior belief of the inducing variables is usually non-Gaussian,
hence potentially compromising the performance of the deterministic approximation methods due to
their biased posterior belief. To resolve this, the stochastic approximation method of [18] utilizes
stochastic gradient Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC) sampling to draw unbiased samples from
the posterior belief. But, generating such samples is computationally costly in both training and
prediction due to its sequential sampling procedure [54] and its convergence is also difficult to assess.
So, the challenge remains in devising a time-efficient approximation method that can recover an
unbiased posterior belief.
This paper presents an implicit posterior variational inference (IPVI) framework for DGPs (Section 3)
that can ideally recover an unbiased posterior belief and still preserve time efficiency, hence combining
the best of both worlds (respectively, stochastic and deterministic approximation methods). Inspired
by generative adversarial networks [17] that can generate samples to represent complex distributions
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

