Decentralized Cooperative Stochastic Bandits

David Martínez-Rubio
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
david.martinez@cs.ox.ac.uk

Varun Kanade
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk

Patrick Rebeschini
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
patrick.rebeschini@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study a decentralized cooperative stochastic multi-armed bandit problem with
K arms on a network of N agents. In our model, the reward distribution of each
arm is the same for each agent and rewards are drawn independently across agents
and time steps. In each round, each agent chooses an arm to play and subsequently
sends a message to her neighbors. The goal is to minimize the overall regret of the
entire network. We design a fully decentralized algorithm that uses an accelerated
consensus procedure to compute (delayed) estimates of the average of rewards
obtained by all the agents for each arm, and then uses an upper confidence bound
(UCB) algorithm that accounts for the delay and error of the estimates. We analyze
the regret of our algorithm and also provide a lower bound. The regret is bounded
by the optimal centralized regret plus a natural and simple term depending on the
spectral gap of the communication matrix. Our algorithm is simpler to analyze than
those proposed in prior work and it achieves better regret bounds, while requiring
less information about the underlying network. It also performs better empirically.

1

Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is one of the most widely studied problems in online learning.
In the most basic setting of this problem, an agent has to pull one among a finite set of arms (or
actions), and she receives a reward that depends on the chosen action. This process is repeated
over a finite time-horizon and the goal is to get a cumulative reward as close as possible to the
reward she could have obtained by committing to the best fixed action (in hindsight). The agent only
observes the rewards corresponding to the actions she chooses, i.e., the bandit setting as opposed to
the full-information setting.
There are two main variants of the MAB problem—the stochastic and adversarial versions. In this
work, our focus is on the former, where each action yields a reward that is drawn from a fixed unknown
(but stationary) distribution. In the latter version, rewards may be chosen by an adversary who may
be aware of the strategy employed by the agent, but does not observe the random choices made by the
agent. Optimal algorithms have been developed for both the stochastic and the adversarial versions
(cf. [9] for references). The MAB problem epitomizes the exploration-exploitation tradeoff that
appears in most online learning settings: in order to maximize the cumulative reward, it is necessary
to trade off between the exploration of the hitherto under-explored arms and the exploitation of the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

