Differentially Private Markov Chain Monte Carlo

Mikko A. Heikkilä ∗
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
mikko.a.heikkila@helsinki.fi
Joonas Jälkö ∗
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science
Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
joonas.jalko@aalto.fi
Onur Dikmen
Center for Applied Intelligent Systems Research (CAISR)
Halmstad University, Halmstad, Sweden
onur.dikmen@hh.se
Antti Honkela
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
antti.honkela@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Recent developments in differentially private (DP) machine learning and DP
Bayesian learning have enabled learning under strong privacy guarantees for the
training data subjects. In this paper, we further extend the applicability of DP
Bayesian learning by presenting the first general DP Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithm whose privacy-guarantees are not subject to unrealistic assumptions on Markov chain convergence and that is applicable to posterior inference
in arbitrary models. Our algorithm is based on a decomposition of the Barker
acceptance test that allows evaluating the Rényi DP privacy cost of the acceptreject choice. We further show how to improve the DP guarantee through data
subsampling and approximate acceptance tests.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006, Dwork and Roth, 2014] and its generalisations to
concentrated DP [Dwork and Rothblum, 2016, Bun and Steinke, 2016] and Rényi DP [Mironov,
2017] have recently emerged as the dominant framework for privacy-preserving machine learning.
There are DP versions of many popular machine learning algorithms, including highly popular and
effective DP stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [Song et al., 2013] for optimisation-based learning.
There has also been a fair amount of work in DP Bayesian machine learning, with the proposed
approaches falling to three main categories: i) DP perturbation of sufficient statistics for inference in
exponential family models [e.g. Zhang et al., 2016, Foulds et al., 2016, Park et al., 2016, Bernstein
and Sheldon, 2018], ii) gradient perturbation similar to DP SGD for stochastic gradient Markov chain
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

