Local SGD with Periodic Averaging:
Tighter Analysis and Adaptive Synchronization

Farzin Haddadpour
Penn State
fxh18@psu.edu

Mohammad Mahdi Kamani
Penn State
mqk5591@psu.edu

Mehrdad Mahdavi
Penn State
mzm616@psu.edu

Viveck R. Cadambe
Penn State
vxc12@psu.edu

Abstract
Communication overhead is one of the key challenges that hinders the scalability
of distributed optimization algorithms. In this paper, we study local distributed
SGD, where data is partitioned among computation nodes, and the computation
nodes perform local updates with periodically exchanging the model among the
workers to perform averaging. While local SGD is empirically shown to provide promising results, a theoretical understanding of its performance remains
open. We strengthen convergence analysis for local SGD, and show that local
SGD can be far less expensive and applied far more generally than current theory
suggests. Specifically, we show that for loss functions that satisfy the PolyakŁojasiewicz condition, O((pT )1/3 ) rounds of communication suffice to achieve
a linear speed up, that is, an error of O(1/pT ), where T is the total number of
model updates at each worker. This is in contrast with previous work which required higher number of communication rounds, as well as was limited to strongly
convex loss functions, for a similar asymptotic performance. We also develop an
adaptive synchronization scheme that provides a general condition for linear speed
up. Finally, we validate the theory with experimental results, running over AWS
EC2 clouds and an internal GPU cluster.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of distributed empirical risk minimization, where a set of p machines, each
with access to a different local shard of training examples Di , i = 1, 2, , . . . , p, attempt to jointly
solve the following optimization problem over entire data set D = D1 ∪ . . . ∪ Dp in parallel:
p
1!
min F (x) !
f (x; Di ),
(1)
p i=1
x∈Rd

where f (·; Di ) is the training loss over the data shard Di . The predominant optimization methodology to solve the above optimization problem is stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where the model
parameters are iteratively updated by
(t)

(t+1)

x(t+1) = x(t) − ηg̃(t) ,

where x and x
are solutions at the tth and (t + 1)th iterations, respectively, and g̃
stochastic gradient of the cost function evaluated on a small mini-batch of all data.

(2)
(t)

is a

In this paper, we are particularly interested in synchronous distributed stochastic gradient descent
algorithms for non-convex optimization problems mainly due to their recent successes and popularity in deep learning models [26, 29, 46, 47]. Parallelizing the updating rule in Eq. (2) can be
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

