Real-Time Reinforcement Learning

arXiv:1911.04448v4 [cs.LG] 12 Dec 2019

Simon Ramstedt
Mila, Element AI,
Université de Montréal
simonramstedt@gmail.com

Christopher Pal
Mila, Element AI,
Polytechnique Montréal
christopher.pal@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), the mathematical framework underlying
most algorithms in Reinforcement Learning (RL), are often used in a way that
wrongfully assumes that the state of an agent’s environment does not change during
action selection. As RL systems based on MDPs begin to find application in realworld, safety-critical situations, this mismatch between the assumptions underlying
classical MDPs and the reality of real-time computation may lead to undesirable
outcomes. In this paper, we introduce a new framework, in which states and actions
evolve simultaneously and show how it is related to the classical MDP formulation.
We analyze existing algorithms under the new real-time formulation and show why
they are suboptimal when used in real time. We then use those insights to create a
new algorithm Real-Time Actor-Critic (RTAC) that outperforms the existing stateof-the-art continuous control algorithm Soft Actor-Critic both in real-time and nonreal-time settings. Code and videos can be found at github.com/rmst/rtrl.

Reinforcement Learning, has led to great successes in games (Tesauro, 1994; Mnih et al., 2015; Silver
et al., 2017) and is starting to be applied successfully to real-world robotic control (Schulman et al.,
2015; Hwangbo et al., 2019).
The theoretical underpinning for most methods in Reinforcement Learning is the Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework (Bellman, 1957).
While it is well suited to describe turn-based decision problems such
as board games, this framework is ill suited for real-time applications
in which the environment’s state continues to evolve while the agent
selects an action (Travnik et al., 2018). Nevertheless, this framework
has been used for real-time problems using what are essentially tricks,
e.g. pausing a simulated environment during action selection or ensuring
that the time required for action selection is negligible (Hwangbo et al.,
2017).

Figure 1: Turn-based
interaction

Instead of relying on such tricks, we propose an augmented decisionmaking framework - Real-Time Reinforcement Learning (RTRL) - in
which the agent is allowed exactly one timestep to select an action.
RTRL is conceptually simple and opens up new algorithmic possibilities
because of its special structure.
We leverage RTRL to create Real-Time Actor-Critic (RTAC), a new actorcritic algorithm, better suited for real-time interaction, that is based on
Soft Actor-Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018a). We then show experimentally
that RTAC outperforms SAC in both real-time and non-real-time settings.

Figure 2: Real-time
interaction

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

