Missing Not at Random in Matrix Completion:
The Effectiveness of Estimating Missingness
Probabilities Under a Low Nuclear Norm Assumption

Wei Ma∗
George H. Chen∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{weima,georgechen}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Matrix completion is often applied to data with entries missing not at random
(MNAR). For example, consider a recommendation system where users tend to
only reveal ratings for items they like. In this case, a matrix completion method
that relies on entries being revealed at uniformly sampled row and column indices
can yield overly optimistic predictions of unseen user ratings. Recently, various
papers have shown that we can reduce this bias in MNAR matrix completion
if we know the probabilities of different matrix entries being missing. These
probabilities are typically modeled using logistic regression or naive Bayes, which
make strong assumptions and lack guarantees on the accuracy of the estimated
probabilities. In this paper, we suggest a simple approach to estimating these
probabilities that avoids these shortcomings. Our approach follows from the
observation that missingness patterns in real data often exhibit low nuclear norm
structure. We can then estimate the missingness probabilities by feeding the (always
fully-observed) binary matrix specifying which entries are revealed or missing to
an existing nuclear-norm-constrained matrix completion algorithm by Davenport et
al. [2014]. Thus, we tackle MNAR matrix completion by solving a different matrix
completion problem first that recovers missingness probabilities. We establish
finite-sample error bounds for how accurate these probability estimates are and
how well these estimates debias standard matrix completion losses for the original
matrix to be completed. Our experiments show that the proposed debiasing strategy
can improve a variety of existing matrix completion algorithms, and achieves
downstream matrix completion accuracy at least as good as logistic regression and
naive Bayes debiasing baselines that require additional auxiliary information.

1

Introduction

Many modern applications involve partially observed matrices where entries are missing not at random
(MNAR). For example, in restaurant recommendation, consider a ratings matrix X ∈ (R ∪ {?})m×n
where rows index users and columns index restaurants, and the entries of the matrix correspond
to user-supplied restaurant ratings or “?” to indicate “missing”. A user who is never in London is
unlikely to go to and subsequently rate London restaurants, and a user who is vegan is unlikely to go
to and rate restaurants that focus exclusively on meat. In particular, the entries in the ratings matrix
are not revealed uniformly at random. As another example, in a health care context, the partially
observed matrix X could instead have rows index patients and columns index medically relevant
∗

Equal contribution
Code available at https://github.com/georgehc/mnar_mc

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

