Characterizing Bias in Classifiers using Generative
Models
Daniel McDuff, Yale Song and Ashish Kapoor
Microsoft
Redmond, WA, USA
{damcduff,yalesong,akapoor}@microsoft.com

Shuang Ma
SUNY Buffalo
Buffalo, NY
shuangma@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Models that are learned from real-world data are often biased because the data
used to train them is biased. This can propagate systemic human biases that exist
and ultimately lead to inequitable treatment of people, especially minorities. To
characterize bias in learned classifiers, existing approaches rely on human oracles
labeling real-world examples to identify the “blind spots” of the classifiers; these
are ultimately limited due to the human labor required and the finite nature of
existing image examples. We propose a simulation-based approach for interrogating classifiers using generative adversarial models in a systematic manner. We
incorporate a progressive conditional generative model for synthesizing photorealistic facial images and Bayesian Optimization for an efficient interrogation of
independent facial image classification systems. We show how this approach can
be used to efficiently characterize racial and gender biases in commercial systems.

1

Introduction

Models that are learned from found data (e.g., data scraped from the Internet) are often biased because
these data sources are biased (Torralba & Efros, 2011). This can propagate systemic inequalities
that exist in the real-world (Caliskan et al., 2017) and ultimately lead to unfair treatment of people.
A model may perform poorly on populations that are minorities within the training set and present
higher risks to them. For example, there is evidence of lower precision in pedestrian detection
systems for people with darker skin tones (higher on the Fitzpatrick (1988) scale). This exposes
one group to greater risk from self-driving/autonomous vehicles than another (Wilson et al., 2019).
Other studies have revealed systematic biases in facial classification systems (Buolamwini, 2017;
Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018), with the error rate of gender classification up to seven times larger
on women than men and poorer on people with darker skin tones. Another study found that face
recognition systems misidentify people with darker skin tones, women, and younger people at higher
error rates (Klare et al., 2012). To exacerbate the negative effects of inequitable performance, there is
evidence that African Americans are subjected to higher rates of facial recognition searches (Garvie,
2016). Commercial facial classification APIs are already deployed in consumer-facing systems and
are being used by law enforcement. The combination of greater exposure to algorithms and a reduced
precision in the results for certain demographic groups deserves urgent attention.
Many learned models exhibit bias as training datasets are limited in size and diversity. The “preferential selection of units for data analysis” leads to sample selection bias Bareinboim & Pearl (2016)
and is the primary form of bias we consider here. Preferential selection need not necessarily be
intentional. Let us take several benchmark datasets as exemplars. Almost 50% of the people featured
in the widely used MS-CELEB-1M dataset (Guo et al., 2016) are from North America (USA and
Canada) and Western Europe (UK and Germany), and over 75% are men. The demographic make up
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

