The Case for Evaluating Causal Models
Using Interventional Measures and Empirical Data

Amanda Gentzel, Dan Garant, and David Jensen
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst

Abstract
Causal modeling is central to many areas of artificial intelligence, including complex reasoning, planning, knowledge-base construction, robotics, explanation, and
fairness. An active community of researchers develops and enhances algorithms
that learn causal models from data, and this work has produced a series of impressive technical advances. However, evaluation techniques for causal modeling
algorithms have remained somewhat primitive, limiting what we can learn from experimental studies of algorithm performance, constraining the types of algorithms
and model representations that researchers consider, and creating a gap between
theory and practice. We argue for more frequent use of evaluation techniques that
examine interventional measures rather than structural or observational measures,
and that evaluate using empirical data rather than synthetic data. We survey the
current practice in evaluation and show that the techniques we recommend are
rarely used in practice. We show that such techniques are feasible and that data
sets are available to conduct such evaluations. We also show that these techniques
produce substantially different results than using structural measures and synthetic
data.

1

Introduction

Evaluation is central to research in artificial intelligence and machine learning [Cohen, 1995, Langley,
2011]. How we evaluate algorithms determines our perception of the relative effectiveness and
usefulness of different approaches, and this knowledge guides choices about future research directions.
As Cohen and Howe [1989] explained three decades ago: “Ideally, evaluation should be a mechanism
by which AI progresses both within and across individual research projects. It should be something
we do as individuals to help our own research and, more importantly, on behalf of the field.”
As fields develop, protocols for evaluation need to develop alongside them. In this paper, we offer
an empirical analysis of the set of techniques typically used to evaluate algorithms for learning
causal models, and we show that this set could be substantially enhanced. The ultimate goal of most
algorithms for causal modeling is to learn models capable of accurately estimating the effects of
interventions in real-world systems. With this goal in mind, we would like to evaluate algorithms by
comparing their estimates to actual interventional effects on data produced by a real-world system.
In practice, though, many evaluations fall short of this ideal, most frequently using only synthetic
data and structural or observational measures. Without the use of empirical data, our evaluations
produce little information about whether our algorithms generalize to real-world systems, and this
greatly reduces their likelihood of widespread adoption by others outside of the field. Without the use
of interventional measures, our evaluations produce little information about whether learned models
will accurately estimate the effects of interventions, limiting their real-world utility.
Note that we do not argue for replacing the prevailing techniques for evaluation. These techniques
have substantial value, both in assessing overall performance and in allowing fine-grained experiments
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

