Using Statistics to Automate Stochastic Optimization
Hunter Lang

Pengchuan Zhang
Lin Xiao
Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA 98052, USA
{hunter.lang, penzhan, lin.xiao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite the development of numerous adaptive optimizers, tuning the learning
rate of stochastic gradient methods remains a major roadblock to obtaining good
practical performance in machine learning. Rather than changing the learning
rate at each iteration, we propose an approach that automates the most common
hand-tuning heuristic: use a constant learning rate until “progress stops”, then
drop. We design an explicit statistical test that determines when the dynamics
of stochastic gradient descent reach a stationary distribution. This test can be
performed easily during training, and when it fires, we decrease the learning rate
by a constant multiplicative factor. Our experiments on several deep learning tasks
demonstrate that this statistical adaptive stochastic approximation (SASA) method
can automatically find good learning rate schedules and match the performance of
hand-tuned methods using default settings of its parameters. The statistical testing
helps to control the variance of this procedure and improves its robustness.

1

Introduction

Stochastic approximation methods, including stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its many variants,
serve as the workhorses of machine learning with big data. Many tasks in machine learning can be
formulated as the stochastic optimization problem:
⇥
⇤
minimizex 2Rn F(x) , E⇠ f (x, ⇠) ,
where ⇠ is a random variable representing data sampled from some (unknown) probability distribution,
x 2 Rn represents the parameters of the model (e.g., the weight matrices in a neural network), and f
is a loss function. In this paper, we focus on the following variant of SGD with momentum,
d k+1 = (1
x k+1 = x k

k
k
k )g + k d ,
k+1
↵k d ,

(1)

where g k = rx f (x k , ⇠ k ) is a stochastic gradient, ↵k > 0 is the learning rate, and k 2 [0, 1) is the
momentum coefficient. This approach can be viewed as an extension of the heavy-ball method
(Polyak, 1964) to the stochastic setting.1 To distinguish it from the classical SGD, we refer to the
method (1) as SGM (Stochastic Gradient with Momentum).
Theoretical conditions on the convergence of stochastic approximation methods are well established
(see, e.g., Wasan, 1969; Kushner and Yin, 2003, and references therein). Unfortunately, these
asymptotic conditions are insufficient in practice. For example, the classical rule ↵k = a/(k + b)c
where a, b > 0 and 1/2 < c  1, often gives poor performance even when a, b, and c are hand-tuned.
Additionally, despite the advent of numerous adaptive variants of SGD and SGM (e.g., Duchi et al.,
2011; Tieleman and Hinton, 2012; Kingma and Ba, 2014, and other variants), achieving good
performance in practice often still requires considerable hand-tuning (Wilson et al., 2017).
1For fixed values of ↵ and , this “normalized” update formula is equivalent to the more common updates
d k+1 = g k + d k , x k+1 = x k ↵ 0 d k+1 with the reparametrization ↵ = ↵ 0 /(1
).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

