Control Batch Size and Learning Rate to Generalize
Well: Theoretical and Empirical Evidence
Fengxiang He Tongliang Liu Dacheng Tao
UBTECH Sydney AI Centre, School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{fengxiang.he, tongliang.liu, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep neural networks have received dramatic success based on the optimization
method of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). However, it is still not clear how
to tune hyper-parameters, especially batch size and learning rate, to ensure good
generalization. This paper reports both theoretical and empirical evidence of a
training strategy that we should control the ratio of batch size to learning rate not too
large to achieve a good generalization ability. Specifically, we prove a PAC-Bayes
generalization bound for neural networks trained by SGD, which has a positive
correlation with the ratio of batch size to learning rate. This correlation builds the
theoretical foundation of the training strategy. Furthermore, we conduct a largescale experiment to verify the correlation and training strategy. We trained 1,600
models based on architectures ResNet-110, and VGG-19 with datasets CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 while strictly control unrelated variables. Accuracies on the test
sets are collected for the evaluation. Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficients
and the corresponding p values on 164 groups of the collected data demonstrate
that the correlation is statistically significant, which fully supports the training
strategy.

1

Introduction

The recent decade saw dramatic success of deep neural networks [9] based on the optimization
method of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [2, 32]. It is an interesting and important problem that
how to tune the hyper-parameters of SGD to make neural networks generalize well. Some works
have been addressing the strategies of tuning hyper-parameters [5, 10, 14, 15] and the generalization
ability of SGD [4, 11, 19, 26, 27]. However, there still lacks solid evidence for the training strategies
regarding the hyper-parameters for neural networks.
In this paper, we present both theoretical and empirical evidence for a training strategy for deep
neural networks:
When employing SGD to train deep neural networks, we should control the batch
size not too large and learning rate not too small, in order to make the networks
generalize well.
This strategy gives a guide to tune the hyper-parameters that helps neural networks achieve good test
performance when the training error has been small. It is derived from the following property:
The generalization ability of deep neural networks has a negative correlation with
the ratio of batch size to learning rate.
As regards the theoretical evidence, we prove a novel PAC-Bayes [24, 25] upper bound for the
generalization error of deep neural networks trained by SGD. The proposed generalization bound
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

