Explaining Landscape Connectivity of Low-cost
Solutions for Multilayer Nets
Rohith Kuditipudi
Xiang Wang
Holden Lee
Duke University
Duke University
Princeton University
rohith.kuditipudi@duke.edu
xwang@cs.duke.edu
holdenl@princeton.edu
Yi Zhang
Zhiyuan Li
Princeton University
Princeton University
y.zhang@cs.princeton.edu
zhiyuanli@cs.princeton.edu
Wei Hu
Sanjeev Arora
Princeton University
Princeton University and Institute for Advanced Study
huwei@cs.princeton.edu
arora@cs.princeton.edu
Rong Ge
Duke University
rongge@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Mode connectivity (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018) is a surprising
phenomenon in the loss landscape of deep nets. Optima—at least those discovered
by gradient-based optimization—turn out to be connected by simple paths on
which the loss function is almost constant. Often, these paths can be chosen to be
piece-wise linear, with as few as two segments.
We give mathematical explanations for this phenomenon, assuming generic properties (such as dropout stability and noise stability) of well-trained deep nets,
which have previously been identified as part of understanding the generalization
properties of deep nets. Our explanation holds for realistic multilayer nets, and
experiments are presented to verify the theory.

1

Introduction

Efforts to understand how and why deep learning works have led to a focus on the optimization
landscape of the training loss. Since optimization to near-zero training loss occurs for many choices
of random initialization, it is clear that the landscape contains many global optima (or near-optima).
However, the loss can become quite high when interpolating between found optima, suggesting that
these optima occur at the bottom of “valleys” surrounded on all sides by high walls. Therefore the
phenomenon of mode connectivity (Garipov et al., 2018; Draxler et al., 2018) came as a surprise:
optima (at least the ones discovered by gradient-based optimization) are connected by simple paths in
the parameter space, on which the loss function is almost constant. In other words, the optima are not
walled off in separate valleys as hitherto believed. More surprisingly, the paths connecting discovered
optima can be piece-wise linear with as few as two segments.
Mode connectivity begs for theoretical explanation. One paper (Freeman and Bruna, 2016) attempted
such an explanation for 2-layer nets, even before the discovery of the phenomenon in multilayer nets.
However, they require the width of the net to be exponential in some relevant parameters. Others
(Venturi et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018; Nguyen, 2019) require special structure
in their networks where the number of neurons needs to be greater than the number of training data
points. Thus it remains an open problem to explain mode connectivity even in the 2-layer case with
realistic parameter settings, let alone for standard multilayer architectures.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

