AGEM: Solving Linear Inverse Problems
via Deep Priors and Sampling

Bichuan Guo
Tsinghua University
gbc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yuxing Han
South China Agricultural University
yuxinghan@scau.edu.cn

Jiangtao Wen
Tsinghua University
jtwen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper we propose to use a denoising autoencoder (DAE) prior to simultaneously solve a linear inverse problem and estimate its noise parameter. Existing
DAE-based methods estimate the noise parameter empirically or treat it as a tunable
hyper-parameter. We instead propose autoencoder guided EM, a probabilistically
sound framework that performs Bayesian inference with intractable deep priors.
We show that efficient posterior sampling from the DAE can be achieved via
Metropolis-Hastings, which allows the Monte Carlo EM algorithm to be used. We
demonstrate competitive results for signal denoising, image deblurring and image
devignetting. Our method is an example of combining the representation power of
deep learning with uncertainty quantification from Bayesian statistics.

1

Introduction

A variety of inverse problems, including sensor denoising [27] and image restoration [2], can be
formulated as recovering a latent signal x from noisy observations y = Hx + n, where H is
the observation model and n is the noise. Model-based reconstruction methods [13, 20, 35] use
priors to constrain the solution space. More recently, data-driven deep priors have been shown to
outperform traditional analytic priors [24]. Here we adopt the unsupervised learning approach: unlike
discriminative learning which requires task-specific data and training, deep priors trained with a DAE
[36] can be used in a plug-and-play way [3, 4, 25], without fine-tuning for specific tasks H.
The noise level of n is essential for controlling the strength of prior. For example, data corrupted by
large noises should be handled with strong priors. For real data, the noise level is usually unknown (i.e.
noise-blind) and needs to be estimated. Although deep priors are able to capture highly sophisticated
data distribution, they often lack the analytic tractability for statistical inference. As a result, many
DAE-based methods either treat the noise level as a tunable hyper-parameter [3, 39], or empirically
compute an adaptive estimate during gradient based optimization [4], without correctness guarantee.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic framework that combines DAE priors with tractable inference.
The latent signal x and the noise level are estimated simultaneously. We rely on the observation that a
trained DAE captures the score of data distribution (gradient of log density) [1]. The key component
of our method is that the intractable posterior distribution of x can be efficiently sampled with a
Metropolis-Hastings [16] sampler. As a consequence, the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) of
the noise level can be obtained using the Monte Carlo EM algorithm [40]. The solution of x can be
constructed from the converged samples, e.g. a minimum mean squared error (MMSE) estimator can
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

