Training Image Estimators
without Image Ground-Truth

Zhihao Xia
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130
zhihao.xia@wustl.edu

Ayan Chakrabarti
Washington University in St. Louis
1 Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130
ayan@wustl.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been very successful in image estimation applications
such as compressive-sensing and image restoration, as a means to estimate images
from partial, blurry, or otherwise degraded measurements. These networks are
trained on a large number of corresponding pairs of measurements and ground-truth
images, and thus implicitly learn to exploit domain-specific image statistics. But
unlike measurement data, it is often expensive or impractical to collect a large
training set of ground-truth images in many application settings. In this paper, we
introduce an unsupervised framework for training image estimation networks, from
a training set that contains only measurements—with two varied measurements per
image—but no ground-truth for the full images desired as output. We demonstrate
that our framework can be applied for both regular and blind image estimation
tasks, where in the latter case parameters of the measurement model (e.g., the
blur kernel) are unknown: during inference, and potentially, also during training.
We evaluate our method for training networks for compressive-sensing and blind
deconvolution, considering both non-blind and blind training for the latter. Our
unsupervised framework yields models that are nearly as accurate as those from
fully supervised training, despite not having access to any ground-truth images.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing images from imperfect observations is a classic inference task in many imaging
applications. In compressive sensing [8], a sensor makes partial measurements for efficient acquisition.
These measurements correspond to a low-dimensional projection of the higher-dimensional image
signal, and the system relies on computational inference for recovering the full-dimensional image.
In other cases, cameras capture degraded images that are low-resolution, blurry, etc., and require a
restoration algorithm [10, 29, 34] to recover a corresponding un-corrupted image. Deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have recently emerged as an effective tool for such image estimation
tasks [4, 6, 7, 12, 27, 30, 31]. Specifically, a CNN for a given application is trained on a large dataset
that consists of pairs of ground-truth images and observed measurements (in many cases where
the measurement or degradation process is well characterized, having a set of ground-truth images
is sufficient to generate corresponding measurements). This training set allows the CNN to learn
to exploit the expected statistical properties of images in that application domain, to solve what is
essentially an ill-posed inverse problem.
But for many domains, it is impractical or prohibitively expensive to capture full-dimensional or
un-corrupted images, and construct such a large representative training set. Unfortunately, it is often
in such domains that a computational imaging solution is most useful. Recently, Lehtinen et al. [14]
proposed a solution to this issue for denoising, with a method that trains with only pairs of noisy
observations. While their method yields remarkably accurate network models without needing any
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

