Who is Afraid of Big Bad Minima? Analysis of
Gradient-Flow in a Spiked Matrix-Tensor Model

Stefano Sarao Mannelli† , Giulio Biroli‡ , Chiara Cammarota∗ ,
Florent Krzakala‡ , and Lenka Zdeborová†

Abstract
Gradient-based algorithms are effective for many machine learning tasks, but
despite ample recent effort and some progress, it often remains unclear why they
work in practice in optimising high-dimensional non-convex functions and why
they find good minima instead of being trapped in spurious ones. Here we present a
quantitative theory explaining this behaviour in a spiked matrix-tensor model. Our
framework is based on the Kac-Rice analysis of stationary points and a closed-form
analysis of gradient-flow originating from statistical physics. We show that there
is a well defined region of parameters where the gradient-flow algorithm finds a
good global minimum despite the presence of exponentially many spurious local
minima. We show that this is achieved by surfing on saddles that have strong
negative direction towards the global minima, a phenomenon that is connected to a
BBP-type threshold in the Hessian describing the critical points of the landscapes.

1

Introduction

A common theme in machine learning and optimisation is to understand the behaviour of gradient
descent methods for non-convex problems with many minima. Despite the non-convexity, such
methods often successfully optimise models such as neural networks, matrix completion and tensor
factorisation. This has motivated a recent spur in research attempting to characterise the properties of
the loss landscape that may shed some light on the reason of such success. Without the aim of being
exhaustive these include [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11].
Over the last few years, a popular line of research has shown, for a variety of systems, that spurious
local minima are not present in certain regimes of parameters. When the signal-to-noise ratio is
large enough, the success of gradient descent can thus be understood by a trivialisation transition
in the loss landscape: either there is only a single minima, or all minima become "good", and no
spurious minima can trap the dynamics. This is what happens, for instance, in the limit of small noise
and abundance of data for matrix completion and tensor factorization [3, 8], or for some very large
neural networks [1, 2]. However, it is often observed in practice that these guarantees fall short of
explaining the success of gradient descent, that is empirically observed to find good minima very far
from the regime under mathematical control. In fact, gradient-descent-based algorithms may be able
to perform well even when spurious local minima are present because the basins of attraction of the
spurious minima may be small and the dynamics might be able to avoid them. Understanding this
behaviour requires, however, a very detailed characterisation of the dynamics and of the landscape, a
feat which is not yet possible in full generality.
† Institut de Physique Théorique, CNRS & CEA & Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France.
‡ Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole normale supérieure ENS, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université,
Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité Paris, France.
∗ Department of Mathematics, King’s College London, Strand London WC2R 2LS, UK.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

