Online Learning via the Differential Privacy Lens

Jacob Abernethy∗
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
prof@gatech.edu
Chansoo Lee∗
Google Brain
chansoo@google.com

Young Hun Jung∗
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
yhjung@umich.edu

Audra McMillan∗
Simons Inst. for the Theory of Computing
Department of Computer Science
Boston University
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
audramarymcmillan@gmail.com

Ambuj Tewari∗
Department of Statistics
Department of EECS
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we use differential privacy as a lens to examine online learning in
both full and partial information settings. The differential privacy framework is, at
heart, less about privacy and more about algorithmic stability, and thus has found
application in domains well beyond those where information security is central.
Here we develop an algorithmic property called one-step differential stability which
facilitates a more refined regret analysis for online learning methods. We show
that tools from the differential privacy literature can yield regret bounds for many
interesting online learning problems including online convex optimization and online linear optimization. Our stability notion is particularly well-suited for deriving
first-order regret bounds for follow-the-perturbed-leader algorithms, something that
all previous analyses have struggled to achieve. We also generalize the standard
max-divergence to obtain a broader class called Tsallis max-divergences. These
define stronger notions of stability that are useful in deriving bounds in partial
information settings such as multi-armed bandits and bandits with experts.

1

Introduction

Stability of output in presence of small changes to input is a desirable feature of methods in statistics
and machine learning [11, 19, 31, 42]. Another area of research for which stability is a core
component is differential privacy (DP). As Dwork and Roth [15] observed, “differential privacy is
enabled by stability and ensures stability.” They argue that the “differential privacy lens” offers a fresh
perspective to examine areas other than privacy. For example, the DP lens has been used successfully
in designing coalition-proof mechanisms [25] and preventing false discovery in statistical analysis
[10, 13, 17, 28].
In this paper, we use the DP lens to design and analyze randomized online learning algorithms in a
variety of canonical online learning problems. The DP lens allows us to analyze a broad class of online
learning problems, spanning both full information (online convex optimization (OCO), online linear
optimization (OLO), experts problem) and partial information settings (multi-armed bandits, bandits
with experts) using a unified framework. We are able to analyze follow-the-perturbed-leader (FTPL)
as well as follow-the-regularized leader (FTRL) based algorithms resulting in both zero-order and
∗

Author order is alphabetical denoting equal contributions.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

