Numerically Accurate Hyperbolic Embeddings Using
Tiling-Based Models

Tao Yu
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
tyu@cs.cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Hyperbolic embeddings achieve excellent performance when embedding hierarchical data structures like synonym or type hierarchies, but they can be limited by
numerical error when ordinary floating-point numbers are used to represent points
in hyperbolic space. Standard models such as the Poincaré disk and the Lorentz
model have unbounded numerical error as points get far from the origin. To address
this, we propose a new model which uses an integer-based tiling to represent any
point in hyperbolic space with provably bounded numerical error. This allows
us to learn high-precision embeddings without using BigFloats, and enables us
to store the resulting embeddings with fewer bits. We evaluate our tiling-based
model empirically, and show that it can both compress hyperbolic embeddings
(down to 2% of a Poincaré embedding on WordNet Nouns) and learn more accurate
embeddings on real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

In the real world, valuable knowledge is encoded in datasets with hierarchical structure, such as
the IBM Information Management System to describe the structure of documents, the large lexical
database WordNet [14], various networks [8] and natural language sentences [24, 5]. It is challenging
but necessary to embed these structured data for the use of modern machine learning methods. Recent
work [11, 26, 27, 7] proposed using hyperbolic spaces to embed these structures and has achieved
exciting results. A hyperbolic space is a manifold with constant negative curvature and endowed with
various geometric properties, in particular, Bowditch [4] shows that any finite subset of an hyperbolic
space looks like a finite tree according to the definition in [18]. Therefore, the hyperbolic space is
well suited to model hierarchical structures.
A major difficulty that arises when learning with hyperbolic embeddings is the numerical instability,
sometimes informally called “the NaN problem”. Models of hyperbolic space commonly used to
learn embeddings, such as the Poincaré ball model [26] and the Lorentz hyperboloid model [27],
suffer from significant numerical error caused by floating-point computation and amplified by the
ill-conditioned Riemannian metrics involved in their construction. To address this when embedding a
graph, one technical solution exploited by Sarkar [32] is to carefully scale down all the edge lengths
by a factor before embedding, then recover the original distances afterwards by dividing by the factor.
However, this scaling increases the distortion of the embedding, and the distortion gets worse as the
scale factor increases [30]. Sala et al. [30] suggested that, to produce a good embedding in hyperbolic
space, one can either increase the number of bits used for the floating-point numbers or increase the
dimension of the space.
While these methods can greatly improve the accuracy of an embedding empirically, they come with a
computational cost, and the floating-point error is still unbounded everywhere. Despite these previous
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

