Limits of Private Learning with Access to Public Data

Noga Alon
Department of Mathematics
Princeton University
nalon@math.princeton.edu

Raef Bassily∗
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Shay Moran
Google AI
Princeton
shaymoran1@gmail.com

Abstract
We consider learning problems where the training set consists of two types of
examples: private and public. The goal is to design a learning algorithm that
satisfies differential privacy only with respect to the private examples. This setting
interpolates between private learning (where all examples are private) and classical
learning (where all examples are public).
We study the limits of learning in this setting in terms of private and public sample complexities. We show that any hypothesis class of VC-dimension d can be
agnostically learned up to an excess error of α using only (roughly) d/α public
examples and d/α2 private labeled examples. This result holds even when the
public examples are unlabeled. This gives a quadratic improvement over the standard d/α2 upper bound on the public sample complexity (where private examples
can be ignored altogether if the public examples are labeled). Furthermore, we give
a nearly matching lower bound, which we prove via a generic reduction from this
setting to the one of private learning without public data.

1

Introduction

In this work, we study a relaxed notion of differentially private (DP) supervised learning which was
introduced by Beimel et al. in [BNS13], where it was coined semi-private learning. In this setting, the
learning algorithm takes as input a training set that is comprised of two parts: (i) a private sample that
contains personal and sensitive information, and (ii) a “public” sample that poses no privacy concerns.
We assume that the private sample is always labeled, while the public sample can be either labeled or
unlabeled. The algorithm is required to satisfy DP only with respect to the private sample. The goal
is to design algorithms that can exploit as little public data as possible to achieve non-trivial gains in
accuracy (or, equivalently savings in sample complexity) over standard DP learning algorithms, while
still providing strong privacy guarantees for the private dataset. Similar settings have been studied
before in literature (see “Related Work” section below).
There are several motivations for studying this problem. First, in practical scenarios, it is often not
hard to collect reasonable amount of public data from users or organizations. For example, in the
language of consumer privacy, there is considerable amount of data collected from the so-called
“opt-in” users, who voluntarily offer or sell their data to companies or organizations. Such data is
deemed by its original owner to have no threat to personal privacy. There are also a variety of other
∗

Part of this work was done while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

