User-Specified Local Differential Privacy in
Unconstrained Adaptive Online Learning

Dirk van der Hoeven
Mathematical Institute
Leiden University
Leiden, 2333 CA
dirkvderhoeven@gmail.com

Abstract
Local differential privacy is a strong notion of privacy in which the provider of
the data guarantees privacy by perturbing the data with random noise. In the
standard application of local differential privacy the distribution of the noise is
constant and known by the learner. In this paper we generalize this approach by
allowing the provider of the data to choose the distribution of the noise without
disclosing any parameters of the distribution to the learner, under the constraint
that the distribution is symmetrical. We consider this problem in the unconstrained
Online Convex Optimization setting with noisy feedback. In this setting the learner
receives the subgradient of a loss function, perturbed by noise, and aims to achieve
sublinear regret with respect to some competitor, without constraints on the norm
of the competitor. We derive the first algorithms that have adaptive regret bounds
in this setting, i.e. our algorithms adapt to the unknown competitor norm, unknown
noise, and unknown sum of the norms of the subgradients, matching state of the art
bounds in all cases.

1

Introduction

In learning, a natural tension exists between learners and the providers of data. The learner aims to
make optimal use of the data, perhaps even at the cost of the privacy of the providers. To nevertheless
ensure sufficient privacy the provider can add random noise to the data that he sends to the learner.
This idea is called -local differential privacy (Wasserman and Zhou, 2010; Duchi et al., 2014) and the
standard implementation has constant  for all providers. However, not all providers care equivalently
about their privacy (Song et al., 2015). Some providers may wish to aid the learner in making optimal
use of their data, while other providers value their privacy over helping the learner. For instance,
celebrities might care more for their privacy than others because they want to preserve the privacy
they have left. To complicate things further, the providers of the data may not wish to reveal how
much they care about their privacy, because when privacy levels differ between providers these
privacy levels become privacy sensitive themselves. Furthermore, not all parts of the data are equally
privacy sensitive. For example, tweets are already publicly available, but browsing history may
contain sensitive information that should be kept private. To capture these varying privacy constraints
we allow each provider to choose how much noise is added for each dimension of the data.
In this paper, we consider these problems in the Online Convex Optimization (OCO) setting (Hazan,
2016) with local differential privacy guarantees. The OCO framework is a popular and successful
framework to design and analyse many algorithms used to train machine learning models. The OCO
setting proceeds in rounds t = 1, . . . , T . In a given round t the learner is to provide a prediction
wt ∈ Rd . An adversary then chooses a convex loss function `t and sends a subgradient gt ∈ ∂`t (wt )
to the learner. We work with an unconstrained domain for w, which has recently grown in popularity
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

