Program Synthesis and Semantic Parsing
with Learned Code Idioms
Richard Shin∗
UC Berkeley
ricshin@berkeley.edu

Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt & Oleksandr Polozov
Microsoft Research
{miallama,mabrocks,polozov}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Program synthesis of general-purpose source code from natural language specifications is challenging due to the need to reason about high-level patterns in the
target program and low-level implementation details at the same time. In this
work, we present PATOIS, a system that allows a neural program synthesizer to
explicitly interleave high-level and low-level reasoning at every generation step.
It accomplishes this by automatically mining common code idioms from a given
corpus, incorporating them into the underlying language for neural synthesis, and
training a tree-based neural synthesizer to use these idioms during code generation. We evaluate PATOIS on two complex semantic parsing datasets and show
that using learned code idioms improves the synthesizer’s accuracy.

1

Introduction

Program synthesis is a task of translating an incomplete specification (e.g. natural language, inputoutput examples, or a combination of the two) into the most likely program that satisfies this specification in a given language [15]. In the last decade, it has advanced dramatically thanks to the novel
neural and neuro-symbolic techniques [5, 10, 19], first mass-market applications [28], and massive
datasets [9, 39, 41]. Table 1 shows a few examples of typical tasks of program synthesis from natural
language. Most of the successful applications apply program synthesis to manually crafted domainspecific languages (DSLs) such as FlashFill and Karel, or to subsets of general-purpose functional
languages such as SQL and Lisp. However, scaling program synthesis to real-life programs in a
general-purpose language with complex control flow remains an open challenge.
We conjecture that one of the main current challenges of synthesizing a program is insufficient
separation between high-level and low-level reasoning. In a typical program generation process,
be it a neural model or a symbolic search, the program is generated in terms of its syntax tokens,
which represent low-level implementation details of the latent high-level patterns in the program. In
contrast, humans switch between high-level reasoning (“a binary search over an array”) and lowlevel implementation (“while l < r: m = (l+r)/2 . . . ”) repeatedly when writing a single function.
Reasoning over multiple abstraction levels at once complicates the generation task for a model.
This conjecture is supported by two key observations. First, recent work [12, 25] has achieved great
results by splitting the synthesis process into sketch generation and sketch completion. The first stage
generates a high-level sketch of the target program, and the second stage fills in missing details in
the sketch. Such separation improves the accuracy of synthesis as compared to an equivalent endto-end generation. However, it allows only one stage of high-level reasoning at the root level of
the program, whereas (a) real-life programs involve common patterns at all syntactic levels, and (b)
programmers often interleave high-level and low-level reasoning during implementation.
∗

Work done partly during an internship at Microsoft Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

