A Generic Acceleration Framework
for Stochastic Composite Optimization

Andrei Kulunchakov and Julien Mairal
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
❛♥❞r❡✐✳❦✉❧✉♥❝❤❛❦♦✈❅✐♥r✐❛✳❢r ❛♥❞ ❥✉❧✐❡♥✳♠❛✐r❛❧❅✐♥r✐❛✳❢r

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce various mechanisms to obtain accelerated first-order
stochastic optimization algorithms when the objective function is convex or strongly
convex. Specifically, we extend the Catalyst approach originally designed for
deterministic objectives to the stochastic setting. Given an optimization method
with mild convergence guarantees for strongly convex problems, the challenge is to
accelerate convergence to a noise-dominated region, and then achieve convergence
with an optimal worst-case complexity depending on the noise variance of the
gradients. A side contribution of our work is also a generic analysis that can
handle inexact proximal operators, providing new insights about the robustness of
stochastic algorithms when the proximal operator cannot be exactly computed.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider stochastic composite optimization problems of the form
min {F (x) := f (x) + ψ(x)}

x∈Rp

with

f (x) = Eξ [f˜(x, ξ)],

(1)

where the function f is convex, or µ-strongly convex, and L-smooth (meaning differentiable with
L-Lipschitz continuous gradient), and ψ is a possibly non-smooth convex lower-semicontinuous
function. For instance, ψ may be the ℓ1 -norm, which is known to induce sparsity, or an indicator
function of a convex set [21]. The random variable ξ corresponds to data samples. When the amount
of training data is finite, the expectation Eξ [f˜(x, ξ)] can be replaced by a finite sum, a setting that
has attracted a lot of attention in machine learning recently, see, e.g., [13, 14, 19, 25, 35, 42, 53] for
incremental algorithms and [1, 26, 30, 33, 47, 55, 56] for accelerated variants.
Yet, as noted in [8], one is typically not interested in the minimization of the empirical risk—that is,
a finite sum of functions—with high precision, but instead, one should focus on the expected risk
involving the true (unknown) data distribution. When one can draw an infinite number of samples
from this distribution, the true risk (1) may be minimized by using appropriate stochastic optimization
techniques. Unfortunately, fast methods designed for deterministic objectives would not apply to
this setting; methods
based on stochastic approximations admit indeed optimal “slow” rates that are
√
typically O(1/ k) for convex functions and O(1/k) for strongly convex ones, depending on the
exact assumptions made on the problem, where k is the number of noisy gradient evaluations [38].
Better understanding the gap between deterministic and stochastic optimization is one goal of this
paper. Specifically, we are interested in Nesterov’s acceleration of gradient-based approaches [39, 40].
In a nutshell, gradient descent or its proximal variant applied to a µ-strongly convex L-smooth
function achieves an exponential convergence rate O((1 − µ/L)k ) in the worst case in function
values, and a sublinear rate O(L/k) if the function is simply convex (µ = 0). By interleaving the
algorithm with clever extrapolation steps, Nesterov showed
that faster convergence could be achieved,
p
and the previous convergence rates become O((1 − µ/L)k ) and O(L/k 2 ), respectively. Whereas
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

