On the Correctness and Sample Complexity of
Inverse Reinforcement Learning

Abi Komanduru
Purdue University
West Lafayette IN 47906
akomandu@purdue.edu

Jean Honorio
Purdue University
West Lafayette IN 47906
jhonorio@purdue.edu

Abstract
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) is the problem of finding a reward function
that generates a given optimal policy for a given Markov Decision Process. This
paper looks at an algorithmic-independent geometric analysis of the IRL problem
with finite states and actions. A L1-regularized Support Vector Machine formulation of the IRL problem motivated by the geometric analysis is then proposed with
the basic objective of the inverse reinforcement problem in mind: to find a reward
function that generates a specified optimal policy. The paper further analyzes
the proposed formulation of inverse reinforcement learning with n states and k
actions, and shows a sample complexity of O(d2 log(nk)) for transition probability
matrices with at most d nonzeros per row, for recovering a reward function that
generates a policy that satisfies Bellman’s optimality condition with respect to the
true transition probabilities.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning is the process of generating an optimal policy for a given Markov Decision
Process (MDP) along with a reward function. Often, in situations including apprenticeship learning,
the reward function is unknown but optimal policy can be observed through the actions of an expert.
In cases such as these, it is desirable to learn a reward function generating the observed optimal policy.
This problem is referred to as Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) Ng & Russel (2000). It is well
known that such a reward function is not necessarily unique. The IRL problem can be formulated
in two different ways. The first is the form considered in Ng & Russel (2000) as well as this paper,
which considers a standard MDP. Several other approaches instead consider the linearly-solvable
MDP (LMDP) formulation presented in Dvijotham & Todorov (2010). Various algorithms to solve
the IRL problem have been proposed including linear programming Ng & Russel (2000), Hybrid IRL
Neu & Szepesvári (2007), Maximum Margin Planning Ratliff et al. (2006), Multiplicative Weights
for Apprenticeship Learning Syed et al. (2008) and Bayesian estimation Ramachandran & Amir
(2007). Approaches to the LMDP formulation of IRL include Maximum Entropy IRL Ziebart et al.
and Gaussian Process IRL Levine et al. (2011). Methods such as Abbeel & Ng (2004) looked at using
IRL to solve the apprenticeship learning problem by trying to find a reward function that maximizes
the margin of the expert’s policy. However, none of the prior works provide a formal guarantee that
the reward function obtained from the empirical data is optimal for the true transition probabilities
in inverse reinforcement learning. We note that the objective for the LMDP formulation of IRL is
different than that of the standard MDP formulation. Indeed, given the true transition probabilities
(although in practice we only access estimated probabilities), methods using the standard MDP
formulation recover a policy that is Bellman optimal while this may not be the case for methods using
the LMDP formulation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

