Trivializations for Gradient-Based
Optimization on Manifolds

Mario Lezcano-Casado
Department of Mathematics
University of Oxford
Oxford,
mario.lezcanocasado@maths.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a framework to study the transformation of problems with manifold
constraints into unconstrained problems through parametrizations in terms of
a Euclidean space. We call these parametrizations trivializations. We prove
conditions under which a trivialization is sound in the context of gradient-based
optimization and we show how two large families of trivializations have overall
favorable properties, but also suffer from a performance issue. We then introduce
dynamic trivializations, which solve this problem, and we show how these form
a family of optimization methods that lie between trivializations and Riemannian
gradient descent, and combine the benefits of both of them. We then show how
to implement these two families of trivializations in practice for different matrix
manifolds. To this end, we prove a formula for the gradient of the exponential
of matrices, which can be of practical interest on its own. Finally, we show how
dynamic trivializations improve the performance of existing methods on standard
tasks designed to test long-term memory within neural networks.1

1

Introduction

Constrained optimization allows to put restrictions on the family of objects being optimized. When
the restrictions are simple, for example, having a vector with entries in [0, 1] or [−1, 1], simple
element-wise parametrizations using sigmoid functions or tanh allow the design of powerful models
such as LSTM [Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997] and GRU [Cho et al., 2014] through the method of
gating. This kind of vector-regularization is now standard, and most of the advanced neural network
architectures use it as a basic building block [Bahdanau et al., 2014]. Constraints on matrices, on the
other hand, are much more challenging.
Most of the interesting sets of matrices turn out to have a manifold structure. Optimization on
manifolds is both theoretically and practically challenging due to the inherent complexity of the
objects involved. Even then, optimization on matrix manifolds has proven to be rather useful in many
different subfields of machine learning and neural networks (NN). Examples of interesting matrix
manifolds in the context of gradient-based optimization are the set of positive definite matrices in
Bayesian statistics [Rasmussen and Williams, 2005], orthogonal matrices within RNNs [Arjovsky
et al., 2016, Helfrich et al., 2018, Lezcano-Casado and Martínez-Rubio, 2019], NNs with structured
linear layers via the QR or the SVD decomposition [Berg et al., 2018, Zhang et al., 2018, Kingma and
Dhariwal, 2018], or invertible matrices in normalizing flows [Berg et al., 2018] and VAEs [Tomczak
and Welling, 2016].
1

An implementation can be found at: https://github.com/Lezcano/expRNN

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

