Zero-shot Knowledge Transfer via
Adversarial Belief Matching

Paul Micaelli
University of Edinburgh
{paul.micaelli}@ed.ac.uk

Amos Storkey
University of Edinburgh
{a.storkey}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Performing knowledge transfer from a large teacher network to a smaller student
is a popular task in modern deep learning applications. However, due to growing
dataset sizes and stricter privacy regulations, it is increasingly common not to
have access to the data that was used to train the teacher. We propose a novel
method which trains a student to match the predictions of its teacher without
using any data or metadata. We achieve this by training an adversarial generator
to search for images on which the student poorly matches the teacher, and then
using them to train the student. Our resulting student closely approximates its
teacher for simple datasets like SVHN, and on CIFAR10 we improve on the stateof-the-art for few-shot distillation (with 100 images per class), despite using no
data. Finally, we also propose a metric to quantify the degree of belief matching
between teacher and student in the vicinity of decision boundaries, and observe
a significantly higher match between our zero-shot student and the teacher, than
between a student distilled with real data and the teacher. Code is available at:
https://github.com/polo5/ZeroShotKnowledgeTransfer

1

Introduction

Large neural networks are ubiquitous in modern deep learning applications, including computer vision
(He et al., 2015), speech recognition (van den Oord et al., 2016) and natural language understanding
(Devlin et al., 2018). While their size allows learning from big datasets, it is a limitation for users
without the appropriate hardware, or for internet-of-things applications. As such, the deep learning
community has seen a focus on model compression techniques, including knowledge distillation
(Ba and Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2015), network pruning (Li et al., 2016; Han et al., 2016) and
quantization (Gupta et al., 2015; Hubara et al., 2016).
These methods typically rely on labeled data drawn from the training distribution of the model that
needs compressed. Distillation does so by construction, and pruning or quantization need to fine-tune
networks on training data to get good performance. We argue that this is a strong limitation because
pretrained models are often released without training data, an increasingly common trend that has
been grounds for controversy in the deep learning community (Radford et al., 2019). We identify
four main reasons why datasets aren’t released: privacy, property, size, and transience. Respective
examples include Facebook’s DeepFace network trained on four million confidential user images
(Taigman et al., 2014), Google’s Neural Machine Translation System trained on internal datasets (Wu
et al., 2016) and regarded as intellectual property, the JFT-300 dataset which contains 300 million
images across more than 18k classes (Sun et al., 2017), and finally the field of policy distillation in
reinforcement learning (Rusu et al., 2016), where one requires observations from the original training
environment which may not exist anymore. One could argue that missing datasets can be emulated
with proxy data for distillation, but in practice that is problematic for two reasons. First, there is a
correlation between data that is not publicly released and data that is hard to emulate, such as medical
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

