Constraint-based Causal Structure Learning with
Consistent Separating Sets
Honghao Li, Vincent Cabeli, Nadir Sella, Hervé Isambert∗
Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS UMR168, Paris
{honghao.li, vincent.cabeli, nadir.sella, herve.isambert}@curie.fr

Abstract
We consider constraint-based methods for causal structure learning, such as the PC
algorithm or any PC-derived algorithms whose ﬁrst step consists in pruning a complete graph to obtain an undirected graph skeleton, which is subsequently oriented.
All constraint-based methods perform this ﬁrst step of removing dispensable edges,
iteratively, whenever a separating set and corresponding conditional independence
can be found. Yet, constraint-based methods lack robustness over sampling noise
and are prone to uncover spurious conditional independences in ﬁnite datasets. In
particular, there is no guarantee that the separating sets identiﬁed during the iterative pruning step remain consistent with the ﬁnal graph. In this paper, we propose
a simple modiﬁcation of PC and PC-derived algorithms so as to ensure that all
separating sets identiﬁed to remove dispensable edges are consistent with the ﬁnal
graph, thus enhancing the explainability of constraint-based methods. It is achieved
by repeating the constraint-based causal structure learning scheme, iteratively,
while searching for separating sets that are consistent with the graph obtained at
the previous iteration. Ensuring the consistency of separating sets can be done at a
limited complexity cost, through the use of block-cut tree decomposition of graph
skeletons, and is found to increase their validity in terms of actual d-separation.
It also signiﬁcantly improves the sensitivity of constraint-based methods while
retaining good overall structure learning performance. Finally and foremost, ensuring sepset consistency improves the interpretability of constraint-based models for
real-life applications.

1

Introduction

While the oracle versions of constraint-based methods have been demonstrated to be sound and
complete (Zhang, 2008; Spirtes, Glymour, and Scheines, 2000; Pearl, 2009), a major limitation of
these methods is their lack of robustness with respect to sampling noise for ﬁnite datasets. This
has largely limited their use to analyze real-life data so far, although important advances have been
made lately, in particular, to limit the order-dependency of constraint-based methods (Colombo
and Maathuis, 2014) or to improve their robustness to sampling noise by recasting them within a
maximum likelihood framework (Affeldt and Isambert, 2015; Affeldt, Verny, and Isambert, 2016).
However, it remains that constraint-based methods still lack graph consistency, in practice, as they do
not guarantee that the learnt structures belong to their presumed class of graphical models, such as a
completed partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG) model for the PC (Spirtes and Glymour, 1991;
Kalisch and Bühlmann, 2008; Kalisch et al., 2012) or IC (Pearl and Verma, 1991) algorithms, or a
partial ancestral graph (PAG) for FCI or related constraint-based algorithms allowing for unobserved
latent variables (Spirtes, Meek, and Richardson, 1999; Richardson and Spirtes, 2002; Colombo et
al., 2012; Verny et al., 2017; Sella et al., 2018). By contrast, search-and-score structure learning
∗

corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

