Understanding the Representation Power of Graph
Neural Networks in Learning Graph Topology

Nima Dehmamy∗
CSSI, Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
nimadt@bu.edu

Albert-László Barabási†
Center for Complex Network Research,
Northeastern University, Boston MA
alb@neu.edu

Rose Yu
Khoury College of Computer Sciences,
Northeastern University, Boston, MA
roseyu@northeastern.edu

Abstract
To deepen our understanding of graph neural networks, we investigate the representation power of Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) through the looking
glass of graph moments, a key property of graph topology encoding path of various lengths. We find that GCNs are rather restrictive in learning graph moments.
Without careful design, GCNs can fail miserably even with multiple layers and
nonlinear activation functions. We analyze theoretically the expressiveness of
GCNs, concluding that a modular GCN design, using different propagation rules
with residual connections could significantly improve the performance of GCN.
We demonstrate that such modular designs are capable of distinguishing graphs
from different graph generation models for surprisingly small graphs, a notoriously
difficult problem in network science. Our investigation suggests that, depth is much
more influential than width, with deeper GCNs being more capable of learning
higher order graph moments. Additionally, combining GCN modules with different
propagation rules is critical to the representation power of GCNs.

1

Introduction

The surprising effectiveness of graph neural networks [17] has led to an explosion of interests in
graph representation learning, leading to applications from particle physics [12], to molecular biology
[37] to robotics [4]. We refer readers to several recent surveys [7, 38, 33, 14] and the references
therein for a non-exhaustive list of the research. Graph convolution networks (GCNs) are among the
most popular graph neural network models. In contrast to existing deep learning architectures, GCNs
are known to contain fewer number of parameters, can handle irregular grids with non-Euclidean
geometry, and introduce relational inductive bias into data-driven systems. It is therefore commonly
believed that graph neural networks can learn arbitrary representations of graph data.
Despite their practical success, most GCNs are deployed as black boxes feature extractors for graph
data. It is not yet clear to what extent can these models capture different graph features. One
prominent feature of graph data is node permutation invariance: many graph structures stay the same
∗

work done when at Center for Complex Network Research, Northeastern University, Boston, MA
Center for Cancer Systems Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston MA, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, Center for Network Science, Central European University,
Budapest, Hungary
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

