TAB-VCR: Tags and Attributes based Visual
Commonsense Reasoning Baselines
Jingxiang Lin, Unnat Jain, Alexander G. Schwing
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
https://deanplayerljx.github.io/tabvcr

Abstract
Reasoning is an important ability that we learn from a very early age. Yet, reasoning
is extremely hard for algorithms. Despite impressive recent progress that has been
reported on tasks that necessitate reasoning, such as visual question answering
and visual dialog, models often exploit biases in datasets. To develop models
with better reasoning abilities, recently, the new visual commonsense reasoning
(VCR) task has been introduced. Not only do models have to answer questions,
but also do they have to provide a reason for the given answer. The proposed
baseline achieved compelling results, leveraging a meticulously designed model
composed of LSTM modules and attention nets. Here we show that a much simpler
model obtained by ablating and pruning the existing intricate baseline can perform
better with half the number of trainable parameters. By associating visual features
with attribute information and better text to image grounding, we obtain further
improvements for our simpler & effective baseline, TAB-VCR. We show that this
approach results in a 5.3%, 4.4% and 6.5% absolute improvement over the previous
state-of-the-art [103] on question answering, answer justification and holistic VCR.

1

Introduction

Reasoning abilities are important for many tasks such as answering of (referential) questions, discussion of concerns and participation in debates. While we are trained to ask and answer “why”
questions from an early age and while we generally master answering of questions about observations
with ease, visual reasoning abilities are all but simple for algorithms.
Nevertheless, respectable accuracies have been achieved recently for many tasks where visual
reasoning abilities are necessary. For instance, for visual question answering [9, 32] and visual
dialog [20], compelling results have been reported in recent years, and many present-day models
achieve accuracies well beyond random guessing on challenging datasets such as [30, 47, 109, 37].
However, it is also known that algorithm results are not stable at all and trained models often leverage
biases to answer questions. For example, both questions about the existence and non-existence of
a “pink elephant” are likely answered affirmatively, while questions about counting are most likely
answered with the number 2. Even more importantly, a random answer is returned if the model is
asked to explain the reason for the provided answer.
To address this concern, a new challenge on “visual commonsense reasoning” [103] was introduced
recently, combining reasoning about physics [69, 99], social interactions [2, 89, 16, 33], understanding
of procedures [107, 3] and forecasting of actions in videos [84, 26, 108, 90, 28, 74, 100]. In addition
to answering a question about a given image, the algorithm is tasked to provide a rationale to
justify the given answer. In this new dataset the questions, answers, and rationales are expressed
using a natural language containing references to the objects. The proposed model, which achieves
compelling results, leverages those cues by combining a long-short-term-memory (LSTM) module
based deep net with attention over objects to obtain grounding and context.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

