Sliced Gromov-Wasserstein
Titouan Vayer
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
titouan.vayer@irisa.fr

Rémi Flamary
Univ. Côte d’Azur, OCA, Lagrange
F-06000 Nice
remi.flamary@unice.fr

Romain Tavenard
Univ. Rennes, CNRS, LETG
F-35000 Rennes
romain.tavenard@univ-rennes2.fr

Laetitia Chapel
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr

Nicolas Courty
Univ. Bretagne-Sud, CNRS, IRISA
F-56000 Vannes
nicolas.courty@irisa.fr

Abstract
Recently used in various machine learning contexts, the Gromov-Wasserstein distance (GW ) allows for comparing distributions whose supports do not necessarily
lie in the same metric space. However, this Optimal Transport (OT) distance requires solving a complex non convex quadratic program which is most of the time
very costly both in time and memory. Contrary to GW , the Wasserstein distance
(W ) enjoys several properties (e.g. duality) that permit large scale optimization.
Among those, the solution of W on the real line, that only requires sorting discrete
samples in 1D, allows defining the Sliced Wasserstein (SW ) distance. This paper
proposes a new divergence based on GW akin to SW . We first derive a closed
form for GW when dealing with 1D distributions, based on a new result for the
related quadratic assignment problem. We then define a novel OT discrepancy that
can deal with large scale distributions via a slicing approach and we show how
it relates to the GW distance while being O(n log(n)) to compute. We illustrate
the behavior of this so called Sliced Gromov-Wasserstein (SGW ) discrepancy in
experiments where we demonstrate its ability to tackle similar problems as GW
while being several order of magnitudes faster to compute.

1

Introduction

Optimal Transport (OT) aims at defining ways to compare probability distributions. One typical
example is the Wasserstein distance (W ) that has been used for varied tasks ranging from computer
graphics [1] to signal processing [2]. It has proved to be very useful for a wide range of machine
learning tasks including generative modelling (Wasserstein GANs [3]), domain adaptation [4] or
supervised embeddings for classification purposes [5]. However one limitation of this approach is that
it implicitly assumes aligned distributions, i.e. that lie in the same metric space or at least between
spaces where a meaningful distance across domains can be computed. From another perspective,
the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW ) distance benefits from more flexibility when it comes to the more
challenging scenario where heterogeneous distributions are involved, i.e. distributions whose supports
do not necessarily lie on the same metric space. It only requires modelling the topological or
relational aspects of the distributions within each domain in order to compare them. As such, it has
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

