Cascaded Dilated Dense Network with Two-step Data
Consistency for MRI Reconstruction

Hao Zheng, Faming Fang∗, Guixu Zhang
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
and the School of Computer Science and Technology
East China Normal University
wsnbzh@hotmail.com, {fmfang, gxzhang}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Compressed Sensing MRI (CS-MRI) aims at reconstrcuting de-aliased images
from sub-Nyquist sampling k-space data to accelerate MR Imaging. Inspired by
recent deep learning methods, we propose a Cascaded Dilated Dense Network
(CDDN) for MRI reconstruction. Dense blocks with residual connection are used
to restore clear images step by step and dilated convolution is introduced for
expanding receptive field without taking more network parameters. After each subnetwork, we use a novel Two-step Data Consistency (TDC) operation in k-space.
We convert the complex result from first DC operation to real-valued images and
applied another replacement with sampled k-space data. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed CDDN with TDC achieves state-of-art result.

1

Introduction

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [11] is widely used in clinical diagnosis. It extracts internal
information of the human body to detect latent lesion. Unlike conventional imaging techniques, MRI
gathers phase-encoding data from k-space instead of image domain. The scanning procecss should
follow the Nyquist criteria [14] to produce clear images, but it leads to long acquisition time. Patients
can have tension as they have to keep still in the entire process.
Sub-Nyquist sampling can significantly reduce the acquisition time by skipping partial phase information, but it leads to aliased artifacts. In order to recovery clear image from sub-sampled k-space data,
CS-MRI approaches were proposed [2]. With the assumption that MR images are sparsity in specific
transfrom domain, classic sparsity-prior methods apply transfroms like discrete Fourier transform
(DFT) [5], discrete cosine transfrom (DCT) [20, 25] and discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [10, 16].
Data-driven methods (i.e. dictionary learning) achieve higher accuracy due to the adaptive feature
representation learnt from a quantity of fully sampled data [33]. Although these methods success in
restoring clear image, they still suffer from heavy computation overhead.
Recent years, deep learning has achieved excellent result in a variety of image-restoring problem
such as de-noising [34], de-blurring [28], super-resolution [26], etc. Generally, deep learning
methods develop deep neural network to learn the mapping function from one distribution to another
one. In MRI reconstruction, a common way is training a convolution neural network (CNN) for
mapping from aliased images (directly reconstructed from zero-filled sub-sampled k-space data) to
corresponding clear images [24]. U-Net is a popular framework in medical image processing [19].
It also accomplished accurate result on MRI reconstruction [7, 17, 29]. Yang et al. [30] proposed
ADMM-CSNet to learn the parameters of ADMM algorithm with nerual network instead of manual
adjustment. More recently, cascading network was introduced to MRI reconstruction [21, 22].
∗

Corresponding Author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

