Unsupervised Co-Learning on G-Manifolds Across
Irreducible Representations

Yifeng Fan1 Tingran Gao2 Zhizhen Zhao1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 University of Chicago
{yifengf2, zhizhenz}@illinois.edu
tingrangao@galton.uchicago.edu
1

Abstract
We introduce a novel co-learning paradigm for manifolds naturally admitting an
action of a transformation group G, motivated by recent developments on learning a
manifold from attached fibre bundle structures. We utilize a representation theoretic
mechanism that canonically associates multiple independent vector bundles over
a common base manifold, which provides multiple views for the geometry of the
underlying manifold. The consistency across these fibre bundles provide a common
base for performing unsupervised manifold co-learning through the redundancy
created artificially across irreducible representations of the transformation group.
We demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed algorithmic paradigm through drastically improved robust nearest neighbor identification in cryo-electron microscopy
image analysis and the clustering accuracy in community detection.

1

Introduction

Fighting with the curse of dimensionality by leveraging low-dimensional intrinsic structures has
become an important guiding principle in modern data science. Apart from classical structural
assumptions commonly employed in sparsity or low-rank models in high dimensional statistics
[63, 11, 12, 49, 2, 64, 67], recently it has become of interest to leverage more intricate properties
of the underlying geometric model, motivated by algebraic or differential geometry techniques, for
efficient learning and inference from massive complex datasets [15, 16, 44, 46, 8]. The assumption
that high dimensional datasets lie approximately on a low-dimensional manifold, known as the
manifold hypothesis, has been the cornerstone for the development of manifold learning [62, 52, 18,
3, 4, 5, 17, 57, 66] in the past few decades.
In many real applications, the low-dimensional manifold underlying the dataset of high ambient
dimensionality admits additional structures that can be fully leveraged to gain deeper insights into
the geometry of the data. One class of such examples arises in scientific fields such as cryo-electron
microscopy (cryo-EM), where large numbers of random projections for a three-dimensional molecule
generate massive collections of images that can be determined only up to in-plane rotations [59, 72].
Another source of examples is the application in computer vision and robotics, where a major
challenge is to recognize and compare three-dimensional spatial configurations up to the action of
Euclidean or conformal groups [28, 10]. In these examples, the dataset of interest consists of images
or shapes of potentially high spatial resolution, and admits a natural group action g ∈ G that plays
the role of a nuisance or latent variable that needs to be “quotient out” before useful information is
revealed.
In geometric terms, on top of a differentiable manifold M underlying the dataset of interest, as
assumed in the manifold hypothesis, we also assume the manifold admits a smooth right action of
a Lie group G, in the sense that there is a smooth map φ : G × M → M satisfying φ (e, m) = m
and φ (g2 , φ (g1 , m)) = φ (g1 g2 , m) for all m ∈ M and g1 , g2 ∈ G, where e is the identity element
of G. A left action can be defined similarly. Such a group action reflects abundant information
about the symmetry of the underlying manifold, with which one can study geometric and topological
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

