An Inexact Augmented Lagrangian Framework for
Nonconvex Optimization with Nonlinear Constraints

Mehmet Fatih Sahin
mehmet.sahin@epfl.ch

Armin Eftekhari
armin.eftekhari@epfl.ch

Fabian Latorre
fabian.latorre@epfl.ch

Ahmet Alacaoglu
ahmet.alacaoglu@epfl.ch

Volkan Cevher
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

LIONS, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland

Abstract
We propose a practical inexact augmented Lagrangian method (iALM) for nonconvex problems with nonlinear constraints. We characterize the total computational
complexity of our method subject to a verifiable geometric condition, which is
closely related to the Polyak-Lojasiewicz and Mangasarian-Fromowitz conditions.
In particular, when a first-order solver is used for the inner iterates, we prove that
iALM finds a first-order stationary point with Õ(1/3 ) calls to the first-order oracle.
If, in addition, the problem is smooth and a second-order solver is used for the
inner iterates, iALM finds a second-order stationary point with Õ(1/5 ) calls to
the second-order oracle. These complexity results match the known theoretical
results in the literature.
We also provide strong numerical evidence on large-scale machine learning problems, including the Burer-Monteiro factorization of semidefinite programs, and
a novel nonconvex relaxation of the standard basis pursuit template. For these
examples, we also show how to verify our geometric condition.

1

Introduction

We study the nonconvex optimization problem
min f (x) + g(x) s.t.

x∈Rd

A(x) = 0,

(1)

where f : Rd → R is a continuously-differentiable nonconvex function and A : Rd → Rm is a
nonlinear operator. We assume that g : Rd → R ∪ {∞} is a proximal-friendly convex function [47].
A host of problems in computer science [33, 37, 70], machine learning [40, 59], and signal processing [57, 58] naturally fall under the template (1), including max-cut, clustering, generalized
eigenvalue decomposition, as well as the quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [70].
To solve (1), we propose an intuitive and easy-to-implement augmented Lagrangian algorithm, and
provide its total iteration complexity under an interpretable geometric condition. Before we elaborate
on the results, let us first motivate (1) with an application to semidefinite programming (SDP):
Vignette: Burer-Monteiro splitting. A powerful convex relaxation for max-cut, clustering, and
many others is provided by the trace-constrained SDP
min hC, Xi s.t.

X∈Sd×d

B(X) = b, tr(X) ≤ α, X  0,

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

