Information-Theoretic Generalization Bounds for
SGLD via Data-Dependent Estimates
Jeffrey Negrea∗
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Mahdi Haghifam∗
University of Toronto,
Element AI

Ashish Khisti
University of Toronto

Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
Element AI

Daniel M. Roy
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute

Abstract
In this work, we improve upon the stepwise analysis of noisy iterative learning
algorithms initiated by Pensia, Jog, and Loh (2018) and recently extended by Bu,
Zou, and Veeravalli (2019). Our main contributions are significantly improved
mutual information bounds for Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics via datadependent estimates. Our approach is based on the variational characterization of
mutual information and the use of data-dependent priors that forecast the minibatch gradient based on a subset of the training samples. Our approach is broadly
applicable within the information-theoretic framework of Russo and Zou (2015)
and Xu and Raginsky (2017). Our bound can be tied to a measure of flatness of the
empirical risk surface. As compared with other bounds that depend on the squared
norms of gradients, empirical investigations show that the terms in our bounds are
orders of magnitude smaller.

1

Introduction

Stochastic subgradient methods, especially stochastic gradient descent (SGD), are at the core of recent advances in deep-learning practice. Despite some progress, developing a precise understanding
of generalization error for that class of algorithms remains wide open. Concurrently, there has been
steady progress for noisy variants of SGD, such as stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics (SGLD)
[13, 26, 34] and its full-batch counterpart, the Langevin algorithm [13]. The introduction of Gaussian noise to the iterates of SGD expands the set of theoretical frameworks that can be brought to
bear on the study of generalization. In pioneering work, Raginsky, Rakhlin, and Telgarsky [26]
exploit the fact that SGLD approximates Langevin diffusion, a continuous time Markov process, in
the small step size limit. One drawback of this and related analyses involving Markov processes is
the reliance on mixing. We hypothesize that SGLD is not mixing in practice, so results based upon
mixing may not be representative of empirical performance.
In recent work, Pensia, Jog, and Loh [24] perform a stepwise analysis of a family of noisy iterative
algorithms that includes SGLD and the Langevin algorithm. At the foundation of this work is the
framework of Russo and Zou [29] and Xu and Raginsky [35], where mean generalization error is
controlled in terms of the mutual information between the dataset and the learned parameters. (See
also the study of on-average KL stability by Wang, Lei, and Fienberg [33].) However, because
the data distribution is unknown, so is any mutual information involving the data. This presents a
significant barrier to understanding generalization in terms of mutual information.
∗ Equal contribution authors, order of names was determined randomly.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

