Tight Regret Bounds for Model-Based Reinforcement
Learning with Greedy Policies

Yonathan Efroni∗
Technion, Israel

Nadav Merlis ∗
Technion, Israel

Mohammad Ghavamzadeh
Facebook AI Research

Shie Mannor
Technion, Israel

Abstract
State-of-the-art efficient model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms typically act by iteratively solving empirical models, i.e., by performing full-planning
on Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) built by the gathered experience. In this
paper, we focus on model-based RL in the finite-state finite-horizon undiscounted
MDP setting and establish that exploring with greedy policies – act by 1-step
plan√
ning – can achieve tight minimax performance in terms of regret, Õ( HSAT ).
Thus, full-planning in model-based RL can be avoided altogether without any performance degradation, and, by doing so, the computational complexity decreases
by a factor of S. The results are based on a novel analysis of real-time dynamic
programming, then extended to model-based RL. Specifically, we generalize existing algorithms that perform full-planning to act by 1-step planning. For these
generalizations, we prove regret bounds with the same rate as their full-planning
counterparts.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [Sutton and Barto, 2018] is a field of machine learning that tackles the
problem of learning how to act in an unknown dynamic environment. An agent interacts with the
environment, and receives feedback on its actions in the form of a state-dependent reward signal.
Using this experience, the agent’s goal is then to find a policy that maximizes the long-term reward.
There are two main approaches for learning such a policy: model-based and model-free. The modelbased approach estimates the system’s model and uses it to assess the long-term effects of actions via
full-planning (e.g., Jaksch et al. 2010). Model-based RL algorithms usually enjoy good performance
guarantees in terms of the regret – the difference between the sum of rewards gained by playing
an optimal policy and the sum of rewards that the agent accumulates [Jaksch et al., 2010, Bartlett
and Tewari, 2009]. Nevertheless, model-based algorithms suffer from high space and computation
complexity. The former is caused by the need for storing a model. The latter is due to the frequent
full-planning, which requires a full solution of the estimated model. Alternatively, model-free RL
algorithms directly estimate quantities that take into account the long-term effect of an action, thus,
avoiding model estimation and planning operations altogether [Jin et al., 2018]. These algorithms
usually enjoy better computational and space complexity, but seem to have worse performance
guarantees.
In many applications, the high computational complexity of model-based RL makes them infeasible.
Thus, practical model-based approaches alleviate this computational burden by using short-term
planning e.g., Dyna [Sutton, 1991], instead of full-planning. To the best of our knowledge, there are
no regret guarantees for such algorithms, even in the tabular setting. This raises the following question:
Can a model-based approach coupled with short-term planning enjoy the favorable performance of
model-based RL?
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

