Preventing Gradient Attenuation in
Lipschitz Constrained Convolutional Networks

Qiyang Li∗ , Saminul Haque∗ , Cem Anil, James Lucas, Roger Grosse, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{qiyang.li, saminul.haque, cem.anil}@mail.utoronto.ca
{jlucas, rgrosse}@cs.toronto.edu
j.jacobsen@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
Lipschitz constraints under L2 norm on deep neural networks are useful for provable adversarial robustness bounds, stable training, and Wasserstein distance estimation. While heuristic approaches such as the gradient penalty have seen much
practical success, it is challenging to achieve similar practical performance while
provably enforcing a Lipschitz constraint. In principle, one can design Lipschitz
constrained architectures using the composition property of Lipschitz functions,
but Anil et al. [2] recently identified a key obstacle to this approach: gradient
norm attenuation. They showed how to circumvent this problem in the case of
fully connected networks by designing each layer to be gradient norm preserving.
We extend their approach to train scalable, expressive, provably Lipschitz convolutional networks. In particular, we present the Block Convolution Orthogonal
Parameterization (BCOP), an expressive parameterization of orthogonal convolution operations. We show that even though the space of orthogonal convolutions is
disconnected, the largest connected component of BCOP with 2n channels can represent arbitrary BCOP convolutions over n channels. Our BCOP parameterization
allows us to train large convolutional networks with provable Lipschitz bounds.
Empirically, we find that it is competitive with existing approaches to provable
adversarial robustness and Wasserstein distance estimation. 2

1

Introduction

There has been much interest in training neural networks with known upper bounds on their Lipschitz
constants under L2 norm3 . Enforcing Lipschitz constraints can provide provable robustness against
adversarial examples [48], improve generalization bounds [46], and enable Wasserstein distance
estimation [2, 3, 22]. Heuristic methods for enforcing Lipschitz constraints, such as the gradient
penalty [22] and spectral norm regularization [52], have seen much practical success, but provide no
guarantees about the Lipschitz constant. It remains challenging to achieve similar practical success
while provably satisfying a Lipschitz constraint.
In principle, one can design provably Lipschitz-constrained architectures by imposing a Lipschitz
constraint on each layer; the Lipschitz bound for the network is then the product of the bounds
for each layer. Anil et al. [2] identified a key difficulty with this approach: because a layer with
a Lipschitz bound of 1 can only reduce the norm of the gradient during backpropagation, each
step of backprop gradually attenuates the gradient norm, resulting in a much smaller Jacobian for
the network’s function than is theoretically allowed. We refer to this problem as gradient norm
attenuation. They showed that Lipschitz-constrained ReLU networks were prevented from using
∗

Equal contributions
Code is available at: github.com/ColinQiyangLi/LConvNet
3
Unless specified otherwise, we refer to Lipschitz constant as the Lipschitz constant under L2 norm.

2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

