Fooling Neural Network Interpretations via
Adversarial Model Manipulation

1

Juyeon Heo1∗, Sunghwan Joo1∗, and Taesup Moon1,2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2 Department of Artificial Intelligence
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea, 16419
heojuyeon12@gmail.com, {shjoo840, tsmoon}@skku.edu

Abstract
We ask whether the neural network interpretation methods can be fooled via adversarial model manipulation, which is defined as a model fine-tuning step that aims to
radically alter the explanations without hurting the accuracy of the original models,
e.g., VGG19, ResNet50, and DenseNet121. By incorporating the interpretation
results directly in the penalty term of the objective function for fine-tuning, we show
that the state-of-the-art saliency map based interpreters, e.g., LRP, Grad-CAM, and
SimpleGrad, can be easily fooled with our model manipulation. We propose two
types of fooling, Passive and Active, and demonstrate such foolings generalize well
to the entire validation set as well as transfer to other interpretation methods. Our
results are validated by both visually showing the fooled explanations and reporting
quantitative metrics that measure the deviations from the original explanations. We
claim that the stability of neural network interpretation method with respect to our
adversarial model manipulation is an important criterion to check for developing robust and reliable neural network interpretation method. The source code is available
at https://github.com/rmrisforbidden/FoolingNeuralNetwork-Interpretations.

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks have made a huge impact on real-world applications with predictive tasks,
much emphasis has been set upon the interpretation methods that can explain the ground of the
predictions of the complex neural network models. Furthermore, accurate explanations can further
improve the model by helping researchers to debug the model or revealing the existence of unintended
bias or effects in the model [1, 2]. To that regard, research on the interpretability framework has
become very active recently, for example, [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], to name a few. Paralleling above
flourishing results, research on sanity checking and identifying the potential problems of the proposed
interpretation methods has also been actively pursued recently. For example, some recent research
[10, 11, 12, 13, 14] showed that many popular interpretation methods are not stable with respect to
the perturbation or the adversarial attacks on the input data.
In this paper, we also discover the instability of the neural network interpretation methods, but with
a fresh perspective. Namely, we ask whether the interpretation methods are stable with respect
to the adversarial model manipulation, which we define as a model fine-tuning step that aims to
dramatically alter the interpretation results without significantly hurting the accuracy of the original
model. In results, we show that the state-of-the-art interpretation methods are vulnerable to those
manipulations. Note this notion of stability is clearly different from that considered in the above
mentioned works, which deal with the stability with respect to the perturbation or attack on the input
to the model. To the best of our knowledge, research on this type of stability has not been explored
before. We believe that such stability would become an increasingly important criterion to check,
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

