Polynomial Cost of Adaptation for X -Armed Bandits
Hédi Hadiji
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay
Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France
hedi.hadiji@math.u-psud.fr

Abstract
In the context of stochastic continuum-armed bandits, we present an algorithm
that adapts to the unknown smoothness of the objective function. We exhibit
and compute a polynomial cost of adaptation to the Hölder regularity for regret
minimization. To do this, we first reconsider the recent lower bound of Locatelli
and Carpentier [21], and define and characterize admissible rate functions. Our new
algorithm matches any of these minimal rate functions. We provide a finite-time
analysis and a thorough discussion about asymptotic optimality.

1 Introduction
Multi-armed bandits are a well-known sequential learning problem. When the number of available
decisions is large, some assumptions on the environment have to be made. In a vast line of work
(see the literature discussion in Section 1.1), these assumptions show up as nonparametric regularity
conditions on the mean-payoff function. If this function is Hölder continuous with constant L and
exponent ↵, and if the values of L and ↵ are given to the player, then natural strategies can ensure
that the regret is upper bounded by
L1/(2↵+1) T (↵+1)/(2↵+1) .

(1)

Of course, assuming that the player knows ↵ and L is often not realistic. Thus the need for
adaptive methods, that are agnostic with respect to the true regularity of the mean-payoff function.
Unfortunately, Locatelli and Carpentier [21] recently showed that full adaptation is impossible, and
that no algorithm can enjoy the same minimax guarantees as when the regularity is given to the player.
We persevere and address the question:
What can the player achieve when the true regularity is completely unknown?
A polynomial cost of adaptation In statistics, minimax adaptation for nonparametric function
estimation is a deep and active research domain. In many contexts, sharp adaptation is possible;
often, an additional logarithmic factor in the error has to be paid when the regularity is unknown:
this is known as the cost of adaptation. See e.g., Lepskii [20], Birgé and Massart [4], Massart
[22] for adaptive methods, and Cai [9] for a detailed survey of the topic. Under some more exotic
assumptions —see e.g., Example 3 of Cai and Low [10] — adapting is significantly harder: there
may be a polynomial cost of adaptation.
In this paper, we show that in the sequential setting of multi-armed bandits, the necessary exploration
forces a similar phenomenon, and we exhibit this polynomial cost of adaptation. To do so, we revisit
the lower bounds of Locatelli and Carpentier [21], and design a new algorithm that matches these
lower bounds.
As a representative example of our results, our algorithm can achieve, without the knowledge of ↵
and L, an unimprovable (up to logarithmic factors) regret bound of order
L1/(1+↵) T (↵+2)/(2↵+2) .
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(2)

