Evaluating Protein Transfer Learning with TAPE

Roshan Rao*
UC Berkeley
roshan_rao@berkeley.edu

Nicholas Bhattacharya*
UC Berkeley
nick_bhat@berkeley.edu

Yan Duan
covariant.ai
rocky@covariant.ai
John Canny
UC Berkeley
canny@berkeley.edu

Neil Thomas*
UC Berkeley
nthomas@berkeley.edu

Xi Chen
covariant.ai
peter@covariant.ai

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@berkeley.edu

Yun S. Song
UC Berkeley
yss@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Machine learning applied to protein sequences is an increasingly popular area
of research. Semi-supervised learning for proteins has emerged as an important
paradigm due to the high cost of acquiring supervised protein labels, but the current
literature is fragmented when it comes to datasets and standardized evaluation
techniques. To facilitate progress in this field, we introduce the Tasks Assessing
Protein Embeddings (TAPE), a set of five biologically relevant semi-supervised
learning tasks spread across different domains of protein biology. We curate
tasks into specific training, validation, and test splits to ensure that each task tests
biologically relevant generalization that transfers to real-life scenarios. We benchmark a range of approaches to semi-supervised protein representation learning,
which span recent work as well as canonical sequence learning techniques. We
find that self-supervised pretraining is helpful for almost all models on all tasks,
more than doubling performance in some cases. Despite this increase, in several
cases features learned by self-supervised pretraining still lag behind features extracted by state-of-the-art non-neural techniques. This gap in performance suggests
a huge opportunity for innovative architecture design and improved modeling
paradigms that better capture the signal in biological sequences. TAPE will help
the machine learning community focus effort on scientifically relevant problems.
Toward this end, all data and code used to run these experiments are available at
https://github.com/songlab-cal/tape.

1

Introduction

New sequencing technologies have led to an explosion in the size of protein databases over the
past decades. These databases have seen exponential growth, with the total number of sequences
doubling every two years [1]. Obtaining meaningful labels and annotations for these sequences
requires significant investment of experimental resources, as well as scientific expertise, resulting in
an exponentially growing gap between the size of protein sequence datasets and the size of annotated
subsets. Billions of years of evolution have sampled the portions of protein sequence space that are
relevant to life, so large unlabeled datasets of protein sequences are expected to contain significant
biological information [2–4]. Advances in natural language processing (NLP) have shown that
self-supervised learning is a powerful tool for extracting information from unlabeled sequences [5–7],
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

