Self-attention with Functional Time Representation
Learning
Da Xu⇤, Chuanwei Ruan⇤, Sushant Kumar , Evren Korpeoglu , Kannan Achan
Walmart Labs
California, CA 94086
{Da.Xu,Chuanwei.Ruan,EKorpeoglu,SKumar4,KAchan}@walmartlabs.com

Abstract
Sequential modelling with self-attention has achieved cutting edge performances
in natural language processing. With advantages in model flexibility, computation complexity and interpretability, self-attention is gradually becoming a key
component in event sequence models. However, like most other sequence models,
self-attention does not account for the time span between events and thus captures
sequential signals rather than temporal patterns. Without relying on recurrent
network structures, self-attention recognizes event orderings via positional encoding. To bridge the gap between modelling time-independent and time-dependent
event sequence, we introduce a functional feature map that embeds time span into
high-dimensional spaces. By constructing the associated translation-invariant time
kernel function, we reveal the functional forms of the feature map under classic
functional function analysis results, namely Bochner’s Theorem and Mercer’s
Theorem. We propose several models to learn the functional time representation
and the interactions with event representation. These methods are evaluated on
real-world datasets under various continuous-time event sequence prediction tasks.
The experiments reveal that the proposed methods compare favorably to baseline
models while also capturing useful time-event interactions.

1

Introduction

Attention mechanism, which assumes that the output of an event sequence is relevant to only part
of the sequential input, is fast becoming an essential instrument for various machine learning tasks
such as neural translation [1], image caption generation [25] and speech recognition [4]. It works
by capturing the importance weights of the sequential inputs successively and is often used as an
add-on component to base models such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [3]. Recently, a seq-to-seq model that relies only on an attention module
called ’self-attention’ achieved state-of-the-art performance in neural translation [20]. It detects
attention weights from input event sequence and returns the sequence representation. Without
relying on recurrent network structures, self-attention offers appealing computational advantage since
sequence processing can be fully parallelized. Key to the original self-attention module is positional
encoding, which maps discrete position index {1, . . . , l} to a vector in Rd and can be either fixed or
jointly optimized as free parameters. Positional encoding allows self-attention to recognize ordering
information. However, it also restricts the model to time-independent or discrete-time event sequence
modelling where the difference in ordered positions can measure distance between event occurrences.
In continuous-time event sequences, the time span between events often has significant implications
on their relative importance for prediction. Since the events take place aperiodically, there are gaps
between the sequential patterns and temporal patterns. For example, in user online behaviour analysis,
⇤

The two first authors contribute equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

