Correlation Clustering with Local Objectives
Sanchit Kalhan

Konstantin Makarychev

Timothy Zhou

Abstract
Correlation Clustering is a powerful graph partitioning model that aims to cluster items based on the notion of similarity between items. An instance of the
Correlation Clustering problem consists of a graph G (not necessarily complete)
whose edges are labeled by a binary classifier as “similar” and “dissimilar”. An
objective which has received a lot of attention in literature is that of minimizing
the number of disagreements: an edge is in disagreement if it is a “similar” edge
and is present across clusters or if it is a “dissimilar” edge and is present within
a cluster. Define the disagreements vector to be an n dimensional vector indexed
by the vertices, where the v-th index is the number of disagreements at vertex v.
Recently, Puleo and Milenkovic (ICML ’16) initiated the study of the Correlation
Clustering framework in which the objectives were more general functions of the
disagreements vector. In this paper, we study algorithms for minimizing `q norms
(q 1) of the disagreements vector for both arbitrary and complete graphs. We
present the first known algorithm for minimizing the `q norm of the disagreements
vector on arbitrary graphs and also provide an improved algorithm for minimizing
the `q norm (q
1) of the disagreements vector on complete graphs. We also
study an alternate cluster-wise local objective introduced by Ahmadi, Khuller and
Saha (IPCO ’19), which aims to minimize the maximum number of disagreements
associated with a cluster. We also present an improved (2 + ")-approximation
algorithm for this objective. Finally, we compliment our algorithmic results for
minimizing the `q norm of the disagreements vector with some hardness results.

1

Introduction

A basic task in machine learning is that of clustering items based on the similarity between them.
This task can be elegantly captured by Correlation Clustering, a clustering framework first introduced
by Bansal et al. [2004]. In this model, we are given access to items and the similarity/dissimilarity
between them in the form of a graph G on n vertices. The edges of G represent whether the items
are similar or dissimilar and are labelled as (“+”) and (“ ”) respectively. The goal is to produce
a clustering that agrees with the labeling of the edges as much as possible, i.e., to group positive
edges in the same cluster and place negative edges across different clusters (a positive edge that
is present across clusters or a negative edge that is present within the same cluster is said to be in
disagreement). The Correlation Clustering problem can be viewed as an agnostic learning problem,
where we are given noisy examples and the task is to fit a hypothesis as best as possible to these
examples. Co-reference resolution (see e.g., Cohen and Richman [2001, 2002]), spam detection
(see e.g., Ramachandran et al. [2007], Bonchi et al. [2014]) and image segmentation (see e.g., Wirth
[2017]) are some of the applications to which Correlation Clustering has been applied to in practice.
This task is made trivial if the labeling given is consistent (transitive): if (u, v) and (v, w) are similar,
then (u, w) is similar for all vertices u, v, w in G (the connected components on similar edges would
give an optimal clustering). Instead, it is assumed that the given labeling is inconsistent, i.e., it is
possible that (u, w) are dissimilar even though (u, v) and (v, w) are similar. For such a triplet u, v, w,
every possible clustering incurs a disagreement on at least one edge and thus, no perfect clustering
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

