Asymmetric Valleys: Beyond Sharp and Flat Local
Minima
Haowei He1∗
hhw19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Gao Huang2,3
gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Yang Yuan1
yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn
1
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)

Abstract
Despite the non-convex nature of their loss functions, deep neural networks are
known to generalize well when optimized with stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Recent work conjectures that SGD with proper configuration is able to find wide
and flat local minima, which are correlated with good generalization performance.
In this paper, we observe that local minima of modern deep networks are more
than being flat or sharp. Instead, at a local minimum there exist many asymmetric
directions such that the loss increases abruptly along one side, and slowly along
the opposite side – we formally define such minima as asymmetric valleys. Under
mild assumptions, we first prove that for asymmetric valleys, a solution biased
towards the flat side generalizes better than the exact empirical minimizer. Then,
we show that performing weight averaging along the SGD trajectory implicitly
induces such biased solutions. This provides theoretical explanations for a series
of intriguing phenomena observed in recent work [25, 5, 51]. Finally, extensive
empirical experiments on both modern deep networks and simple 2 layer networks
are conducted to validate our assumptions and analyze the intriguing properties of
asymmetric valleys.

1

Introduction

The loss landscape of neural networks has attracted great research interests in the deep learning
community [9, 10, 32, 12, 15, 43, 36]. A deeper understanding of the loss landscape is important for
designing better optimization algorithms, and helps to answer the question of when and how a deep
network can achieve good generalization performance. One hypothesis that draws attention recently
is that the local minima of neural networks can be characterized by their flatness, and it is conjectured
that sharp minima tend to generalize worse than the flat ones [32]. A plausible explanation is that
a flat minimizer of the training loss can achieve lower generalization error if the test loss is shifted
from the training loss due to random perturbations. Figure 1(a) gives an illustration for this argument.
Although being supported by plenty of empirical observations [32, 25, 34], the definition of flatness
was recently challenged in [11], which shows that one can construct arbitrarily sharp minima through
weight re-parameterization without affecting the generalization performance. Moreover, recent
evidences suggest that the minima of modern deep networks are connected with simple paths with
low generalization error [12, 13]. It is empirically found that the minima found by large batch training
∗

Code available at https://github.com/962086838/code-for-Asymmetric-Valley

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

