Implicit Semantic Data Augmentation for Deep
Networks
Yulin Wang1∗ Xuran Pan1∗ Shiji Song1 Hong Zhang2 Cheng Wu1 Gao Huang1†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
2
Baidu Inc., China
{yulin.bh, fykalviny}@gmail.com, pxr18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
{shijis, wuc, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel implicit semantic data augmentation (ISDA)
approach to complement traditional augmentation techniques like flipping, translation or rotation. Our work is motivated by the intriguing property that deep
networks are surprisingly good at linearizing features, such that certain directions
in the deep feature space correspond to meaningful semantic transformations, e.g.,
adding sunglasses or changing backgrounds. As a consequence, translating training samples along many semantic directions in the feature space can effectively
augment the dataset to improve generalization. To implement this idea effectively
and efficiently, we first perform an online estimate of the covariance matrix of
deep features for each class, which captures the intra-class semantic variations.
Then random vectors are drawn from a zero-mean normal distribution with the
estimated covariance to augment the training data in that class. Importantly, instead
of augmenting the samples explicitly, we can directly minimize an upper bound
of the expected cross-entropy (CE) loss on the augmented training set, leading to
a highly efficient algorithm. In fact, we show that the proposed ISDA amounts
to minimizing a novel robust CE loss, which adds negligible extra computational
cost to a normal training procedure. Although being simple, ISDA consistently
improves the generalization performance of popular deep models (ResNets and
DenseNets) on a variety of datasets, e.g., CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet.
Code for reproducing our results is available at https://github.com/blackfeatherwang/ISDA-for-Deep-Networks.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation is an effective technique to alleviate the overfitting problem in training deep
networks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. In the context of image recognition, this usually corresponds to applying
content preserving transformations, e.g., cropping, horizontal mirroring, rotation and color jittering,
on the input samples. Although being effective, these augmentation techniques are not capable of
performing semantic transformations, such as changing the background of an object or the texture
of a foreground object. Recent work has shown that data augmentation can be more powerful if
(class identity preserving) semantic transformations are allowed [6, 7, 8]. For example, by training
a generative adversarial network (GAN) for each class in the training set, one could then sample
an infinite number of samples from the generator. Unfortunately, this procedure is computationally
intensive because training generative models and inferring them to obtain augmented samples are
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

