Capacity Bounded Differential Privacy

Kamalika Chaudhuri
UC San Diego
kamalika@cs.ucsd.edu

Jacob Imola
UC San Diego
jimola@eng.ucsd.edu

Ashwin Machanavajjhala
Duke University
ashwin@cs.duke.edu

Abstract
Differential privacy has emerged as the gold standard for measuring the risk posed
by an algorithm’s output to the privacy of a single individual in a dataset. It is
defined as the worst-case distance between the output distributions of an algorithm
that is run on inputs that differ by a single person. In this work, we present a novel
relaxation of differential privacy, capacity bounded differential privacy, where the
adversary that distinguishes the output distributions is assumed to be capacitybounded – i.e. bounded not in computational power, but in terms of the function
class from which their attack algorithm is drawn. We model adversaries of this
form using restricted f -divergences between probability distributions, and study
properties of the definition and algorithms that satisfy them. Our results demonstrate that these definitions possess a number of interesting properties enjoyed by
differential privacy and some of its existing relaxations; additionally, common
mechanisms such as the Laplace and Gaussian mechanisms enjoy better privacy
guarantees for the same added noise under these definitions.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [8] has emerged as a gold standard for measuring the privacy risk posed by
algorithms analyzing sensitive data. A randomized algorithm satisfies differential privacy if an
arbitrarily powerful attacker is unable to distinguish between the output distributions of the algorithm
when the inputs are two datasets that differ in the private value of a single person. This provides a
guarantee that the additional disclosure risk to a single person in the data posed by a differentially
private algorithm is limited, even if the attacker has access to side information. However, a body
of prior work [28, 3, 17, 1] has shown that this strong privacy guarantee comes at a cost: for many
machine-learning tasks, differentially private algorithms require a much higher number of samples to
acheive the same amount of accuracy than is needed without privacy.
Prior work has considered relaxing differential privacy in a number of different ways. Pufferfish [16]
and Blowfish [12] generalize differential privacy by restricting the properties of an individual that
should not be inferred by the attacker, as well as explicitly enumerating the side information available
to the adversary. Renyi- and KL-differential privacy [23, 31] measure privacy loss as the α-Renyi
and KL-divergence between the output distributions (respectively). The original differential privacy
definition measures privacy as a max-divergence (or α-Renyi, with α → ∞). Computational
differential privacy (CDP) [24] considers a computationally bounded attacker, and aims to ensure that
the output distributions are computationally indistinguishable. These three approaches are orthogonal
to one another as they generalize or relax different aspects of the privacy definition.
In this paper, we consider an novel approach to relaxing differential privacy by restricting the
adversary to “attack" or post-process the output of a private algorithm using functions drawn from a
restricted function class and show how to quantitatively calculate privacy losses against particular
function classes. These adversaries, that we call capacity bounded, can be used to model two kinds of
application scenarios. The first is where the attacker is machine learnt and lies in some known space
of functions (e.g., all linear functions, linear classifiers, etc.). The second is a user under a data-usage
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

