-Best-Arm Identification in Pay-Per-Reward
Multi-Armed Bandits
Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Beer-Sheva, Israel 8410501
sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
We study -best-arm identification, in a setting where during the exploration phase,
the cost of each arm pull is proportional to the expected future reward of that arm.
We term this setting Pay-Per-Reward. We provide an algorithm for this setting, that
with a high probability returns an -best arm, while incurring a cost that depends
only linearly on the total expected reward of all arms, and does not depend at all
on the number of arms. Under mild assumptions, the algorithm can be applied also
to problems with infinitely many arms.

1

Introduction

Consider placing an ad next to search engine results, based on the search query. In a preliminary
survey for a future promotion, a retailer wishes to identify the best query expression to link to its ad,
that is, the expression that maximizes the expected number of clicks on the ad. The payment per ad is
proportional to the number of clicks. However, during the survey, clicks do not lead to profit, while
the payment is still due.
This problem can be formulated as a type of best-arm-identification problem in a stochastic multiarmed bandit (MAB) setting [see, e.g., 14, 15, 8, 3]. In stochastic MAB, there is a set of arms, each
associated with a non-negative reward distribution. Each pull of an arm draws an instantaneous
reward from the corresponding reward distribution. The MAB algorithm iteratively pulls arms and
observes their instantaneous rewards. At the end of the run, the algorithm selects one arm. The
goal is to find an arm with a near-maximal expected reward with a high probability. In the example
above, each arm in the MAB framework can be mapped to a specific search expression, and pulling
the arm is equivalent to linking the ad to the expression represented by this arm for a given period
of time, and then observing the number of clicks. In standard MAB, each arm pull incurs a unit
cost. However, in the example above, the cost of pulling an arm is the number of clicks on the ad,
assuming the common pay-per-click advertisement model. Thus, the expected cost in the survey stage
is proportional to the expected reward after the survey stage. We term this setting Pay-Per-Reward
(PPR). Other applications of this model include any case where there is an exploration stage in which
rewards are not collected, but payment is still proportional to the quality of the arm. For instance,
consider a sensor field, where the goal is to find the most active sensor, but each activity report has
a communication cost. Here, “pulling an arm” is done by activating the sensor’s reporting option
for a given period of time. Another example is finding the best crowd worker on a crowd-sourcing
platform. Here, an "arm pull" is equivalent to providing the worker with a test task. The workers are
paid according to their success rate in the test task, thus a more successful worker will be paid more
during the exploration stage.
Our contribution. We provide an algorithm, MAB-PPR, for the pay-per-reward setting, that finds
an -optimal arm with a probability of at least 1 − δ, for given , δ ∈ (0, 1). We show that the cost
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

