Learning to Self-Train for Semi-Supervised
Few-Shot Classification
Xinzhe Li1∗ Qianru Sun2† Yaoyao Liu3∗ Shibao Zheng1†
Qin Zhou4
1

Tat-Seng Chua5

Bernt Schiele6

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Singapore Management University 3 Tianjin University 4 Alibaba Group
National University of Singapore 6 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

5

Abstract
Few-shot classification (FSC) is challenging due to the scarcity of labeled training
data (e.g. only one labeled data point per class). Meta-learning has shown to
achieve promising results by learning to initialize a classification model for FSC.
In this paper we propose a novel semi-supervised meta-learning method called
learning to self-train (LST) that leverages unlabeled data and specifically metalearns how to cherry-pick and label such unsupervised data to further improve
performance. To this end, we train the LST model through a large number of
semi-supervised few-shot tasks. On each task, we train a few-shot model to
predict pseudo labels for unlabeled data, and then iterate the self-training steps
on labeled and pseudo-labeled data with each step followed by fine-tuning. We
additionally learn a soft weighting network (SWN) to optimize the self-training
weights of pseudo labels so that better ones can contribute more to gradient descent
optimization. We evaluate our LST method on two ImageNet benchmarks for
semi-supervised few-shot classification and achieve large improvements over the
state-of-the-art method. Code is at github.com/xinzheli1217/learning-to-self-train.

1

Introduction

Today’s deep neural networks require large amounts of labeled data for supervised training and best
performance [39, 8, 30]. Their potential applications to the small-data regimes are thus limited.
There has been growing interest in reducing the required amount of data, e.g. to only 1-shot [12].
One of the most powerful methods is meta-learning that transfers the experience learned from
similar tasks to the target task [3]. Among different meta strategies, gradient descent based methods
are particularly promising for today’s neural networks [3, 32, 27]. Another intriguing idea is to
additionally use unlabeled data. Semi-supervised learning using unlabeled data with a relatively
small set of labeled ones has obtained good performance on standard datasets [21, 20]. A classic,
intuitive and simple method is e.g. self-training. It first trains a supervised model with labeled data,
and then enlarges the labeled set based on the most confident predictions (called pseudo labels) on
unlabeled data [40, 35, 20]. It can outperform regularization based methods [17, 6, 9], especially
when labeled data is scarce.
The focus of this paper is thus on the semi-supervised few-shot classification (SSFSC) task. Specifically, there are few labeled data and a much larger amount of unlabeled data for training classifiers.
To tackle this problem, we propose a new SSFSC method called learning to self-train (LST) that
successfully embeds a well-performing semi-supervised method, i.e. self-training, into the meta
∗
†

This work was done during their internships mainly supervised by Qianru.
Corresponding authors: qianrusun@smu.edu.sg; sbzh@sjtu.edu.cn.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

