k-Means Clustering of Lines for Big Data

Yair Marom
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
yairmrm@gmail.com

Dan Feldman
Department of Computer Science
University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
dannyf.post@gmail.com

Abstract
The input to the k-mean for lines problem is a set L of n lines in Rd , and the goal
is to compute a set of k centers (points) in Rd that minimizes the sum of squared
distances over every line in L and its nearest center. This is a straightforward
generalization of the k-mean problem where the input is a set of n points instead
of lines.
We suggest the first PTAS that computes a (1 + ε)-approximation to this problem
in time O(n log n) for any constant approximation error ε ∈ (0, 1), and constant
integers k, d ≥ 1. This is by proving that there is always a weighted subset (called
coreset) of dk O(k) log(n)/ε2 lines in L that approximates the sum of squared
distances from L to any given set of k points.
Using traditional merge-and-reduce technique, this coreset implies results for a
streaming set (possibly infinite) of lines to M machines in one pass (e.g. cloud)
using memory, update time and communication that is near-logarithmic in n, as
well as deletion of any line but using linear space. These results generalized for
other distance functions such as k-median (sum of distances) or ignoring farthest
m lines from the given centers to handle outliers.
Experimental results on 10 machines on Amazon EC2 cloud show that the
algorithm performs well in practice. Open source code for all the algorithms and
experiments is also provided.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

Clustering is the task of partitioning the input set to subsets, where items in the same subset (cluster)
are similar to each other, compared to items in other clusters. There are many different clustering
techniques, but arguably the most common in both industry and academy is the k-mean problem,
where the input is a set P of n points in Rd , and the goal is to compute a set C of k centers (points) in
Rd , that minimizes the sum of squared distances over each point p ∈ P to its nearest center in C, i.e.
X
2
C ∈ arg min
min
kp − c0 k .
0
0
C 0 ⊆Rd ,|C 0 |=k p∈P c ∈C

A very common heuristics to solve this problem is the Lloyd’s algorithm [3, 22], that is similar to the
EM-Algorithm that is described in Section 5 in supplementary material [2]. We consider a natural
generalization of this k-mean problem, where the input set P of n points is replaced by a set L of n
lines in Rd ; See Fig. 2. Here, the distance from a line to a center c is the closest Euclidean distance
to c over all the points on the line. Since we only assume the “weak" triangle inequality between
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

