Contextual Bandits With Cross-Learning

Santiago Balseiro
Columbia Business School
srb2155@columbia.edu

Negin Golrezaei
MIT Sloan School of Management
golrezae@mit.edu

Vahab Mirrokni
Google Research
mirrokni@google.com

Mohammad Mahdian
Google Research
mahdian@google.com

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Abstract
In the classical contextual bandits problem, in each round t, a learner observes
some context c, chooses some action a to perform, and receives some reward
ra,t (c). We consider the variant of this problem where in addition to receiving the
reward ra,t (c), the learner also learns the values of ra,t (c0 ) for all other contexts
c0 ; i.e., the rewards that would have been achieved by performing that action under
different contexts. This variant arises in several strategic settings, such as learning
how to bid in non-truthful repeated auctions, which has gained a lot of attention
lately as many platforms have switched to running first-price auctions. We call this
problem the contextual bandits problem with cross-learning.
The best algorithms
√
for the classical contextual bandits problem achieve Õ( CKT ) regret against all
stationary policies, where C is the number of contexts, K the number of actions,
and T the number of rounds. We demonstrate algorithms for the contextual bandits
problem
with cross-learning that remove the dependence on C and achieve regret
√
Õ( KT ). We simulate our algorithms on real auction data from an ad exchange
running first-price auctions (showing that they outperform traditional contextual
bandit algorithms).

1

Introduction

In the contextual bandits problem, a learner repeatedly observes some context, takes some action
depending on that context, and receives some reward depending on that context. The learner’s goal is
to maximize their total reward over some number of rounds. The contextual bandits problem is a
fundamental problem in online learning: it is a simplified (yet analyzable) variant of reinforcement
learning and it captures a large class of repeated decision problems. In addition, the algorithms
developed for the contextual bandits problem have been successfully applied in domains like ad
placement, news recommendation, and clinical trials [12, 16, 23].
Ideally, one would like an algorithm for the contextual bandits problem which performs approximately
as well as the best stationary strategy (i.e., the best fixed mapping from contexts to actions). This can
be accomplished by running a separate instance of some low-regret algorithm for the
√ non-contextual
bandits problem (e.g. EXP3) for every context. This algorithm achieves regret Õ( CKT ) where C
is the number of contexts, K the number of actions, and T the number of rounds. This bound can
be shown to be tight [6]. Since the number of contexts can be very large, these algorithms can be
impractical to use, and much modern current research on the contextual bandits problem instead aims
to achieve low regret with respect to some smaller set of policies [2, 15, 4].
However, some settings possess
√ additional structure between the rewards and contexts which allow
one to achieve less than Õ( CKT ) regret while still competing with the best stationary strategy.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

