DualDICE: Behavior-Agnostic Estimation of
Discounted Stationary Distribution Corrections
Ofir Nachum∗

Yinlam Chow∗
Bo Dai
Lihong Li
Google Research
{ofirnachum,yinlamchow,bodai,lihong}@google.com

Abstract
In many real-world reinforcement learning applications, access to the environment is limited to a fixed dataset, instead of direct (online) interaction with the
environment. When using this data for either evaluation or training of a new policy, accurate estimates of discounted stationary distribution ratios — correction
terms which quantify the likelihood that the new policy will experience a certain
state-action pair normalized by the probability with which the state-action pair
appears in the dataset — can improve accuracy and performance. In this work,
we propose an algorithm, DualDICE, for estimating these quantities. In contrast
to previous approaches, our algorithm is agnostic to knowledge of the behavior
policy (or policies) used to generate the dataset. Furthermore, it eschews any
direct use of importance weights, thus avoiding potential optimization instabilities
endemic of previous methods. In addition to providing theoretical guarantees, we
present an empirical study of our algorithm applied to off-policy policy evaluation
and find that our algorithm significantly improves accuracy compared to existing
techniques.1

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has recently demonstrated a number of successes in various domains,
such as games [25], robotics [1], and conversational systems [11, 18]. These successes have often
hinged on the use of simulators to provide large amounts of experience necessary for RL algorithms.
While this is reasonable in game environments, where the game is often a simulator itself, and some
simple real-world tasks can be simulated to an accurate enough degree, in general one does not have
such direct or easy access to the environment. Furthermore, in many real-world domains such as
medicine [26], recommendation [19], and education [24], the deployment of a new policy, even just
for the sake of performance evaluation, may be expensive and risky. In these applications, access
to the environment is usually in the form of off-policy data [39], logged experience collected by
potentially multiple and possibly unknown behavior policies.
State-of-the-art methods which consider this more realistic setting — either for policy evaluation
or policy improvement — often rely on estimating (discounted) stationary distribution ratios or
corrections. For each state and action in the environment, these quantities measure the likelihood
that one’s current target policy will experience the state-action pair normalized by the probability
with which the state-action pair appears in the off-policy data. Proper estimation of these ratios can
improve the accuracy of policy evaluation [21] and the stability of policy learning [12, 14, 22, 40]. In
general, these ratios are difficult to compute, let alone estimate, as they rely not only on the probability
that the target policy will take the desired action at the relevant state, but also on the probability that
the target policy’s interactions with the environment dynamics will lead it to the relevant state.
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Find code at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/dual_dice.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

