Compositional De-Attention Networks

†

Yi Tay∗, ] Luu Anh Tuan∗ , \ Aston Zhang, ♣ Shuohang Wang, [ Siu Cheung Hui
†,[
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
]
MIT CSAIL, \ Amazon AI
♣
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
ytay017@gmail.com

Abstract
Attentional models are distinctly characterized by their ability to learn relative
importance, i.e., assigning a different weight to input values. This paper proposes
a new quasi-attention that is compositional in nature, i.e., learning whether to
add, subtract or nullify a certain vector when learning representations. This is
strongly contrasted with vanilla attention, which simply re-weights input tokens.
Our proposed Compositional De-Attention (CoDA) is fundamentally built upon the
intuition of both similarity and dissimilarity (negative affinity) when computing
affinity scores, benefiting from a greater extent of expressiveness. We evaluate
CoDA on six NLP tasks, i.e. open domain question answering, retrieval/ranking,
natural language inference, machine translation, sentiment analysis and text2code
generation. We obtain promising experimental results, achieving state-of-the-art
performance on several tasks/datasets.

1

Introduction

Not all inputs are created equal. This highly intuitive motivator, commonly referred to as ‘attention’,
forms the bedrock of many recent and successful advances in deep learning research [Bahdanau et al.,
2014, Parikh et al., 2016, Seo et al., 2016, Vaswani et al., 2017]. To this end, the Softmax operator
lives at it’s heart, signifying the importance of learning relative importance as a highly effective
inductive bias for many problem domains and model architectures.
This paper proposes a new general purpose quasi-attention method. Our method is ‘quasi’ in the
sense that it behaves like an attention mechanism, albeit with several key fundamental differences.
Firstly, instead of learning relative importance (weighted sum), we learn a compositional pooling
of tokens, deciding whether to add, subtract or delete an input token. Since our method learns to
flip/subtract tokens, deviating from the original motivation of attention, we refer to our method as a
quasi-attention method. Secondly, we introduce a secondary de-attention (deleted attention) matrix,
finally learning a multiplicative composition of similarity and dissimilarity. We hypothesize that
more flexible design can lead to more expressive and powerful models which will arrive at better
performance.
In order to achieve this, we introduce two technical contributions. The first, is a dual affinity scheme,
which introduces a secondary affinity matrix N , in addition to the original affinity matrix E. The
affinity matrix E, commonly found in pairwise [Parikh et al., 2016] or self-attentional [Vaswani et al.,
2017] models, learns pairwise similarity computation between all elements in a sequence (or two
sequences), i.e., eij = a>
i bj . Contrary to E, our new N matrix is learned a dissimilarity metric such
as negative L1 distance, providing dual flavours of pairwise composition.
∗

Denotes equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

