LDMI: A Novel Information-theoretic Loss Function
for Training Deep Nets Robust to Label Noise
Yilun Xu∗, Peng Cao∗
School of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University
{xuyilun,caopeng2016}@pku.edu.cn
Yuqing Kong
The Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
Computer Science Dept., Peking University
yuqing.kong@pku.edu.cn

Yizhou Wang
Computer Science Dept., Peking University
Deepwise AI Lab
Yizhou.Wang@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately annotating large scale dataset is notoriously expensive both in time
and in money. Although acquiring low-quality-annotated dataset can be much
cheaper, it often badly damages the performance of trained models when using
such dataset without particular treatment. Various methods have been proposed for
learning with noisy labels. However, most methods only handle limited kinds of
noise patterns, require auxiliary information or steps (e.g., knowing or estimating
the noise transition matrix), or lack theoretical justification. In this paper, we
propose a novel information-theoretic loss function, LDMI , for training deep neural
networks robust to label noise. The core of LDMI is a generalized version of
mutual information, termed Determinant based Mutual Information (DMI), which
is not only information-monotone but also relatively invariant. To the best of
our knowledge, LDMI is the first loss function that is provably robust to instanceindependent label noise, regardless of noise pattern, and it can be applied to any
existing classification neural networks straightforwardly without any auxiliary
information. In addition to theoretical justification, we also empirically show that
using LDMI outperforms all other counterparts in the classification task on both
image dataset and natural language dataset include Fashion-MNIST, CIFAR-10,
Dogs vs. Cats, MR with a variety of synthesized noise patterns and noise amounts,
as well as a real-world dataset Clothing1M.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks, together with large scale accurately annotated datasets, have achieved remarkable performance in a great many classification tasks in recent years (e.g., [18, 11]). However, it is
usually money- and time- consuming to find experts to annotate labels for large scale datasets. While
collecting labels from crowdsourcing platforms like Amazon Mechanical Turk is a potential way
to get annotations cheaper and faster, the collected labels are usually very noisy. The noisy labels
hampers the performance of deep neural networks since the commonly used cross entropy loss is not
noise-robust. This raises an urgent demand on designing noise-robust loss functions.
Some previous works have proposed several loss functions for training deep neural networks with
noisy labels. However, they either use auxiliary information[29, 12](e.g., having an additional set of
clean data or the noise transition matrix) or steps[20, 33](e.g. estimating the noise transition matrix),
∗

Equal Contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

