The Cells Out of Sample (COOS) dataset and
benchmarks for measuring out-of-sample
generalization of image classifiers

Alex X. Lu
Computer Science,
University of Toronto
alexlu@cs.toronto.edu

Amy X. Lu
Computer Science,
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
amyxlu@cs.toronto.edu

Wiebke Schormann
Biological Sciences,
Sunnybrook Research Institute
wiebke.schormann@sri.utoronto.ca

Marzyeh Ghassemi
CIFAR AI Chair,
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
marzyeh@cs.toronto.edu

David W. Andrews
Biological Sciences,
Sunnybrook Research Institute
Biochemistry and Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto
david.andrews@sri.utoronto.ca

Alan M. Moses
Cell and Systems Biology
Computer Science
CAGEF
University of Toronto
alan.moses@utoronto.ca

Abstract
Understanding if classifiers generalize to out-of-sample datasets is a central problem in machine learning. Microscopy images provide a standardized way to
measure the generalization capacity of image classifiers, as we can image the same
classes of objects under increasingly divergent, but controlled factors of variation.
We created a public dataset of 132,209 images of mouse cells, COOS-7 (Cells
Out Of Sample 7-Class). COOS-7 provides a classification setting where four
test datasets have increasing degrees of covariate shift: some images are random
subsets of the training data, while others are from experiments reproduced months
later and imaged by different instruments. We benchmarked a range of classification models using different representations, including transferred neural network
features, end-to-end classification with a supervised deep CNN, and features from a
self-supervised CNN. While most classifiers perform well on test datasets similar to
the training dataset, all classifiers failed to generalize their performance to datasets
with greater covariate shifts. These baselines highlight the challenges of covariate
shifts in image data, and establish metrics for improving the generalization capacity
of image classifiers.

1

Introduction

For a classifier to be useful predictively, it must be able to accurately label out-of-sample data (new
data not seen during training). Researchers often estimate predictive performance by holding out a
random subset of the training data, but this only simulates the condition where test and training data
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

