Stein Variational Gradient Descent with
Matrix-Valued Kernels
Dilin Wang* Ziyang Tang⇤ Chandrajit Bajaj Qiang Liu
Department of Computer Science, UT Austin
{dilin, ztang, bajaj, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Stein variational gradient descent (SVGD) is a particle-based inference algorithm
that leverages gradient information for efficient approximate inference. In this work,
we enhance SVGD by leveraging preconditioning matrices, such as the Hessian
and Fisher information matrix, to incorporate geometric information into SVGD
updates. We achieve this by presenting a generalization of SVGD that replaces the
scalar-valued kernels in vanilla SVGD with more general matrix-valued kernels.
This yields a significant extension of SVGD, and more importantly, allows us to
flexibly incorporate various preconditioning matrices to accelerate the exploration
in the probability landscape. Empirical results show that our method outperforms
vanilla SVGD and a variety of baseline approaches over a range of real-world
Bayesian inference tasks.

1

Introduction

Approximate inference of intractable distributions is a central task in probabilistic learning and
statistics. An efficient approximation inference algorithm must perform both efficient optimization
to explore the high probability regions of the distributions of interest, and reliable uncertainty
quantification for evaluating the variation of the given distributions. Stein variational gradient descent
(SVGD) (Liu & Wang, 2016) is a deterministic sampling algorithm that achieves both desiderata by
optimizing the samples using a procedure similar to gradient-based optimization, while achieving
reliable uncertainty estimation using an interacting repulsive mechanism. SVGD has been shown
to provide a fast and flexible alternative to traditional methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) (e.g., Neal et al., 2011; Hoffman & Gelman, 2014) and parametric variational inference
(VI) (e.g., Wainwright et al., 2008; Blei et al., 2017) in various challenging applications (e.g., Pu
et al., 2017; Wang & Liu, 2016; Kim et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2017).
On the other hand, standard SVGD only uses the first order gradient information, and can not leverage
the advantage of the second order methods, such as Newton’s method and natural gradient, to achieve
better performance on challenging problems with complex loss landscapes or domains. Unfortunately,
due to the special form of SVGD, it is not straightforward to derive second order extensions of
SVGD by simply extending similar ideas from optimization. While this problem has been recently
considered (e.g., Detommaso et al., 2018; Liu & Zhu, 2018; Chen et al., 2019), the presented solutions
either require heuristic approximations (Detommaso et al., 2018), or lead to complex algorithmic
procedures that are difficult to implement in practice (Liu & Zhu, 2018).
Our solution to this problem is through a key generalization of SVGD that replaces the original scalarvalued positive definite kernels in SVGD with a class of more general matrix-valued positive definite
kernels. Our generalization includes all previous variants of SVGD (e.g., Wang et al., 2018; Han &
Liu, 2018) as special cases. More significantly, it allows us to easily incorporate various structured
⇤

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

