Accurate, reliable and fast robustness evaluation

Wieland Brendel1,3

Jonas Rauber1-3

Matthias Kümmerer1-3

Ivan Ustyuzhaninov1-3

Matthias Bethge1,3,4
1

2

Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, University of Tübingen
International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems
3
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Tübingen
4
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
wieland.brendel@bethgelab.org

Abstract
Throughout the past five years, the susceptibility of neural networks to minimal
adversarial perturbations has moved from a peculiar phenomenon to a core issue in
Deep Learning. Despite much attention, however, progress towards more robust
models is significantly impaired by the difficulty of evaluating the robustness of
neural network models. Today’s methods are either fast but brittle (gradient-based
attacks), or they are fairly reliable but slow (score- and decision-based attacks).
We here develop a new set of gradient-based adversarial attacks which (a) are
more reliable in the face of gradient-masking than other gradient-based attacks, (b)
perform better and are more query efficient than current state-of-the-art gradientbased attacks, (c) can be flexibly adapted to a wide range of adversarial criteria
and (d) require virtually no hyperparameter tuning. These findings are carefully
validated across a diverse set of six different models and hold for L0 , L1 , L2 and
L∞ in both targeted as well as untargeted scenarios. Implementations will soon
be available in all major toolboxes (Foolbox, CleverHans and ART). We hope that
this class of attacks will make robustness evaluations easier and more reliable, thus
contributing to more signal in the search for more robust machine learning models.

1

Introduction

Manipulating just a few pixels in an input can easily derail the predictions of a deep neural network
(DNN). This susceptibility threatens deployed machine learning models and highlights a gap between
human and machine perception. This phenomenon has been intensely studied since its discovery in
Deep Learning [Szegedy et al., 2014] but progress has been slow [Athalye et al., 2018a].
One core issue behind this lack of progress is the shortage of tools to reliably evaluate the robustness
of machine learning models. Almost all published defenses against adversarial perturbations have
later been found to be ineffective [Athalye et al., 2018a]: the models just appeared robust on the
surface because standard adversarial attacks failed to find the true minimal adversarial perturbations
against them. State-of-the-art attacks like PGD [Madry et al., 2018] or C&W [Carlini and Wagner,
2016] may fail for a number of reasons, ranging from (1) suboptimal hyperparameters over (2) an
insufficient number of optimization steps to (3) masking of the backpropagated gradients.
In this paper, we adopt ideas from the decision-based boundary attack [Brendel et al., 2018] and
combine them with gradient-based estimates of the boundary. The resulting class of gradient-based
attacks surpasses current state-of-the-art methods in terms of attack success, query efficiency and
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

