Data Cleansing for Models Trained with SGD
Satoshi Hara⇤

Atsushi Nitanda†

Takanori Maehara‡

Abstract
Data cleansing is a typical approach used to improve the accuracy of machine
learning models, which, however, requires extensive domain knowledge to identify
the influential instances that affect the models. In this paper, we propose an algorithm that can identify influential instances without using any domain knowledge.
The proposed algorithm automatically cleans the data, which does not require any
of the users’ knowledge. Hence, even non-experts can improve the models. The
existing methods require the loss function to be convex and an optimal model to be
obtained, which is not always the case in modern machine learning. To overcome
these limitations, we propose a novel approach specifically designed for the models
trained with stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The proposed method infers the
influential instances by retracing the steps of the SGD while incorporating intermediate models computed in each step. Through experiments, we demonstrate that
the proposed method can accurately infer the influential instances. Moreover, we
used MNIST and CIFAR10 to show that the models can be effectively improved
by removing the influential instances suggested by the proposed method.

1

Introduction

Building accurate models is one of the fundamental goals in machine learning. If the obtained model
is not satisfactory, users try to improve the model in several ways such as by modifying input features,
cleansing data, or even by gathering additional data. Error analysis [Ng, 2017] is a typical approach
for this purpose. In this analysis, the users hypothesize the cause of model’s failure by investigating
important features or examining the misclassified instances. However, a good hypothesis requires
experience and domain knowledge. Therefore, it is difficult for non-domain experts or non-machine
learning specialists to build accurate models.
How can we help non-experts to build accurate machine learning models? In this study, we focus on
the following data cleansing problem that removes “harmful” instances from the training set.
Problem 1 (Data Cleansing). Find a subset of the training instances such that the trained model
obtained after removing the subset has a better accuracy.
Currently, the users hypothesize the training instances that can have certain influences on the resulting
models by inspecting instances based on the domain knowledge. Our aim is to develop an algorithm
that can identify influential instances without using any domain knowledge. With such an algorithm,
the users do not need to hypothesize influential instances. Instead, the algorithm automatically
cleans the data, which does not require any of the users’ knowledge. Hence, with this process, even
non-experts can improve the models.
For data cleansing, we need to determine the training instances that affect the model. In the literature
of statistics, an influential instance is defined as the instance that leads to a distinct model from the
current model if the corresponding instance is absent [Cook, 1977]. A naive approach to determine
⇤

satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp, Osaka University, Japan
nitanda@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp, The University of Tokyo, Japan
‡
takanori.maehara@riken.jp, RIKEN AIP, Japan
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

