Prior-Free Dynamic Auctions with Low Regret
Buyers

Yuan Deng
Duke University
ericdy@cs.duke.edu

Jon Schneider
Google Research
jschnei@google.com

Balasubramanian Sivan
Google Research
balusivan@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of how to repeatedly sell to a buyer running a no-regret,
mean-based algorithm. Previous work [Braverman et al., 2018] shows that it is
possible to design effective mechanisms in such a setting that extract almost all
of the economic surplus, but these mechanisms require the buyer’s values each
round to be drawn independently and identically from a fixed distribution. In this
work, we do away with this assumption and consider the prior-free setting where
the buyer’s value each round is chosen adversarially (possibly adaptively).
We show that even in this prior-free setting, it is possible to extract a (1 − ε)approximation of the full economic surplus for any ε > 0. The number of options
offered to a buyer in any round scales independently of the number of rounds T
and polynomially in ε. We show that this is optimal up to a polynomial factor;
any mechanism achieving this approximation factor, even when values are drawn
stochastically, requires at least Ω(1/ε) options. Finally, we examine what is
possible when we constrain our mechanism to a natural auction format where
overbidding is dominated. Braverman et al. [2018] show that even when values are
drawn from a known stochastic distribution supported on [1/H, 1], it is impossible
in general to extract more than O(log log H/ log H) of the economic surplus. We
show how to achieve the same approximation factor in the prior-independent setting
(where the distribution is unknown to the seller), and an approximation factor of
O(1/ log H) in the prior-free setting (where the values are chosen adversarially).

1

Introduction

Revenue optimal auction design in settings where a seller interacts repeatedly with a buyer (like in
the sale of Internet ads) is a problem of high commercial relevance. The promise of dynamic auctions,
that allow the linking of buyers’ decisions across time, is the significantly higher revenue they can
achieve over running independent/decoupled auctions across time. The technical challenges that
dynamic auctions introduce, along with their practical impact has inspired a lot of recent work in this
area [Papadimitriou et al., 2016, Ashlagi et al., 2016, Mirrokni et al., 2018].
Traditionally, almost all work in dynamic mechanism design operates in the regime where the
players’ types (e.g. bidders’ values) are drawn stochastically from a fixed distribution. In many
situations this is far from a realistic assumption – for example, if the values of a buyer are modelled
as a distribution, this underlying distribution likely drifts over time and is also subject to shocks
determined by uncontrolled exogenous events. But this assumption is also in many ways critical: in a
dynamic mechanism in an adversarial setting, a fully rational buyer (who cares about the effect of his
current action on his future utility) would be unable to compute his future utility at any point of time
in the game and thus unable to meaningfully best-respond.
On the other hand, auctions for digital ads have become increasingly more complex over time. The
design space of dynamic auctions, in which a buyer bids on many items over the course of many
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

