On Single Source Robustness in Deep Fusion Models

Taewan Kim∗
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX
twankim@utexas.edu

Joydeep Ghosh
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX
jghosh@utexas.edu

Abstract
Algorithms that fuse multiple input sources benefit from both complementary and
shared information. Shared information may provide robustness against faulty or
noisy inputs, which is indispensable for safety-critical applications like self-driving
cars. We investigate learning fusion algorithms that are robust against noise added
to a single source. We first demonstrate that robustness against single source
noise is not guaranteed in a linear fusion model. Motivated by this discovery, two
possible approaches are proposed to increase robustness: a carefully designed
loss with corresponding training algorithms for deep fusion models, and a simple
convolutional fusion layer that has a structural advantage in dealing with noise.
Experimental results show that both training algorithms and our fusion layer make
a deep fusion-based 3D object detector robust against noise applied to a single
source, while preserving the original performance on clean data.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have accomplished superior performance in several machine learning problems
[26] including object recognition [24, 40, 42, 15, 18], object detection [37, 16, 7, 36, 30, 35] and
speech recognition [17, 14, 38, 5, 2, 4], which use either visual or audio sources. One natural way
of improving a model’s performance is to make use of multiple input sources relevant to a given
task so that enough information can be extracted to build strong features. Therefore, deep fusion
models have recently attracted considerable attention for autonomous driving [21, 3, 33, 25], medical
imaging [23, 48, 39, 29], and audio-visual speech recognition [19, 32, 41, 6].
Two benefits are expected when fusion-based learning models are selected for a given problem.
First, given adequate data, more information from multiple sources can enrich the model’s feature
space to achieve higher prediction performance, especially, when different input sources provide
complementary information to the model. This expectation coincides with a simple information
theoretic fact: if we have multiple input sources X1 , · · · , Xns and a target variable Y , mutual
information I(; ) obeys I(Y ; X1 , · · · , Xns ) ≥ I(Y ; Xi ) (∀i ∈ [ns ]).
The second expected advantage is increased robustness against single source faults, which is the
primary concern of our work. An underlying intuition comes from the fact that different sources may
have shared information so one sensor can partially compensate for others. This type of robustness
is critical in real-world fusion models, because each source may be exposed to different types of
corruption but not at the same time. For example, self-driving cars using an RGB camera and ranging
sensors like LIDAR and radar are exposed to single source corruption. LIDARs and radars work fine
at night whereas RGB cameras do not. Also, each source used in the model may have its own sensing
device, and hence not necessarily be corrupted by some physical attack simultaneously with others.
It would be ideal if the structure of machine learning based fusion models and shared information
could compensate for the corruption and automatically guarantee robustness without additional steps.
∗

This work was done when Taewan Kim was at the University of Texas at Austin, prior to joining Amazon.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

