Semi-Parametric Dynamic Contextual Pricing
Virag Shah
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
virag@stanford.edu

Jose Blanchet
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
jblanche@stanford.edu

Ramesh Johari
Management Science and Engineering
Stanford University
California, USA 94305
rjohari@stanford.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the application of real-time pricing in e-commerce platforms, we
consider the problem of revenue-maximization in a setting where the seller can
leverage contextual information describing the customer’s history and the product’s type to predict her valuation of the product. However, her true valuation is
unobservable to the seller, only binary outcome in the form of success-failure of
a transaction is observed. Unlike in usual contextual bandit settings, the optimal
price/arm given a covariate in our setting is sensitive to the detailed characteristics
of the residual uncertainty distribution. We develop a semi-parametric model in
which the residual distribution is non-parametric and provide the first algorithm
p
which learns both regression parameters and residual distribution with Õ( n)
regret. We empirically test a scalable implementation of our algorithm and observe
good performance.

1

Introduction

Many e-commerce platforms are experimenting with approaches to personalized dynamic pricing
based on the customer’s context (i.e. customer’s prior search/purchase history and the product’s type).
However, the mapping from context to optimal price needs to be learned. Our paper develops a bandit
learning approach towards solving this problem motivated by practical considerations faced by online
platforms. In our model, customers arrive sequentially, and each customer is interested in buying one
product. The customer purchases the product if her valuation (unobserved by the platform) for the
product exceeds the price set by the seller. The platform observes the covariate vector corresponding
to the context, and chooses a price. The customer buys the item if and only if the price is lower than
her valuation.
We emphasize three salient features of this model; taken together, these are the features that distinguish
our work. First, feedback is only binary: either the customer buys the item, or she does not. In other
words, the platform must learn from censored feedback. This type of binary feedback is a common
feature of practical demand estimation problems, since typically exact observation of the valuation of
a customer is not possible.
Second, the platform must learn the functional form of the relationship between the covariates and the
expected valuation. In our work, we assume a parametric model for this relationship. In particular, we
presume that the expected value of the logarithm of the valuation is linear in the covariates. Among
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

