Learning dynamic polynomial proofs

Alhussein Fawzi
DeepMind
afawzi@google.com

Mateusz Malinowski
DeepMind
mateuszm@google.com

Hamza Fawzi
University of Cambridge
hf323@cam.ac.uk

Omar Fawzi
ENS Lyon
omar.fawzi@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
Polynomial inequalities lie at the heart of many mathematical disciplines. In this
paper, we consider the fundamental computational task of automatically searching
for proofs of polynomial inequalities. We adopt the framework of semi-algebraic
proof systems that manipulate polynomial inequalities via elementary inference
rules that infer new inequalities from the premises. These proof systems are known
to be very powerful, but searching for proofs remains a major difficulty. In this
work, we introduce a machine learning based method to search for a dynamic
proof within these proof systems. We propose a deep reinforcement learning
framework that learns an embedding of the polynomials and guides the choice of
inference rules, taking the inherent symmetries of the problem as an inductive bias.
We compare our approach with powerful and widely-studied linear programming
hierarchies based on static proof systems, and show that our method reduces the
size of the linear program by several orders of magnitude while also improving
performance. These results hence pave the way towards augmenting powerful and
well-studied semi-algebraic proof systems with machine learning guiding strategies
for enhancing the expressivity of such proof systems.

1

Introduction

Polynomial inequalities abound in mathematics and its applications. Many questions in the areas
of control theory [Par00], robotics [MAT13], geometry [PP04], combinatorics [Lov79], program
verification [MFK+ 16] can be modeled using polynomial inequalities. For example, deciding the
stability of a control system can be reduced to proving the nonnegativity of a polynomial [PP02].
Producing proofs of polynomial inequalities is thus of paramount importance for these applications,
and has been a very active field of research [Las15].
To produce such proofs, we rely on semi-algebraic proof systems, which define a framework for
manipulating polynomial inequalities. These proof systems define inference rules that generate new
polynomial inequalities from existing ones. For example, inference rules can state that the product
and sum of two non-negative polynomials is non-negative. Given a polynomial f (x), a proof of
global non-negativity of f consists of a sequence of applications of the inference rules, starting from
a set of axioms, until we reach the target statement. Finding such a path is in general a very complex
task. To overcome this, a very popular approach in polynomial optimization is to use hierarchies
that are based on static proof systems, whereby inference rules are unrolled for a fixed number of
steps, and convex optimization is leveraged for the proof search. Despite the great success of such
methods in computer science and polynomial optimization [Lau03, CT12], this approach however
can suffer from a lack of expressivity for lower levels of the hierarchy, and a curse of dimensionality
at higher levels of the hierarchy. Moreover, such static proofs significantly depart from our common
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

