Implicit Regularization of Accelerated Methods in
Hilbert Spaces

Nicolò Pagliana
University of Genoa
DIMA & MaLGa
pagliana@dima.unige.it

Lorenzo Rosasco
University of Genoa
DIBRIS, MaLGa, IIT & MIT
lrosasco@mit.edu

Abstract
We study learning properties of accelerated gradient descent methods for linear
least-squares in Hilbert spaces. We analyze the implicit regularization properties
of Nesterov acceleration and a variant of heavy-ball in terms of corresponding
learning error bounds. Our results show that acceleration can provides faster bias
decay than gradient descent, but also suffers of a more unstable behavior. As a
result acceleration cannot be in general expected to improve learning accuracy with
respect to gradient descent, but rather to achieve the same accuracy with reduced
computations. Our theoretical results are validated by numerical simulations.
Our analysis is based on studying suitable polynomials induced by the accelerated dynamics and combining spectral techniques with concentration inequalities.

1

Introduction

The focus on optimization is a major trend in modern machine learning, where efficiency is mandatory
in large scale problems [4]. Among other solutions, first order methods have emerged as methods of
choice. While these techniques are known to have potentially slow convergence guarantees, they also
have low iteration costs, ideal in large scale problems. Consequently the question of accelerating
first order methods while keeping their small iteration costs have received much attention, see e.g.
[33]. Since machine learning solutions are typically derived minimizing an empirical objective (the
training error), most theoretical studies have focused on the error estimated for this latter quantity.
However, it has recently become clear that optimization can play a key role from a statistical point of
view when the goal is to minimize the expected (test) error. On the one hand, iterative optimization
implicitly bias the search for a solution, e.g. converging to suitable minimal norm solutions [27]. On
the other hand, the number of iterations parameterize paths of solutions of different complexity [31].
The idea that optimization can implicitly perform regularization has a long history. In the context
of linear inverse problems, it is known as iterative regularization [11]. It is also an old trick for
training neural networks where it is called early stopping [15]. The question of understanding the
generalization properties of deep learning applications has recently sparked a lot of attention on
this approach, which has be referred to as implicit regularization, see e.g. [13]. Establishing the
regularization properties of iterative optimization requires the study of the corresponding expected
error by combining optimization and statistical tools. First results in this sense focused on linear
least squares with gradient descent and go back to [6, 31], see also [25] and references there in for
improvements. Subsequent works have started considering other loss functions [16], multi-linear
models [13] and other optimization methods, e.g. stochastic approaches [26, 18, 14].
In this paper, we consider the implicit regularization properties of acceleration. We focus on linear
least squares in Hilbert space, because this setting allows to derive sharp results and working in
infinite dimension magnify the role of regularization. Unlike in finite dimension learning bounds are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

