Markov Random Fields for Collaborative Filtering

Harald Steck
Netflix
Los Gatos, CA 95032
hsteck@netflix.com

Abstract
In this paper, we model the dependencies among the items that are recommended
to a user in a collaborative-filtering problem via a Gaussian Markov Random
Field (MRF). We build upon Besag’s auto-normal parameterization and pseudolikelihood [7], which not only enables computationally efficient learning, but also
connects the areas of MRFs and sparse inverse covariance estimation with autoencoders and neighborhood models, two successful approaches in collaborative
filtering. We propose a novel approximation for learning sparse MRFs, where
the trade-off between recommendation-accuracy and training-time can be controlled. At only a small fraction of the training-time compared to various baselines,
including deep nonlinear models, the proposed approach achieved competitive
ranking-accuracy on all three well-known data-sets used in our experiments, and
notably a 20% gain in accuracy on the data-set with the largest number of items.

1

Introduction

Collaborative filtering has witnessed significant improvements in recent years, largely due to models
based on low-dimensional embeddings, like weighted matrix factorization (e.g., [26, 39]) and deep
learning [23, 22, 33, 47, 62, 58, 20, 11], including autoencoders [58, 33]. Also neighborhood-based
approaches are competitive in certain regimes (e.g., [1, 53, 54]), despite being simple heuristics based
on item-item (or user-user) similarity matrices (like cosine similarity). In this paper, we outline that
Markov Random Fields (MRF) are closely related to autoencoders as well as to neighborhood-based
approaches. We build on the enormous progress made in learning MRFs, in particular in sparse
inverse covariance estimation (e.g., [36, 59, 15, 2, 60, 44, 45, 63, 55, 24, 25, 52, 56, 51]). Much of
the literature on sparse inverse covariance estimation focuses on the regime where the number of data
points n is much smaller than the number of variables m in the model (n < m).
This paper is concerned with a different regime, where the number n of data-points (i.e., users) and
the number m of variables (i.e., items) are both large as well as n > m, which is typical for many
collaborative filtering applications. We use an MRF as to model the dependencies (i.e., similarities)
among the items that are recommended to a user, while a user corresponds to a sample drawn from
the distribution of the MRF. In this regime (n > m), learning a sparse model may not lead to
significant improvements in prediction accuracy (compared to a dense model). Instead, we exploit
model-sparsity as to reduce the training-time considerably, as computational cost is a main concern
when both n and m are large. To this end, we propose a novel approximation that enables one to trade
prediction-accuracy for training-time. This trade-off subsumes the two extreme cases commonly
considered in the literature, namely regressing each variable against its neighbors in the MRF and
inverting the covariance matrix.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we review Besag’s auto-normal parameterization and pseudo-likelihood, and the resulting closed-form solution for the fully-connected MRF. We
then state the key Corollary in Section 2.2.2, which is the basis of our novel sparse approximation
outlined in Section 3. We discuss the connections to various related approaches in Section 4. The
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

