A Self Validation Network for Object-Level Human
Attention Estimation

1

Zehua Zhang,1 Chen Yu,2 David Crandall1
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering
2
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University Bloomington
{zehzhang, chenyu, djcran}@indiana.edu

Abstract
Due to the foveated nature of the human vision system, people can focus their visual
attention on only a small region of their visual field at a time, which usually contains
a single object. Estimating this object of attention in first-person (egocentric) videos
is useful for many human-centered real-world applications such as augmented
reality and driver assistance systems. A straightforward solution for this problem
is to first estimate the gaze with a traditional gaze estimator and generate object
candidates from an off-the-shelf object detector, and then pick the object that the
estimated gaze falls in. However, such an approach can fail because it addresses
the where and the what problems separately, despite that they are highly related,
chicken-and-egg problems. In this paper, we propose a novel unified model that
incorporates both spatial and temporal evidence in identifying as well as locating
the attended object in first-person videos. It introduces a novel Self Validation
Module that enforces and leverages consistency of the where and the what concepts.
We evaluate on two public datasets, demonstrating that the Self Validation Module
significantly benefits both training and testing and that our model outperforms the
state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Humans can focus their visual attention on only a small part of their surroundings at any moment,
and thus have to choose what to pay attention to in real time [43]. Driven by the tasks and intentions
we have in mind, we manage attention with our foveated visual system by adjusting our head pose
and our gaze point in order to focus on the most relevant object in the environment at any moment in
time [8, 17, 29, 47, 62].
This close relationship between intention, attention, and semantic objects has inspired a variety
of work in computer vision, including image classification [26], object detection [27, 46, 50, 52],
action recognition [4, 36, 42, 48], action prediction [53], video summarization [30], visual search
modeling [51], and irrelevant frame removal [38], in which the attended object estimation serves as
auxiliary information. Despite being a key component of these papers, how to identify and locate the
important object is seldom studied explicitly. This problem in and of itself is of broad potential use in
real-world applications such as driver assistance systems and intelligent human-like robots.
In this paper, we discuss how to identify and locate the attended object in first-person videos. Recorded
by head-mounted cameras along with eye trackers, first-person videos capture an approximation
of what people see in their fields of view as they go about their lives, yielding interesting data for
studying real-time human attention. In contrast to gaze studies of static images or pre-recorded
videos, first-person video is unique in that there is exactly one correct point of attention in each frame,
as a camera wearer can only gaze at one point at a time. Accordingly, one and only one gazed object
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

