Singleshot : a scalable Tucker tensor decomposition

Abraham Traoré
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
abraham.traore@etu.univ-rouen.fr

Maxime Bérar
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
maxime.berar@univ-rouen.fr

Alain Rakotomamonjy
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
Criteo AI Lab, Criteo Paris
alain.rakoto@insa-rouen.fr

Abstract
This paper introduces a new approach for the scalable Tucker decomposition
problem. Given a tensor X , the algorithm proposed, named Singleshot, allows to
perform the inference task by processing one subtensor drawn from X at a time.
The key principle of our approach is based on the recursive computations of the
gradient and on cyclic update of the latent factors involving only one single step of
gradient descent. We further improve the computational efficiency of Singleshot by
proposing an inexact gradient version named Singleshotinexact. The two algorithms
are backed with theoretical guarantees of convergence and convergence rates under
mild conditions. The scalabilty of the proposed approaches, which can be easily
extended to handle some common constraints encountered in tensor decomposition
(e.g non-negativity), is proven via numerical experiments on both synthetic and
real data sets.

1

Introduction

The recovery of information-rich and task-relevant variables hidden behind observation data (commonly referred to as latent variables) is a fundamental task that has been extensively studied in
machine learning. In many applications, the dataset we are dealing with naturally presents different
modes (or dimensions) and thus, can be naturally represented by multidimensional arrays (also called
tensors). The recent interest for efficient techniques to deal with such datasets is motivated by the
fact that the methodologies that matricize the data and then apply matrix factorization give a flattened
view of data and often cause a loss of the internal structure information. Hence, to mitigate the
extent of this loss, it is more favorable to process a multimodal data set in its own domain, i.e. tensor
domain, to obtain a multiple perspective view of data rather than a flattened one.
Tensors represent generalization of matrices and the related decomposition techniques are promising
tools for exploratory analysis of multidimensional data in diverse disciplines including signal processing [11], social networks analysis [28], etc. The two most common decompositions used for tensor
analysis are the Tucker decomposition [43] and the Canonical Polyadic Decomposition also named
CPD[16, 6]. These decompositions are used to infer multilinear relationships from multidimensional
datasets as they allow to extract hidden (latent) components and investigate the relationships among
them.
In this paper, we focus on the Tucker decomposition motivated by the fact that this decomposition
and its variants have been successfully used in many real applications [24, 19]. Our technical goal
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

