Dynamics of stochastic gradient descent for two-layer
neural networks in the teacher-student setup

Sebastian Goldt1 , Madhu S. Advani2 , Andrew M. Saxe3
Florent Krzakala4 , Lenka Zdeborová1
1
Institut de Physique Théorique, CNRS, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Saclay, France
2
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom
4
Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, Sorbonne Universités,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 6, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve stellar generalisation even when they have enough
parameters to easily fit all their training data. We study this phenomenon by
analysing the dynamics and the performance of over-parameterised two-layer
neural networks in the teacher-student setup, where one network, the student, is
trained on data generated by another network, called the teacher. We show how the
dynamics of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is captured by a set of differential
equations and prove that this description is asymptotically exact in the limit of
large inputs. Using this framework, we calculate the final generalisation error of
student networks that have more parameters than their teachers. We find that the
final generalisation error of the student increases with network size when training
only the first layer, but stays constant or even decreases with size when training
both layers. We show that these different behaviours have their root in the different
solutions SGD finds for different activation functions. Our results indicate that
achieving good generalisation in neural networks goes beyond the properties of
SGD alone and depends on the interplay of at least the algorithm, the model
architecture, and the data set.
Deep neural networks behind state-of-the-art results in image classification and other domains
have one thing in common: their size. In many applications, the free parameters of these models
outnumber the samples in their training set by up to two orders of magnitude 1,2 . Statistical learning
theory suggests that such heavily over-parameterised networks generalise poorly without further
regularisation 3–9 , yet empirical studies consistently find that increasing the size of networks to
the point where they can easily fit their training data and beyond does not impede their ability to
generalise well, even without any explicit regularisation 10–12 . Resolving this paradox is arguably one
of the big challenges in the theory of deep learning.
One tentative explanation for the success of large networks has focused on the properties of stochastic
gradient descent (SGD), the algorithm routinely used to train these networks. In particular, it has
been proposed that SGD has an implicit regularisation mechanism that ensures that solutions found
by SGD generalise well irrespective of the number of parameters involved, for models as diverse as
(over-parameterised) neural networks 10,13 , logistic regression 14 and matrix factorisation models 15,16 .
In this paper, we analyse the dynamics of one-pass (or online) SGD in two-layer neural networks. We
focus in particular on the influence of over-parameterisation on the final generalisation error. We use
the teacher-student framework 17,18 , where a training data set is generated by feeding random inputs
through a two-layer neural network with M hidden units called the teacher. Another neural network,
the student, is then trained using SGD on that data set. The generalisation error is defined as the mean
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

