Post training 4-bit quantization of convolutional
networks for rapid-deployment
Ron Banner1 , Yury Nahshan1 , and Daniel Soudry2
Intel – Artificial Intelligence Products Group (AIPG)1
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology2
{ron.banner, yury.nahshan}@intel.com
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks require significant memory bandwidth and storage for intermediate computations, apart from substantial computing resources.
Neural network quantization has significant benefits in reducing the amount of
intermediate results, but it often requires the full datasets and time-consuming
fine tuning to recover the accuracy lost after quantization. This paper introduces the first practical 4-bit post training quantization approach: it does not
involve training the quantized model (fine-tuning), nor it requires the availability of the full dataset. We target the quantization of both activations and
weights and suggest three complementary methods for minimizing quantization
error at the tensor level, two of whom obtain a closed-form analytical solution.
Combining these methods, our approach achieves accuracy that is just a few
percents less the state-of-the-art baseline across a wide range of convolutional
models. The source code to replicate all experiments is available on GitHub:
https://github.com/submission2019/cnn-quantization.

1

Introduction

A significant drawback of deep learning models is their computational costs. Low precision is one of
the key techniques being actively studied recently to overcome the problem. With hardware support,
low precision training and inference can compute more operations per second, reduce memory
bandwidth and power consumption, and allow larger networks to fit into a device.
The majority of literature on neural network quantization involves some sort of training either from
scratch (Hubara et al., 2016) or as a fine-tuning step from a pre-trained floating point model (Han et al.,
2015). Training is a powerful method to compensate for model’s accuracy loss due to quantization.
Yet, it is not always applicable in real-world scenarios since it requires the full-size dataset, which is
often unavailable from reasons such as privacy, proprietary or when using an off-the-shelf pre-trained
model for which data is no longer accessible. Training is also time-consuming, requiring very long
periods of optimization as well as skilled manpower and computational resources.
Consequently, it is often desirable to reduce the model size by quantizing weights and activations
post-training, without the need to re-train/fine-tune the model. These methods, commonly referred
to as post-training quantization, are simple to use and allow for quantization with limited data. At
8-bit precision, they provide close to floating point accuracy in several popular models, e.g., ResNet,
VGG, and AlexNet. Their importance can be seen from the recent industrial publications, focusing
on quantization methods that avoid re-training (Goncharenko et al., 2018; Choukroun et al., 2019;
Meller et al., 2019; Migacz, 2017).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

