Faster Boosting with Smaller Memory
Julaiti Alafate
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

Yoav Freund
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093

Abstract
State-of-the-art implementations of boosting, such as XGBoost and LightGBM,
can process large training sets extremely fast. However, this performance requires
that the memory size is sufficient to hold a 2-3 multiple of the training set size. This
paper presents an alternative approach to implementing the boosted trees, which
achieves a significant speedup over XGBoost and LightGBM, especially when the
memory size is small. This is achieved using a combination of three techniques:
early stopping, effective sample size, and stratified sampling. Our experiments
demonstrate a 10-100 speedup over XGBoost when the training data is too large to
fit in memory.

1

Introduction

Boosting [7, 16], and in particular gradient boosted trees [9], are some of the most popular learning
algorithms used in practice. There are several highly optimized implementations of boosting, among
which XGBoost [5] and LightGBM [12] are two of the most popular ones. These implementations
can train models with hundreds of trees using millions of training examples in a matter of minutes.
However, a significant limitation of these methods is that all of the training examples are required to
be stored in the main memory. For LightGBM this requirement is strict. XGBoost can operate in the
disk-mode, which makes it possible to use machines with smaller memory than the training set size.
However, it comes with a penalty in much longer training time.
In this paper, we present a new implementation of boosted trees1 . This implementation can run
efficiently on machines whose memory sizes are much smaller than the training set. It is achieved
with no penalty in accuracy, and with a speedup of 10-100 over XGBoost in disk mode.
Our method is based on the observation that each boosting step corresponds to an estimation of
the gradients along the axis defined by the weak rules. The common approach to performing this
estimation is to scan all of the training examples so as to minimize the estimation error. This operation
is very expensive especially when the training set does not fit in memory.
We reduce the number of examples scanned in each boosting iteration by combining two ideas. First,
we use early stopping [19] to minimize the number of examples scanned at each boosting iteration.
1

The source code of the implementation is released at

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

.

