Cormorant: Covariant Molecular Neural Networks
Brandon Anderson∗‡ , Truong-Son Hy∗ and Risi Kondor∗†]
∗
Department of Computer Science, † Department of Statistics
The University of Chicago
]
Center for Computational Mathematics, Flatiron Institute
‡
Atomwise
{hytruongson,risi}@uchicago.edu
brandona@jfi.uchicago.edu

Abstract
We propose Cormorant, a rotationally covariant neural network architecture for
learning the behavior and properties of complex many-body physical systems.
We apply these networks to molecular systems with two goals: learning atomic
potential energy surfaces for use in Molecular Dynamics simulations, and learning ground state properties of molecules calculated by Density Functional Theory.
Some of the key features of our network are that (a) each neuron explicitly corresponds to a subset of atoms; (b) the activation of each neuron is covariant to rotations, ensuring that overall the network is fully rotationally invariant. Furthermore,
the non-linearity in our network is based upon tensor products and the ClebschGordan decomposition, allowing the network to operate entirely in Fourier space.
Cormorant significantly outperforms competing algorithms in learning molecular
Potential Energy Surfaces from conformational geometries in the MD-17 dataset,
and is competitive with other methods at learning geometric, energetic, electronic,
and thermodynamic properties of molecules on the GDB-9 dataset.

1

Introduction

In principle, quantum mechanics provides a perfect description of the forces governing the behavior
of atoms, molecules and crystalline materials such as metals. However, for systems larger than a
few dozen atoms, solving the Schrödinger equation explicitly at every timestep is not a feasible
proposition on present day computers. Even Density Functional Theory (DFT) [Hohenberg and
Kohn, 1964], a widely used approximation to the equations of quantum mechanics, has trouble
scaling to more than a few hundred atoms.
Consequently, the majority of practical work in molecular dynamics today falls back on fundamentally classical models, where the atoms are essentially treated as solid balls and the forces between
them are given by pre-defined formulae called atomic force fields or empirical potentials, such as
the CHARMM family of models [Brooks et al., 1983, 2009]. There has been a widespread realization that this approach has inherent limitations, so in recent years a burgeoning community has
formed around trying to use machine learning to learn more descriptive force fields directly from
DFT computations [Behler and Parrinello, 2007, Bartók et al., 2010, Rupp et al., 2012, Shapeev,
2015, Chmiela et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2018, Schütt et al., 2017, Hirn et al., 2017]. More broadly,
there is considerable interest in using ML methods not just for learning force fields, but also for
predicting many other physical/chemical properties of atomic systems across different branches of
materials science, chemistry and pharmacology [Montavon et al., 2013, Gilmer et al., 2017, Smith
et al., 2017, Yao et al., 2018].
At the same time, there have been significant advances in our understanding of the equivariance
and covariance properties of neural networks, starting with [Cohen and Welling, 2016a,b] in the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

