Poisson-Randomized Gamma Dynamical Systems

Aaron Schein
Data Science Institute
Columbia University
Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin

Scott W. Linderman
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
David M. Blei
Department of Statistics
Columbia University

Hanna Wallach
Microsoft Research
New York, NY

Abstract
This paper presents the Poisson-randomized gamma dynamical system (PRGDS), a
model for sequentially observed count tensors that encodes a strong inductive bias
toward sparsity and burstiness. The PRGDS is based on a new motif in Bayesian
latent variable modeling, an alternating chain of discrete Poisson and continuous
gamma latent states that is analytically convenient and computationally tractable.
This motif yields closed-form complete conditionals for all variables by way of the
Bessel distribution and a novel discrete distribution that we call the shifted confluent
hypergeometric distribution. We draw connections to closely related models and
compare the PRGDS to these models in studies of real-world count data sets of
text, international events, and neural spike trains. We find that a sparse variant of
the PRGDS, which allows the continuous gamma latent states to take values of
exactly zero, often obtains better predictive performance than other models and is
uniquely capable of inferring latent structures that are highly localized in time.

1

Introduction

Political scientists routinely analyze event counts of the number of times country i took action a
toward country j during time step t [1]. Such data can be represented as a sequence of count tensors
Y (1) , . . . , Y (T ) each of which contains the V ×V ×A event counts for that time step for every combination of V sender countries, V receivers, and A action types. International event data sets exhibit “complex dependence structures” [2] like coalitions of countries and bursty temporal dynamics. These dependence structures violate the independence assumptions of the regression-based methods that political scientists have traditionally used to test theories of international relations [3–5]. Political scientists
have therefore advocated for using latent variable models to infer unobserved structures as a way of
controlling for them [6]. This approach motivates interpretable yet expressive models that are capable
of capturing a variety of complex dependence structures. Recent work has applied tensor factorization
methods to international event data sets [7–11] to infer coalition structures among countries and topic
structures among actions; however, these methods assume that the sequentially observed count tensors
are exchangeable, thereby failing to capture the bursty temporal dynamics inherent to such data sets.
Sequentially observed count tensors present unique statistical challenges because they tend to be bursty
[12], high-dimensional, and sparse [13, 14]. There are few models that are tailored to the challenging
properties of both time series and count tensors. In recent years, Poisson factorization has emerged
as a framework for modeling count matrices [15–20] and tensors [13, 21, 9]. Although factorization
methods generally scale with the size of the matrix or tensor, many Poisson factorization models
yield inference algorithms that scale linearly with the number of non-zero entries. This property
allows researchers to efficiently infer latent structures from massive tensors, provided these tensors
are sparse; however, this property is unique to a subset of Poisson factorization models that only posit
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

