Neural Spline Flows

Conor Durkan∗ Artur Bekasov∗ Iain Murray George Papamakarios
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
{conor.durkan, artur.bekasov, i.murray, g.papamakarios}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
A normalizing flow models a complex probability density as an invertible transformation of a simple base density. Flows based on either coupling or autoregressive
transforms both offer exact density evaluation and sampling, but rely on the parameterization of an easily invertible elementwise transformation, whose choice
determines the flexibility of these models. Building upon recent work, we propose a fully-differentiable module based on monotonic rational-quadratic splines,
which enhances the flexibility of both coupling and autoregressive transforms while
retaining analytic invertibility. We demonstrate that neural spline flows improve
density estimation, variational inference, and generative modeling of images.

1

Introduction

Models that can reason about the joint distribution of high-dimensional random variables are central
to modern unsupervised machine learning. Explicit density evaluation is required in many statistical procedures, while synthesis of novel examples can enable agents to imagine and plan in an
environment prior to choosing a action. In recent years, the variational autoencoder [VAE, 29, 48]
and generative adversarial network [GAN, 15] have received particular attention in the generativemodeling community, and both are capable of sampling with a single forward pass of a neural network.
However, these models do not offer exact density evaluation, and can be difficult to train. On the
other hand, autoregressive density estimators [13, 50, 56, 58, 59, 60] can be trained by maximum
likelihood, but sampling requires a sequential loop over the output dimensions.
Flow-based models present an alternative approach to the above methods, and in some cases provide
both exact density evaluation and sampling in a single neural-network pass. A normalizing flow
models data x as the output of an invertible, differentiable transformation f of noise u:
x = f (u) where u ∼ π(u).
The probability density of x under the flow is obtained by a change of variables:
 −1 

∂f
−1
p(x) = π f (x) det
.
∂x

(1)

(2)

Intuitively, the function f compresses and expands the density of the noise distribution π(u), and this
change is quantified by the determinant of the Jacobian of the transformation. The noise distribution
π(u) is typically chosen to be simple, such as a standard normal, whereas the transformation f
and its inverse f −1 are often implemented by composing a series of invertible neural-network
modules.
Given a dataset D = x(n) N
n=1 , the flow is trained by maximizing the total log likelihood
P
(n)
log
p
x
with
respect
to
the
parameters
of the transformation f . In recent years, normalizing
n
flows have received widespread attention in the machine-learning literature, seeing successful use in
density estimation [10, 43], variational inference [30, 36, 46, 57], image, audio and video generation
[26, 28, 32, 45], likelihood-free inference [44], and learning maximum-entropy distributions [34].
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

