Mapping State Space using Landmarks
for Universal Goal Reaching

Zhiao Huang ∗
UC San Diego

Fangchen Liu ∗
UC San Diego

Hao Su
UC San Diego

z2huang@eng.ucsd.edu

fliu@eng.ucsd.edu

haosu@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
An agent that has well understood the environment should be able to apply its
skills for any given goals, leading to the fundamental problem of learning the
Universal Value Function Approximator (UVFA). A UVFA learns to predict the
cumulative rewards between all state-goal pairs. However, empirically, the value
function for long-range goals is always hard to estimate and may consequently
result in failed policy. This has presented challenges to the learning process and
the capability of neural networks. We propose a method to address this issue
in large MDPs with sparse rewards, in which exploration and routing across
remote states are both extremely challenging. Our method explicitly models the
environment in a hierarchical manner, with a high-level dynamic landmark-based
map abstracting the visited state space, and a low-level value network to derive
precise local decisions. We use farthest point sampling to select landmark states
from past experience, which has improved exploration compared with simple
uniform sampling. Experimentally we showed that our method enables the agent to
reach long-range goals at the early training stage, and achieve better performance
than standard RL algorithms for a number of challenging tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) allows training agents for planning and control tasks by feedbacks from
the environment. While significant progress has been made in the standard setting of achieving a
goal known at training time, e.g., to reach a given flag as in MountainCar [1], very limited efforts
have been exerted on the setting when goals at evaluation are unknown at training time. For example,
when a robot walks in an environment, the destination may vary from time to time. Tasks of this
kind are unanimous and of crucial importance in practice. We call them Universal Markov Decision
Process (UMDP) problems following the convention of [2].
Pioneer work handles UMDP problems by learning a Universal Value Function Approximator
(UVFA). In particular, Schaul et al. [3] proposed to approximate a goal-conditioned value function
V (s, g)2 by a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), and Andrychowicz et al. [4] proposed a framework
called hindsight experience replay (HER) to smartly reuse past experience to fit the universal value
function by TD-loss. However, for complicated policies of long-term horizon, the UVFA learned by
networks is often not good enough. This is because UVFA has to memorize the cumulative reward
between all the state-goal pairs, which is a daunting job. In fact, the cardinality of state-goal pairs
grows by a high-order polynomial over the horizon of goals.
While the general UMDP problem is extremely difficult, we consider a family of UMDP problems
whose state space is a low-dimension manifold in the ambient space. Most control problems are
∗
2

equal contribution
s is the current state and g is the goal.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

