Debiased Bayesian inference for average treatment
effects
Kolyan Ray
Department of Mathematics
King’s College London
kolyan.ray@kcl.ac.uk

Botond Szabó
Mathematical Institute
Leiden University
b.t.szabo@math.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract
Bayesian approaches have become increasingly popular in causal inference problems due to their conceptual simplicity, excellent performance and in-built uncertainty quantification (‘posterior credible sets’). We investigate Bayesian inference
for average treatment effects from observational data, which is a challenging problem due to the missing counterfactuals and selection bias. Working in the standard
potential outcomes framework, we propose a data-driven modification to an arbitrary (nonparametric) prior based on the propensity score that corrects for the
first-order posterior bias, thereby improving performance. We illustrate our method
for Gaussian process (GP) priors using (semi-)synthetic data. Our experiments
demonstrate significant improvement in both estimation accuracy and uncertainty
quantification compared to the unmodified GP, rendering our approach highly
competitive with the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Inferring the causal effect of a treatment or condition is an important problem in many applications,
such as healthcare [11, 17, 38], education [20], economics [16], marketing [6] and survey sampling
[13] amongst others. While carefully designed experiments are the gold standard for measuring
causal effects, these are often impractical due to ethical, financial or time-constraints. For example,
when evaluating the effectiveness of a new medicine it may not be ethically feasible to randomly
assign a patient to a particular treatment irrespective of their particular circumstances. An alternative
is to use observational data which, while typically much easier to obtain, requires careful analysis.
A common framework for causal inference is the potential outcomes setup [19], where every individual possesses two ‘potential outcomes’ corresponding to the individual’s outcomes with and
without treatment. For every subject in the observation cohort we thus observe only one of these two
outcomes and not the ‘missing’ counterfactual outcome, without which we cannot observe the true
treatment effect. This problem differs from standard supervised learning in that we must thus account
for the missing counterfactuals, which is the well-known missing data problem in causal inference.
A further complication is that in practice, particularly in observational studies, individuals are often
assigned treatments in a biased manner [36] so that a simple comparison of the two groups may be
misleading. A common way to deal with selection bias is to measure features, called confounders,
that are believed to influence both the treatment assignment and outcomes. The discrepancy in feature
distributions for the treated and control subject groups can be expressed via the propensity score,
which is then used to apply a correction to the estimate. Under the assumption of unconfoundedness,
namely that the treatment assignment and outcome are conditionally independent given the features,
one can then identify the causal effect. Widely used methods include propensity score matching
[32, 34, 36] and double robust methods [5, 31, 33].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

