Quality Aware Generative Adversarial Networks

Parimala Kancharla, Sumohana S. Channappayya
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad
{ee15m17p100001, sumohana}@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have become a very popular tool for implicitly learning high-dimensional probability distributions. Several improvements
have been made to the original GAN formulation to address some of its shortcomings like mode collapse, convergence issues, entanglement, poor visual quality etc.
While a significant effort has been directed towards improving the visual quality
of images generated by GANs, it is rather surprising that objective image quality
metrics have neither been employed as cost functions nor as regularizers in GAN
objective functions. In this work, we show how a distance metric that is a variant
of the Structural SIMilarity (SSIM) index (a popular full-reference image quality
assessment algorithm), and a novel quality aware discriminator gradient penalty
function that is inspired by the Natural Image Quality Evaluator (NIQE, a popular
no-reference image quality assessment algorithm) can each be used as excellent
regularizers for GAN objective functions. Specifically, we demonstrate state-ofthe-art performance using the Wasserstein GAN gradient penalty (WGAN-GP)
framework over CIFAR-10, STL10 and CelebA datasets.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goo+14] have become a very popular tool for implicitly
learning high-dimensional probability distributions. A large number of very interesting and useful
applications have emerged due to the ability of GANs to learn complex real-world distributions.
Some of these include image translation [Iso+17], image super-resolution [Led+17], image saliency
detection [Pan+17] etc. While GANs have indeed become very popular, they suffer from drawbacks
such as mode collapse, convergence issues, entanglement, poor visual quality etc. A significant
amount of research effort has focused on addressing these shortcomings in the original GAN formulation. While the literature does consider the quality of the generated images as a performance metric,
it is rather surprising that the use of objective image quality metrics in the GAN cost function has
been very limited. We address this lacuna with our contributions as summarized below:
• We make explicit use of objective image quality assessment (IQA) metrics and their variants
for regularizing WGAN with gradient penalty (WGAN-GP), and propose Quality Aware
GANs (QAGANs).
• We propose a novel quality aware discriminator gradient penalty function based on the local
statistical signature of natural images as in NIQE [MSB13].
• We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10, STL 10 and CelebA datasets
for non-progressive GANs.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

