Chirality Nets for Human Pose Regression

Raymond A. Yeh∗, Yuan-Ting Hu* , Alexander G. Schwing
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{yeh17, ythu2, aschwing}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We propose Chirality Nets, a family of deep nets that is equivariant to the “chirality
transform,” i.e., the transformation to create a chiral pair. Through parameter
sharing, odd and even symmetry, we propose and prove variants of standard
building blocks of deep nets that satisfy the equivariance property, including fully
connected layers, convolutional layers, batch-normalization, and LSTM/GRU cells.
The proposed layers lead to a more data efficient representation and a reduction
in computation by exploiting symmetry. We evaluate chirality nets on the task
of human pose regression, which naturally exploits the left/right mirroring of the
human body. We study three pose regression tasks: 3D pose estimation from
video, 2D pose forecasting, and skeleton based activity recognition. Our approach
achieves/matches state-of-the-art results, with more significant gains on small
datasets and limited-data settings.

1

Introduction

Human pose regression tasks such as human pose estimation, human pose forecasting and skeleton
based action recognition, have numerous applications in video understanding, security and humancomputer interaction. For instance, collaborative virtual reality applications rely on accurate pose
estimation for which significant advances have been reported in recent years.
Specifically, recent state-of-the-art approaches use supervised learning to address pose regression and
employ deep nets. Input and output of those nets depend on the task: inputs are typically 2D or 3D
human pose key-points stacked into a vector; the output may represent human pose key-points for
pose estimation or a classification probability for activity recognition. To improve accuracy of those
tasks, a variety of deep net architectures have been proposed [34, 3, 17, 29, 42, 48], generally relying
on common deep net building blocks, such as, fully connected, convolutional or recurrent layers.
Unlike for image datasets, to enlarge the size of human pose datasets, a reflection (left-right flipping)
of the pose coordinates as illustrated in step (1) of Fig. 1 is not sufficient. The chirality of the human
pose requires to additionally switch the labeling of left and right as illustrated in step (2) of Fig. 1.
However, while this two-step data augmentation is conceptually easy to employ during training, we
argue that even better accuracy is possible for human pose regression tasks if this pose symmetry is
directly built into the deep net. In particular, if confronted with either of the poses illustrated on the
left or right hand side of Fig. 1 the output of a deep net should be equivariant to the transformation,
i.e., the output is also transformed in a “predefined way.” For example, if the network’s output is also
a human pose, the output pose should follow the same transformation. On the other hand, for an
activity recognition task, the output probability should remain unchanged. The equivariant map, for
pose estimation, is illustrated in Fig. 2 and we make the equivariance property more precise later.
To encode this form of equivariance for human pose regression tasks, we propose “chirality nets.”
Specifically, the output of a chirality net is guaranteed to be equivariant w.r.t. a transformation
composed of reflections and label switching. To build chirality nets, we develop chirality equivariant
∗

Indicates equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

