Conformalized Quantile Regression

Yaniv Romano
Department of Statistics
Stanford University

Evan Patterson
Department of Statistics
Stanford University

Emmanuel J. Candès
Departments of Mathematics and of Statistics
Stanford University

Abstract
Conformal prediction is a technique for constructing prediction intervals that attain valid coverage in finite samples, without making distributional assumptions.
Despite this appeal, existing conformal methods can be unnecessarily conservative because they form intervals of constant or weakly varying length across the
input space. In this paper we propose a new method that is fully adaptive to heteroscedasticity. It combines conformal prediction with classical quantile regression,
inheriting the advantages of both. We establish a theoretical guarantee of valid
coverage, supplemented by extensive experiments on popular regression datasets.
We compare the efficiency of conformalized quantile regression to other conformal
methods, showing that our method tends to produce shorter intervals.

1

Introduction

In many applications of regression modeling, it is important not only to predict accurately but also to
quantify the accuracy of the predictions. This is especially true in situations involving high-stakes
decision making, such as estimating the efficacy of a drug or the risk of a credit default. The
uncertainty in a prediction can be quantified using a prediction interval, giving lower and upper
bounds between which the response variable lies with high probability. An ideal procedure for
generating prediction intervals should satisfy two properties. First, it should provide valid coverage
in finite samples, without making strong distributional assumptions, such as Gaussianity. Second, its
intervals should be as short as possible at each point in the input space, so that the predictions will be
informative. When the data is heteroscedastic, getting valid but short prediction intervals requires
adjusting the lengths of the intervals according to the local variability at each query point in predictor
space. This paper introduces a procedure that performs well on both criteria, being distribution-free
and adaptive to heteroscedasticity.
Our work is heavily inspired by conformal prediction, a general methodology for constructing
prediction intervals [1–6]. Conformal prediction has the virtue of providing a nonasymptotic,
distribution-free coverage guarantee. The main idea is to fit a regression model on the training
samples, then use the residuals on a held-out validation set to quantify the uncertainty in future
predictions. The effect of the underlying model on the length of the prediction intervals, and attempts
to construct intervals with locally varying length, have been studied in numerous recent works [6–16].
Nevertheless, existing methods yield conformal intervals of either fixed length or length depending
only weakly on the predictors, as argued in [6, 15, 17].
In conformal prediction to date, there has been a mismatch between the primary inferential focus—
conditional mean estimation—and the ultimate inferential goal—prediction interval estimation.
Statistical efficiency is lost by estimating a mean when an interval is needed. A more direct approach
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

