On Lazy Training in Differentiable Programming

Lénaïc Chizat
CNRS, Université Paris-Sud
Orsay, France
lenaic.chizat@u-psud.fr

Edouard Oyallon
CentraleSupelec, INRIA
Gif-sur-Yvette, France
edouard.oyallon@centralesupelec.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA, ENS, PSL Research University
Paris, France
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
In a series of recent theoretical works, it was shown that strongly overparameterized neural networks trained with gradient-based methods could converge
exponentially fast to zero training loss, with their parameters hardly varying. In
this work, we show that this “lazy training” phenomenon is not specific to overparameterized neural networks, and is due to a choice of scaling, often implicit,
that makes the model behave as its linearization around the initialization, thus
yielding a model equivalent to learning with positive-definite kernels. Through a
theoretical analysis, we exhibit various situations where this phenomenon arises
in non-convex optimization and we provide bounds on the distance between the
lazy and linearized optimization paths. Our numerical experiments bring a critical
note, as we observe that the performance of commonly used non-linear deep convolutional neural networks in computer vision degrades when trained in the lazy
regime. This makes it unlikely that “lazy training” is behind the many successes of
neural networks in difficult high dimensional tasks.

1

Introduction

Differentiable programming is becoming an important paradigm in signal processing and machine
learning that consists in building parameterized models, sometimes with a complex architecture and
a large number of parameters, and adjusting these parameters in order to minimize a loss function
using gradient-based optimization methods. The resulting problem is in general highly non-convex.
It has been observed empirically that, for fixed loss and model class, changes in the parameterization,
optimization procedure, or initialization could lead to a selection of models with very different
properties [36]. This paper is about one such implicit bias phenomenon, that we call lazy training,
which corresponds to the model behaving like its linearization around the initialization.
This work is motivated by a series of recent articles [11, 22, 10, 2, 37] where it is shown that overparameterized neural networks could converge linearly to zero training loss with their parameters
hardly varying. With a slightly different approach, it was shown in [17] that infinitely wide neural
networks behave like the linearization of the neural network around its initialization. In the present
work, we argue that this behavior is not specific to neural networks, and is not so much due to
over-parameterization than to an implicit choice of scaling. By introducing an explicit scale factor,
we show that essentially any parametric model can be trained in this lazy regime if its output is
close to zero at initialization. This shows that guaranteed fast training is indeed often possible, but
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

