Are Labels Required for Improving
Adversarial Robustness?
Jonathan Uesato⇤

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac⇤

Robert Stanforth

Alhussein Fawzi

Po-Sen Huang⇤
Pushmeet Kohli

DeepMind
{juesato,jalayrac,posenhuang}@google.com

Abstract
Recent work has uncovered the interesting (and somewhat surprising) finding that
training models to be invariant to adversarial perturbations requires substantially
larger datasets than those required for standard classification. This result is a key
hurdle in the deployment of robust machine learning models in many real world
applications where labeled data is expensive. Our main insight is that unlabeled
data can be a competitive alternative to labeled data for training adversarially robust
models. Theoretically, we show that in a simple statistical setting, the sample
complexity for learning an adversarially robust model from unlabeled data matches
the fully supervised case up to constant factors. On standard datasets like CIFAR10, a simple Unsupervised Adversarial Training (UAT) approach using unlabeled
data improves robust accuracy by 21.7% over using 4K supervised examples alone,
and captures over 95% of the improvement from the same number of labeled
examples. Finally, we report an improvement of 4% over the previous state-of-theart on CIFAR-10 against the strongest known attack by using additional unlabeled
data from the uncurated 80 Million Tiny Images dataset. This demonstrates that
our finding extends as well to the more realistic case where unlabeled data is also
uncurated, therefore opening a new avenue for improving adversarial training.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has revolutionized many areas of research such as natural language processing, speech
recognition or computer vision. System based on these techniques are now being developed and
deployed for a wide variety of applications, from recommending/ranking content on the web [13, 22]
to autonomous driving [7] and even in medical diagnostics [14]. The safety-critical nature of some of
these tasks necessitates the need for ensuring that the deployed models are robust and generalize well
to all sorts of variations that can occur in the inputs. Yet, it has been shown that the commonly used
deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations in the input [43], e.g. it is possible
to fool an image classifier into predicting arbitrary classes by carefully choosing perturbations
imperceptible to the human eye.
Since the discovery of these results, many approaches have been developed to prevent this type of
behaviour. One of the most effective and popular approaches is known as supervised adversarial
training [17, 30] which works by generating adversarial samples in an online manner through an
inner optimization procedure and then using them to augment the standard training set. Despite
* Equal contribution, random order.

†
The authors declare that the present paper is independent of “Unlabeled Data Improves Adversarial
Robustness” [10].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

