Computing Full Conformal Prediction Set with
Approximate Homotopy

Eugene Ndiaye
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project
eugene.ndiaye@riken.jp

Ichiro Takeuchi
Nagoya Institute of Technology
takeuchi.ichiro@nitech.ac.jp

Abstract
If you are predicting the label y of a new object with ŷ, how confident are you
that y = ŷ? Conformal prediction methods provide an elegant framework for
answering such question by building a 100(1 − α)% confidence region without
assumptions on the distribution of the data. It is based on a refitting procedure that
parses all the possibilities for y to select the most likely ones. Although providing
strong coverage guarantees, conformal set is impractical to compute exactly for
many regression problems. We propose efficient algorithms to compute conformal
prediction set using approximated solution of (convex) regularized empirical risk
minimization. Our approaches rely on a new homotopy continuation technique for
tracking the solution path with respect to sequential changes of the observations.
We also provide a detailed analysis quantifying its complexity.

1

Introduction

In many practical applications of regression models it is beneficial to provide, not only a pointprediction, but also a prediction set that has some desired coverage property. This is especially
true when a critical decision is being made based on the prediction, e.g., in medical diagnosis or
experimental design. Conformal prediction is a general framework for constructing non-asymptotic
and distribution-free prediction sets. Since the seminal work of [23, 21], the statistical properties and
computational algorithms for conformal prediction have been developed for a variety of machine
learning problems such as density estimation, clustering, and regression - see the review of [2].
Let Dn = {(x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xn , yn )} be a sequence of features and labels of random variables in
Rp × R from a distribution P. Based on observed data Dn and a new test instance xn+1 in Rp , the
goal of conformal prediction is to build a 100(1 − α)% confidence set that contains the unobserved
variable yn+1 for α in (0, 1), without any specific assumptions on the distribution P.
The conformal prediction set for yn+1 is defined as the set of z ∈ R whose typicalness is sufficiently
large. The typicalness of each z is defined based on the residuals of the regression model, trained
with an augmented training set Dn+1 (z) = Dn ∪ (xn+1 , z). On average, prediction sets constructed
within a conformal prediction framework are shown to have a desirable coverage property, as long
as the training instances {(xi , yi )}n+1
i=1 are exchangeable, and the regression estimator is symmetric
with respect to the training instances (even when the model is not correctly specified).
Despite these attractive properties, the computation of conformal prediction sets has been intractable
since one needs to fit infinitely many regression models with an augmented training set Dn+1 (z), for
all possible z ∈ R. Except for simple regression estimators with quadratic loss (such as least-square
regression, ridge regression or lasso estimators) where an explicit and exact solution of the model
parameter can be written as a piece of a linear function in the observation vectors, the computation of
the full and exact conformal set for the general regression problem is challenging and still open.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

