Neural Lyapunov Control

Ya-Chien Chang
UCSD
yac021@eng.ucsd.edu

Nima Roohi
UCSD
nroohi@eng.ucsd.edu

Sicun Gao
UCSD
sicung@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
We propose new methods for learning control policies and neural network Lyapunov
functions for nonlinear control problems, with provable guarantee of stability. The
framework consists of a learner that attempts to find the control and Lyapunov
functions, and a falsifier that finds counterexamples to quickly guide the learner
towards solutions. The procedure terminates when no counterexample is found by
the falsifier, in which case the controlled nonlinear system is provably stable. The
approach significantly simplifies the process of Lyapunov control design, provides
end-to-end correctness guarantee, and can obtain much larger regions of attraction
than existing methods such as LQR and SOS/SDP. We show experiments on how the
new methods obtain high-quality solutions for challenging robot control problems
such as path tracking for wheeled vehicles and humanoid robot balancing.

1

Introduction

Learning-based methods hold the promise of solving hard nonlinear control problems in robotics.
Most existing work focuses on learning control functions represented as neural networks through
repeated interactions of an unknown environment in the framework of deep reinforcement learning,
with notable success. However, there are still well-known issues that impede the immediate use of
these methods in practical control applications, including sample complexity, interpretability, and
safety [5]. Our work investigates a different direction: Can learning methods be valuable even in
the most classical setting of nonlinear control design? We focus on the challenging problem of
designing feedback controllers for stabilizing nonlinear dynamical systems with provable guarantee.
This problem captures the core difficulty of underactuated robotics [25]. We demonstrate that neural
networks and deep learning can find provably stable controllers in a direct way and tackle the
full nonlinearity of the systems, and significantly outperform existing methods based on linear or
polynomial approximations such as linear-quadratic regulators (LQR) [17] and sum-of-squares (SOS)
and semidefinite programming (SDP) [21]. The results show the promise of neural networks and
deep learning in improving the solutions of many challenging problems in nonlinear control.
The prevalent way of stabilizing nonlinear dynamical systems is to linearize the system dynamics
around an equilibrium, and formulate LQR problems to minimize deviation from the equilibrium.
LQR methods compute a linear feedback control policy, with stability guarantee within a small
neighborhood where linear approximation is accurate. However, the dependence on linearization
produces extremely conservative systems, and it explains why agile robot locomotion is hard [25].
To control nonlinear systems outside their linearizable regions, we need to rely on Lyapunov methods [13]. Following the intuition that a dynamical system stabilizes when its energy decreases over
time, Lyapunov methods construct a scalar field that can force stabilization. These fields are highly
nonlinear and the need for function approximations has long been recognized [13]. Many existing
approaches rely on polynomial approximations of the dynamics and the search of sum-of-squares
polynomials as Lyapunov functions through semidefinite programming (SDP) [21]. A rich theory
has been developed around the approach, but in practice the polynomial approximations pose much
restriction on the systems and the Lyapunov landscape. Moreover, well-known numerical sensitivity
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

