Privacy-Preserving Classification of Personal Text
Messages with Secure Multi-Party Computation: An
Application to Hate-Speech Detection
Devin Reich1 , Ariel Todoki1 , Rafael Dowsley2 , Martine De Cock1⇤, Anderson Nascimento1
1
School of Engineering and Technology
University of Washington Tacoma
Tacoma, WA 98402
{dreich,atodoki,mdecock,andclay}@uw.edu
2
Department of Computer Science
Bar-Ilan University, 5290002, Ramat-Gan, Israel
rafael@dowsley.net

Abstract
Classification of personal text messages has many useful applications in surveillance, e-commerce, and mental health care, to name a few. Giving applications
access to personal texts can easily lead to (un)intentional privacy violations. We
propose the first privacy-preserving solution for text classification that is provably
secure. Our method, which is based on Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC),
encompasses both feature extraction from texts, and subsequent classification with
logistic regression and tree ensembles. We prove that when using our secure text
classification method, the application does not learn anything about the text, and
the author of the text does not learn anything about the text classification model
used by the application beyond what is given by the classification result itself.
We perform end-to-end experiments with an application for detecting hate speech
against women and immigrants, demonstrating excellent runtime results without
loss of accuracy.

1

Introduction

The ability to elicit information through automated scanning of personal texts has significant economic
and societal value. Machine learning (ML) models for classification of text such as e-mails and SMS
messages can be used to infer whether the author is depressed [46], suicidal [42], a terrorist threat
[1], or whether the e-mail is a spam message [2, 49]. Other valuable applications of text message
classification include user profiling for tailored advertising [32], detection of hate speech [6], and
detection of cyberbullying [51]. Some of the above are integrated in parental control applications2
that monitor text messages on the phones of children and alert their parents when content related to
drug use, sexting, suicide etc. is detected. Regardless of the clear benefits, giving applications access
to one’s personal text messages and e-mails can easily lead to (un)intentional privacy violations.
In this paper, we propose the first privacy-preserving (PP) solution for text classification that is
provably secure. To the best of our knowledge, there are no existing Differential Privacy (DP) or
Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC) based solutions for PP feature extraction and classification of
unstructured texts; the only existing method is based on Homomorphic Encryption (HE) and takes 19
minutes to classify a tweet [15] while leaking information about the text being classified. In our SMC
⇤

2

Guest Professor at Dept. of Applied Mathematics, Computer Science, and Statistics, Ghent University
https://www.bark.us/, https://kidbridge.com/, https://www.webwatcher.com/

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

