Sample Complexity of Learning Mixtures of
Sparse Linear Regressions
Akshay Krishnamurthy
Microsoft Research, NYC
akshay@cs.umass.edu

Arya Mazumdar
UMass Amherst
arya@cs.umass.edu

Andrew McGregor
UMass Amherst
mcgregor@cs.umass.edu

Soumyabrata Pal
UMass Amherst
spal@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
In the problem of learning mixtures of linear regressions, the goal is to learn a collection of signal vectors from a sequence of (possibly noisy) linear measurements,
where each measurement is evaluated on an unknown signal drawn uniformly from
this collection. This setting is quite expressive and has been studied both in terms
of practical applications and for the sake of establishing theoretical guarantees. In
this paper, we consider the case where the signal vectors are sparse; this generalizes
the popular compressed sensing paradigm. We improve upon the state-of-the-art
results as follows: In the noisy case, we resolve an open question of Yin et al. (IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 2019) by showing how to handle collections
of more than two vectors and present the first robust reconstruction algorithm, i.e.,
if the signals are not perfectly sparse, we still learn a good sparse approximation
of the signals. In the noiseless case, as well as in the noisy case, we show how to
circumvent the need for a restrictive assumption required in the previous work. Our
techniques are quite different from those in the previous work: for the noiseless
case, we rely on a property of sparse polynomials and for the noisy case, we provide
new connections to learning Gaussian mixtures and use ideas from the theory of
error correcting codes.

1

Introduction

Learning mixtures of linear regressions is a natural generalization of the basic linear regression
problem. In the basic problem, the goal is to learn the best linear relationship between the scalar
responses (i.e., labels) and the explanatory variables (i.e., features). In the generalization, each scalar
response is stochastically generated by picking a function uniformly from a set of L unknown linear
functions, evaluating this function on the explanatory variables and possibly adding noise; the goal
is to learn the set of L unknown linear functions. The problem was introduced by De Veaux [11]
over thirty years ago and has recently attracted growing interest [8, 14, 22, 24, 25, 27]. Recent
work focuses on a query-based scenario in which the input to the randomly chosen linear function
can be specified by the learner. The sparse setting, in which each linear function depends on only
a small number of variables, was recently considered by Yin et al. [27], and can be viewed as a
generalization of the well-studied compressed sensing problem [7, 13]. The problem has numerous
applications in modelling heterogeneous data arising in medical applications, behavioral health, and
music perception [27].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

