Reward Constrained Interactive Recommendation
with Natural Language Feedback

Ruiyi Zhang1∗ , Tong Yu2∗ , Yilin Shen2 , Hongxia Jin2 , Changyou Chen3 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University, 2 Samsung Research America, 3 University at Buffalo

Abstract
Text-based interactive recommendation provides richer user feedback and has
demonstrated advantages over traditional interactive recommender systems. However, recommendations can easily violate preferences of users from their past
natural-language feedback, since the recommender needs to explore new items
for further improvement. To alleviate this issue, we propose a novel constraintaugmented reinforcement learning (RL) framework to efficiently incorporate user
preferences over time. Specifically, we leverage a discriminator to detect recommendations violating user historical preference, which is incorporated into the
standard RL objective of maximizing expected cumulative future rewards. Our
proposed framework is general and is further extended to the task of constrained
text generation. Empirical results show that the proposed method yields consistent
improvement relative to standard RL methods.

1

Introduction

Traditional recommender systems depend heavily on user history. However, these approaches, when
implemented in an offline manner, cannot provide satisfactory performance due to sparse history
data and unseen dynamic new items (e.g., new products, recent movies, etc.). Recent work on
recommender systems has sought to interact with users, to adapt to user preferences over time. Most
existing interactive recommender systems are designed based on simple user feedback, such as
clicking data or updated ratings [6, 29, 32]. However, this type of feedback contains little information
to reflect complex user attitude towards various aspects of an item. For example, a user may like the
graphic of a dress but not its color. A click or numeric rating is typically not sufficient to express such
a preference, and thus it may lead to poor recommendations. By contrast, allowing a recommender
system to use natural-language feedback provides richer information for future recommendation,
especially for visual item recommendation [19, 20]. With natural-language feedback, a user can
describe features of desired items that are lacking in the current recommended items. The system
can then incorporate feedback and subsequently recommend more suitable items. This type of
recommendation is referred to as text-based interactive recommendation.
Flexible feedback with natural language may still induce undesired issues. For example, a system may
ignore the previous interactions and keep recommending similar items, for which a user has expressed
the preference before. To tackle these issues, we propose a reward constrained recommendation
(RCR) framework, where one sequentially incorporates constraints from previous feedback into
the recommendation. Specifically, we formulate the text-based interactive recommendation as
a constraint-augmented reinforcement learning (RL) problem. Compared to standard constraintaugmented RL, there are no explicit constraints in text-based interactive recommendation. To this end,
we use a discriminator to detect violations of user preferences in an adversarial manner. To further
validate our proposed RCR framework, we extend it to constrained text generation to discourage
undesired text generation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
∗

Equal contribution. Work done while RZ was a part-time research intern at Samsung Research America.

