Are deep ResNets provably
better than linear predictors?

Chulhee Yun
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
chulheey@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
suvrit@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
Recent results in the literature indicate that a residual network (ResNet) composed
of a single residual block outperforms linear predictors, in the sense that all local
minima in its optimization landscape are at least as good as the best linear predictor.
However, these results are limited to a single residual block (i.e., shallow ResNets),
instead of the deep ResNets composed of multiple residual blocks. We take a
step towards extending this result to deep ResNets. We start by two motivating
examples. First, we show that there exist datasets for which all local minima of a
fully-connected ReLU network are no better than the best linear predictor, whereas
a ResNet has strictly better local minima. Second, we show that even at the global
minimum, the representation obtained from the residual block outputs of a 2-block
ResNet do not necessarily improve monotonically over subsequent blocks, which
highlights a fundamental difficulty in analyzing deep ResNets. Our main theorem
on deep ResNets shows under simple geometric conditions that, any critical point in
the optimization landscape is either (i) at least as good as the best linear predictor;
or (ii) the Hessian at this critical point has a strictly negative eigenvalue. Notably,
our theorem shows that a chain of multiple skip-connections can improve the
optimization landscape, whereas existing results study direct skip-connections
to the last hidden layer or output layer. Finally, we complement our results by
showing benign properties of the “near-identity regions” of deep ResNets, showing
depth-independent upper bounds for the risk attained at critical points as well as
the Rademacher complexity.

1

Introduction

Empirical success of deep neural network models has sparked a huge interest in the theory of deep
learning, but a concrete theoretical understanding of deep learning still remains elusive. From the
optimization point of view, the biggest mystery is why gradient-based methods find close-to-global
solutions despite nonconvexity of the empirical risk.
There have been several attempts to explain this phenomenon by studying the loss surface of the risk.
The idea is to find benign properties of the empirical or population risk that make optimization easier.
So far, the theoretical investigation as been mostly focused on vanilla fully-connected neural networks
[1, 8, 10, 11, 18, 20, 22–29, 31]. For example, Kawaguchi [8] proved that “local minima are global
minima” property holds for squared error empirical risk of linear neural networks (i.e., no nonlinear
activation function at hidden nodes). Other results on deep linear neural networks [10, 27, 29, 31]
have extended [8]. However, it was later theoretically and empirically shown that “local minima are
global minima” property no longer holds in nonlinear neural networks [20, 29] for general datasets
and activations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

