Random Path Selection for Incremental Learning

Jathushan Rajasegaran

Munawar Hayat

Fahad Shahbaz Khan

Salman Khan
Ling Shao

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
first.last@inceptioniai.org

Abstract
Incremental life-long learning is a main challenge towards the long-standing goal
of Artificial General Intelligence. In real-life settings, learning tasks arrive in a
sequence and machine learning models must continually learn to increment already
acquired knowledge. Existing incremental learning approaches, fall well below the
state-of-the-art cumulative models that use all training classes at once. In this paper,
we propose a random path selection algorithm, called RPS-Net, that progressively
chooses optimal paths for the new tasks while encouraging parameter sharing.
Since the reuse of previous paths enables forward knowledge transfer, our approach
requires a considerably lower computational overhead. As an added novelty, the
proposed model integrates knowledge distillation and retrospection along with the
path selection strategy to overcome catastrophic forgetting. In order to maintain
an equilibrium between previous and newly acquired knowledge, we propose a
simple controller to dynamically balance the model plasticity. Through extensive
experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed method surpasses the state-of-theart performance on incremental learning and by utilizing parallel computation this
method can run in constant time with nearly the same efficiency as a conventional
deep convolutional neural network.

1

Introduction

The ability to incrementally learn novel tasks and acquire new knowledge is necessary for life-long
machine learning. Deep neural networks suffer from ‘catastrophic forgetting’ [18], a phenomenon
that occurs when a network is sequentially trained on a series of tasks and the learning acquired
on new tasks interferes with the previously learned concepts. As an example, in a typical transfer
learning scenario, when a model pre-trained on a source task is adapted to another task by fine-tuning
its weights, its performance significantly degrades on the source task whose weights are overridden
by the newly learned parameters [13]. It is, therefore, necessary to develop continual learning models
capable of incrementally adding newly available classes without the need to retrain models from
scratch using all previous class-sets (a cumulative setting). .
An ideal incremental learning model must meet the following criterion. (a) As a model is trained
on new tasks, it is desirable to maintain its performance on the old ones, thus avoiding catastrophic
forgetting. (b) The knowledge acquired on old tasks should help in accelerating the learning on new
tasks (a.k.a forward transfer) and vice versa. (c) As the class-incremental learning progresses, the
network must share and reuse the previously tuned parameters to realize a bounded computational
complexity and memory footprint, (d) At all learning phases, the model must maintain a tight
Codes available at https://github.com/brjathu/RPSnet
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

