Beating SGD Saturation with Tail-Averaging and
Minibatching

Nicole Mücke
Institute for Stochastics and Applications
University of Stuttgart
nicole.muecke@mathematik.uni-stuttgart.de

Gergely Neu
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
gergely.neu@gmail.com

Lorenzo Rosasco
Universita’ degli Studi di Genova
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
lrosasco@mit.edu

Abstract
While stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the major workhorses in machine
learning, the learning properties of many practically used variants are still poorly
understood. In this paper, we consider least squares learning in a nonparametric
setting and contribute to filling this gap by focusing on the effect and interplay of
multiple passes, mini-batching and averaging, in particular tail averaging. Our results show how these different variants of SGD can be combined to achieve optimal
learning rates, providing practical insights. A novel key result is that tail averaging
allows faster convergence rates than uniform averaging in the nonparametric setting.
Further, we show that a combination of tail-averaging and minibatching allows
more aggressive step-size choices than using any one of said components.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) provides a simple and yet stunningly efficient way to solve a
broad range of machine learning problems. Our starting observation is that, while a number of
variants including multiple passes over the data, mini-batching and averaging are commonly used,
their combination and learning properties are studied only partially. The literature on convergence
properties of SGD is vast, but usually only one pass over the data is considered, see, e.g., [23]. In the
context of nonparametric statistical learning, which we consider here, the study of one-pass SGD was
probably first considered in [35] and then further developed in a number of papers (e.g., [37, 36, 25]).
Another line of work derives statistical learning results for one pass SGD with averaging from a
worst-case sequential prediction analysis [29, 18, 28]. The idea of using averaging also has a long
history going back to at least the works of [32] and [27], see also [34] and references therein. More
recently, averaging was shown to lead to larger, possibly constant, step-sizes, see [2, 10, 11]. A
different take on the role of (weighted) averaging was given in [24], highlighting a connection with
ridge regression, a.k.a. Tikhonov regularization. A different flavor of averaging called tail averaging
for one-pass SGD was considered in [19] in a parametric setting. The role of minibatching has
also being considered and shown to potentially lead to linear parallelization speedups, see e.g. [7]
and references therein. Very few results consider the role of multiple passes for learning. Indeed,
this variant of SGD is typically analyzed for the minimization of the empirical risk, rather than
the actual population risk, see for example [4]. To the best of our knowledge the first paper to
analyze the learning properties of multipass SGD was [31], where a cyclic selection strategy was
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

