Causal Regularization

Dominik Janzing
Amazon Research Tübingen
Germany
janzind@amazon.com

Abstract
We argue that regularizing terms in standard regression methods not only help
against overfitting finite data, but sometimes also help in getting better causal
models. We first consider a multi-dimensional variable linearly influencing a
target variable with some multi-dimensional unobserved common cause, where
the confounding effect can be decreased by keeping the penalizing term in Ridge
and Lasso regression even in the population limit. The reason is a close analogy
between overfitting and confounding observed for our toy model. In the case of
overfitting, we can choose regularization constants via cross validation, but here we
choose the regularization constant by first estimating the strength of confounding,
which yielded reasonable results for simulated and real data. Further, we show
a ‘causal generalization bound’ which states (subject to our particular model of
confounding) that the error made by interpreting any non-linear regression as
causal model can be bounded from above whenever functions are taken from a not
too rich class.

1

Introduction

Predicting a scalar target variable Y from a d-dimensional predictor X := (X1 , . . . , Xd ) via appropriate regression models is among the classical problems of machine learning [1]. In the standard
supervised learning scenario, some finite number of observations, independently drawn from an unknown but fixed joint distribution PY,X , are used for inferring Y -values corresponding to unlabelled
X-values. To solve this task, regularization is known to be crucial for obtaining regression models
that generalize well from training to test data [2]. Deciding whether such a regression model admits a
causal interpretation is, however, challenging. Even if causal influence from Y to X can be excluded
(e.g. by time order), the statistical relation between X and Y cannot necessarily be attributed to the
influence of X on Y . Instead, it could be due to possible common causes, also called ‘confounders’.
For the case where common causes are known and observed, there is a huge number of techniques to
infer the causal influence1 , e.g., [3], addressing different challenges, for instance, high dimensional
confounders [4] or the case where some variables other than the common causes are observed [5],
just to mention a few of them. If common causes are not known, the task of inferring the influence
of X on Y gets incredibly hard. Given observations from any further variables other than X and Y ,
conditional independences may help to detect or disprove the existence of common causes [5], and
so-called instrumental variables may admit the identification of causal influence [6].
Here we consider the case where only observations from X and Y are given. In this case, naively
interpreting the regression model as causal model is a natural baseline. We show that strong
regularization increases the chances that the regression model contains some causal truth. We
are aware of the risk that this result could be mistaken as a justification to ignore the hardness of the
problem and blindly infer causal models by strong regularization. Our goal is, instead, to inspire a
1

often for d = 1 and with a binary treatment variable X

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

