Neural Networks with Cheap Differential Operators

Ricky T. Q. Chen, David Duvenaud
University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{rtqichen,duvenaud}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Gradients of neural networks can be computed efficiently for any architecture, but
some applications require differential operators with higher time complexity. We
describe a family of restricted neural network architectures that allow efficient computation of a family of differential operators involving dimension-wise derivatives,
used in cases such as computing the divergence. Our proposed architecture has
a Jacobian matrix composed of diagonal and hollow (non-diagonal) components.
We can then modify the backward computation graph to extract dimension-wise
derivatives efficiently with automatic differentiation. We demonstrate these cheap
differential operators for solving root-finding subproblems in implicit ODE solvers,
exact density evaluation for continuous normalizing flows, and evaluating the
Fokker–Planck equation for training stochastic differential equation models.

1

Introduction

Artificial neural networks are useful as arbitrarily-flexible function approximators (Cybenko, 1989;
Hornik, 1991) in a number of fields. However, their use in applications involving differential equations
is still in its infancy. While many focus on the training of black-box neural nets to approximately
represent solutions of differential equations (e.g., Lagaris et al. (1998); Tompson et al. (2017)), few
have focused on designing neural networks such that differential operators can be efficiently applied.
In modeling differential equations, it is common to see differential operators that require only
dimension-wise or element-wise derivatives, such as the Jacobian diagonal, the divergence (ie. the
Jacobian trace), or generalizations involving higher-order derivatives. Often we want to compute
these operators when evaluating a differential equation or as a downstream task. For instance, once we
have fit a stochastic differential equation, we may want to apply the Fokker–Planck equation (Risken,
1996) to compute the probability density, but this requires computing the divergence and other
differential operators. The Jacobian diagonal can also be used in numerical optimization schemes
such as the accelerating fixed-point iterations, where it can be used to approximate the full Jacobian
while maintaining the same fixed-point solution.
In general, neural networks do not admit cheap evaluation of arbitrary differential operators. If
we view the evaluation of a neural network as traversing a computation graph, then reverse-mode
automatic differentiation–a.k.a backpropagation–traverses the exact same set of nodes in the reverse
direction (Griewank and Walther, 2008; Schulman et al., 2015). This allows us to compute what is
mathematically equivalent to vector-Jacobian products with asymptotic time cost equal to that of
the forward evaluation. However, in general, the number of backward passes—ie. vector-Jacobian
products—required to construct the full Jacobian for unrestricted architectures grows linearly with
the dimensionality of the input and output. Unfortunately, this is also true for extracting the diagonal
elements of the Jacobian needed for differential operators such as the divergence.
In this work, we construct a neural network in a manner that allows a family of differential operators
involving dimension-wise derivatives to be cheaply accessible. We then modify the backward
computation graph to efficiently compute these derivatives with a single backward pass.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

