Hyperparameter Learning via Distributional Transfer
Ho Chung Leon Law⇤
University of Oxford
ho.law@stats.ox.ac.uk

Peilin Zhao⇤
Tencent AI Lab
masonzhao@tencent.com

Lucian Chan
University of Oxford
leung.chan@stats.ox.ac.uk

Junzhou Huang
Tencent AI Lab
joehhuang@tencent.com

Dino Sejdinovic⇤
University of Oxford
dino.sejdinovic@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian optimisation is a popular technique for hyperparameter learning but typically requires initial exploration even in cases where similar prior tasks have been
solved. We propose to transfer information across tasks using learnt representations
of training datasets used in those tasks. This results in a joint Gaussian process
model on hyperparameters and data representations. Representations make use of
the framework of distribution embeddings into reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces.
The developed method has a faster convergence compared to existing baselines, in
some cases requiring only a few evaluations of the target objective.

1

Introduction

Hyperparameter selection is an essential part of training a machine learning model and a judicious
choice of values of hyperparameters such as learning rate, regularisation, or kernel parameters is what
often makes the difference between an effective and a useless model. To tackle the challenge in a
more principled way, the machine learning community has been increasingly focusing on Bayesian
optimisation (BO) [34], a sequential strategy to select hyperparameters ✓ based on past evaluations
of model performance. In particular, a Gaussian process (GP) [31] prior is used to represent the
underlying accuracy f as a function of the hyperparameters ✓, whilst different acquisition functions
↵(✓; f ) are proposed to balance between exploration and exploitation. This has been shown to give
superior performance compared to traditional methods [34] such as grid search or random search.
However, BO suffers from the so called ‘cold start’ problem [28, 38], namely, initial observations
of f at different hyperparameters are required to fit a GP model. Various methods [38, 6, 36, 28]
were proposed to address this issue by transferring knowledge from previously solved tasks, however,
initial random evaluations of the models are still needed to consider the similarity across tasks. This
might be prohibitive: evaluations of f can be computationally costly and our goal may be to select
hyperparameters and deploy our model as soon as possible. We note that treating f as a black-box
function, as is often the case in BO, is ignoring the highly structured nature of hyperparameter
learning – it corresponds to training specific models on specific datasets. We make steps towards
utilizing such structure in order to borrow strength across different tasks and datasets.
Contribution. We consider a scenario where a number of tasks have been previously solved and we
propose a new BO algorithm, making use of the embeddings of the distribution of the training data
⇤

Corresponding authors

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

