Generalized Matrix Means for Semi-Supervised
Learning with Multilayer Graphs

Pedro Mercado1 , Francesco Tudisco2 and Matthias Hein1
1
University of Tübingen, Germany
2
Gran Sasso Science Institute, Italy

Abstract
We study the task of semi-supervised learning on multilayer graphs by taking into
account both labeled and unlabeled observations together with the information
encoded by each individual graph layer. We propose a regularizer based on the
generalized matrix mean, which is a one-parameter family of matrix means that
includes the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic means as particular cases. We
analyze it in expectation under a Multilayer Stochastic Block Model and verify
numerically that it outperforms state of the art methods. Moreover, we introduce a
matrix-free numerical scheme based on contour integral quadratures and Krylov
subspace solvers that scales to large sparse multilayer graphs.

1

Introduction

The task of graph-based Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) is to build a classifier that takes into
account both labeled and unlabeled observations, together with the information encoded by a given
graph[4, 27]. A common and successful approach is to take a suitable loss function on the labeled
nodes and a regularizer which provides information encoded by the graph [2, 15, 30, 32, 35]. Whereas
this task is well studied, traditionally these methods assume that the graph is composed by interactions
of one single kind, i.e. only one graph is available.
For the case where multiple graphs, or equivalently, multiple layers are available, the challenge is to
boost the classification performance by merging the information encoded in each graph. The arguably
most popular approach for this task consists of finding some form of convex combination of graph
matrices, where more informative graphs receive a larger weight [1, 13, 14, 23, 28, 29, 31, 33].
Note that a convex combination of graph matrices can be seen as a weighted arithmetic mean of
graph matrices. In the context of multilayer graph clustering, previous studies [19–21] have shown
that weighted arithmetic means are suboptimal under certain benchmark generative graph models,
whereas other matrix means, such as the geometric [20] and harmonic means [19], are able to discover
clustering structures that the arithmetic means overlook.
In this paper we study the task of semi-supervised learning with multilayer graphs with a novel
regularizer based on the power mean Laplacian. The power mean Laplacian is a one-parameter family
of Laplacian matrix means that includes as special cases the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic mean
of Laplacian matrices.We show that in expectation under a Multilayer Stochastic Block Model, our
approach provably correctly classifies unlabeled nodes in settings where state of the art approaches fail.
In particular, a limit case of our method is provably robust against noise, yielding good classification
performance as long as one layer is informative and remaining layers are potentially just noise. We
verify the analysis in expectation with extensive experiments with random graphs, showing that our
approach compares favorably with state of the art methods, yielding a good classification performance
on several relevant settings where state of the art approaches fail.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

