Deep Generative Video Compression

Jun Han∗
Dartmouth College

Salvator Lombardo∗
Disney Research LA

junhan@cs.dartmouth.edu

salvator.d.lombardo@disney.com

Christopher Schroers
DisneyResearch|Studios

Stephan Mandt
University of California, Irvine

christopher.schroers@disney.com

mandt@uci.edu

Abstract
The usage of deep generative models for image compression has led to impressive
performance gains over classical codecs while neural video compression is still in
its infancy. Here, we propose an end-to-end, deep generative modeling approach to
compress temporal sequences with a focus on video. Our approach builds upon
variational autoencoder (VAE) models for sequential data and combines them
with recent work on neural image compression. The approach jointly learns to
transform the original sequence into a lower-dimensional representation as well
as to discretize and entropy code this representation according to predictions of
the sequential VAE. Rate-distortion evaluations on small videos from public data
sets with varying complexity and diversity show that our model yields competitive
results when trained on generic video content. Extreme compression performance
is achieved when training the model on specialized content.

1

Introduction

The transmission of video content is responsible for up to 80% of the consumer internet traffic, and
both the overall internet traffic as well as the share of video data is expected to increase even further
in the future (Cisco, 2017). Improving compression efficiency is more crucial than ever. The most
commonly used standard is H.264 (Wiegand et al., 2003); more recent codecs include H.265 (Sullivan
et al., 2012) and VP9 (Mukherjee et al., 2015). All of these existing codecs follow the same block
based hybrid structure (Musmann et al., 1985) which essentially emerged from engineering out and
refining this concept over decades. From a high level perspective, they differ in a huge number of
smaller design choices and have grown to become more and more complex systems.
While there is room for improving the block based hybrid approach even further (Fraunhofer,
2018), the question remains as to how much longer significant improvements can be obtained while
following the same paradigm. In the context of image compression, deep learning approaches that
are fundamentally different to existing codecs have already shown promising results (Ballé et al.,
2018, 2016; Theis et al., 2017; Agustsson et al., 2017; Minnen et al., 2018). Motivated by these
successes for images, we propose a first step towards innovating beyond block-based hybrid codecs
by framing video compression in a deep generative modeling context. To this end, we propose an
unsupervised deep learning approach to encoding video. The approach simultaneously learns the
optimal transformation of the video to a lower-dimensional representation and a powerful predictive
model that assigns probabilities to video segments, allowing us to efficiently entropy-code the
discretized latent representation into a short code length.
∗

Shared first authorship.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

