Modeling Dynamic Functional Connectivity with
Latent Factor Gaussian Processes
Lingge Li∗
UC Irvine
linggel@uci.edu

Dustin Pluta∗
UC Irvine
dpluta@uci.edu

Babak Shahbaba
UC Irvine
babaks@uci.edu

Hernando Ombao
KAUST
hernando.ombao@kaust.edu.sa

Norbert Fortin
UC Irvine
norbert.fortin@uci.edu

Pierre Baldi
UC Irvine
pfbaldi@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
Dynamic functional connectivity, as measured by the time-varying covariance
of neurological signals, is believed to play an important role in many aspects of
cognition. While many methods have been proposed, reliably establishing the
presence and characteristics of brain connectivity is challenging due to the high
dimensionality and noisiness of neuroimaging data. We present a latent factor Gaussian process model which addresses these challenges by learning a parsimonious
representation of connectivity dynamics. The proposed model naturally allows
for inference and visualization of connectivity dynamics. As an illustration of the
scientific utility of the model, application to a data set of rat local field potential
activity recorded during a complex non-spatial memory task provides evidence of
stimuli differentiation.

1

Introduction

The celebrated discoveries of place cells, grid cells, and similar structures in the hippocampus have
produced a detailed, experimentally validated theory of the formation and processing of spatial
memories. However, the specific characteristics of non-spatial memories, e.g. memories of odors and
sounds, are still poorly understood. Recent results from human fMRI and EEG experiments suggest
that dynamic functional connectivity (DFC) is important for the encoding and retrieval of memories
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], yet DFC in local field potentials (LFP) in animal models has received relatively little
attention. We here propose a novel latent factor Gaussian process (LFGP) model for DFC estimation
and apply it to a data set of rat hippocampus LFP during a non-spatial memory task [7]. The model
produces strong statistical evidence for DFC and finds distinctive patterns of DFC associated with
different experimental stimuli.
Due to the high-dimensionality of time-varying covariance and the complex nature of cognitive
processes, effective analysis of DFC requires balancing model parsimony, flexibility, and robustness
to noise. DFC models fall into a common framework with three key elements: dimensionality
reduction, covariance estimation from time series, and identification of connectivity patterns [8].
Many neuroimaging studies use a combination of various methods, such as sliding window (SW)
estimation, principal component analysis (PCA), and the hidden Markov model (HMM) (see e.g.
[9, 10, 11]). In general, these methods are not fully probabilistic, which can make uncertainty
quantification and inference difficult in practice.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
∗
These authors contributed equally to this work.

