Uncoupled Regression
from Pairwise Comparison Data
Liyuan Xu 1,2 ⇤
liyuan@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Gang Niu 2
gang.niu@riken.jp
1

Junya Honda 1,2
honda@stat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Masashi Sugiyama 2,1
sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo

2

RIKEN

Abstract
Uncoupled regression is the problem to learn a model from unlabeled data and the
set of target values while the correspondence between them is unknown. Such a
situation arises in predicting anonymized targets that involve sensitive information,
e.g., one’s annual income. Since existing methods for uncoupled regression often
require strong assumptions on the true target function, and thus, their range of
applications is limited, we introduce a novel framework that does not require such
assumptions in this paper. Our key idea is to utilize pairwise comparison data,
which consists of pairs of unlabeled data that we know which one has a larger target
value. Such pairwise comparison data is easy to collect, as typically discussed
in the learning-to-rank scenario, and does not break the anonymity of data. We
propose two practical methods for uncoupled regression from pairwise comparison
data and show that the learned regression model converges to the optimal model
with the optimal parametric convergence rate when the target variable distributes
uniformly. Moreover, we empirically show that for linear models the proposed
methods are comparable to ordinary supervised regression with labeled data.

1

Introduction

In supervised regression, we need a vast amount of labeled data in the training phase, which is costly
and laborious to collect in many real-world applications. To deal with this problem, weakly-supervised
regression has been proposed in various settings, such as semi-supervised learning (see Kostopoulos
et al. [17] for the survey), multiple instance regression [27, 34], and transductive regression [4, 5].
See [35] for a thorough review of the weakly-supervised learning in binary classification, which can
be extended to regression with slight modifications.
Uncoupled regression [2] is one variant of weakly-supervised learning. In ordinary “coupled”
regression, the pairs of features and targets are provided, and we aim to learn a model that minimizes
a certain prediction error on test data. On the other hand, in the uncoupled regression problem, we
only have access to unlabeled data and the set of target values, and thus, we do not know the true target
for each data point. Such a situation often arises when we aim to predict people’s sensitive matters
such as one’s annual salary or the total amount of deposit, the data of which is often anonymized for
privacy concerns. Note that it may not be impossible to conduct uncoupled regression without further
assumptions, since no labeled data is provided.
Carpentier and Schlueter [2] showed that uncoupled regression is solvable when the feature is
one-dimensional and the true target function is monotonic to it. Although their algorithm is of less
⇤

Now at Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

