Reconciling λ-Returns with Experience Replay

Brett Daley
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
b.daley@northeastern.edu

Christopher Amato
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115
c.amato@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Modern deep reinforcement learning methods have departed from the incremental
learning required for eligibility traces, rendering the implementation of the λ-return
difficult in this context. In particular, off-policy methods that utilize experience
replay remain problematic because their random sampling of minibatches is not
conducive to the efficient calculation of λ-returns. Yet replay-based methods are
often the most sample efficient, and incorporating λ-returns into them is a viable
way to achieve new state-of-the-art performance. Towards this, we propose the
first method to enable practical use of λ-returns in arbitrary replay-based methods
without relying on other forms of decorrelation such as asynchronous gradient
updates. By promoting short sequences of past transitions into a small cache within
the replay memory, adjacent λ-returns can be efficiently precomputed by sharing
Q-values. Computation is not wasted on experiences that are never sampled, and
stored λ-returns behave as stable temporal-difference (TD) targets that replace the
target network. Additionally, our method grants the unique ability to observe TD
errors prior to sampling; for the first time, transitions can be prioritized by their
true significance rather than by a proxy to it. Furthermore, we propose the novel
use of the TD error to dynamically select λ-values that facilitate faster learning. We
show that these innovations can enhance the performance of DQN when playing
Atari 2600 games, even under partial observability. While our work specifically
focuses on λ-returns, these ideas are applicable to any multi-step return estimator.

1

Introduction

Eligibility traces [1, 15, 36] have been a historically successful approach to the credit assignment
problem in reinforcement learning. By applying time-decaying 1-step updates to recently visited
states, eligibility traces provide an efficient and online mechanism for generating the λ-return at each
timestep [34]. The λ-return (equivalent to an exponential average of all n-step returns [39]) often
yields faster empirical convergence by interpolating between low-variance temporal-difference (TD)
returns [33] and low-bias Monte Carlo returns. Eligibility traces can be effective when the reward
signal is sparse or the environment is partially observable.
More recently, deep reinforcement learning has shown promise on a variety of high-dimensional
tasks such as Atari 2600 games [25], Go [32], 3D maze navigation [23], Doom [17], and robotic
locomotion [6, 11, 18, 19, 29]. While neural networks are theoretically compatible with eligibility
traces [34], training a non-linear function approximator online can cause divergence due to the
strong correlations between temporally successive states [37]. Circumventing this issue has required
unconventional solutions like experience replay [21], in which gradient updates are conducted using
randomly sampled past experience to decorrelate the training data. Experience replay is also important
for sample efficiency because environment transitions are reused multiple times rather than being
discarded immediately. For this reason, well-tuned algorithms using experience replay such as
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

