Finite-time Analysis of Approximate Policy Iteration
for the Linear Quadratic Regulator

Karl Krauth
University of California, Berkeley
karlk@berkeley.edu

Stephen Tu
University of California, Berkeley
stephentu@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Recht
University of California, Berkeley
brecht@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We study the sample complexity of approximate policy iteration (PI) for the
Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR), building on a recent line of work using LQR
as a testbed to understand the limits of reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms
on continuous control tasks. Our analysis quantifies the tension between policy
improvement and policy evaluation, and suggests that policy evaluation is the
dominant factor in terms of sample complexity. Specifically, we show that to obtain
a controller that is within ε of the optimal LQR controller, each step of policy
evaluation requires at most (n + d)3 /ε2 samples, where n is the dimension of
the state vector and d is the dimension of the input vector. On the other hand,
only log(1/ε) policy improvement steps suffice, resulting in an overall sample
complexity of (n + d)3 ε−2 log(1/ε). We furthermore build on our analysis and
construct a simple adaptive procedure based on ε-greedy exploration which relies
on approximate PI as a sub-routine and obtains T 2/3 regret, improving upon a
recent result of Abbasi-Yadkori et al. [3].

1

Introduction

With the recent successes of reinforcement learning (RL) on continuous control tasks, there has been
a renewed interest in understanding the sample complexity of RL methods. A recent line of work
has focused on the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) as a testbed to understand the behavior and
trade-offs of various RL algorithms in the continuous state and action space setting. These results
can be broadly grouped into two categories: (1) the study of model-based methods which use data to
build an estimate of the transition dynamics, and (2) model-free methods which directly estimate the
optimal feedback controller from data without building a dynamics model as an intermediate step.
Much of the recent progress in LQR has focused on the model-based side, with an analysis of robust
control from Dean et al. [12] and certainty equivalence control by Fiechter [17] and Mania et al.
[26]. These techniques have also been extended to the online, adaptive setting [1, 4, 11, 13, 31]. On
the other hand, for classic model-free RL algorithms such as Q-learning, SARSA, and approximate
policy iteration (PI), our understanding is much less complete within the context ofd LQR. This is
despite the fact that these algorithms are well understood in the tabular (finite state and action space)
setting. Indeed, most of the model-free analysis for LQR [16, 24, 35] has focused exclusively on
derivative-free random search methods.
In this paper, we extend our understanding of model-free algorithms for LQR by studying the
performance of approximate PI on LQR, which is a classic approximate dynamic programming
algorithm. Approximate PI is a model-free algorithm which iteratively uses trajectory data to estimate
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

