Intrinsically Efficient, Stable, and Bounded
Off-Policy Evaluation for Reinforcement Learning

Masatoshi Uehara ∗
Harvard University
Cambrdige, MA
uehara_m@g.harvard.edu

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) in both contextual bandits and reinforcement learning
allows one to evaluate novel decision policies without needing to conduct exploration, which is often costly or otherwise infeasible. The problem’s importance
has attracted many proposed solutions, including importance sampling (IS), selfnormalized IS (SNIS), and doubly robust (DR) estimates. DR and its variants
ensure semiparametric local efficiency if Q-functions are well-specified, but if they
are not they can be worse than both IS and SNIS. It also does not enjoy SNIS’s
inherent stability and boundedness. We propose new estimators for OPE based
on empirical likelihood that are always more efficient than IS, SNIS, and DR and
satisfy the same stability and boundedness properties as SNIS. On the way, we
categorize various properties and classify existing estimators by them. Besides
the theoretical guarantees, empirical studies suggest the new estimators provide
advantages.

1

Introduction

Off-policy evaluation (OPE) is the problem of evaluating a given policy (evaluation policy) using data
generated by the log of another policy (behavior policy). OPE is a key problem in both reinforcement
learning (RL) [7, 13–15, 17, 23, 32] and contextual bandits (CB) [5, 19, 28] and it finds applications
as varied as healthcare [18] and education [16].
Methods for OPE can be roughly categorized into three types. The first approach is the direct
method (DM), wherein we directly estimate the Q-function using regression and use it to directly
estimate the value of the evaluation policy. The problem of this approach is that if the model is wrong
(misspecified), the estimator is no longer consistent.
The second approach is importance sampling (IS; aka Horvitz-Thompson), which averages the data
weighted by the density ratio of the evaluation and behavior policies. Although IS gives an unbiased
and consistent estimate, its variance tends to be large. Therefore self-normalized IS (SNIS; aka
Hájek) is often used [28], which divides IS by the average of density ratios. SNIS has two important
properties: (1) its value is bounded in the support of rewards and (2) its conditional variance given
action and state is bounded by the conditional variance of the rewards. This leads to increased stability
compared with IS, especially when the density ratios are highly variable due to low overlap.
The third approach is the doubly robust (DR) method, which combines DM and IS and is given by
adding the estimated Q-function as a control variate [5, 7, 25]. If the Q-function is well specified, DR
is locally efficient in the sense that its asymptotic MSE achieves the semiparametric lower bound
[33]. However, if the Q-function is misspecified, DR can actually have worse MSE than IS and/or
SNIS [12]. In addition, it does not have the boundedness property.
To address these deficiencies, we propose novel OPE estimators for both CB and RL that are
guaranteed to improve over both (SN)IS and DR in terms of asymptotic MSE (termed intrinsic
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

