D PP N ET: Approximating Determinantal Point
Processes with Deep Networks

Zelda Mariet ∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
zelda@csail.mit.edu

Yaniv Ovadia & Jasper Snoek
Google Brain
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA
{yovadia, jsnoek}@google.com

Abstract
Determinantal point processes (D PPs) provide an elegant and versatile way to
sample sets of items that balance the quality with the diversity of selected items. For
this reason, they have gained prominence in many machine learning applications
that rely on subset selection. However, sampling from a D PP over a ground set
of size N is a costly operation, requiring in general an O(N 3 ) preprocessing cost
and an O(N k 3 ) sampling cost for subsets of size k. We approach this problem
by introducing D PP N ETs: generative deep models that produce D PP-like samples
for arbitrary ground sets. We develop an inhibitive attention mechanism based
on transformer networks that captures a notion of dissimilarity between feature
vectors. We show theoretically that such an approximation is sensible as it maintains
the guarantees of inhibition or dissimilarity that makes D PPs so powerful and
unique. Empirically, we show across multiple datasets that D PP N ET is orders of
magnitude faster than competing approaches for D PP sampling, while generating
high-likelihood samples and performing as well as D PPs on downstream tasks.

1

Introduction

Selecting a representative sample of data from a large pool of available candidates is an essential step
of a large class of machine learning problems: noteworthy examples include automatic summarization,
matrix approximation, and minibatch selection. Such problems require sampling schemes that
calibrate the tradeoff between the point-wise quality – e.g. the relevance of a sentence to a summary –
of selected elements and the set-wise diversity2 of the sampled set.
Submodular set functions and their log-submodular counterparts (functions f such that log f is
submodular) have arisen as a theoretically grounded model for such diversity modeling problems, with
applications to settings such as sensor placement [27], summarization [33], and optimal experimental
design [44]. Submodular functions over a ground set [N ] := {1, . . . , N } are functions f : 2[N ] → R
that satisfy the inequality
f (S) + f (T ) ≥ f (S ∩ T ) + f (S ∪ T ) for S, T ⊆ [N ].
Among log-submodular measures, determinantal point processes (D PPs) have proven to be of
particular interest to the machine learning community, due to their ability to elegantly model the
tradeoff between quality and diversity. Given a ground set of size N , D PPs allow for O(N 3 ) sampling
over all 2N possible subsets of elements, assigning to any subset S of elements the probability
PL (S) = det LS / det(I + L),
∗

(1)

Work done while at Google Brain.
Here, we use diversity to mean useful coverage across dissimilar examples in a meaningful feature space,
rather than other definitions of diversity that may appear in the ML fairness literature.
2

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

