Safe Exploration for Interactive Machine Learning
Matteo Turchetta
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
matteotu@inf.ethz.ch

Felix Berkenkamp
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
befelix@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
In Interactive Machine Learning (IML), we iteratively make decisions and obtain
noisy observations of an unknown function. While IML methods, e.g., Bayesian
optimization and active learning, have been successful in applications, on realworld systems they must provably avoid unsafe decisions. To this end, safe IML
algorithms must carefully learn about a priori unknown constraints without making
unsafe decisions. Existing algorithms for this problem learn about the safety of all
decisions to ensure convergence. This is sample-inefficient, as it explores decisions
that are not relevant for the original IML objective. In this paper, we introduce a
novel framework that renders any existing unsafe IML algorithm safe. Our method
works as an add-on that takes suggested decisions as input and exploits regularity
assumptions in terms of a Gaussian process prior in order to efficiently learn about
their safety. As a result, we only explore the safe set when necessary for the
IML problem. We apply our framework to safe Bayesian optimization and to safe
exploration in deterministic Markov Decision Processes (MDP), which have been
analyzed separately before. Our method outperforms other algorithms empirically.

1

Introduction

Interactive Machine Learning (IML) problems, where an autonomous agent actively queries an
unknown function to optimize it, learn it, or otherwise act based on the observations made, are
pervasive in science and engineering. For example, Bayesian optimization (BO) (Mockus et al., 1978)
is an established paradigm to optimize unknown functions and has been applied to diverse tasks
such as optimizing robotic controllers (Marco et al., 2017) and hyperparameter tuning in machine
learning (Snoek et al., 2012). Similarly, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Puterman, 2014) model
sequential decision making problems with long term consequences and are applied to a wide range of
problems including finance and management of water resources (White, 1993).
However, real-world applications are subject to safety constraints, which cannot be violated during
the learning process. Since the dependence of the safety constraints on the decisions is unknown a
priori, existing algorithms are not applicable. To optimize the objective without violating the safety
constraints, we must carefully explore the space and ensure that decisions are safe before evaluating
them. In this paper, we propose a data-efficient algorithm for safety-constrained IML problems.
Related work One class of IML algorithms that consider safety are those for BO with Gaussian
Process (GP) (Rasmussen, 2004) models of the objective. While classical BO algorithms focus
on efficient optimization (Srinivas et al., 2010; Thompson, 1933; Wang and Jegelka, 2017), these
methods have been extended to incorporate safety constraints. For example, Gelbart et al. (2014)
present a variant of expected improvement with unknown constraints, while Hernández-Lobato et al.
(2016) extend an information-theoretic BO criterion to handle black-box constraints. However, these
methods only consider finding a safe solution, but allow unsafe evaluations during the optimization
process. Wu et al. (2016) define safety as a constraint on the cumulative reward, while Schreiter et al.
(2015) consider the safe exploration task on its own. The algorithms S AFE OPT (Sui et al., 2015;
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

