Adaptively Aligned Image Captioning via
Adaptive Attention Time

1

Lun Huang1 Wenmin Wang1,3∗ Yaxian Xia1 Jie Chen1,2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Macau University of Science and Technology

huanglun@pku.edu.cn, {wangwm@ece.pku.edu.cn, wmwang@must.edu.mo}
xiayaxian@pku.edu.cn, chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent neural models for image captioning usually employ an encoder-decoder
framework with an attention mechanism. However, the attention mechanism
in such a framework aligns one single (attended) image feature vector to one
caption word, assuming one-to-one mapping from source image regions and target
caption words, which is never possible. In this paper, we propose a novel attention
model, namely Adaptive Attention Time (AAT), to align the source and the target
adaptively for image captioning. AAT allows the framework to learn how many
attention steps to take to output a caption word at each decoding step. With
AAT, an image region can be mapped to an arbitrary number of caption words
while a caption word can also attend to an arbitrary number of image regions.
AAT is deterministic and differentiable, and doesn’t introduce any noise to the
parameter gradients. In this paper, we empirically show that AAT improves over
state-of-the-art methods on the task of image captioning. Code is available at
https://github.com/husthuaan/AAT.

1

Introduction

Image captioning aims to automatically describe the content of an image using natural language [15,
31, 18, 7]. It is regarded as a kind of “translation” task that translates the content in an image to a
sequence of words in some language.
Inspired by the development of neural machine translation [24], recent approaches to image captioning
that adopt an encoder-decoder framework with an attention mechanism have achieved great success.
In such a framework, a CNN-based image encoder is used to extract feature vectors for a given image,
while an RNN-based caption decoder to generate caption words recurrently. At each decoding step,
the attention mechanism attends to one (averaged) image region.
Despite the success that the existing approaches have achieved, there are still limitations in the current
encoder-decoder framework. The attention model generates one single image feature vector at each
decoding step, which subsequently provides the decoder information for predicting a caption word.
Obviously, one-to-one mapping from image regions to caption words is assumed in the paradigm,
which, however, is never possible and may involve the following issues: 1) unnecessary or even
misleading visual information is given to all caption words, no matter whether they require visual
clues or not [17]; 2) visual information in the decoder accumulates over time; however, words at
earlier decoding steps need more knowledge about the image, but they are provided less [32]; 3) it’s
hard for the decoder to understand interactions among objects by analyzing one single attended
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

