Learning to Predict Layout-to-image Conditional
Convolutions for Semantic Image Synthesis

Xihui Liu
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xihuiliu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Jing Shao
SenseTime Research
shaojing@sensetime.com

Guojun Yin
University of Science and Technology of China
gjyin91@gmail.com
Xiaogang Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Hongsheng Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis aims at generating photorealistic images from semantic
layouts. Previous approaches with conditional generative adversarial networks
(GAN) show state-of-the-art performance on this task, which either feed the semantic label maps as inputs to the generator, or use them to modulate the activations
in normalization layers via affine transformations. We argue that convolutional
kernels in the generator should be aware of the distinct semantic labels at different
locations when generating images. In order to better exploit the semantic layout
for the image generator, we propose to predict convolutional kernels conditioned
on the semantic label map to generate the intermediate feature maps from the noise
maps and eventually generate the images. Moreover, we propose a feature pyramid
semantics-embedding discriminator, which is more effective in enhancing fine
details and semantic alignments between the generated images and the input semantic layouts than previous multi-scale discriminators. We achieve state-of-the-art
results on both quantitative metrics and subjective evaluation on various semantic
segmentation datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.1

1

Introduction

Recently, generative adversarial networks (GAN) [6] have shown stunning results in generating photorealistic images of faces [16, 17] and simple objects [34, 1, 22]. However, generating photorealistic
images for complex scenes with different types of objects and stuff remains a challenging problem.
We consider semantic image synthesis, which aims at generating photorealistic images conditioned
on semantic layouts. It has wide applications on controllable image synthesis and interactive image
manipulation. State-of-the-art methods are mostly based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN).
A fundamental question to semantic image synthesis is how to exploit the semantic layout information
in the generator. Most previous GAN-based approaches feed the label maps as inputs, and generate
images by an encoder-decoder network [13, 29, 25]. Nonetheless, since the semantic label maps are
only fed into the network once at the input layer, the layout information cannot be well preserved in
1

Code is available at https://github.com/xh-liu/CC-FPSE

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

