On the Hardness of Robust Classification
Pascale Gourdeau
University of Oxford
pascale.gourdeau@cs.ox.ac.uk
Marta Kwiatkowska
University of Oxford
marta.kwiatkowska@cs.ox.ac.uk

Varun Kanade
University of Oxford
varunk@cs.ox.ac.uk
James Worrell
University of Oxford
james.worrell@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
It is becoming increasingly important to understand the vulnerability of machine
learning models to adversarial attacks. In this paper we study the feasibility of
robust learning from the perspective of computational learning theory, considering
both sample and computational complexity. In particular, our definition of robust
learnability requires polynomial sample complexity. We start with two negative
results. We show that no non-trivial concept class can be robustly learned in
the distribution-free setting against an adversary who can perturb just a single
input bit. We show moreover that the class of monotone conjunctions cannot
be robustly learned under the uniform distribution against an adversary who can
perturb !(log n) input bits. However if the adversary is restricted to perturbing
O(log n) bits, then the class of monotone conjunctions can be robustly learned with
respect to a general class of distributions (that includes the uniform distribution).
Finally, we provide a simple proof of the computational hardness of robust learning
on the boolean hypercube. Unlike previous results of this nature, our result does
not rely on another computational model (e.g. the statistical query model) nor on
any hardness assumption other than the existence of a hard learning problem in the
PAC framework.

1

Introduction

There has been considerable interest in adversarial machine learning since the seminal work
of Szegedy et al. [25], who coined the term adversarial example to denote the result of applying a carefully chosen perturbation that causes a classification error to a previously correctly classified
datum. Biggio et al. [4] independently observed this phenomenon. However, as pointed out by Biggio
and Roli [3], adversarial machine learning has been considered much earlier in the context of spam
filtering [8, 19, 20]. Their survey also distinguished two settings: evasion attacks, where an adversary
modifies data at test time, and poisoning attacks, where the adversary modifies the training data.1
Several different definitions of adversarial learning exist in the literature and, unfortunately, in some
instances the same terminology has been used to refer to different notions (for some discussion see
e.g., [11, 10]). Our goal in this paper is to take the most widely-used definitions and consider their
implications for robust learning from a statistical and computational viewpoint. For simplicity, we
will focus on the setting where the input space is the boolean hypercube X = {0, 1}n and consider
the realizable setting, i.e. the labels are consistent with a target concept in some concept class.
An adversarial example is constructed from a natural example by adding a perturbation. Typically,
the power of the adversary is curtailed by specifying an upper bound on the perturbation under some
1

For an in-depth review and definitions of different types of attacks, the reader may refer to [3, 11].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

