Reverse KL-Divergence Training of Prior Networks:
Improved Uncertainty and Adversarial Robustness
Andrey Malinin ⇤
Yandex Research
am969@yandex-team.ru

Mark Gales
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
mjfg@eng.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Ensemble approaches for uncertainty estimation have recently been applied to
the tasks of misclassification detection, out-of-distribution input detection and
adversarial attack detection. Prior Networks have been proposed as an approach
to efficiently emulate an ensemble of models for classification by parameterising a Dirichlet prior distribution over output distributions. These models have
been shown to outperform alternative ensemble approaches, such as Monte-Carlo
Dropout, on the task of out-of-distribution input detection. However, scaling
Prior Networks to complex datasets with many classes is difficult using the training criteria originally proposed. This paper makes two contributions. First, we
show that the appropriate training criterion for Prior Networks is the reverse KLdivergence between Dirichlet distributions. This addresses issues in the nature of
the training data target distributions, enabling prior networks to be successfully
trained on classification tasks with arbitrarily many classes, as well as improving
out-of-distribution detection performance. Second, taking advantage of this new
training criterion, this paper investigates using Prior Networks to detect adversarial
attacks and proposes a generalized form of adversarial training. It is shown that the
construction of successful adaptive whitebox attacks, which affect the prediction
and evade detection, against Prior Networks trained on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
using the proposed approach requires a greater amount of computational effort than
against networks defended using standard adversarial training or MC-dropout.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) have become the dominant approach to addressing computer vision (CV)
[1, 2, 3], natural language processing (NLP) [4, 5, 6], speech recognition (ASR) [7, 8] and bioinformatics [9, 10] tasks. One important challenge is for NNs to make reliable estimates of confidence
in their predictions. Notable progress has recently been made on predictive uncertainty estimation for
Deep Learning through the definition of baselines, tasks and metrics [11], and the development of
practical methods for estimating uncertainty using ensemble methods, such as Monte-Carlo Dropout
[12] and Deep Ensembles [13]. Uncertainty estimates derived from ensemble approaches have
been successfully applied to the tasks of detecting misclassifications and out-of-distribution inputs,
and have also been investigated for adversarial attack detection [14, 15]. However, ensembles can
be computationally expensive and it is hard to control their behaviour. Recently, [16] proposed
Prior Networks - a new approach to modelling uncertainty which has been shown to outperform
Monte-Carlo dropout on a range of tasks. Prior Networks parameterize a Dirichlet prior over output
distributions, which allows them to emulate an ensemble of models using a single network, whose
behaviour can be explicitly controlled via choice of training data.
⇤

Work done while at Cambridge University Department of Engineering

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

