Reducing the variance in online optimization by
transporting past gradients

Sébastien M. R. Arnold ∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
seb.arnold@usc.edu
Reza Babanezhad
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
rezababa@cs.ubc.ca

Pierre-Antoine Manzagol
Google Brain
Montréal, QC
manzagop@google.com

Ioannis Mitliagkas
Mila, Université de Montréal
Montréal, QC
ioannis@iro.umontreal.ca

Nicolas Le Roux
Mila, Google Brain
Montréal, QC
nlr@google.com

Abstract
Most stochastic optimization methods use gradients once before discarding them.
While variance reduction methods have shown that reusing past gradients can be
beneficial when there is a finite number of datapoints, they do not easily extend
to the online setting. One issue is the staleness due to using past gradients. We
propose to correct this staleness using the idea of implicit gradient transport (IGT)
which transforms gradients computed at previous iterates into gradients evaluated
at the current iterate without using the Hessian explicitly. In addition to reducing
the variance and bias of our updates over time, IGT can be used as a drop-in
replacement for the gradient estimate in a number of well-understood methods
such as heavy ball or Adam. We show experimentally that it achieves state-ofthe-art results on a wide range of architectures and benchmarks. Additionally,
the IGT gradient estimator yields the optimal asymptotic convergence rate for
online stochastic optimization in the restricted setting where the Hessians of all
component functions are equal.2

1

Introduction

We wish to solve the following minimization problem:
θ∗ = arg min Ex∼p [f (θ, x)] ,
θ

(1)

where we only have access to samples x and to a first-order oracle that gives us, for a given θ and a
(θ,x)
given x, the derivative of f (θ, x) with respect to θ, i.e. ∂f ∂θ
= g(θ, x). It is known [35] that, when
f is smooth and strongly convex, there is a converging algorithm for Problem 1 that takes the form
θt+1 = θt − αt g(θt , xt ), where xt is a sample from p. This algorithm, dubbed stochastic gradient
(SG), has a convergence rate of O(1/t) (see for instance [4]), within a constant factor of the minimax
rate for this problem. When one has access to the true gradient g(θ) = Ex∼p [g(θ, x)] rather than just
a sample, this rate dramatically improves to O(e−νt ) for some ν > 0.
In addition to hurting the convergence speed, noise in the gradient makes optimization algorithms
harder to tune. Indeed, while full gradient descent is convergent for constant stepsize α, and also
∗
2

Work done while at Mila.
Open-source implementation available at: https://github.com/seba-1511/igt.pth

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

