Efficient Pure Exploration in Adaptive Round model

†

Tianyuan Jin† , Jieming Shi‡ , Xiaokui Xiao‡ , Enhong Chen†∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
‡
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
†
jty123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, cheneh@ustc.edu.cn, ‡ {shijm, xkxiao}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In the adaptive setting, many multi-armed bandit applications allow the learner
to adaptively draw samples and adjust sampling strategy in rounds. In many
real applications, not only the query complexity but also the round complexity
need to be optimized. In this paper, we study both PAC and exact top-k arm
identification problems and design efficient algorithms considering both round
complexity and query complexity. For PAC problem, we achieve optimal query
complexity and use only O(log∗k (n)) rounds, which matches the lower bound
δ
of round complexity, while most of existing works need Θ(log nk ) rounds. For
exact top-k arm identification, we improve the round complexity factor from log n
to log∗1 (n), and achieve near optimal query complexity. In experiments, our
δ
algorithms conduct far fewer rounds, and outperform state of the art by orders of
magnitude with respect to query cost.

1

Introduction

Mutli-armed bandit (MAB) problems are classic decision problems with numerous applications such
as medical trials [1], online advertisement [2], and crowdsourcing [3]. These problems typically
consider a bandit with a set of arms, each of which has an unknown reward distribution with an
unknown mean, and the objective is either to (i) identify the top-k arms with the maximum reward
means or (ii) maximize the expected total reward under some constrains on the costs of arm pulling.
This paper studies the problem of top-k arms identification in the adaptive setting, which allows the
leaner to draw samples from the arms adaptively in rounds to estimate their means, and to adjust the
sampling strategy for the i-th round based on the observations from the first i − 1 rounds. Following
previous work [4], we assume that in each round, the learner is allowed to query an arbitrary number
of arms for an arbitrary number of times, but the query results would only be revealed at the end of
the round. We aim to minimize the number of rounds performed, as well as achieving best possible
query complexity. In addition, our proposed algorithms exhibit superior practical performance due to
our small constant factors. Existing top-k algorithms mainly focus on query complexity and most of
them are not efficient due to their large constants [5, 6, 3, 7, 8] or inferior query complexities [9, 10].
Adaptive round setting of MAB has many real applications, as described below.
Medical trials. In medical trials [11], to identify the best drug for a disease, one can conduct tests in
rounds, such that each round involves testing multiple candidate drugs on multiple clinical subjects
(e.g., mice) simultaneously. However, after each round of testing, there is typically a waiting time
(e.g., days) before the effects of drugs become observable to guide the design of the next round of
testing. It is important to minimize not only the total number of tests on clinical subjects (i.e., query
complexity) but also the number of rounds, to identify the best drug within the shortest time frame.
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

