How to Initialize your Network?
Robust Initialization for WeightNorm & ResNets
Devansh Arpit∗ †, Víctor Campos∗ ‡, Yoshua Bengio§
†Salesforce Research, ‡Barcelona Supercomputing Center,
§Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Université de Montréal, CIFAR Senior Fellow

devansharpit@gmail.com, victor.campos@bsc.es

Abstract
Residual networks (ResNet) and weight normalization play an important role in
various deep learning applications. However, parameter initialization strategies
have not been studied previously for weight normalized networks and, in practice,
initialization methods designed for un-normalized networks are used as a proxy.
Similarly, initialization for ResNets have also been studied for un-normalized
networks and often under simplified settings ignoring the shortcut connection.
To address these issues, we propose a novel parameter initialization strategy that
avoids explosion/vanishment of information across layers for weight normalized
networks with and without residual connections. The proposed strategy is based
on a theoretical analysis using mean field approximation. We run over 2,500
experiments and evaluate our proposal on image datasets showing that the proposed
initialization outperforms existing initialization methods in terms of generalization
performance, robustness to hyper-parameter values and variance between seeds,
especially when networks get deeper in which case existing methods fail to even
start training. Finally, we show that using our initialization in conjunction with
learning rate warmup is able to reduce the gap between the performance of weight
normalized and batch normalized networks.

1

Introduction

Parameter initialization is an important aspect of deep network optimization and plays a crucial role
in determining the quality of the final model. In order for deep networks to learn successfully using
gradient descent based methods, information must flow smoothly in both forward and backward
directions [5, 10, 8, 7]. Too large or too small parameter scale leads to information exploding or
vanishing across hidden layers in both directions. This could lead to loss being stuck at initialization
or quickly diverging at the beginning of training. Beyond these characteristics near the point
of initialization itself, we argue that the choice of initialization also has an impact on the final
generalization performance. This non-trivial relationship between initialization and final performance
emerges because good initializations allow the use of larger learning rates which have been shown in
existing literature to correlate with better generalization [12, 26, 27].
Weight normalization [23] accelerates convergence of stochastic gradient descent optimization by
re-parameterizing weight vectors in neural networks. However, previous works have not studied
initialization strategies for weight normalization and it is a common practice to use initialization
schemes designed for un-normalized networks as a proxy. We study initialization conditions for
weight normalized ReLU networks, and propose a new initialization strategy for both plain and
residual architectures.
∗

Equal contribution. Work done while Víctor Campos was an intern at Salesforce Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

