Addressing Failure Prediction
by Learning Model Confidence

Charles Corbière1,2
charles.corbiere@valeo.com
Avner Bar-Hen1
avner@cnam.fr

1

Matthieu Cord2,3
matthieu.cord@lip6.fr

Nicolas Thome1
nicolas.thome@cnam.fr
Patrick Pérez2
patrick.perez@valeo.com

CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France
2
valeo.ai, Paris, France
3
Sorbonne University, Paris, France

Abstract
Assessing reliably the confidence of a deep neural network and predicting its failures is of primary importance for the practical deployment of these models. In this
paper, we propose a new target criterion for model confidence, corresponding to
the True Class Probability (TCP). We show how using the TCP is more suited than
relying on the classic Maximum Class Probability (MCP). We provide in addition
theoretical guarantees for TCP in the context of failure prediction. Since the true
class is by essence unknown at test time, we propose to learn TCP criterion on
the training set, introducing a specific learning scheme adapted to this context.
Extensive experiments are conducted for validating the relevance of the proposed
approach. We study various network architectures, small and large scale datasets for
image classification and semantic segmentation. We show that our approach consistently outperforms several strong methods, from MCP to Bayesian uncertainty,
as well as recent approaches specifically designed for failure prediction.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have seen a wide adoption, driven by their impressive performance in various
tasks including image classification [25], object recognition [43, 33, 37], natural language processing
[34, 35], and speech recognition [18, 15]. Despite their growing success, safety remains a great
concern when it comes to implement these models in real-world conditions [1, 19]. Estimating when a
model makes an error is even more crucial in applications where failing carries serious repercussions,
such as in autonomous driving, medical diagnosis or nuclear power plant monitoring [32].
This paper addresses the challenge of failure prediction with deep neural networks [17, 20, 16].
The objective is to provide confidence measures for model’s predictions that are reliable and whose
ranking among samples enables to distinguish correct from incorrect predictions. Equipped with such
a confidence measure, a system could decide to stick to the prediction or, on the contrary, to hand
over to a human or a back-up system with, e.g. other sensors, or simply to trigger an alarm.
In the context of classification, a widely used baseline for confidence estimation with neural networks
is to take the value of the predicted class’ probability, namely the Maximum Class Probability (MCP),
given by the softmax layer output. Although recent evaluations of MCP for failure prediction with
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

