DTWNet: a Dynamic Time Warping Network

Xingyu Cai
University of Connecticut
Jinfeng Yi
JD.com AI Lab

Junzhou Huang
Tencent AI Lab

Tingyang Xu
Tencent AI Lab
Sanguthevar Rajasekaran
University of Connecticut

Abstract
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is widely used as a similarity measure in various
domains. Due to its invariance against warping in the time axis, DTW provides
more meaningful discrepancy measurements between two signals than other distance measures. In this paper, we propose a novel component in an artificial neural
network. In contrast to the previous successful usage of DTW as a loss function, the
proposed framework leverages DTW to obtain a better feature extraction. For the
first time, the DTW loss is theoretically analyzed, and a stochastic backpropogation
scheme is proposed to improve the accuracy and efficiency of the DTW learning.
We also demonstrate that the proposed framework can be used as a data analysis
tool to perform data decomposition.

1

Introduction

In many data mining and machine learning problems, a proper metric of similarity or distance could
play a significant role in the model performance. Minkowski distance, defined as dist(x, y) =
Pd
( k=1 |xk − yk |p )1/p for input x, y ∈ Rd , is one of the most popular metrics. In particular, when
p = 1, it is called Manhattan distance; when p = 2, it is the Euclidean distance. Another popular
measure, known as Mahalanobis distance, can be viewed as the distorted Euclidean distance. It is
defined as dist(x, y) = ((x − y)T Σ−1 (x − y))1/2 , where Σ ∈ Rd×d is the covariance matrix. With
geometry in mind, these distance (or similarity) measures, are straightforward and easy to represent.
However, in the domain of sequence data analysis, both Minkowski and Mahalanobis distances fail to
reveal the true similarity between two targets. Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [1] has been proposed
as an attractive alternative. The most significant advantage of DTW is its invariance against signal
warping (shifting and scaling in the time axis, or Doppler effect). Therefore, DTW has become one
of the most preferable measures in pattern matching tasks. For instance, two different sampling
frequencies could generate two pieces of signals, while one is just a compressed version of the other.
In this case, it will be very dissimilar and deviant from the truth to use the point-wise Euclidean
distance. On the contrary, DTW would capture such scaling nicely and output a very small distance
between them. DTW not only outputs the distance value, but also reveals how two sequences are
aligned against each other. Sometimes, the alignment could be more interesting. Furthermore, DTW
could be leveraged as a feature extracting tool, and hence it becomes much more useful than a
similarity measure itself. For example, predefined patterns can be identified in the data via DTW
computing. Subsequently these patterns could be used to classify the temporal data into categories,
e.g., [8]. Some interesting applications can be found in, e.g., [6, 14].
The standard algorithm for computing Dynamic Time Warping involves a Dynamic Programming
(DP) process. With the help of O(n2 ) space, a cost matrix C would be built sequentially, where
Ci,j = ||xi − yj || + min{Ci−1,j , Ci,j−1 , Ci−1,j−1 }

(1)

Here ||xi − yj || denotes the norm of (xi − yj ), e.g., p-norm, p = 1, 2 or ∞. After performing the
DP, we can trace back and identify the warping path from the cost matrix. This is illustrated in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

