Experience Replay for Continual Learning
David Rolnick
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA USA
drolnick@seas.upenn.edu

Arun Ahuja
DeepMind
London, UK
arahuja@google.com

Timothy P. Lillicrap
DeepMind
London, UK
countzero@google.com

Jonathan Schwarz
DeepMind
London, UK
schwarzjn@google.com

Greg Wayne
DeepMind
London, UK
gregwayne@google.com

Abstract
Interacting with a complex world involves continual learning, in which tasks and
data distributions change over time. A continual learning system should demonstrate both plasticity (acquisition of new knowledge) and stability (preservation of
old knowledge). Catastrophic forgetting is the failure of stability, in which new
experience overwrites previous experience. In the brain, replay of past experience
is widely believed to reduce forgetting, yet it has been largely overlooked as a
solution to forgetting in deep reinforcement learning. Here, we introduce CLEAR,
a replay-based method that greatly reduces catastrophic forgetting in multi-task
reinforcement learning. CLEAR leverages off-policy learning and behavioral
cloning from replay to enhance stability, as well as on-policy learning to preserve
plasticity. We show that CLEAR performs better than state-of-the-art deep learning
techniques for mitigating forgetting, despite being significantly less complicated
and not requiring any knowledge of the individual tasks being learned.

1

Introduction

An intelligent system that interacts with its environment faces the problem of continual learning,
in which new experience is constantly being acquired, while old experience may still be relevant
[25]. An effective continual learning system must optimize for two potentially conflicting goals.
First, when a previously encountered scenario is encountered, performance should immediately be
good, ideally as good as it was historically. Second, maintenance of old skills should not inhibit rapid
acquisition of a new skill. These simultaneous constraints – maintaining the old while still adapting
to the new – represent the challenge known as the stability-plasticity dilemma [6].
The quintessential failure mode of continual learning is catastrophic forgetting, in which new
knowledge supplants old knowledge, resulting in high plasticity but little stability. Within biological
systems, hippocampal replay has been proposed as a systems-level mechanism to reduce catastrophic
forgetting and improve generalization, as in the theory of complementary learning systems [18]. This
process complements local consolidation of past experience at the level of individual neurons and
synapses, which is also believed to be present in biological neural networks [2, 14].
Within artificial continual learning systems, deep neural networks have become ubiquitous tools and
increasingly are applied in situations where catastrophic forgetting becomes relevant. In reinforcement
learning (RL) settings, this problem is often circumvented by using massive computational resources
to ensure that all tasks are learned simultaneously, instead of sequentially. Namely, in simulation or
in self-play RL, fresh data can be generated on demand and trained on within the same minibatch,
resulting in a stable data distribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

