Meta-Weight-Net: Learning an Explicit Mapping
For Sample Weighting
Jun Shu1 , Qi Xie1 , Lixuan Yi1 , Qian Zhao1 , Sanping Zhou1 , Zongben Xu1 , and Deyu Meng*2,1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University
The Macau University of Science and Technology
*Corresponding author:dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

2

Abstract
Current deep neural networks (DNNs) can easily overfit to biased training data with
corrupted labels or class imbalance. Sample re-weighting strategy is commonly
used to alleviate this issue by designing a weighting function mapping from training
loss to sample weight, and then iterating between weight recalculating and classifier
updating. Current approaches, however, need manually pre-specify the weighting
function as well as its additional hyper-parameters. It makes them fairly hard to be
generally applied in practice due to the significant variation of proper weighting
schemes relying on the investigated problem and training data. To address this issue,
we propose a method capable of adaptively learning an explicit weighting function
directly from data. The weighting function is an MLP with one hidden layer,
constituting a universal approximator to almost any continuous functions, making
the method able to fit a wide range of weighting functions including those assumed
in conventional research. Guided by a small amount of unbiased meta-data, the
parameters of the weighting function can be finely updated simultaneously with
the learning process of the classifiers. Synthetic and real experiments substantiate
the capability of our method for achieving proper weighting functions in class
imbalance and noisy label cases, fully complying with the common settings in traditional methods, and more complicated scenarios beyond conventional cases. This
naturally leads to its better accuracy than other state-of-the-art methods. Source
code is available at https://github.com/xjtushujun/meta-weight-net.

1

Introduction

DNNs have recently obtained impressive good performance on various applications due to their
powerful capacity for modeling complex input patterns. However, DNNs can easily overfit to biased
training data1 , like those containing corrupted labels [2] or with class imbalance[3], leading to
their poor performance in generalization in such cases. This robust deep learning issue has been
theoretically illustrated in multiple literatures [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
In practice, however, such biased training data are commonly encountered. For instance, practically
collected training samples always contain corrupted labels [10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. A typical
example is a dataset roughly collected from a crowdsourcing system [18] or search engines [19, 20],
which would possibly yield a large amount of noisy labels. Another popular type of biased training
data is those with class imbalance. Real-world datasets are usually depicted as skewed distributions,
with a long-tailed configuration. A few classes account for most of the data, while most classes are
1
We call the training data biased when they are generated from a joint sample-label distribution deviating
from the distribution of evaluation/test set[1].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

