Neural Relational Inference
with Fast Modular Meta-learning

Ferran Alet, Erica Weng, Tomás Lozano Pérez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
{alet,ericaw,tlp,lpk}@mit.edu

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are effective models for many dynamical systems
consisting of entities and relations. Although most GNN applications assume
a single type of entity and relation, many situations involve multiple types of
interactions. Relational inference is the problem of inferring these interactions and
learning the dynamics from observational data. We frame relational inference as a
modular meta-learning problem, where neural modules are trained to be composed
in different ways to solve many tasks. This meta-learning framework allows us
to implicitly encode time invariance and infer relations in context of one another
rather than independently, which increases inference capacity. Framing inference
as the inner-loop optimization of meta-learning leads to a model-based approach
that is more data-efficient and capable of estimating the state of entities that we
do not observe directly, but whose existence can be inferred from their effect
on observed entities. To address the large search space of graph neural network
compositions, we meta-learn a proposal function that speeds up the inner-loop
simulated annealing search within the modular meta-learning algorithm, providing
two orders of magnitude increase in the size of problems that can be addressed.

1

Introduction

Many dynamical systems can be modeled in terms of entities interacting with each other, and can be
best described by a set of nodes and relations. Graph neural networks (GNNs) (Gori et al., 2005;
Battaglia et al., 2018) leverage the representational power of deep learning to model these relational
structures. However, most applications of GNNs to such systems only consider a single type of object
and interaction, which limits their applicability. In general there may be several types of interaction;
for example, charged particles of the same sign repel each other and particles of opposite charge
attract each other. Moreover, even when there is a single type of interaction, the graph of interactions
may be sparse, with only some object pairs interacting. Similarly, relational inference can be a useful
framework for a variety of applications such as modeling multi-agent systems (Sun et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2019a), discovering causal relationships (Bengio et al., 2019b) or inferring goals and beliefs of
agents (Rabinowitz et al., 2018).
We would like to infer object types and their relations by observing the dynamical system. Kipf et al.
(2018) named this problem neural relational inference and approached it using a variational inference
framework. In contrast, we propose to approach this problem as a modular meta-learning problem:
after seeing many instances of dynamical systems with the same underlying dynamics but different
relational structures, we see a new instance for a short amount of time and have to predict how it will
evolve. Observing the behavior of the new instance allows us to infer its relational structure, and
therefore make better predictions of its future behavior.
Meta-learning, or learning to learn, aims at fast generalization. The premise is that, by training on a
distribution of tasks, we can learn a learning algorithm that, when given a new task, will learn from
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

