Invertible Convolutional Flow

∗

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein†

Mahdi Karami∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Alberta
karami1@ualberta.ca

Dale Schuurmans† ∗
Laurent Dinh†
†
Google Brain

Daniel Duckworth†

Abstract
Normalizing flows can be used to construct high quality generative probabilistic
models, but training and sample generation require repeated evaluation of Jacobian
determinants and function inverses. To make such computations feasible, current
approaches employ highly constrained architectures that produce diagonal, triangular, or low rank Jacobian matrices. As an alternative, we investigate a set of
novel normalizing flows based on the circular and symmetric convolutions. We
show that these transforms admit efficient Jacobian determinant computation and
inverse mapping (deconvolution) in O(N log N ) time. Additionally, element-wise
multiplication, widely used in normalizing flow architectures, can be combined
with these transforms to increase modeling flexibility. We further propose an
analytic approach to designing nonlinear elementwise bijectors that induce special
properties in the intermediate layers, by implicitly introducing specific regularizers
in the loss. We show that these transforms allow more effective normalizing flow
models to be developed for generative image models.

1

Introduction

Flow-based generative networks have shown tremendous promise for modeling complex observations
in high dimensional datasets. In flow-based models, a complex probability density is constructed by
transforming a simple base density, such as a standard normal distribution, via a chain of smooth,
invertible mappings (bijections), to yield a normalizing flow. Such models are employed in various
contexts, including approximating a complex posterior distribution in variational inference [Rezende
and Mohamed, 2015], or for density estimation with generative models [Dinh et al., 2016].
Using a complex transformation (bijective function) to define a normalized density requires the
computation of a Jacobian determinant, which is generally impractical for arbitrary neural network
transformations. To overcome this difficulty and enable fast computation, previous work has carefully
designed architectures that produce simple Jacobian forms. For example, [Rezende and Mohamed,
2015, Berg et al., 2018] consider transformations with a Jacobian that corresponds to low rank
perturbations of a diagonal matrix, enabling the use of Sylvester’s determinant lemma. Other
works, such as [Dinh et al., 2014, 2016, Kingma et al., 2016, Papamakarios et al., 2017], use a
constrained transformation where the Jacobian has a triangular structure. The latter approach has
proved particularly successful, since this constraint is easy to enforce without major sacrifices in
expressiveness or computational efficiency. More recently, Kingma and Dhariwal [2018] propose the
use of 1 × 1 convolutions for cross channel mixing in a multi-channel signal, achieving tractability
via a block diagonal Jacobian. Nevertheless, these models have overlooked some opportunities
for formulating tractable normalizing flows that can enhance expressiveness and better capture the
structure of natural data, such as images and audio. Also, a new line of work based on ordinary
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

