On Testing for Biases in Peer Review
Ivan Stelmakh, Nihar B. Shah and Aarti Singh
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
{stiv,nihars,aarti}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We consider the issue of biases in scholarly research, specifically, in peer review.
There is a long standing debate on whether exposing author identities to reviewers
induces biases against certain groups, and our focus is on designing tests to detect
the presence of such biases. Our starting point is a remarkable recent work by
Tomkins, Zhang and Heavlin which conducted a controlled, large-scale experiment
to investigate existence of biases in the peer reviewing of the WSDM conference.
We present two sets of results in this paper. The first set of results is negative,
and pertains to the statistical tests and the experimental setup used in the work of
Tomkins et al. We show that the test employed therein does not guarantee control
over false alarm probability and under correlations between relevant variables,
coupled with any of the following conditions, with high probability can declare
a presence of bias when it is in fact absent: (a) measurement error, (b) model
mismatch, (c) reviewer calibration. Moreover, we show that the setup of their
experiment may itself inflate false alarm probability if (d) bidding is performed in
non-blind manner or (e) popular reviewer assignment procedure is employed. Our
second set of results is positive, in that we present a general framework for testing
for biases in (single vs. double blind) peer review. We then present a hypothesis
test with guaranteed control over false alarm probability and non-trivial power even
under conditions (a)–(c). Conditions (d) and (e) are more fundamental problems
that are tied to the experimental setup and not necessarily related to the test.

1

Introduction

Past research in social sciences indicates that humans display various biases including gender, race and
age biases in many critical domains such as hiring [4], university admission [32], bail decisions [2]
and many others. Our focus is on fairness in academia and scholarly research, and specifically, on
biases in peer review. Peer review is a backbone of scholarly research and is employed by a vast
majority of journals and conferences. Due to the widespread prevalence of the Matthew effect –
rich get richer and poor get poorer – in academia [31, 27], any biases in peer review can have far
reaching consequences on career trajectories of researchers. Specifically, we follow the long-standing
debate [6, 25, 26, 1, 23, 8, 35, 14, and references therein] on whether the authors’ identities should
be hidden from reviewers or not. The focus of this paper is on designing statistical tests to detect the
presence of biases in peer review.
In a recent remarkable piece of work, Tomkins et al. [33] conducted a large scale (semi-) randomized
controlled trial during the peer review for the ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining (WSDM) 2017. In their experiment, the entire pool of reviewers was partitioned uniformly
at random into two equal groups – single blind and double blind – and each paper was assigned
to two reviewers from each of the groups. In this manner, the peer-review data contained both
single-blind and double-blind reviews for each paper. The experiment allowed them to conduct a
causal inference to test for biases, and conclude that the single-blind system induces a bias in favor of
papers authored by (i) researchers from top universities, (ii) researchers from top companies and (iii)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

