Generative Well-intentioned Networks
Justin Cosentino, Jun Zhu∗
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center,
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
justin@cosentino.io, dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose Generative Well-intentioned Networks (GWINs), a novel framework
for increasing the accuracy of certainty-based, closed-world classifiers. A conditional generative network recovers the distribution of observations that the classifier
labels correctly with high certainty. We introduce a reject option to the classifier
during inference, allowing the classifier to reject an observation instance rather
than predict an uncertain label. These rejected observations are translated by the
generative network to high-certainty representations, which are then relabeled by
the classifier. This architecture allows for any certainty-based classifier or rejection
function and is not limited to multilayer perceptrons. The capability of this framework is assessed using benchmark classification datasets and shows that GWINs
significantly improve the accuracy of uncertain observations.

1

Introduction

An essential aspect of any machine learning system is understanding what the model does not know.
Despite achieving state-of-the-art performance across a wide array of problem domains, current
deep learning techniques do not actually capture model uncertainty. Core settings in which standard
deep learning approaches have been deployed, such as medical diagnoses, autonomous vehicles, and
critical systems, rely on accurate estimates of uncertainty [16, 10]. Though traditional Bayesian
probability theory offers mathematical tools to reason about model uncertainty, such approaches
do not scale to the high dimensional feature spaces found in many deep learning tasks. The need
for principled uncertainty estimates from deep learning architectures has given rise to the field of
Bayesian deep learning (see e.g., [35]) and many deep learning techniques have been interpreted
through a Bayesian lens with the development of advanced inference algorithms [36, 39], providing
novel methods for obtaining uncertainty estimates from deep learning models [21, 11, 12, 13, 22].
One may be able to measure epistemic uncertainty – uncertainty in model prediction due to the lack
of knowledge – using Bayesian neural networks [25, 29], but the question of how to best utilize
uncertainty estimates still remains. In this paper, we propose Generative Well-intentioned Networks
(GWINs), a novel framework that leverages these uncertainty estimates to increase the generalizability
and accuracy of certainty-based classifiers. Rather than make low-certainty predictions, a model can
reject an observation to achieve an arbitrarily high accuracy [5]. However, a model that refuses to
classify is not particularly useful. Borrowing ideas from the fields of classification with rejection
and generative networks, we allow a classifier to reject uncertain observations and then, using a
generative network, transform them into representations that the classifier labels correctly with high
certainty. Informally, one can view the classifier as “intuition” and the generative network as “critical
thinking”: given a new observation that we can not quickly reason about with prior knowledge, we
apply critical thinking to reformulate the problem by relating it to information we already know to
be true. We show that the generative network G is able to recover the distribution of observations
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

