Stabilizing Off-Policy Q-Learning via Bootstrapping
Error Reduction
Aviral Kumar∗
UC Berkeley
aviralk@berkeley.edu
George Tucker
Google Brain
gjt@google.com

Justin Fu∗
UC Berkeley
justinjfu@eecs.berkeley.edu
Sergey Levine
UC Berkeley, Google Brain
svlevine@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Off-policy reinforcement learning aims to leverage experience collected from
prior policies for sample-efficient learning. However, in practice, commonly used
off-policy approximate dynamic programming methods based on Q-learning and
actor-critic methods are highly sensitive to the data distribution, and can make only
limited progress without collecting additional on-policy data. As a step towards
more robust off-policy algorithms, we study the setting where the off-policy experience is fixed and there is no further interaction with the environment. We identify
bootstrapping error as a key source of instability in current methods. Bootstrapping error is due to bootstrapping from actions that lie outside of the training data
distribution, and it accumulates via the Bellman backup operator. We theoretically
analyze bootstrapping error, and demonstrate how carefully constraining action selection in the backup can mitigate it. Based on our analysis, we propose a practical
algorithm, bootstrapping error accumulation reduction (BEAR). We demonstrate
that BEAR is able to learn robustly from different off-policy distributions, including
random and suboptimal demonstrations, on a range of continuous control tasks.

1

Introduction

One of the primary drivers of the success of machine learning methods in open-world perception
settings, such as computer vision [19] and NLP [8], has been the ability of high-capacity function
approximators, such as deep neural networks, to learn generalizable models from large amounts of
data. Reinforcement learning (RL) has proven comparatively difficult to scale to unstructured realworld settings because most RL algorithms require active data collection. As a result, RL algorithms
can learn complex behaviors in simulation, where data collection is straightforward, but real-world
performance is limited by the expense of active data collection. In some domains, such as autonomous
driving [38] and recommender systems [3], previously collected datasets are plentiful. Algorithms
that can utilize such datasets effectively would not only make real-world RL more practical, but also
would enable substantially better generalization by incorporating diverse prior experience.
In principle, off-policy RL algorithms can leverage this data; however, in practice, off-policy algorithms are limited in their ability to learn entirely from off-policy data. Recent off-policy RL
methods (e.g., [18, 29, 23, 9]) have demonstrated sample-efficient performance on complex tasks
in robotics [23] and simulated environments [36]. However, these methods can still fail to learn
when presented with arbitrary off-policy data without the opportunity to collect more experience
∗

Equal Contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

