GRU-ODE-Bayes: Continuous modeling of
sporadically-observed time series
Edward De Brouwer⇤†
ESAT-STADIUS
KU LEUVEN
Leuven, 3001, Belgium
edward.debrouwer@esat.kuleuven.be
Adam Arany
ESAT-STADIUS
KU LEUVEN
Leuven, 3001, Belgium
adam.arany@esat.kuleuven.be

Jaak Simm⇤
ESAT-STADIUS
KU LEUVEN
Leuven, 3001, Belgium
jaak.simm@esat.kuleuven.be
Yves Moreau
ESAT-STADIUS
KU LEUVEN
Leuven, 3001, Belgium
moreau@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
Modeling real-world multidimensional time series can be particularly challenging when these are sporadically observed (i.e., sampling is irregular both in time
and across dimensions)—such as in the case of clinical patient data. To address
these challenges, we propose (1) a continuous-time version of the Gated Recurrent
Unit, building upon the recent Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (Chen et al.,
2018), and (2) a Bayesian update network that processes the sporadic observations.
We bring these two ideas together in our GRU-ODE-Bayes method. We then
demonstrate that the proposed method encodes a continuity prior for the latent
process and that it can exactly represent the Fokker-Planck dynamics of complex
processes driven by a multidimensional stochastic differential equation. Additionally, empirical evaluation shows that our method outperforms the state of the art on
both synthetic data and real-world data with applications in healthcare and climate
forecast. What is more, the continuity prior is shown to be well suited for low
number of samples settings.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series are ubiquitous in various domains of science, such as healthcare (Jensen et al.,
2014), astronomy (Scargle, 1982), or climate science (Schneider, 2001). Much of the methodology for
time-series analysis assumes that signals are measured systematically at fixed time intervals. However,
much real-world data can be sporadic (i.e., the signals are sampled irregularly and not all signals are
measured each time). A typical example is patient measurements, which are taken when the patient
comes for a visit (e.g., sometimes skipping an appointment) and where not every measurement is
taken at every visit. Modeling then becomes challenging as such data violates the main assumptions
underlying traditional machine learning methods (such as recurrent neural networks).
Recently, the Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) model (Chen et al., 2018) opened the
way for a novel, continuous representation of neural networks. As time is intrinsically continuous,
this framework is particularly attractive for time-series analysis. It opens the perspective of tackling
⇤
†

Both authors contributed equally
Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

