Efficiently Estimating Erdős-Rényi Graphs
with Node Differential Privacy

Adam Sealfon
MIT and UC Berkeley
asealfon@berkeley.edu

Jonathan Ullman
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
We give a simple, computationally efficient, and node-differentially-private algorithm for estimating the parameter of an Erdős-Rényi graph—that is, estimating
p in a G(n, p)—with near-optimal accuracy. Our algorithm nearly matches the
information-theoretically optimal exponential-time algorithm for the same problem
due to Borgs et al. (FOCS 2018). More generally, we give an optimal, computationally efficient, private algorithm for estimating the edge-density of any graph
whose degree distribution is concentrated in a small interval.

1

Introduction

Network data modeling individuals and relationships between individuals are increasingly central in
data science. As some of the most interesting network datasets include sensitive information about
individuals, there is a need for private methods for analysis of these datasets, ideally satisfying strong
mathematical guarantees like differential privacy [9]. However, while there is a highly successful
literature on differentially private statistical estimation for traditional i.i.d. data, the literature on
estimating network statistics is far less developed.
Early work on private network data focused on edge differential privacy, in which the algorithm is
required to “hide” the presence or absence of a single edge in the graph (e.g. [20, 14, 16, 13, 1, 22, 17]
and many more). A more desirable notion of privacy, which is the focus of this work, is node
differential privacy (node-DP), which requires the algorithm to hide the presence or absence of a
single node and the (arbitrary) set of edges incident to that node.
However, node-DP is often difficult to achieve without compromising accuracy, because even very
simple graph statistics can be highly sensitive to adding or removing a single node. For example,
the count of edges in the graph, |E|, can change by ±n by adding or deleting a single node from an
n-node graph, which means that no node-DP algorithm can count the number of edges with error o(n)
on a worst-case graph. We emphasize that even these simple statistics like the edge count can disclose
sensitive information if no steps are taken to ensure privacy, especially when we release many such
statistics on related graphs. There has been an enormous body of work that has uncovered the privacy
risks of releasing simple statistics like counts in the i.i.d. setting (e.g. [8, 10, 12, 15, 19, 5, 11]) and
the additional graph structure only makes these risks more acute.
Although node-DP is difficult to achieve on worst-case graphs, the beautiful works of Blocki et
al. [2] and Kasiviswanathan et al. [18] showed how to design node-DP estimators that are highly
accurate on “nice” graphs that have additional properties observed in practice—for example, graphs
with small maximum degree—using the technique of Lipschitz extensions. However, many of the
known constructions of Lipschitz extensions require exponential running time, and constructions of
computationally efficient Lipschitz extensions [21, 7, 6] lag behind. As a result, even for estimating
very simple graph models, there are large gaps in accuracy between the best known computationally
efficient algorithms and the information theoretically optimal algorithms.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

