Metamers of neural networks reveal divergence from
human perceptual systems

1

Jenelle Feather1,2,3 Alex Durango1,2,3 Ray Gonzalez1,2,3 Josh McDermott1,2,3,4
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
McGovern Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
3
Center for Brains Minds and Machines, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
4
Speech and Hearing Bioscience and Technology, Harvard University

{jfeather,durangoa,raygon,jhm}@mit.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks have been embraced as models of sensory systems, instantiating representational transformations that appear to resemble those in
the visual and auditory systems. To more thoroughly investigate their similarity
to biological systems, we synthesized model metamers – stimuli that produce
the same responses at some stage of a network’s representation. We generated model metamers for natural stimuli by performing gradient descent on
a noise signal, matching the responses of individual layers of image and audio networks to a natural image or speech signal. The resulting signals reflect
the invariances instantiated in the network up to the matched layer. We then
measured whether model metamers were recognizable to human observers –
a necessary condition for the model representations to replicate those of humans. Although model metamers from early network layers were recognizable
to humans, those from deeper layers were not. Auditory model metamers became more human-recognizable with architectural modifications that reduced
aliasing from pooling operations, but those from the deepest layers remained
unrecognizable. We also used the metamer test to compare model representations. Cross-model metamer recognition dropped off for deeper layers, roughly
at the same point that human recognition deteriorated, indicating divergence
across model representations. The results reveal discrepancies between model
and human representations, but also show how metamers can help guide model
refinement and elucidate model representations.

1 Introduction
Artificial neural networks now achieve human-level performance on tasks such as image and
speech recognition, raising the question of whether they should be taken seriously as models of
biological sensory systems [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Detailed comparisons of network performance characteristics in some cases reveal human-like error patterns, suggesting computational similarities with
humans [6, 7, 8]. Other studies have found that brain responses can be better predicted by features
learned by deep neural networks than by those of traditional sensory models [2, 8]. On the other
hand, neural network models can typically be fooled by adversarial perturbations that have no
effect on humans [9, 10], are in some cases excessively dependent on particular image features,
such as texture [11], and do not fully mirror human sensitivity to image distortions [12, 13], suggesting differences with human perceptual systems. However, these discrepancies have primarily
been demonstrated using stimuli specifically constructed to induce classification errors. Here, we
demonstrate that the divergence between artificial network and human representations occurs
generically rather than only in adversarial situations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

