One ticket to win them all: generalizing lottery ticket
initializations across datasets and optimizers

Ari S. Morcos∗
Facebook AI Research
arimorcos@fb.com

Haonan Yu
Facebook AI Research
haonanu@gmail.com

Michela Paganini
Facebook AI Research
michela@fb.com

Yuandong Tian
Facebook AI Research
yuandong@fb.com

Abstract
The success of lottery ticket initializations [7] suggests that small, sparsified networks can be trained so long as the network is initialized appropriately. Unfortunately, finding these “winning ticket” initializations is computationally expensive.
One potential solution is to reuse the same winning tickets across a variety of
datasets and optimizers. However, the generality of winning ticket initializations
remains unclear. Here, we attempt to answer this question by generating winning
tickets for one training configuration (optimizer and dataset) and evaluating their
performance on another configuration. Perhaps surprisingly, we found that, within
the natural images domain, winning ticket initializations generalized across a variety of datasets, including Fashion MNIST, SVHN, CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet, and
Places365, often achieving performance close to that of winning tickets generated
on the same dataset. Moreover, winning tickets generated using larger datasets
consistently transferred better than those generated using smaller datasets. We also
found that winning ticket initializations generalize across optimizers with high
performance. These results suggest that winning ticket initializations generated
by sufficiently large datasets contain inductive biases generic to neural networks
more broadly which improve training across many settings and provide hope for
the development of better initialization methods.

1

Introduction

The recently proposed lottery ticket hypothesis [7, 8] argues that the initialization of overparameterized neural networks contains much smaller sub-network initializations, which, when
trained in isolation, reach similar performance as the full network. The presence of these “lucky”
sub-network initializations has several intriguing implications. First, it suggests that the most commonly used initialization schemes, which have primarily been discovered heuristically [10, 14], are
sub-optimal and have significant room to improve. This is consistent with work which suggests that
theoretically-grounded initialization schemes can enable the training of extremely deep networks
with hundreds of layers [13, 27, 29, 33, 35]. Second, it suggests that over-parameterization is not
necessary during the course of training as has been argued previously [1, 2, 5, 6, 24, 25], but rather
over-parameterization is merely necessary to find a “good” initialization of an appropriately parameterized network. If this hypothesis is true, it indicates that by training and performing inference in
networks which are 1-2 orders of magnitude larger than necessary, we are wasting large amounts of
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

