Tensor Programs I:
Wide Feedforward or Recurrent Neural Networks of
Any Architecture are Gaussian Processes

Greg Yang∗
Microsoft Research AI
gregyang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Wide neural networks with random weights and biases are Gaussian processes, as
originally observed by Neal (1995) and more recently by Lee et al. (2018) and
Matthews et al. (2018) for deep fully-connected networks, as well as by Novak
et al. (2019) and Garriga-Alonso et al. (2019) for deep convolutional networks.
We show that this Neural Network-Gaussian Process correspondence surprisingly
extends to all modern feedforward or recurrent neural networks composed of multilayer perceptron, RNNs (e.g. LSTMs, GRUs), (nD or graph) convolution, pooling,
skip connection, attention, batch normalization, and/or layer normalization. More
generally, we introduce a language for expressing neural network computations,
and our result encompasses all such expressible neural networks. This work serves
as a tutorial on the tensor programs technique formulated in Yang (2019) and
elucidates the Gaussian Process results obtained there. We provide open-source implementations of the Gaussian Process kernels of simple RNN, GRU, transformer,
and batchnorm+ReLU network at github.com/thegregyang/GP4A.

1

Introduction

Motivated to understand the Bayesian prior in neural networks (NNs), Neal [41] theoretically showed
that infinitely wide, shallow neural networks with random weights and biases are Gaussian processes
(GPs). He empirically explored this phenomenon over deep networks as well, but this was not proven
rigorously until recently [37, 40, 43, 18], with concrete progress made over the intervening years
[56, 34, 22, 13]. This neural network-Gaussian process correspondence (NN-GP correspondence) has
not only allowed one to transform the implicit prior of NNs into explicit priors that can be understood
analytically [46, 49, 63, 59, 65], but has also created new state-of-the-art kernels by converting from
deep neural networks [37, 43]. Yet, so far the focus has dwelled entirely on multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) or simple convolutional neural networks (CNNs). As new architectures are created with
blistering speed, a question starts to emerge and reverberate:
Do all infinitely wide, randomly initialized neural networks correspond to Gaussian processes?
Even if the answer is yes, at the current rate where each new architecture warrants its own NN-GP
correspondence paper, theory will never catch up to practice. On a more basic level, what does this
question even mean for recurrent neural networks?
Our Contributions In this paper, we formulate the notion of a Gaussian process with variabledimensional output (see Definition 2.1), and show that feedforward and recurrent neural networks
of standard architectures converge to Gaussian processes in this sense as their widths or number
∗

Please see https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12478 for the full version of this paper.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

