The Implicit Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm
Kirill Neklyudov
Samsung-HSE Laboratory
HSE∗, Moscow, Russia
Samsung AI Center Moscow
k.necludov@gmail.com

Evgenii Egorov
Skoltech†, Moscow, Russia
egorov.evgenyy@ya.ru

Dmitry Vetrov
Samsung-HSE Laboratory
HSE∗, Moscow, Russia
Samsung AI Center Moscow
vetrovd@yandex.ru

Abstract
Recent works propose using the discriminator of a GAN to ﬁlter out unrealistic
samples of the generator. We generalize these ideas by introducing the implicit
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. For any implicit probabilistic model and a target
distribution represented by a set of samples, implicit Metropolis-Hastings operates
by learning a discriminator to estimate the density-ratio and then generating a
chain of samples. Since the approximation of density ratio introduces an error on
every step of the chain, it is crucial to analyze the stationary distribution of such
chain. For that purpose, we present a theoretical result stating that the discriminator
loss upper bounds the total variation distance between the target distribution and
the stationary distribution. Finally, we validate the proposed algorithm both for
independent and Markov proposals on CIFAR-10, CelebA and ImageNet datasets.

1

Introduction

Learning a generative model from an empirical target distribution is one of the key tasks in unsupervised machine learning. Currently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) are among the most successful approaches in building such models. Unlike conventional
sampling techniques, such as Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC), they operate by learning the
implicit probabilistic model, which allows for sampling but not for a density evaluation. Due to
the availability of large amounts of empirical data, GANs ﬁnd many applications in computer vision: image super-resolution (Ledig et al., 2017), image inpainting (Yu et al., 2018), and learning
representations (Donahue et al., 2016).
Despite the practical success, GANs remain hard for theoretical analysis and do not provide any
guarantees on the learned model. For now, most of the theoretical results assume optimality of the
learned discriminator (critic) what never holds in practice (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Nowozin et al.,
2016; Arjovsky et al., 2017). Moreover, there is empirical evidence that GANs do not learn to sample
from a target distribution (Arora & Zhang, 2017).
Recently, the idea of a GAN postprocessing by ﬁltering the generator was proposed in several
works. Under the assumption that the learned discriminator evaluates the exact density-ratio they
ﬁlter samples from a generator by rejection sampling (Azadi et al., 2018) or by the independent
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (Neklyudov et al., 2018; Turner et al., 2018). Since the assumption
of the discriminator optimality never holds in practice, we still cannot be sure that the resulting
distribution will be close to the target, we even cannot guarantee that we will improve the output of
the generator.
In this work, we present a theoretical result that justiﬁes the heuristic proposed by Neklyudov
et al. (2018); Turner et al. (2018) and generalize the proposed algorithm to the case of any implicit
∗
†

National Research University Higher School of Economics
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

