Solving a Class of Non-Convex Min-Max Games
Using Iterative First Order Methods

Maher Nouiehed
nouiehed@usc.edu ∗

Maziar Sanjabi
sanjabi@usc.edu †

Tianjian Huang
tianjian@usc.edu ‡

Jason D. Lee
jasonlee@princeton.edu §

Meisam Razaviyayn
razaviya@usc.edu ¶

Abstract
Recent applications that arise in machine learning have surged significant interest
in solving min-max saddle point games. This problem has been extensively studied
in the convex-concave regime for which a global equilibrium solution can be
computed efficiently. In this paper, we study the problem in the non-convex regime
and show that an ε–first order stationary point of the game can be computed when
one of the player’s objective can be optimized to global optimality efficiently. In
particular, we first consider the case where the objective of one of the players
satisfies the Polyak-Łojasiewicz (PL) condition. For such a game, we show that a
simple multi-step gradient descent-ascent algorithm finds an ε–first order stationary
e −2 ) iterations. Then we show that our framework can
point of the problem in O(ε
also be applied to the case where the objective of the “max-player" is concave.
In this case, we propose a multi-step gradient descent-ascent algorithm that finds
e −3.5 ) iterations, which is the
an ε–first order stationary point of the game in O(ε
best known rate in the literature. We applied our algorithm to a fair classification
problem of Fashion-MNIST dataset and observed that the proposed algorithm
results in smoother training and better generalization.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed a wide range of machine learning and robust optimization applications
being formulated as a min-max saddle point game; see [51, 11, 10, 50, 20, 53] and the references
therein. Examples of problems that are formulated under this framework include generative adversarial networks (GANs) [51], reinforcement learning [11], adversarial learning [53], learning
exponential families [10], fair statistical inference [17, 56, 52, 37], generative adversarial imitation
learning [6, 27], distributed non-convex optimization [35] and many others. These applications
require solving an optimization problem of the form
min max f (θ, α).
θ∈Θ α∈A

(1)

This optimization problem can be viewed as a zero-sum game between two players. The goal of the
first player is to minimize f (θ, α) by tuning θ, while the other player’s objective is to maximize
∗

Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California
Data Science and Operations Department, Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California
‡
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California
§
Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University
¶
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Southern California
†

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

