Asymptotic Guarantees for Learning Generative
Models with the Sliced-Wasserstein Distance
Kimia Nadjahi1 , Alain Durmus2 , Umut Şimşekli1,3 , Roland Badeau1
1: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2: CMLA, ENS Cachan, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, France
3: Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
{kimia.nadjahi, umut.simsekli, roland.badeau}@telecom-paris.fr
alain.durmus@cmla.ens-cachan.fr

Abstract
Minimum expected distance estimation (MEDE) algorithms have been widely
used for probabilistic models with intractable likelihood functions and they have
become increasingly popular due to their use in implicit generative modeling (e.g.
Wasserstein generative adversarial networks, Wasserstein autoencoders). Emerging
from computational optimal transport, the Sliced-Wasserstein (SW) distance has
become a popular choice in MEDE thanks to its simplicity and computational
benefits. While several studies have reported empirical success on generative
modeling with SW, the theoretical properties of such estimators have not yet been
established. In this study, we investigate the asymptotic properties of estimators
that are obtained by minimizing SW. We first show that convergence in SW implies
weak convergence of probability measures in general Wasserstein spaces. Then we
show that estimators obtained by minimizing SW (and also an approximate version
of SW) are asymptotically consistent. We finally prove a central limit theorem,
which characterizes√
the asymptotic distribution of the estimators and establish a
convergence rate of n, where n denotes the number of observed data points. We
illustrate the validity of our theory on both synthetic data and neural networks.

1

Introduction

Minimum distance estimation (MDE) is a generalization of maximum-likelihood inference, where
the goal is to minimize a distance between the empirical distribution of a set of independent and
identically distributed (i.i.d.) observations Y1:n = (Y1 , . . . , Yn ) and a family of distributions indexed
by a parameter θ. The problem is formally defined as follows [1, 2]:
θ̂n = argminθ∈Θ D(µ̂n , µθ ) ,

(1)

where D denotes a distance (or a divergence in general) between probability measures, µθ denotes a
probability measure indexed by θ, Θ denotes the parameter space, and
1 Xn
µ̂n =
δYi
(2)
i=1
n
denotes the empirical measure of Y1:n , with δY being the Dirac distribution with mass on the point Y .
When D is chosen as the Kullback-Leibler divergence, this formulation coincides with the maximum
likelihood estimation (MLE) [2].
While MDE provides a fruitful framework for statistical inference, when working with generative
models, solving the optimization problem in (1) might be intractable since it might be impossible to
evaluate the probability density function associated with µθ . Nevertheless, in various settings, even if
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

