Efficiently avoiding saddle points
with zero order methods: No gradients required

Lampros Flokas∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
lamflokas@cs.columbia.edu

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider the case of derivative-free algorithms for non-convex optimization,
also known as zero order algorithms, that use only function evaluations rather than
gradients. For a wide variety of gradient approximators based on finite differences,
we establish asymptotic convergence to second order stationary points using a
carefully tailored application of the Stable Manifold Theorem. Regarding efficiency,
we introduce a noisy zero-order method that converges to second order stationary
points, i.e avoids saddle points. Our algorithm uses only Õ(1/2 ) approximate
gradient calculations and, thus, it matches the converge rate guarantees of their exact
gradient counterparts up to constants. In contrast to previous work, our convergence
rate analysis avoids imposing additional dimension dependent slowdowns in the
number of iterations required for non-convex zero order optimization.

1

Introduction

Given a function f : Rd → R, solving the problem
x∗ = arg min f (x)
x∈Rd

is one of the building blocks that many machine learning algorithms are based on. The difficulty
of this problem varies significantly depending on the properties of f and the way we can access
information about it. The general case of non-convex functions makes the problem significantly more
challenging, since first order stationary points can be global or local optima as well as saddle points.
In fact, discovering global optima is an NP hard problem in general and even for quartic functions
verifying local optima is a co-NP complete problem [MK87, LPP+ 19].
While local optima may be satisfactory for some applications in machine learning [CHM+ 15],
saddle points can make high dimensional non convex optimization tasks significantly more difficult
[DPG+ 14, SQW18]. Therefore, researchers have focused their efforts on functions possessing
the strict saddle property. Under this property, Hessians of f evaluated at saddle points have at
least one negative eigenvalue making detection of saddle points tractable. Given this assumption,
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

