KNG: The K-Norm Gradient Mechanism
Matthew Reimherr ∗
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16802
mreimherr@psu.edu

Jordan Awan
Department of Statistics
Pennsylvania State University
State College, PA 16802
awan@psu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a new mechanism for producing sanitized statistical summaries
that achieve differential privacy, called the K-Norm Gradient Mechanism, or KNG.
This new approach maintains the strong flexibility of the exponential mechanism,
while achieving the powerful utility performance of objective perturbation. KNG
starts with an inherent objective function (often an empirical risk), and promotes
summaries that are close to minimizing the objective by weighting according to
how far the gradient of the objective function is from zero. Working with the
gradient instead of the original objective function allows for additional flexibility
as one can penalize using different norms. We show that, unlike the exponential
mechanism, the noise added by KNG is asymptotically negligible compared to the
statistical error for many problems. In addition to theoretical guarantees on privacy
and utility, we confirm the utility of KNG empirically in the settings of linear and
quantile regression through simulations.

1

Introduction

The last decade has seen a tremendous increase in research activity related to data privacy [Aggarwal
and Philip, 2008, Lane et al., 2014, Machanavajjhala and Kifer, 2015, Dwork et al., 2017]. This drive
has been fueled by an increasing societal concern over the large amounts of data being collected
by companies, governments, and scientists. These data often contain vast amounts of personal
information, for example DNA sequences, images, voice recordings, electronic health records, and
internet usage patterns. Such data allows for great scientific progress by researchers and governments,
as well as increasingly curated business strategies by companies. However, the such data also comes
with increased risk for privacy breaches, placing greater pressure on institutions to prevent disclosures.
Currently, Differential Privacy (DP) [Dwork et al., 2006] is the leading framework for formally
quantifying privacy risk. One of the most popular methods for achieving DP is the Exponential
Mechanism, introduced by McSherry and Talwar [2007], and used in [Friedman and Schuster, 2010,
Wasserman and Zhou, 2010, Blum et al., 2013, Dwork and Roth, 2014]. A major attribute of the
exponential mechanism that contributes to its popularity is its flexibility; it can be readily adapted and
incorporated into most statistical analyses. In particular, its structure makes it amenable to a wide
array of statistical and machine learning problems that are based on minimizing an objective function,
so called “m-estimators” [van der Vaart, 2000, Chapter 5]. Some examples where the exponential
mechanism has been used include PCA [Chaudhuri et al., 2013, Awan et al., 2019], hypothesis testing
[Canonne et al., 2019], maximum likelihood estimation (related to posterior sampling) [Wang et al.,
2015, Minami et al., 2016], and density estimation [Wasserman and Zhou, 2010].
However, examples have arisen [Wang et al., 2015, Awan et al., 2019] where the magnitude of the
noise added by the exponential mechanism is substantially higher than other mechanisms. Recently,
∗

Research supported in part by NSF DMS 1712826, NSF SES 1853209, and the Simons Institute for the
Theory of Computing at UC Berkeley.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

