AutoAssist: A Framework to
Accelerate Training of Deep Neural Networks
Jiong Zhang ⇤

Hsiang-Fu Yu †

Inderjit S. Dhillon⇤†

zhangjiong724@utexas.edu

rofu.yu@gmail.com

inderjit@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have yielded superior performance in many contemporary applications. However, the gradient computation in a deep model
with millions of instances leads to a lengthy training process even with modern
GPU/TPU hardware acceleration. In this paper, we propose AutoAssist, a simple
framework to accelerate training of a deep neural network. Typically, as the training
procedure evolves, the amount of improvement by a stochastic gradient update
varies dynamically with the choice of instances in the mini-batch. In AutoAssist,
we utilize this fact and design an instance shrinking operation that is used to filter
out instances with relatively low marginal improvement to the current model; thus
the computationally intensive gradient computations are performed on informative
instances as much as possible. Specifically, we train a very lightweight Assistant
model jointly with the original deep network, which we refer to as the Boss. The
Assistant model is designed to gauge the importance of a given instance with respect to the current Boss model such that the shrinking operation can be applied in
the batch generator. With careful design, we train the Boss and Assistant in a nonblocking and asynchronous fashion such that overhead is minimal. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of AutoAssist, we conduct experiments on two contemporary
applications: image classification using ResNets with varied number of layers,
and neural machine translation using LSTMs, ConvS2S and Transformer models.
For each application, we verify that AutoAssist leads to significant reduction in
training time; in particular, 30% to 40% of the total operation count can be reduced
which leads to faster convergence and a corresponding decrease in training time.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) trained on a large number of instances have been successfully applied
to many real world applications, such as [6, 11] and [20]. Due to the increasing number of training
instances and the increasing complexity of deep models, variants of (mini-batch) stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) are still the most widely used optimization methods because of their simplicity and
flexibility. In a typical SGD implementation, a batch of instances is generated by either a randomly
permuted order or a uniform sampler. Due to the complexity of deep models, the gradient calculation
is usually extremely computationally intensive and requires powerful hardware (such as a GPU or
TPU) to perform the entire training in a reasonable time frame. At any given time in the training
process, each instance has its own utility in terms of improving the current model. As a result,
performing SGD updates on a batch of instances which are sampled/generated uniformly can be
suboptimal in terms of maximizing the return-on-investment (ROI) on GPU/TPU cycles. In this paper,
we propose AutoAssist, a simple framework to accelerate training deep models with an Assistant that
generates instances in a sequence that attempts to improve the ROI.
⇤
†

The University of Texas at Austin
Amazon

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

