SPoC: Search-based Pseudocode to Code
Sumith Kulal∗, Panupong Pasupat∗, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee,
Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, Percy Liang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{sumith,ppasupat,kach,minalee,padon,aaiken,pliang}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the task of mapping pseudocode to executable code, assuming a oneto-one correspondence between lines of pseudocode and lines of code. Given test
cases as a mechanism to validate programs, we search over the space of possible
translations of the pseudocode to find a program that compiles and passes the test
cases. While performing a best-first search, compilation errors constitute 88.7%
of program failures. To better guide this search, we learn to predict the line of the
program responsible for the failure and focus search over alternative translations
of the pseudocode for that line. For evaluation, we collected the SPoC dataset
(Search-based Pseudocode to Code) containing 18,356 C++ programs with humanauthored pseudocode and test cases. Under a budget of 100 program compilations,
performing search improves the synthesis success rate over using the top-one
translation of the pseudocode from 25.6% to 44.7%.

1

Introduction

We consider the task of mapping natural language pseudocode to functionally correct computer
programs that are long enough to have significant intermediate state (e.g., 10–20 lines) and perform
non-trivial computations. Previous work on executable semantic parsing mainly focuses on translating
short text descriptions to one-line programs [57, 47, 58, 59, 29, 11], and while recent work explored
generating longer programs from text descriptions [30, 54, 39, 18, 19, 17], these programs are mostly
evaluated on syntactic metrics (e.g., exact match and BLEU score) rather than functional correctness.
In contrast, the program synthesis community emphasizes functional correctness, typically captured
by a set of input-output test cases that the program must compute correctly [14, 13]. However,
input-output pairs give no information about the intermediate states of the program, making it difficult
to synthesize long programs.
Synthesizing a general class of programs of significant length and internal complexity is too challenging without some description of the steps of computation. To that end, we propose synthesizing
programs from natural language pseudocode and test cases. The test cases provide the functional
specification, while the pseudocode provides guidance for the intermediate computations the program
should perform.
To synthesize a functionally correct program, instead of relying on the top-one translation of the
pseudocode, we search over the space of possible translations to find one that passes the test cases.
In this work, we view the desired program as a composition of segments of code, each aligned to a
segment of natural language in the pseudocode. Figure 1 instantiates our setup: each pseudocode
line translates to a line of code with approximately one or two atomic statements. Unlike treating
the whole program as a single big chunk (too coarse) or decomposing into individual tokens (too
fine-grained), semantically coherent segments of code (rendered as single lines here) form a natural
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

