The Normalization Method for Alleviating
Pathological Sharpness in Wide Neural Networks

Ryo Karakida
AIST
Tokyo, Japan
karakida.ryo@aist.go.jp

Shotaro Akaho
AIST
Ibaraki, Japan
s.akaho@aist.go.jp

Shun-ichi Amari
RIKEN CBS
Saitama, Japan
amari@brain.riken.jp

Abstract
Normalization methods play an important role in enhancing the performance
of deep learning while their theoretical understandings have been limited. To
theoretically elucidate the effectiveness of normalization, we quantify the geometry
of the parameter space determined by the Fisher information matrix (FIM), which
also corresponds to the local shape of the loss landscape under certain conditions.
We analyze deep neural networks with random initialization, which is known
to suffer from a pathologically sharp shape of the landscape when the network
becomes sufficiently wide. We reveal that batch normalization in the last layer
contributes to drastically decreasing such pathological sharpness if the width
and sample number satisfy a specific condition. In contrast, it is hard for batch
normalization in the middle hidden layers to alleviate pathological sharpness in
many settings. We also found that layer normalization cannot alleviate pathological
sharpness either. Thus, we can conclude that batch normalization in the last layer
significantly contributes to decreasing the sharpness induced by the FIM.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have performed excellently in various practical applications [1], but
there are still many heuristics and an arbitrariness in their settings and learning algorithms. To proceed
further, it would be beneficial to give theoretical elucidation of how and under what conditions deep
learning works well in practice.
Normalization methods are widely used to enhance the trainability and generalization ability of
DNNs. In particular, batch normalization makes optimization faster with a large learning rate and
achieves better generalization in experiments [2]. Recently, some studies have reported that batch
normalization changes the shape of the loss function, which leads to better performance [3, 4].
Batch normalization alleviates a sharp change of the loss function and makes the loss landscape
smoother [3], and prevents an explosion of the loss function and its gradient [4]. The flatness of
the loss landscape and its geometric characterization have been explored in various topics such
as improvement of generalization ability [5, 6], advantage of skip connections [7], and robustness
against adversarial attacks [8]. Thus, it seems to be an important direction of research to investigate
normalization methods from the viewpoint of the geometric characterization. Nevertheless, its
theoretical elucidation has been limited to only linear networks [4] and simplified models neglecting
the hierarchical structure of DNNs [3, 9].
One promising approach of analyzing normalization methods is to consider DNNs with random
weights and sufficiently wide hidden layers. While theoretical analysis of DNNs often becomes
intractable because of hierarchical nonlinear transformations, wide DNNs with random weights
can overcome such difficulties and are attracting much attention, especially within the last few
years; mean field theory of DNNs [10–14], random matrix theory [15] and kernel methods [16, 17].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

