Bipartite expander Hopfield networks as
self-decoding high-capacity error correcting codes

Rishidev Chaudhuri
Center for Neuroscience,
Departments of Mathematics and
Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior,
University of California, Davis,
Davis, CA 95616
rchaudhuri@ucdavis.edu

Ila Fiete
Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139
fiete@mit.edu

Abstract
Neural network models of memory and error correction famously include the Hopfield network, which can directly store—and error-correct through its dynamics—
arbitrary N -bit patterns, but only for ∼ N such patterns. On the other end of
the spectrum, Shannon’s coding theory established that it is possible to represent
exponentially many states (∼ eN ) using N symbols in such a way that an optimal
decoder could correct all noise upto a threshold. We prove that it is possible to
construct an associative content-addressable network that combines the properties
of strong error correcting codes and Hopfield networks: it simultaneously possesses
exponentially many stable states, these states are robust enough, with large enough
basins of attraction that they can be correctly recovered despite errors in a finite
fraction of all nodes, and the errors are intrinsically corrected by the network’s
own dynamics. The network is a two-layer Boltzmann machine with simple neural
dynamics, low dynamic-range (binary) pairwise synaptic connections, and sparse
expander graph connectivity. Thus, quasi-random sparse structures—characteristic
of important error-correcting codes—may provide for high-performance computation in artificial neural networks and the brain.

1

Introduction

Neural systems must be able to recover stored states from partial or noisy cues (pattern completion
or cleanup), the definition of an associative memory. If the memory state can be addressed by its
content, it is furthermore called content-addressable. The classic framework for neural associative
content-addressable (ACA) memory is the conceptually powerful Hopfield network [1–3].
Here, we are motivated by both the Hopfield network and by strong error-correcting codes (ECCs).
ECCs are simultaneously compact, allowing the specification of exponentially many coding states
using codewords that grow only linearly in size; and well-separated or robust, permitting the correction
of relatively large errors by an appropriate decoder. Specifically, ECCs can use strings of N bits to
encode exponentially-many messages (∼ 2αN , 0 < α < 1), and to retrieve them in the presence of
noise that corrupts a finite fraction of bits [4, 5].
However, in ECCs, the decoder is external to the system and its costs (in time, space, and computational complexity) are not taken into account when determining the capacity of the code. By contrast,
the simple neural dynamics of Hopfield networks permits them to cleanup or decode their own states,
though only for a small number of such states. Here we pose (and answer) the question of whether
it is possible to build simple, Hopfield-like neural networks that can represent exponentially many
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

