Subquadratic High-Dimensional Hierarchical
Clustering

Amir Abboud
IBM Research
amir.abboud@gmail.com

Vincent Cohen-Addad
CNRS & Sorbonne Université
vcohenad@gmail.com

Hussein Houdrouge
École Polytechnique
hussein.houdrouge@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
We consider the widely-used average-linkage, single-linkage, and Ward’s methods
for computing hierarchical clusterings of high-dimensional Euclidean inputs. It is
easy to show that there is no efficient implementation of these algorithms in high
dimensional Euclidean space since it implicitly requires to solve the closest pair
problem, a notoriously difficult problem.
However, how fast can these algorithms be implemented if we allow approximation? More precisely: these algorithms successively merge the clusters that are
at closest average (for average-linkage), minimum distance (for single-linkage),
or inducing the least sum-of-square error (for Ward’s). We ask whether one
could obtain a significant running-time improvement if the algorithm can merge
γ-approximate closest clusters (namely, clusters that are at distance (average, minimum, or sum-of-square error) at most γ times the distance of the closest clusters).
We show that one can indeed take advantage of the relaxation and compute the
r
approximate hierarchical clustering tree using Opnq
γ-approximate nearest neighbor queries. This leads to an algorithm running in time r
Opndq ` n1`Op1{γq for
d-dimensional Euclidean space. We then provide experiments showing that these
algorithms perform as well as the non-approximate version for classic classification tasks while achieving a significant speed-up.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical Clustering (HC) is a ubiquitous task in data science. Given a data set of n points
with some similarity or distance function over them, the goal is to group similar points together
into clusters, and then recursively group similar clusters into larger clusters. The clusters produced
throughout the procedure can be thought of as a hierarchy or a tree with the data points at the leaves
and each internal node corresponds to a cluster containing the points in its subtree. This tree is often
referred to as a “dendrogram” and is an important illustrative aid in many settings. By inspecting the
tree at different levels we get partitions of the data points to varying degrees of granularity. Famous
applications are in image and text classification [39], community detection [28], finance [40], and in
biology [8, 19].
Perhaps the most popular procedures for HC are Single-Linkage, Average-Linkage, and Ward’s
method. These are so-called agglomerative HC algorithms (as opposed to divisive) since they proceed in a bottom-up fashion: In the beginning, each data point is in its own cluster, and then the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

