Crowdsourcing via Pairwise Co-occurrences:
Identifiability and Algorithms

Shahana Ibrahim
School of Elect. Eng. & Computer Sci.
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
ibrahish@oregonstate.edu
Nikos Kargas
Department of Elect. & Computer Eng.
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
kaga005@umn.edu

Xiao Fu∗
School of Elect. Eng. & Computer Sci.
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97331
xiao.fu@oregonstate.edu
Kejun Huang
Department of Computing & Info. Sci. & Eng.
University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611
kejun.huang@ufl.edu

Abstract
The data deluge comes with high demands for data labeling. Crowdsourcing (or,
more generally, ensemble learning) techniques aim to produce accurate labels via
integrating noisy, non-expert labeling from annotators. The classic Dawid-Skene
estimator and its accompanying expectation maximization (EM) algorithm have
been widely used, but the theoretical properties are not fully understood. Tensor
methods were proposed to guarantee identification of the Dawid-Skene model, but
the sample complexity is a hurdle for applying such approaches—since the tensor
methods hinge on the availability of third-order statistics that are hard to reliably
estimate given limited data. In this paper, we propose a framework using pairwise
co-occurrences of the annotator responses, which naturally admits lower sample
complexity. We show that the approach can identify the Dawid-Skene model under
realistic conditions. We propose an algebraic algorithm reminiscent of convex
geometry-based structured matrix factorization to solve the model identification
problem efficiently, and an identifiability-enhanced algorithm for handling more
challenging and critical scenarios. Experiments show that the proposed algorithms
outperform the state-of-art algorithms under a variety of scenarios.

1

Introduction

Background. The drastically increasing availability of data has successfully enabled many timely
applications in machine learning and artificial intelligence. At the same time, most supervised
learning tasks, e.g., the core tasks in computer vision, natural language processing, and speech
processing, heavily rely on labeled data. However, labeling data is not a trivial task—it requires
educated and knowledgeable annotators (which could be human workers or machine classifiers),
to work under a reliable way. More importantly, it needs an effective mechanism to integrate the
possibly different labeling from multiple annotators. Techniques addressing this problem in machine
learning are called crowdsourcing [24] or more generally, ensemble learning [8].
∗
The work is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under projects ECCS 1808159 and NSF
ECCS 1608961, and by the Army Research Office (ARO) under projects ARO W911NF-19-1-0247 and ARO
W911NF-19-1-0407.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

