Improving Textual Network Learning with
Variational Homophilic Embeddings
Wenlin Wang1 , Chenyang Tao1 , Zhe Gan2 , Guoyin Wang1 , Liqun Chen1
Xinyuan Zhang1 , Ruiyi Zhang1 , Qian Yang1 , Ricardo Henao1 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University, 2 Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
wenlin.wang@duke.edu

Abstract
The performance of many network learning applications crucially hinges on the
success of network embedding algorithms, which aim to encode rich network
information into low-dimensional vertex-based vector representations. This paper
considers a novel variational formulation of network embeddings, with special
focus on textual networks. Different from most existing methods that optimize a
discriminative objective, we introduce Variational Homophilic Embedding (VHE),
a fully generative model that learns network embeddings by modeling the semantic
(textual) information with a variational autoencoder, while accounting for the structural (topology) information through a novel homophilic prior design. Homophilic
vertex embeddings encourage similar embedding vectors for related (connected)
vertices. The proposed VHE promises better generalization for downstream tasks,
robustness to incomplete observations, and the ability to generalize to unseen
vertices. Extensive experiments on real-world networks, for multiple tasks, demonstrate that the proposed method consistently achieves superior performance relative
to competing state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Network learning is challenging since graph structures are not directly amenable to standard machine
learning algorithms, which traditionally assume vector-valued inputs [4, 15]. Network embedding
techniques solve this issue by mapping a network into vertex-based low-dimensional vector representations, which can then be readily used for various downstream network analysis tasks [10]. Due to its
effectiveness and efficiency in representing large-scale networks, network embeddings have become
an important tool in understanding network behavior and making predictions [24], thus attracting
considerable research attention in recent years [31, 37, 16, 42, 8, 47, 40].
Existing network embedding models can be roughly grouped into two categories. The first consists
of models that only leverage the structural information (topology) of a network, e.g., available edges
(links) across vertices. Prominent examples include classic deterministic graph factorizations [6, 1],
probabilistically formulated LINE [37], and diffusion-based models such as DeepWalk [31] and
Node2Vec [16]. While widely applicable, these models are often vulnerable to violations to their
underlying assumptions, such as dense connections, and noise-free and complete (non-missing)
observations [30]. They also ignore rich side information commonly associated with vertices,
provided naturally in many real-world networks, e.g., labels, texts, images, etc. For example, in
social networks users have profiles, and in citation networks articles have text content (e.g., abstracts).
Models from the second category exploit these additional attributes to improve both informativeness
and robustness of network embeddings [49, 36]. More recently, models such as CANE [40] and
WANE [34] advocate the use of contextualized network embeddings to increase representation
capacity, further enhancing performance in downstream tasks.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

