Temporal FiLM: Capturing Long-Range Sequence
Dependencies with Feature-Wise Modulation

Sawyer Birnbaum∗12 , Volodymyr Kuleshov∗12 ,
S. Zayd Enam1 , Pang Wei Koh1 , and Stefano Ermon1
1
Stanford University, Stanford, CA
2
Afresh Technologies, San Francisco, CA
{sawyerb,kuleshov,zayd,pangwei,ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning representations that accurately capture long-range dependencies in sequential inputs — including text, audio, and genomic data — is a key problem in
deep learning. Feed-forward convolutional models capture only feature interactions
within finite receptive fields while recurrent architectures can be slow and difficult
to train due to vanishing gradients. Here, we propose Temporal Feature-Wise Linear Modulation (TFiLM) — a novel architectural component inspired by adaptive
batch normalization and its extensions — that uses a recurrent neural network to
alter the activations of a convolutional model. This approach expands the receptive
field of convolutional sequence models with minimal computational overhead.
Empirically, we find that TFiLM significantly improves the learning speed and accuracy of feed-forward neural networks on a range of generative and discriminative
learning tasks, including text classification and audio super-resolution.

1

Introduction

In many application domains of deep learning — including speech [27, 19], genomics [2], and natural
language [49] — data takes the form of long, high-dimensional sequences. The prevalence and
importance of sequential inputs has motivated a range of deep architectures specifically designed for
this data [20, 31, 50].
One of the challenges in processing sequential data is accurately capturing long-range input dependencies — interactions between symbols that are far apart in the sequence. For example, in speech
recognition, data occurring at the beginning of a recording may influence the conversion of words
enunciated much later.
Sequential inputs in deep learning are often processed using recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
[14, 20]. However, training RNNs is often difficult, mainly due to the vanishing gradient problem
[3]. Feed-forward convolutional approaches are highly effective at processing both images [33] and
sequential data [31, 51, 16] and are easier to train. However, convolutional models only account
for feature interactions within finite receptive fields and are not ideally suited to capture long-term
dependencies.
In this paper, we introduce Temporal Feature-Wise Linear Modulation (TFiLM), a neural network component that captures long-range input dependencies in sequential inputs by combining elements of convolutional and recurrent approaches. Our component modulates the
activations of a convolutional model based on long-range information captured by a recurrent neural network. More specifically, TFiLM parametrizes the rescaling parameters of a
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

