Primal-Dual Block Generalized Frank-Wolfe
∗

∗

Qi Lei† , Jiacheng Zhuo† , Constantine Caramanis† , Inderjit S. Dhillon†‡ , and
Alexandros G. Dimakis†
†
UT Austin ‡ Amazon
{leiqi@oden., jzhuo@, constantine@, inderjit@cs.,
dimakis@austin.}utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose a generalized variant of Frank-Wolfe algorithm for solving a class
of sparse/low-rank optimization problems. Our formulation includes Elastic Net,
regularized SVMs and phase retrieval as special cases. The proposed Primal-Dual
Block Generalized Frank-Wolfe algorithm reduces the per-iteration cost while
maintaining linear convergence rate. The per iteration cost of our method depends
on the structural complexity of the solution (i.e. sparsity/low-rank) instead of
the ambient dimension. We empirically show that our algorithm outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods on (multi-class) classification tasks.

1

Introduction

We consider optimization problems of the form:
X
min :
fi (a>
i x) + g(x),
x∈C

i

directly motivated by regularized and constrained Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). Particularly,
we are interested in problems whose solution has special “simple” structure like low-rank or sparsity. The sparsity constraint applies to large-scale multiclass/multi-label classification, low-degree
polynomial data mapping [5], random feature kernel machines [32], and Elastic Net [39]. Motivated
by recent applications in low-rank multi-class SVM, phase retrieval, matrix completion, affine rank
minimization and other problems (e.g., [9, 31, 2, 3]), we also consider settings where the constraint
x ∈ C (e.g., trace norm ball) while convex, may be difficult to project onto. A wish-list for this class
of problems would include an algorithm that (1) exploits the function finite-sum form and the simple
structure of the solution, (2) achieves linear convergence for smooth and strongly convex problems,
(3) does not pay a heavy price for the projection step.
We propose a Frank-Wolfe (FW) type method that attains these three goals. This does not come
without challenges: Although it is currently well-appreciated that FW type algorithms avoid the cost
of projection [14, 1], the benefits are limited to constraints that are hard to project onto, like the trace
norm ball. For problems like phase retrieval and ERM for multi-label multi-class classification, the
gradient computation requires large matrix multiplications. This dominates the per-iteration cost,
and the existing FW type methods do not asymptotically reduce time complexity per iteration, even
without paying the expensive projection step. Meanwhile, for simpler constraints like the `1 norm ball
or the simplex, it is unclear if FW can offer any benefits compared to other methods. Moreover, as is
generally known, FW suffers from sub-linear convergence rate even for well-conditioned problems
that enjoy strong convexity and smoothness.
Our contributions. In this paper we tackle the challenges by exploiting the special structure induced
by the constraints and FW steps. We propose a generalized variant of FW that we call Primal-Dual
Block Generalized Frank Wolfe. The main advantage is that the computational complexity depends
∗

Both authors contribute equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

