How degenerate is the parametrization of neural
networks with the ReLU activation function?
Julius Berner
Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Vienna, Austria
julius.berner@univie.ac.at
Dennis Elbrächter
Faculty of Mathematics, University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Vienna, Austria
dennis.elbraechter@univie.ac.at
Philipp Grohs
Faculty of Mathematics and Research Platform DataScience@UniVienna, University of Vienna
Oskar-Morgenstern-Platz 1, 1090 Vienna, Austria
philipp.grohs@univie.ac.at

Abstract
Neural network training is usually accomplished by solving a non-convex optimization problem using stochastic gradient descent. Although one optimizes over
the networks parameters, the main loss function generally only depends on the
realization of the neural network, i.e. the function it computes. Studying the optimization problem over the space of realizations opens up new ways to understand
neural network training. In particular, usual loss functions like mean squared error
and categorical cross entropy are convex on spaces of neural network realizations,
which themselves are non-convex. Approximation capabilities of neural networks
can be used to deal with the latter non-convexity, which allows us to establish
that for sufficiently large networks local minima of a regularized optimization
problem on the realization space are almost optimal. Note, however, that each
realization has many different, possibly degenerate, parametrizations. In particular,
a local minimum in the parametrization space needs not correspond to a local
minimum in the realization space. To establish such a connection, inverse stability
of the realization map is required, meaning that proximity of realizations must
imply proximity of corresponding parametrizations. We present pathologies which
prevent inverse stability in general, and, for shallow networks, proceed to establish
a restricted space of parametrizations on which we have inverse stability w.r.t. to a
Sobolev norm. Furthermore, we show that by optimizing over such restricted sets,
it is still possible to learn any function which can be learned by optimization over
unrestricted sets.

1

Introduction and Motivation

In recent years much effort has been invested into explaining and understanding the overwhelming
success of deep learning based methods. On the theoretical side, impressive approximation capabilities of neural networks have been established [9, 10, 16, 20, 32, 33, 37, 39]. No less important
are recent results on the generalization of neural networks, which deal with the question of how
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

