Convergence-Rate-Matching Discretization of
Accelerated Optimization Flows Through
Opportunistic State-Triggered Control

Miguel Vaquero
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
UC San Diego
San Diego, CA 9500
mivaquerovallina@ucsd.edu

Jorge Cortés
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
UC San Diego
San Diego, CA 9500
cortes@ucsd.edu

Abstract
A recent body of exciting work seeks to shed light on the behavior of accelerated methods in optimization via high-resolution differential equations. These
differential equations are continuous counterparts of the discrete-time optimization
algorithms, and their convergence properties can be characterized using the powerful tools provided by classical Lyapunov stability analysis. An outstanding question
of pivotal importance is how to discretize these continuous flows while maintaining
their convergence rates. This paper provides a novel approach through the idea of
opportunistic state-triggered control. We take advantage of the Lyapunov functions
employed to characterize the rate of convergence of high-resolution differential
equations to design variable-stepsize forward-Euler discretizations that preserve
the Lyapunov decay of the original dynamics. The philosophy of our approach
is not limited to forward-Euler discretizations and may be combined with other
integration schemes.

1

Introduction

This paper builds on the current research activity that seeks to characterize the convergence properties
of dynamical systems that are continuous-time versions of accelerated algorithms in optimization.
This body of work sits at the intersection of various disciplines, most notably nonlinear systems and
optimization, and has brought to the understanding of acceleration properties a wealth of powerful
techniques from Lyapunov stability analysis, calculus of variations, and geometric methods. This
paper takes another step in this direction by further advancing the synergy between stability analysis
and the study of optimization algorithms. Here, we propose to employ an opportunistic state-triggered
approach to discretize continuous flows in a way that respects the Lyapunov function decay that
explains their accelerated convergence rates.
Summary of Results
The contribution of this paper is the design of a variable-stepsize forward-Euler discretization that
preserves the Lyapunov decay of high-resolution differential equations. A main novelty of our
technical approach is to employ, in the context of the discretization of state-of-the-art optimization
flows, ideas from opportunistic state-triggered control to develop real-time implementations of
closed-loop dynamical systems. We build on the Lyapunov functions employed to characterize
the rate of convergence of high-resolution differential equations to identify triggers that help us
determine the stepsize of the discretization as a function of the current iterate. By design, these
triggers ensure that the discretization retains the decay rate of the Lyapunov function. Since the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

