Deep RGB-D Canonical Correlation Analysis For
Sparse Depth Completion
Yiqi Zhong∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
yiqizhon@usc.edu

Cho-Ying Wu∗
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
choyingw@usc.edu

Suya You
US Army Research Laboratory
Playa Vista, California
suya.you.civ@mail.mil

Ulrich Neumann
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, California
uneumann@usc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose our Correlation For Completion Network (CFCNet), an
end-to-end deep learning model that uses the correlation between two data sources
to perform sparse depth completion. CFCNet learns to capture, to the largest extent,
the semantically correlated features between RGB and depth information. Through
pairs of image pixels and the visible measurements in a sparse depth map, CFCNet
facilitates feature-level mutual transformation of different data sources. Such a
transformation enables CFCNet to predict features and reconstruct data of missing
depth measurements according to their corresponding, transformed RGB features.
We extend canonical correlation analysis to a 2D domain and formulate it as one
of our training objectives (i.e. 2d deep canonical correlation, or “2D2 CCA loss").
Extensive experiments validate the ability and flexibility of our CFCNet compared
to the state-of-the-art methods on both indoor and outdoor scenes with different reallife sparse patterns. Codes are available at: https://github.com/choyingw/CFCNet.

1

Introduction

Depth measurements are widely used in computer vision applications [1, 2, 3]. However, most of
the existing techniques for depth capture produce depth maps with incomplete data. For example,
structured-light cameras cannot capture depth measurements where surfaces are too shiny; Visual
Simultaneous Localization And Mappings (VSLAMs) are not able to recover depth of non-textured
objects; LiDARs produce semi-dense depth map due to the limited scanlines and scanning frequency.
Recently, researchers have introduced the sparse depth completion task, aiming to fill missing depth
measurements using deep learning based methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Those studies produce
dense depth maps by fusing features of sparse depth measurements and corresponding RGB images.
However, they usually treat feature extraction of these two types of information as independent
processes, which in reality turns the task they work on into "multi-modality depth prediction" rather
than "depth completion." While the multi-modality depth prediction may produce dense outputs,
they fail to fully utilize observable data. The depth completion task is unique in that part of its
output is already observable in the input. Revealing the relationship between data pairs (i.e. between
observable depth measurements and the corresponding image pixels) may help complete depth maps
by emphasizing the information from image domain at the locations where the depth values are
non-observable.
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

