Facility Location Problem in Differential Privacy
Model Revisited
Yunus Esencayi ∗
SUNY at Buffalo
yunusese@buffalo.edu

Marco Gaboardi
Boston University
gaboardi@bu.edu

Shi Li
SUNY at Buffalo
shil@buffalo.edu

Di Wang
SUNY at Buffalo
dwang45@buffalo.edu

Abstract
In this paper we study the uncapacitated facility location problem in the model
of differential privacy (DP) with uniform facility cost. Specifically, we first show
that, under the hierarchically well-separated tree (HST) metrics and the super-set
output setting that was introduced in [8], there is an -DP algorithm that achieves
an O( 1 ) (expected multiplicative) approximation ratio; this implies an O( log n )
approximation ratio for the general metric case, where n is the size of the input
metric. These bounds improve the best-known results given by [8]. In particular,
our approximation ratio for HST-metrics is independent of n, and the ratio for
general metrics is independent of the aspect ratio of the input metric.
On the negative side, we show that the approximation ratio of any -DP algorithm
is lower bounded by Ω( √1 ), even for instances on HST metrics with uniform
facility cost, under the super-set output setting. The lower bound shows that the
dependence of the approximation ratio for HST metrics on  can not be removed or
greatly improved. Our novel methods and techniques for both the upper and lower
bound may find additional applications.

1

Introduction

The facility location problem is one of the most fundamental problems in combinatorial optimization
and has a wide range of applications such as plant or warehouse location problems and network design
problems, also it is closely related to clustering problems such as k-median, where one typically
seeks to partition a set of data points, which themselves find applications in data mining, machine
learning, and bioinformatics [1, 13, 4]. Due to its versatility, the problem has been studied by both
operations research and computer science communities [20, 19, 16, 15, 1, 13, 4]. Formally, it can be
defined as following.
Definition 1 (Uniform Facility Location Problem (Uniform-FL)). The input to the Uniform Facility
~ ), where (V, d) is a n-point discrete metric,
Location (Uniform-FL) problem is a tuple (V, d, f, N
~ = (Nv )v∈V ∈ ZV gives the number of clients in each location
f ∈ R≥0 is the facility cost, and N
≥0
v ∈ V . The goal of the problem is to find a set of facility locations S ⊆ V which minimize the
following, where d(v, S) = mins∈S d(v, s),
X
~ ) := |S| · f +
min costd (S; N
Nv d(v, S).
(1)
S⊆V

v∈V

The first term of (1) is called the facility cost and the second term is called the connection cost.
∗

Authors are alphabetically ordered.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

