Learning low-dimensional state embeddings and
metastable clusters from time series data
Yifan Sun
Carnegie Mellon University
yifans@andrew.cmu.edu

Yaqi Duan
Princeton University
yaqid@princeton.edu

Hao Gong
Princeton University
hgong@princeton.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
This paper studies how to find compact state embeddings from high-dimensional
Markov state trajectories, where the transition kernel has a small intrinsic rank.
In the spirit of diffusion map, we propose an efficient method for learning a lowdimensional state embedding and capturing the process’s dynamics. This idea also
leads to a kernel reshaping method for more accurate nonparametric estimation
of the transition function. State embedding can be used to cluster states into
metastable sets, thereby identifying the slow dynamics. Sharp statistical error
bounds and misclassification rate are proved. Experiment on a simulated dynamical
system shows that the state clustering method indeed reveals metastable structures.
We also experiment with time series generated by layers of a Deep-Q-Network
when playing an Atari game. The embedding method identifies game states to
be similar if they share similar future events, even though their raw data are far
different.

1

Introduction

High-dimensional time series is ubiquitous in scientific studies and machine learning. Finding
compact representation from state-transition trajectories is often a prerequisite for uncovering the
underlying physics and making accurate predictions. Suppose that we are given a Markov process
{Xt } taking values in Ω ⊂ d . Let p(y|x) be the one-step transition density function (transition
kernel) of the Markov process. In practice, state-transition trajectories may appear high-dimensional,
but they are often generated by a system with fewer internal parameters and small intrinsic dimension.

R

In this paper, we focus on problems where the transition kernel p(y|x) admits a low-rank decomposition structure. Low-rank or nearly low-rank nature of the transition kernel has been widely identified
in scientific and engineering applications, e.g. molecular dynamics [RZMC11, SS13], periodized
diffusion process [Går54], traffic transition data [ZW18, DKW19], Markov decision process and
reinforcement learning [KAL16]. For reversible dynamical systems, leading eigenfunctions of p are
related to metastable sets and slow dynamics [SS13]. Low-rank latent structures also helps state
representation learning and dimension reduction in robotics and control [BSB+ 15].
Our goal is to estimate the transition kernel p(·|·) from finite time series and find state representation
in lower dimensions. For nonparametric estimation of probability distributions, one natural approach
is the kernel mean embedding (KME). Our approach starts with a kernel space, but we “open up” the
kernel function into a set of features. We will leverage the low-rankness of p in the spirit of diffusion
map for dimension reduction. By using samples of transition pairs {(Xt , Xt+1 )}, we can estimate the
“projection” of p onto the product feature space and finds its leading singular functions. This allows
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

