Learning Auctions with Robust Incentive Guarantees

Jacob Abernethy
Georgia Tech
prof@gatech.edu

Rachel Cummings
Georgia Tech
rachelc@gatech.edu

Jamie Morgenstern
Georgia Tech
jamiemmt.cs@gatech.edu

Bhuvesh Kumar
Georgia Tech
bhuvesh@gatech.edu

Samuel Taggart
Oberlin College
sam.taggart@oberlin.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning Bayesian-optimal revenue-maximizing auctions.
The classical approach to maximizing revenue requires a known prior distribution
on the demand of the bidders, although recent work has shown how to replace
the knowledge of a prior distribution with a polynomial sample. However, in an
online setting, when buyers can participate in multiple rounds, standard learning
techniques are susceptible to strategic overfitting: bidders can improve their longterm wellbeing by manipulating the trajectory of the learning algorithm through
bidding. For example, they may be able to strategically adjust their behavior in
earlier rounds to achieve lower, more favorable future prices. Such non-truthful
behavior can hinder learning and harm revenue. In this paper, we combine tools
from differential privacy, mechanism design, and sample complexity to give a
repeated auction that (1) learns bidder demand from past data, (2) is approximately
revenue-optimal, and (3) strategically robust, as it incentivizes bidders to behave
truthfully.

1

Introduction

When we observe prices in market settings—stock exchanges, farmers’ markets, ad auctions—we
understand that these prices were not chosen arbitrarily. Rather, the seller (auctioneer, market maker,
etc.) selected these prices after observing a stream of previous transactions, which provide relevant
information about the demands of buyers that are key to maximizing income as well as managing
available inventory. The process of setting prices from a growing database of previous sales is
fundamentally a learning problem, with all of the typical tradeoffs akin to bias versus variance, etc.
In the case of repeated auctions, however, there is one additional challenge: market participants are
often quite aware of the underlying learning procedures employed by the auctioneer and can seek
to benefit using deceptive bidding strategies. Buyers, in other words, can aim to induce overfitting,
introducing additional hurdles to learning problem at hand.
Under bayesian assumptions, and in a batch setting where agents only act once, auction pricing
has been well-understood since the work of Myerson [39], who characterized the revenue-optimal
scheme as a function of the prior distribution of values of the bidders. Frequentist alternatives to
this model have been introduced in recent years [21, 13, 4, 18, 37, 5, 38, 25, 17, 23], with the
goal of designing auctions with good revenue guarantees if one does not have a prior but instead is
given only samples from the underlying distribution. These methods, however, still imagine only a
one-shot mechanism and are not robust to multi-round strategic behavior of bidders.
This paper studies the design of multi-round auction-learning algorithms that exhibit theoretical
guarantees that limit a buyer’s ability to manipulate the mechanism towards their own benefit. Our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

