Loaded DiCE: Trading off Bias and Variance in
Any-Order Score Function Estimators for
Reinforcement Learning

Gregory Farquhar ∗
University of Oxford

Shimon Whiteson
University of Oxford

Jakob Foerster
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Gradient-based methods for optimisation of objectives in stochastic settings with
unknown or intractable dynamics require estimators of derivatives. We derive an
objective that, under automatic differentiation, produces low-variance unbiased
estimators of derivatives at any order. Our objective is compatible with arbitrary
advantage estimators, which allows the control of the bias and variance of any-order
derivatives when using function approximation. Furthermore, we propose a method
to trade off bias and variance of higher order derivatives by discounting the impact
of more distant causal dependencies. We demonstrate the correctness and utility of
our objective in analytically tractable MDPs and in meta-reinforcement-learning
for continuous control.

1

Introduction

In stochastic settings, such as reinforcement learning (RL), it is often impossible to compute the
derivative of our objectives, because they depend on an unknown or intractable distribution (such
as the transition function of an RL environment). In these cases, gradient-based optimisation is
only possible through the use of stochastic gradient estimators. Great successes in these domains
have been found by building estimators of first-order derivatives which are amenable to automatic
differentiation, and using them to optimise the parameters of deep neural networks [François-Lavet
et al., 2018].
Nonetheless, for a number of exciting applications, first-order derivatives are insufficient. Metalearning and multi-agent learning often involve differentiating through the learning step of a gradientbased learner [Finn et al., 2017, Stadie et al., 2018, Zintgraf et al., 2019, Foerster et al., 2018a].
Higher-order optimisation methods can also improve sample efficiency [Furmston et al., 2016].
However, estimating these higher order derivatives correctly, with low variance, and easily in the
context of automatic differentiation, has proven challenging.
Foerster et al. [2018b] propose tools for constructing estimators for any-order derivatives that are
easy to use because they avoid the cumbersome manipulations otherwise required to account for the
dependency of the gradient estimates on the distributions they are sampled from. However, their
formulation relies on pure Monte-Carlo estimates of the objective, introducing unacceptable variance
in estimates of first- and higher-order derivatives and limiting the uptake of methods relying on these
derivatives.
Meanwhile, great strides have been made in the development of estimators for first-order derivatives
of stochastic objectives. In reinforcement learning, the use of learned value functions as both critics
and baselines has been extensively studied. The trade-off between bias and variance in gradient
estimators can be made explicit in mixed objectives that combine Monte-Carlo samples of the
∗

Correspondence to gregory.farquhar@cs.ox.ac.uk

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

