Outlier-robust estimation of a sparse linear model
using `1-penalized Huber’s M -estimator

Arnak S. Dalalyan
ENSAE Paristech-CREST
arnak.dalalyan@ensae.fr

Philip Thompson
ENSAE Paristech-CREST
philipthomp@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the problem of estimating a p-dimensional s-sparse vector in a linear
model with Gaussian design and additive noise. In the case where the labels are
contaminated by at most o adversarial outliers, we prove that the `1 -penalized
Huber’s M -estimator based on n samples attains the optimal rate of convergence
(s/n)1/2 + (o/n), up to a logarithmic factor. For more general design matrices,
our results highlight the importance of two properties: the transfer principle and
the incoherence property. These properties with suitable constants are shown to
yield the optimal rates, up to log-factors, of robust estimation with adversarial
contamination.

1

Introduction

Is it possible to attain optimal rates of estimation in outlier-robust sparse regression using penalized
empirical risk minimization (PERM) with convex loss and convex penalties? Current state of literature
on robust estimation does not answer this question. Furthermore, it contains some signals that might
suggest that the answer to this question is negative. First, it has been shown in (Chen et al., 2013,
Theorem 1) that in the case of adversarially corrupted samples, no method based on penalized
empirical loss minimization, with convex loss and convex penalty, can lead to consistent support
recovery. The authors then advocate for robustifying the `1 -penalized least-squares estimators by
replacing usual scalar products by their trimmed counterparts. Second, (Chen et al., 2018) established
that in the multivariate Gaussian model subject to Huber’s contamination, coordinatewise median—
which is the ERM for the `1 -loss—is sub-optimal. Similar result was proved in (Lai et al., 2016,
Prop. 2.1) for the geometric median, the ERM corresponding to the `2 -loss. These negative results
prompted researchers to use other techniques, often of higher computational complexity, to solve the
problem of outlier-corrupted sparse linear regression.
In the present work, we prove that the `1 -penalized empirical risk minimizer based on Huber’s loss is
minimax-rate-optimal, up to possible logarithmic factors. Naturally, this result is not valid in the most
general situation, but we demonstrate its validity under the assumptions that the design matrix satisfies
some incoherence condition and only the response is subject to contamination. The incoherence
condition is shown to be satisfied by the Gaussian design with a covariance matrix that has bounded
and bounded away from zero diagonal entries. This relatively simple setting is chosen in order to
convey the main message of this work: for properly chosen convex loss and convex penalty functions,
the PERM is minimax-rate-optimal in sparse linear regression with adversarially corrupted labels.
To describe more precisely the aforementioned optimality result, let Dn◦ = {(X i , yi◦ ); i = 1, . . . , n}
be iid feature-label pairs such that X i ∈ Rp are Gaussian with zero mean and covariance matrix Σ
and yi◦ are defined by the linear model
∗
yi◦ = X >
i β + ξi ,

i = 1, . . . , n,

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

