Kernel-Based Approaches for Sequence Modeling:
Connections to Neural Methods
Kevin J Liang∗ Guoyin Wang∗ Yitong Li Ricardo Henao Lawrence Carin
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
{kevin.liang, guoyin.wang, yitong.li, ricardo.henao, lcarin}@duke.edu

Abstract
We investigate time-dependent data analysis from the perspective of recurrent
kernel machines, from which models with hidden units and gated memory cells
arise naturally. By considering dynamic gating of the memory cell, a model closely
related to the long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network is derived.
Extending this setup to n-gram filters, the convolutional neural network (CNN),
Gated CNN, and recurrent additive network (RAN) are also recovered as special
cases. Our analysis provides a new perspective on the LSTM, while also extending
it to n-gram convolutional filters. Experiments1 are performed on natural language
processing tasks and on analysis of local field potentials (neuroscience). We
demonstrate that the variants we derive from kernels perform on par or even better
than traditional neural methods. For the neuroscience application, the new models
demonstrate significant improvements relative to the prior state of the art.

1

Introduction

There has been significant recent effort directed at connecting deep learning to kernel machines
[1, 5, 23, 36]. Specifically, it has been recognized that a deep neural network may be viewed as
constituting a feature mapping x → ϕθ (x), for input data x ∈ Rm . The nonlinear function ϕθ (x),
with model parameters θ, has an output that corresponds to a d-dimensional feature vector; ϕθ (x)
may be viewed as a mapping of x to a Hilbert space H, where H ⊂ Rd . The final layer of deep
neural networks typically corresponds to an inner product ω | ϕθ (x), with weight vector ω ∈ H; for
a vector output, there are multiple ω, with ωi| ϕθ (x) defining the i-th component of the output. For
example, in a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) [19], ϕθ (x) is a function defined by the
multiple convolutional layers, the output of which is a d-dimensional feature map; ω represents the
fully-connected layer that imposes inner products on the feature map. Learning ω and θ, i.e., the
cumulative neural network parameters, may be interpreted as learning within a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS) [4], with ω the function in H; ϕθ (x) represents the mapping from the space of
the input x to H, with associated kernel kθ (x, x0 ) = ϕθ (x)| ϕθ (x0 ), where x0 is another input.
Insights garnered about neural networks from the perspective of kernel machines provide valuable
theoretical underpinnings, helping to explain why such models work well in practice. As an example,
the RKHS perspective helps explain invariance and stability of deep models, as a consequence of
the smoothness properties of an appropriate RKHS to variations in the input x [5, 23]. Further, such
insights provide the opportunity for the development of new models.
Most prior research on connecting neural networks to kernel machines has assumed a single input x,
e.g., image analysis in the context of a CNN [1, 5, 23]. However, the recurrent neural network (RNN)
has also received renewed interest for analysis of sequential data. For example, long short-term
∗
1

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Implementations can be found at https://github.com/kevinjliang/kernels2rnns.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

