A Nonconvex Approach for Exact and Efficient
Multichannel Sparse Blind Deconvolution

Qing Qu
New York University
qq213@nyu.edu

Zhihui Zhu˚
Johns Hopkins University
zzhu29@jhu.edu

Xiao Li
Chinese University of Hong Kong
xli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We study the multi-channel sparse blind deconvolution (MCS-BD) problem,
whose task is to simultaneously recover a kernel a and multiple sparse inputs
txi upi“1 from their circulant convolution yi “ a f xi (i “ 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , p). We formulate the task as a nonconvex optimization problem over the sphere. Under mild
statistical assumptions of the data, we prove that the vanilla Riemannian gradient
descent (RGD) method, with random initializations, provably recovers both the
kernel a and the signals txi upi“1 up to a signed shift ambiguity. In comparison
with state-of-the-art results, our work shows significant improvements in terms
of sample complexity and computational efficiency. Our theoretical results are
corroborated by numerical experiments, which demonstrate superior performance
of the proposed approach over the previous methods on both synthetic and real
datasets.

1

Introduction

We study the blind deconvolution problem with multiple inputs: given circulant convolutions
yi “ a f x i P R n ,

i P rps :“ t1, . . . , pu,

(1)

p

we aim to recover both the kernel a P Rn and the signals txi ui“1 P Rn using efficient methods.
Blind deconvolution is an ill-posed problem in its most general form. Nonetheless, problems in practice often exhibits intrinsic low-dimensional structures, showing promises for efficient optimization.
p
One such useful structure is the sparsity of the signals txi ui“1 [1]. The multichannel sparse blind
deconvolution (MCS-BD) broadly appears in the context of communications [2, 3], computational
imaging [4, 5], seismic imaging [6–8], neuroscience [9–13], computer vision [14–16], and more.
• Neuroscience. Detections of neuronal spiking activity is a prerequisite for understanding the
mechanism of brain function. Calcium imaging [12,13] and functional MRI [9,11] are two widely
used techniques, which record the convolution of unknown neuronal transient response and sparse
spike trains. The spike detection problem can be naturally cast as a MCS-BD problem.
• Computational (microscopy) imaging. Super-resolution fluorescent microscopy imaging [4, 17,
18] conquers the resolution limit by solving sparse deconvolution problems. Its basic principle
is using photoswitchable fluorophores that stochastically activate fluorescent molecular, creating
a video sequence of sparse superpositions of point spread function (PSF). In many scenarios
(especially in 3D imaging), as it is often difficult to obtain the PSF due to defocus and unknown
aberrations [19], it is preferred to estimate the point-sources and PSF jointly by solving MCS-BD.
• Image deblurring. Sparse blind deconvolution problems also arise in natural image processing:
when a blurry image is taken due to the resolution limit or malfunction of imaging procedure, it
˚

ZZ is also with the Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Denver.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

