Ease-of-Teaching and Language Structure from
Emergent Communication

Fushan Li
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
fushan@ualberta.ca

Michael Bowling
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada
mbowling@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Artificial agents have been shown to learn to communicate when needed to complete
a cooperative task. Some level of language structure (e.g., compositionality) has
been found in the learned communication protocols. This observed structure is
often the result of specific environmental pressures during training. By introducing
new agents periodically to replace old ones, sequentially and within a population,
we explore such a new pressure — ease of teaching — and show its impact on the
structure of the resulting language.

1

Introduction

Communication among agents is often necessary in partially observable multi-agent cooperative
tasks. Recently, communication protocols have been automatically learned in pure communication
scenarios such as referential games (Lazaridou et al., 2016; Havrylov and Titov, 2017; Evtimova
et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018) as well as alongside behaviour polices (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Foerster
et al., 2016; Lowe et al., 2017; Grover et al., 2018; Jaques et al., 2019).
In addition to demonstrating successful communication in different scenarios, one of the language
properties, compositionality, is often studied in the structure of the resulting communication protocols
(Smith et al., 2003a; Andreas and Klein, 2017; Bogin et al., 2018). Many works (Kirby et al.,
2015; Mordatch and Abbeel, 2018) have illustrated that compositionality can be encouraged by
environmental pressures. Under a series of specific environmental pressures, Kottur et al. (2017) have
coaxed agents to communicate the compositional atoms each turn independently in a grounded multiturn dialog. More general impact of environmental pressures on compositionality is investigated in
Lazaridou et al. (2018) and Choi et al. (2018), including different vocabulary sizes, different message
lengths and carefully constructed distractors.
Compositionality enables languages to represent complex meanings using meanings of its components.
It preserves the expressivity and compressibility of the language at the same time (Kirby et al., 2015).
Moreover, often emergent languages can be hard to interpret for humans. With the compressibility of
fewer rules underlying a language, emergent languages can be easier to understand. Intuitively, a
language that is more easily understood should be easier-to-teach as well. We explore the connection
between ease-of-teaching and the structure of the language through empirical experiments. We show
that a compositional language is, in fact, easier to teach than a less structured one.
To facilitate the emergence of easier-to-teach languages, we create a new environmental pressure for
the speaking agent, by periodically forcing it to interact with new listeners during training. Since the
speaking agent needs to communicate with new listeners over and over again, it has an encouragement
to create a language that is easier-to-teach. We explore this idea, introducing new listeners periodically
to replace old ones, and measure the impact of the new training regime on ease-of-teaching of the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

