GENO – GENeric Optimization
for Classical Machine Learning

Sören Laue
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
&
Data Assessment Solutions GmbH
soeren.laue@uni-jena.de

Matthias Mitterreiter
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Germany
matthias.mitterreiter@uni-jena.de

Joachim Giesen
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena
Germany
joachim.giesen@uni-jena.de

Abstract
Although optimization is the longstanding algorithmic backbone of machine learning, new models still require the time-consuming implementation of new solvers.
As a result, there are thousands of implementations of optimization algorithms
for machine learning problems. A natural question is, if it is always necessary
to implement a new solver, or if there is one algorithm that is sufficient for most
models. Common belief suggests that such a one-algorithm-fits-all approach cannot work, because this algorithm cannot exploit model specific structure and thus
cannot be efficient and robust on a wide variety of problems. Here, we challenge
this common belief. We have designed and implemented the optimization framework GENO (GENeric Optimization) that combines a modeling language with a
generic solver. GENO generates a solver from the declarative specification of an
optimization problem class. The framework is flexible enough to encompass most
of the classical machine learning problems. We show on a wide variety of classical
but also some recently suggested problems that the automatically generated solvers
are (1) as efficient as well-engineered specialized solvers, (2) more efficient by
a decent margin than recent state-of-the-art solvers, and (3) orders of magnitude
more efficient than classical modeling language plus solver approaches.

1

Introduction

Optimization is at the core of machine learning and many other fields of applied research, for instance
operations research, optimal control, and deep learning. The latter fields have embraced frameworks
that combine a modeling language with only a few optimization solvers; interior point solvers in
operations research and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and variants thereof in deep learning
frameworks like TensorFlow, PyTorch, or Caffe. That is in stark contrast to classical (i.e., non-deep)
machine learning, where new problems are often accompanied by new optimization algorithms
and their implementation. However, designing and implementing optimization algorithms is still a
time-consuming and error-prone task.
The lack of an optimization framework for classical machine learning problems can be explained
partially by the common belief, that any efficient solver needs to exploit problem specific structure.
Here, we challenge this common belief.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

