Integer Discrete Flows and Lossless Compression
Emiel Hoogeboom⇤
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
e.hoogeboom@uva.nl

Jorn W.T. Peters⇤
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
j.w.t.peters@uva.nl

Rianne van den Berg†
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
riannevdberg@gmail.com

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
Lossless compression methods shorten the expected representation size of data
without loss of information, using a statistical model. Flow-based models are
attractive in this setting because they admit exact likelihood optimization, which
is equivalent to minimizing the expected number of bits per message. However,
conventional flows assume continuous data, which may lead to reconstruction
errors when quantized for compression. For that reason, we introduce a flow-based
generative model for ordinal discrete data called Integer Discrete Flow (IDF): a
bijective integer map that can learn rich transformations on high-dimensional data.
As building blocks for IDFs, we introduce a flexible transformation layer called
integer discrete coupling. Our experiments show that IDFs are competitive with
other flow-based generative models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that IDF based
compression achieves state-of-the-art lossless compression rates on CIFAR10,
ImageNet32, and ImageNet64. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
lossless compression method that uses invertible neural networks.

1

Introduction

Every day, 2500 petabytes of data are generated. Clearly, there is a need for compression to enable
efficient transmission and storage of this data. Compression algorithms aim to decrease the size
of representations by exploiting patterns and structure in data. In particular, lossless compression
methods preserve information perfectly–which is essential in domains such as medical imaging,
astronomy, photography, text and archiving. Lossless compression and likelihood maximization
are inherently connected through Shannon’s source coding theorem [34], i.e., the expected message
length of an optimal entropy encoder is equal to the negative log-likelihood of the statistical model.
In other words, maximizing the log-likelihood (of data) is equivalent to minimizing the expected
number of bits required per message.
In practice, data is usually high-dimensional which introduces challenges when building statistical
models for compression. In other words, designing the likelihood and optimizing it for high dimensional data is often difficult. Deep generative models permit learning these complicated statistical
models from data and have demonstrated their effectiveness in image, video, and audio modeling
⇤
†

Equal contribution
Now at Google

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

