Differentially Private Distributed Data
Summarization under Covariate Shift ⇤
Kanthi K. Sarpatwar 1
IBM Research
sarpatwa@us.ibm.com

Karthikeyan Shanmugam 1
IBM Research AI
karthikeyan.shanmugam2@ibm.com

Venkata Sitaramagiridharganesh Ganapavarapu
IBM Research
giridhar.ganapavarapu@ibm.com

Ashish Jagmohan
IBM Research
ashishja@us.ibm.com

Roman Vaculin
IBM Research
vaculin@us.ibm.com

Abstract
We envision Artificial Intelligence marketplaces to be platforms where consumers,
with very less data for a target task, can obtain a relevant model by accessing many
private data sources with vast number of data samples. One of the key challenges is
to construct a training dataset that matches a target task without compromising on
privacy of the data sources. To this end, we consider the following distributed data
summarizataion problem. Given K private source datasets denoted by [Di ]i2[K]
and a small target validation set Dv , which may involve a considerable
covariate
S
shift with respect to the sources, compute a summary dataset Ds ✓ i2[K] Di such
that its statistical distance from the validation dataset Dv is minimized. We use the
popular Maximum Mean Discrepancy as the measure of statistical distance. The
non-private problem has received considerable attention in prior art, for example in
prototype selection (Kim et al., NIPS 2016). Our work is the first to obtain strong
differential privacy guarantees while ensuring the quality guarantees of the nonprivate version. We study this problem in a Parsimonious Curator Privacy Model,
where a trusted curator coordinates the summarization process while minimizing
the amount of private information accessed. Our central result is a novel protocol
1
that (a) ensures the curator accesses at most O(K 3 |Ds | + |Dv |) points (b) has
formal privacy guarantees on the leakage of information between the data owners
and (c) closely matches the best known non-private greedy algorithm. Our protocol
uses two hash functions, one inspired by the Rahimi-Recht random features method
and the second leverages state of the art differential privacy mechanisms. Further,
we introduce a novel “noiseless” differentially private auctioning protocol for
winner notification, which may be of independent interest. Apart from theoretical
guarantees, we demonstrate the efficacy of our protocol using real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Integrating new types of data to drive analytics based decision-making can contribute significant
economic impact across a broad spectrum of industries including healthcare, banking, insurance,
⇤1

Equal contribution by these authors.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

