Verified Uncertainty Calibration
Ananya Kumar, Percy Liang, Tengyu Ma
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University

Abstract
Applications such as weather forecasting and personalized medicine demand models that output calibrated probability estimates—those representative of the true
likelihood of a prediction. Most models are not calibrated out of the box but are
recalibrated by post-processing model outputs. We find in this work that popular recalibration methods like Platt scaling and temperature scaling are (i) less calibrated
than reported, and (ii) current techniques cannot estimate how miscalibrated they
are. An alternative method, histogram binning, has measurable calibration error
but is sample inefficient—it requires O(B/✏2 ) samples, compared to O(1/✏2 ) for
scaling methods, where B is the number of distinct probabilities the model can
output. To get the best of both worlds, we introduce the scaling-binning calibrator,
which first fits a parametric function to reduce variance and then bins the function
values to actually ensure calibration. This requires only O(1/✏2 + B) samples.
Next, we show that we can estimate a model’s calibration error more accurately
using an estimator from the meteorological community—or
equivalently measure
p
its calibration error with fewer samples (O( B) instead of O(B)). We validate
our approach with multiclass calibration experiments on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet,
where we obtain a 35% lower calibration error than histogram binning and, unlike
scaling methods, guarantees on true calibration. We implement all these methods in
a Python library:

1

Introduction

The probability that a system outputs for an event should reflect the true frequency of that event: if
an automated diagnosis system says 1,000 patients have cancer with probability 0.1, approximately
100 of them should indeed have cancer. In this case, we say the model is uncertainty calibrated.
The importance of this notion of calibration has been emphasized in personalized medicine [1],
meteorological forecasting [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] and natural language processing applications [7, 8]. As most
modern machine learning models, such as neural networks, do not output calibrated probabilities out
of the box [9, 10, 11], reseachers use recalibration methods that take the output of an uncalibrated
model, and transform it into a calibrated probability. Scaling approaches for recalibration—Platt
scaling [12], isotonic regression [13], and temperature scaling [9]—are widely used and require very
few samples, but do they actually produce calibrated probabilities?
We discover that these methods are less calibrated than reported. Past work approximates a model’s
calibration error using a finite set of bins. We show that by using more bins, we can uncover a higher
calibration error for models on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet. We show that a fundamental limitation
with approaches that output a continuous range of probabilities is that their true calibration error is
unmeasurable with a finite number of bins (Example 3.2).
An alternative approach, histogram binning [10], outputs probabilities from a finite set. Histogram
binning can produce a model that is calibrated, and unlike scaling methods we can measure its
calibration error, but it is sample inefficient. In particular, the number of samples required to calibrate
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

