Levenshtein Transformer
Jiatao Gu† , Changhan Wang† , and Jake Zhao (Junbo)‡
†
Facebook AI Research
‡
New York University  Tigerobo Inc.
†
{jgu, changhan}@fb.com ‡ jakezhao@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
Modern neural sequence generation models are built to either generate tokens
step-by-step from scratch or (iteratively) modify a sequence of tokens bounded
by a fixed length. In this work, we develop Levenshtein Transformer, a new
partially autoregressive model devised for more flexible and amenable sequence
generation. Unlike previous approaches, the basic operations of our model are
insertion and deletion. The combination of them facilitates not only generation
but also sequence refinement allowing dynamic length changes. We also propose
a set of new training techniques dedicated at them, effectively exploiting one as
the other’s learning signal thanks to their complementary nature. Experiments
applying the proposed model achieve comparable or even better performance
with much-improved efficiency on both generation (e.g. machine translation, text
summarization) and refinement tasks (e.g. automatic post-editing). We further
confirm the flexibility of our model by showing a Levenshtein Transformer trained
by machine translation can straightforwardly be used for automatic post-editing. 1

1

Introduction

Neural sequence generation models are widely developed and deployed in tasks such as machine
translation (Bahdanau et al., 2015; Vaswani et al., 2017). As we examine the current frameworks,
the most popular autoregressive models generate tokens step-by-step. If not better, recent nonautoregressive approaches (Gu et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018) have proved it
possible to perform generation within a much smaller number of decoding iterations.
In this paper, we propose Levenshtein Transformer (LevT), aiming to address the lack of flexibility of
the current decoding models. Notably, in the existing frameworks, the length of generated sequences
is either fixed or monotonically increased as the decoding proceeds. This remains incompatible
with human-level intelligence where humans can revise, replace, revoke or delete any part of their
generated text. Hence, LevT is proposed to bridge this gap by breaking the in-so-far standardized
decoding mechanism and replacing it with two basic operations — insertion and deletion.
We train the LevT using imitation learning. The resulted model contains two policies and they are
executed in an alternate manner. Empirically, we show that LevT achieves comparable or better results
than a standard Transformer model on machine translation and summarization, while maintaining
the efficiency advantages benefited from parallel decoding similarly to (Lee et al., 2018). With this
model, we argue that the decoding becomes more flexible. For example, when the decoder is given an
empty token, it falls back to a normal sequence generation model. On the other hand, the decoder acts
as a refinement model when the initial state is a low-quality generated sequence. Indeed, we show
that a LevT trained from machine translation is directly applicable to translation post-editing without
1

Codes for reproducing this paper are released in https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq/tree/
master/examples/nonautoregressive_translation

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

