Reducing Noise in GAN Training with Variance
Reduced Extragradient
Tatjana Chavdarova⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal
Idiap, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Gauthier Gidel⇤
Mila, Université de Montréal
Element AI

François Fleuret
Idiap, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne

Simon Lacoste-Julien†
Mila, Université de Montréal

Abstract
We study the effect of the stochastic gradient noise on the training of generative adversarial networks (GANs) and show that it can prevent the convergence of standard
game optimization methods, while the batch version converges. We address this
issue with a novel stochastic variance-reduced extragradient (SVRE) optimization
algorithm, which for a large class of games improves upon the previous convergence rates proposed in the literature. We observe empirically that SVRE performs
similarly to a batch method on MNIST while being computationally cheaper, and
that SVRE yields more stable GAN training on standard datasets.

1

Introduction

Many empirical risk minimization algorithms rely on gradient-based optimization methods. These
iterative methods handle large-scale training datasets by computing gradient estimates on a subset of
it, a mini-batch, instead of using all the samples at each step, the full batch, resulting in a method
called stochastic gradient descent (SGD, Robbins and Monro (1951); Bottou (2010)).
SGD methods are known to efficiently minimize single objective loss functions, such as cross-entropy
for classification or squared loss for regression. Some algorithms go beyond such training objective
and define multiple agents with different or competing objectives. The associated optimization
paradigm requires a multi-objective joint minimization. An example of such a class of algorithms are
the generative adversarial networks (GANs, Goodfellow et al., 2014), which aim at finding a Nash
equilibrium of a two-player minimax game, where the players are deep neural networks (DNNs).
As of their success on supervised tasks, SGD based algorithms have been adopted for GAN training
as well. Recently, Gidel et al. (2019a) proposed to use an optimization technique coming from the
variational inequality literature called extragradient (Korpelevich, 1976) with provable convergence
guarantees to optimize games (see § 2). However, convergence failures, poor performance (sometimes
referred to as “mode collapse”), or hyperparameter susceptibility are more commonly reported
compared to classical supervised DNN optimization.
We question naive adoption of such methods for game optimization so as to address the reported
training instabilities. We argue that as of the two player setting, noise impedes drastically more the
training compared to single objective one. More precisely, we point out that the noise due to the
stochasticity may break the convergence of the extragradient method, by considering a simplistic
stochastic bilinear game for which it provably does not converge.
⇤
†

equal contribution
Canada CIFAR AI Chair

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

