Robustness Verification of Tree-based Models
Hongge Chen*,1

Huan Zhang*,2 Si Si3 Yang Li3 Duane Boning1 Cho-Jui Hsieh2,3
1
Department of EECS, MIT
2
Department of Computer Science, UCLA
3
Google Research
chenhg@mit.edu, huan@huan-zhang.com, sisidaisy@google.com
liyang@google.com, boning@mtl.mit.edu, chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu
*
Hongge Chen and Huan Zhang contributed equally.

Abstract
We study the robustness verification problem for tree based models, including
decision trees, random forests (RFs) and gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs).
Formal robustness verification of decision tree ensembles involves finding the
exact minimal adversarial perturbation or a guaranteed lower bound of it. Existing
approaches find the minimal adversarial perturbation by a mixed integer linear
programming (MILP) problem, which takes exponential time so is impractical for
large ensembles. Although this verification problem is NP-complete in general,
we give a more precise complexity characterization. We show that there is a
simple linear time algorithm for verifying a single tree, and for tree ensembles
the verification problem can be cast as a max-clique problem on a multi-partite
graph with bounded boxicity. For low dimensional problems when boxicity can
be viewed as constant, this reformulation leads to a polynomial time algorithm.
For general problems, by exploiting the boxicity of the graph, we develop an
efficient multi-level verification algorithm that can give tight lower bounds on
robustness of decision tree ensembles, while allowing iterative improvement and
any-time termination. On RF/GBDT models trained on 10 datasets, our algorithm is
hundreds of times faster than a previous approach that requires solving MILPs, and
is able to give tight robustness verification bounds on large GBDTs with hundreds
of deep trees.

1

Introduction

Recent studies have demonstrated that neural network models are vulnerable to adversarial
perturbations—a small and human imperceptible input perturbation can easily change the predicted
label [37, 17, 6, 15]. This has created serious security threats to many real applications so it becomes
important to formally verify the robustness of machine learning models. Usually, the robustness
verification problem can be cast as finding the minimal adversarial perturbation to an input example
that can change the predicted class label. A series of robustness verification algorithms have been
developed for neural network models [21, 38, 43, 42, 41, 47, 16, 35], where efficient algorithms are
mostly based on convex relaxations of nonlinear activation functions of neural networks [32].
We study the robustness verification problem of tree-based models, including a single decision tree
and tree ensembles such as random forests (RFs) and gradient boosted decision trees (GBDTs). These
models have been widely used in practice [12, 22, 46] and recent studies have demonstrated that both
RFs and GBDTs are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations [20, 13, 9]. It is thus important to develop
a formal robustness verification algorithm for tree-based models. Robustness verification requires
computing the minimal adversarial perturbation. [20] showed that computing minimal adversarial
perturbation for tree ensemble is NP-complete in general, and they proposed a Mixed-Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) based approach to compute the minimal adversarial perturbation. Although
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

