Third-Person Visual Imitation Learning via
Decoupled Hierarchical Controller

Pratyusha Sharma
MIT

Deepak Pathak
Facebook AI Research

Abhinav Gupta
CMU

Abstract
We study a generalized setup for learning from demonstration to build an agent that
can manipulate novel objects in unseen scenarios by looking at only a single video
of human demonstration from a third-person perspective. To accomplish this goal,
our agent should not only learn to understand the intent of the demonstrated thirdperson video in its context but also perform the intended task in its environment
configuration. Our central insight is to enforce this structure explicitly during
learning by decoupling what to achieve (intended task) from how to perform it
(controller). We propose a hierarchical setup where a high-level module learns to
generate a series of first-person sub-goals conditioned on the third-person video
demonstration, and a low-level controller predicts the actions to achieve those
sub-goals. Our agent acts from raw image observations without any access to the
full state information. We show results on a real robotic platform using Baxter for
the manipulation tasks of pouring and placing objects in a box. Project video is
available at https://pathak22.github.io/hierarchical-imitation/.

1

Introduction

Humans have an extraordinary ability to perform complex operations by watching others. How do we
achieve this? Imitation requires inferring the goal/intention of the other person one is trying to imitate,
translating these goals into one’s own context, mapping the third-person’s actions to first-person
actions, and then finally using these translated goals and mapped actions to perform low-level control.
For example, as shown in Figure 1, imitating the pouring task not only involves understanding how
to change object states (tilt glass on top of another glass), but also imagining how to adapt goals to
novel objects in scene followed by low-level control to accomplish the task.
As one can imagine, simultaneously learning these functions is extremely difficult. Therefore, most
of the classical work in robotics has focused on a much-restricted version of the problem. One of the
most common setup is learning from demonstration (LfD) [2, 3, 14, 18, 22, 29], where demonstrations
are collected either by manually actuating the robot, i.e., kinesthetic demonstrations, or controlling
it via teleoperation. LfD involves learning a policy from such demonstrations with the hope that it
would generalize to new location/poses of the objects in unseen scenarios. Some recent works explore
a relatively general version where a robot learns to imitate a video of the demonstration collected
from either the robot’s viewpoint [17] or with only a little different expert viewpoint [28].
In this paper, we tackle the generalized setting of learning from third-person demonstrations. Our
agent first observes a video of a human demonstrating the task in front of it, and then it performs that
task by itself. We do not assume any access to the state-space information of the environment and
learn directly from raw camera images. To be successful, the robot needs to translate the observed
goal states to its own context (imagine the goals in its viewpoint) as well as map the third-person
actions to its trajectory. One way to solve this would be to use classical vision methods that estimate
Work done at CMU and UC Berkeley. Correspondence to pratyuss@csail.mit.edu
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

