On the Curved Geometry of Accelerated
Optimization

Aaron Defazio
Facebook AI Research
New York

Abstract
In this work we propose a differential geometric motivation for Nesterov’s accelerated gradient method (AGM) for strongly-convex problems. By considering
the optimization procedure as occurring on a Riemannian manifold with a natural
structure, The AGM method can be seen as the proximal point method applied
in this curved space. This viewpoint can also be extended to the continuous time
case, where the accelerated gradient method arises from the natural block-implicit
Euler discretization of an ODE on the manifold. We provide an analysis of the
convergence rate of this ODE for quadratic objectives.

1

Introduction

The core algorithms of convex optimization are gradient descent (GD) and the accelerated gradient
method (AGM). These methods are rarely used directly, more often they occur as the building blocks
for distributed, composite, or non-convex optimization. In order to build upon these components, it is
helpful to understand not just how they work, but why. The gradient method is well understood in this
sense. It is commonly viewed as following a direction of steepest descent or as minimizing a quadratic
upper bound. These interpretations provide a motivation for the method as well as suggesting a
potential convergence proof strategy.
The accelerated gradient method in contrast has an identity crisis. Its equational form is remarkably
malleable, allowing for many different ways of writing the same updates. We list a number of these
forms in Table 1. Nesterov’s original motivation for the AGM method used the concept of estimate
sequences. Unfortunately, estimate sequences do not necessarily yield the simplest accelerated
methods when generalized, such as for the composite case (Beck and Teboulle 2009, Nesterov
2007), and they have not been successfully applied in the important finite-sum (variance reduced)
optimization setting.
Because of the complexity of estimate sequences, the AGM method is commonly motivated as a form
of momentum. This view is flawed as a way of introducing the AGM method from first principles, as
the most natural way of using momentum yields the heavy ball method instead:


xk+1 = xk − γ∇f xk + β xk − xk−1 ,
which arises from discretizing the physics of a particle in a potential well with additional friction.
The heavy-ball method does not achieve an accelerated convergence rate on general convex problems,
suggesting that momentum, per se, is not the reason for acceleration. Another contemporary view is
the linear-coupling interpretation of Allen-Zhu and Orecchia [2017], which views the AGM method
as an interpolation between gradient descent and mirror descent. We take a more geometric view in
our interpretation.
In this work we motivate the AGM by introducing it as an application of the proximal-point method:
n
o
η
2
xk = arg min f (x) +
x − xk−1
.
x
2
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

