McDiarmid-Type Inequalities for Graph-Dependent
Variables and Stability Bounds
Rui (Ray) Zhang ∗
School of Mathematics
Monash University
rui.zhang@monash.edu

Xingwu Liu †
Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liuxingwu@ict.ac.cn

Yuyi Wang
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
X-Order Lab, China
yuyiwang920@gmail.com

Liwei Wang
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE,
School of EECS, Peking University
Center for Data Science, Peking University
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
A crucial assumption in most statistical learning theory is that samples are independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, for many real applications,
the i.i.d. assumption does not hold. We consider learning problems in which examples are dependent and their dependency relation is characterized by a graph.
To establish algorithm-dependent generalization theory for learning with non-i.i.d.
data, we first prove novel McDiarmid-type concentration inequalities for Lipschitz
functions of graph-dependent random variables. We show that concentration relies on the forest complexity of the graph, which characterizes the strength of the
dependency. We demonstrate that for many types of dependent data, the forest
complexity is small and thus implies good concentration. Based on our new inequalities, we establish stability bounds for learning graph-dependent data.

1

Introduction

Generalization theory is at the foundation of machine learning. It quantifies how accurate a model
would predict on the test data which the learning algorithm is not able to access during training.
It usually relies on a crucial assumption: The data are independently and identically distributed
(i.i.d.). The i.i.d. assumption allows one to use many powerful tools from probability to prove
strong generalization error bounds. However, in real applications, the data are often non-i.i.d. i.e.,
the data collected can be dependent. There have been extensive discussions on why and how the
data are dependent. We refer the readers to [1, 2].
Establishing generalization theory for dependent data has received a lot of attention [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
A major line of research in this direction models the data dependency by various types of mixing
such as α-mixing [8], β-mixing [9], ϕ-mixing [10], η-mixing [11], etc. Mixing models have been
used in statistical learning theory to establish generalization error bounds based on Rademacher
complexity [4, 6, 12] or algorithmic stability [3, 12, 13] via concentration results [14] or independent
∗

This work was done when this author was a master student at the Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. This research forms part of
Rui (Ray) Zhang’s master thesis submitted to the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in May 2019.
†
Corresponding author
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

