Escaping from saddle points on Riemannian
manifolds
Nicolas Flammarion
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
nicolas.flammarion@epfl.ch

Yue Sun
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
yuesun@uw.edu

Maryam Fazel
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98105
mfazel@uw.edu

Abstract
We consider minimizing a nonconvex, smooth function f on a Riemannian manifold M. We show that a perturbed version of Riemannian gradient descent
algorithm converges to a second-order stationary point (and hence is able to escape
saddle points on the manifold). The rate of convergence depends as 1/2 on the
accuracy , which matches a rate known only for unconstrained smooth minimization. The convergence rate depends polylogarithmically on the manifold dimension
d, hence is almost dimension-free. The rate also has a polynomial dependence
on the parameters describing the curvature of the manifold and the smoothness of
the function. While the unconstrained problem (Euclidean setting) is well-studied,
our result is the first to prove such a rate for nonconvex, manifold-constrained
problems.

1

Introduction

We consider minimizing a non-convex smooth function on a smooth manifold M,
minimizex∈M f (x),

(1)

1

where M is a d-dimensional smooth manifold , and f is twice differentiable, with a Hessian that
is ρ-Lipschitz (assumptions are formalized in section 4). This framework includes a wide range of
fundamental problems (often non-convex), such as PCA (Edelman et al., 1998), dictionary learning
(Sun et al., 2017), low rank matrix completion (Boumal & Absil, 2011), and tensor factorization
(Ishteva et al., 2011). Finding the global minimum to Eq. (1) is in general NP-hard; our goal is to
find an approximate second order stationary point with first order optimization methods. We are
interested in first-order methods because they are extremely prevalent in machine learning, partly
because computing Hessians is often too costly. It is then important to understand how first-order
methods fare when applied to nonconvex problems, and there has been a wave of recent interest on
this topic since (Ge et al., 2015), as reviewed below.
In the Euclidean space, it is known that with random initialization, gradient descent avoids saddle
points asymptotically (Pemantle, 1990; Lee et al., 2016). Lee et al. (2017) (section 5.5) show that this
is also true on smooth manifolds, although the result is expressed in terms of nonstandard manifold
smoothness measures. Also, importantly, this line of work does not give quantitative rates for the
algorithm’s behaviour near saddle points.
1

Here d is the dimension of the manifold itself; we do not consider M as a submanifold of a higher
dimensional space. For instance, if M is a 2-dimensional sphere embedded in R3 , its dimension is d = 2.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

