Sim2real transfer learning for 3D human pose
estimation: motion to the rescue

∗

Deepmind, London

Carl Doersch∗
Andrew Zisserman∗†
†
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Abstract
Synthetic visual data can provide practically infinite diversity and rich labels,
while avoiding ethical issues with privacy and bias. However, for many tasks,
current models trained on synthetic data generalize poorly to real data. The task of
3D human pose estimation is a particularly interesting example of this sim2real
problem, because learning-based approaches perform reasonably well given real
training data, yet labeled 3D poses are extremely difficult to obtain in the wild,
limiting scalability. In this paper, we show that standard neural-network approaches,
which perform poorly when trained on synthetic RGB images, can perform well
when the data is pre-processed to extract cues about the person’s motion, notably
as optical flow and the motion of 2D keypoints. Therefore, our results suggest
that motion can be a simple way to bridge a sim2real gap when video is available.
We evaluate on the 3D Poses in the Wild dataset, the most challenging modern
benchmark for 3D pose estimation, where we show full 3D mesh recovery that is
on par with state-of-the-art methods trained on real 3D sequences, despite training
only on synthetic humans from the SURREAL dataset.

1

Introduction

3D pose estimation, especially for humans, is a classic computer vision problem, with applications
in imitation learning, robotic interaction, and activity understanding. Pose estimation is extremely
challenging with objects that are articulated, deformable, or have wide intra-class variation, as is
the case with humans. Therefore, state-of-the-art approaches rely on neural networks and learning.
However, learning-based methods are extremely data hungry, and acquiring sufficient data in the real
world is difficult. First, there is no straightforward way for people to annotate 3D ground truth poses.
Worse, in settings like industrial warehouses or homes, hundreds of thousands of different object
types may appear, and new objects may arrive at random. Here, even simple labeling will generally
be impractical, much less 3D poses. And any time data involves real humans, issues with privacy,
intellectual property, and bias can become serious obstacles [33, 36, 92].
Synthetic data, however, provides an answer to all these problems, providing a potentially infinite
dataset where ground-truth properties are easily accessible. In domains with many objects where
labeling is impractical, scanning and simulating objects may not be [25, 26]. Furthermore, synthetic
humans do not have any privacy or intellectual property concerns [33], and datasets can be balanced
exactly with respect to sensitive attributes like race, gender, and other physical characteristics,
minimizing the problems algorithms currently have with bias [36, 92]. Even better, simulations can
be made interactive for training robotic policies.
Considering all the advantages, why isn’t simulation the dominant approach in computer vision? One
problem is that neural networks trained on synthetic data do not necessarily work on real data as well
as methods trained directly on real data. Thus, even though such “sim2real” transfer has performed
well in some domains, such as hand tracking [48] or text detection [23], it is rare on the most popular
benchmarks like human pose estimation, object classification, or object detection. Curiously, the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

