Fast Low-rank Metric Learning for Large-scale and
High-dimensional Data

Han Liu † , Zhizhong Han‡ , Yu-Shen Liu† ∗ , Ming Gu†
† School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
BNRist & KLISS, Beijing, China
‡ Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
liuhan15@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
h312h@umd.edu
liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
guming@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-rank metric learning aims to learn better discrimination of data subject to
low-rank constraints. It keeps the intrinsic low-rank structure of datasets and
reduces the time cost and memory usage in metric learning. However, it is still a
challenge for current methods to handle datasets with both high dimensions and
large numbers of samples. To address this issue, we present a novel fast low-rank
metric learning (FLRML) method. FLRML casts the low-rank metric learning
problem into an unconstrained optimization on the Stiefel manifold, which can be
efficiently solved by searching along the descent curves of the manifold. FLRML
significantly reduces the complexity and memory usage in optimization, which
makes the method scalable to both high dimensions and large numbers of samples.
Furthermore, we introduce a mini-batch version of FLRML to make the method
scalable to larger datasets which are hard to be loaded and decomposed in limited
memory. The outperforming experimental results show that our method is with
high accuracy and much faster than the state-of-the-art methods under several
benchmarks with large numbers of high-dimensional data. Code has been made
available at https://github.com/highan911/FLRML.

1

Introduction

Metric learning aims to learn a distance (or similarity) metric from supervised or semi-supervised
information, which provides better discrimination between samples. Metric learning has been widely
used in various area, such as dimensionality reduction [1, 2, 3], robust feature extraction [4, 5] and
information retrieval [6, 7]. For existing metric learning methods, the huge time cost and memory
usage are major challenges when dealing with high-dimensional datasets with large numbers of
samples. To resolve this issue, low-rank metric learning (LRML) methods optimize a metric matrix
subject to low-rank constraints. These methods tend to keep the intrinsic low-rank structure of the
dataset, and also, reduce the time cost and memory usage in the learning process. Reducing the
matrix size in optimization is an important idea to reduce time and memory usage. However, the
size of the matrix to be optimized still increases linearly or squarely with either the dimensions, the
number of samples, or the number of pairwise/triplet constraints. As a result, it is still a research
challenge when dealing with the metric learning task on datasets with both high dimensions and large
numbers of samples [8, 9].
To address this issue, we present a Fast Low-Rank Metric Learning (FLRML). In contrast to state-ofthe-art methods, FLRML introduces a novel formulation to better employ the low rank constraints to
further reduce the complexity, the size of involved matrices, which enables FLRML to achieve high
∗

Corresponding author: Yu-Shen Liu.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

