Dancing to Music

Hsin-Ying Lee1 Xiaodong Yang2 Ming-Yu Liu2 Ting-Chun Wang2
Yu-Ding Lu1 Ming-Hsuan Yang1 Jan Kautz2
1
University of California, Merced 2 NVIDIA

Abstract
Dancing to music is an instinctive move by humans. Learning to model the
music-to-dance generation process is, however, a challenging problem. It requires
significant efforts to measure the correlation between music and dance as one needs
to simultaneously consider multiple aspects, such as style and beat of both music
and dance. Additionally, dance is inherently multimodal and various following
movements of a pose at any moment are equally likely. In this paper, we propose
a synthesis-by-analysis learning framework to generate dance from music. In
the analysis phase, we decompose a dance into a series of basic dance units,
through which the model learns how to move. In the synthesis phase, the model
learns how to compose a dance by organizing multiple basic dancing movements
seamlessly according to the input music. Experimental qualitative and quantitative
results demonstrate that the proposed method can synthesize realistic, diverse,
style-consistent, and beat-matching dances from music.

1

Introduction

Does this sound familiar? Upon hearing certain genres of music, you cannot help but clap your
hands, tap your feet, or swing you hip accordingly. Indeed, music inspires dances in daily life. Via
spontaneous and elementary movements, people compose body movements into dances [24, 31].
However, it is only through proper training and constant practice, professional choreographers learn to
compose the dance moves in a way that is both artistically elegant and rhythmic. Therefore, dance to
music is a creative process that is both innate and acquired. In this paper, we propose a computational
model for the music-to-dance creation process. Inspired by the above observations, we use prior
knowledge to design the music-to-dance framework and train it with a large amount of paired music
and dance data. This is a challenging but interesting generative task with the potential to assist and
expand content creations in arts and sports, such as theatrical performance, rhythmic gymnastics, and
figure skating. Furthermore, modeling how we human beings match our body movements to music
can lead to better understanding of cross-modal synthesis.
Existing methods [13, 22, 26] convert the task into a similarity-based retrieval problem, which shows
limited creativity. In contrast, we formulate the task from the generative perspective. Learning
to synthesize dances from music is a highly challenging generative problem for several reasons.
First, to synchronize dance and music, the generated dance movements, beyond realism, need to be
aligned well with the given musical style and beats. Second, dance is inherently multimodal, i.e., a
dancing pose at any moment can be followed by various possible movements. Third, the long-term
spatio-temporal structures of body movements in dancing result in high kinematic complexity.
In this paper, we propose to synthesize dance from music through a decomposition-to-composition
framework. It first learns how to move (i.e., produce basic movements) in the decomposition/analysis
phase, and then how to compose (i.e., organize basic movements into a sequence) in the composition/synthesis phase. In the top-down decomposition phase, analogous to audio beat tracking of
music [11], we develop a kinematic beat detector to extract movement beats from a dancing sequence.
We then leverage the extracted movement beats to temporally normalize each dancing sequence
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

