Multiclass Performance Metric Elicitation
Gaurush Hiranandani
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
gaurush2@illinois.edu

Shant Boodaghians
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
boodagh2@illinois.edu

Ruta Mehta
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
rutameht@illinois.edu

Oluwasanmi Koyejo
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
sanmi@illinois.edu

Abstract
Metric Elicitation is a principled framework for selecting the performance metric
that best reflects implicit user preferences. However, available strategies have so
far been limited to binary classification. In this paper, we propose novel strategies
for eliciting multiclass classification performance metrics using only relative preference feedback. We also show that the strategies are robust to both finite sample
and feedback noise.

1

Introduction

Consider a machine learning model for cancer diagnosis and treatment support where the doctor
applies a cost-sensitive predictive model to classify patients into cancer categories [23, 24]. It is clear
that the chosen costs directly determine the model decisions, and thus dictate the patient outcomes.
This raises an obvious question, how should the cost-tradeoffs be chosen so that it reflects the
expert’s decision-making? As it turns out, going from expert intuition to precise quantitative cost
trade-offs is often difficult. Needless to say, this is not only true for medical applications as there are
a plethora of domains where the question of ‘what to measure’ poses a serious ongoing challenge [3].
To address this issue, Hiranandani et al. [7] recently formalized the problem of Metric Elicitation
(ME), which aims to determine the user’s performance metric based on preference feedback. The
motivation behind ME is that employing the performance metrics which reflect innate user tradeoffs
will allow one to learn models that best capture user preferences. As humans are often inaccurate in
providing absolute quality feedback [17], Hiranandani et al. [7] propose to use pairwise comparison
queries, where the user (oracle) is asked to compare two classifiers and provide an indicator of relative
preference. They show that in various settings, the user’s innate metric can be elicited based on this
preference feedback. Figure 1 (reproduced from Hiranandani et al. [7]) illustrates this framework.
Conceptually, ME is applicable to any learning setting. However, Hiranandani et al. [7] only proposed
methods for eliciting binary classification performance metrics. This manuscript extends prior
work by proposing ME strategies for the more complicated multiclass classification setting – thus
significantly increasing the use cases for ME. Similar to the binary case, we also consider the most
common families of performance metrics which are functions of the confusion matrix [15]; however,
in our case, the elements of the confusion matrix summarize multiclass error statistics.
In order to perform efficient multilcass performance metric elicitation, we study novel geometric
properties of the space of multiclass confusion matrices. Our analysis reveals that due to structural
differences between the space of binary and multiclass confusions, we can not trivially extend the
elicitation procedure used for binary to the multiclass case. Instead, we provide novel strategies for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

