Twin Auxiliary Classifiers GAN
Mingming Gong *1,3 , Yanwu Xu *1 , Chunyuan Li2 , Kun Zhang3 , and Kayhan Batmanghelich1
1

Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, {mig73,yanwuxu,kayhan}@pitt.edu
2
Microsoft Research, Redmond, cl319@duke.edu
3
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Conditional generative models enjoy remarkable progress over the past few years.
One of the popular conditional models is Auxiliary Classifier GAN (AC-GAN),
which generates highly discriminative images by extending the loss function of
GAN with an auxiliary classifier. However, the diversity of the generated samples
by AC-GAN tends to decrease as the number of classes increases, hence limiting its
power on large-scale data. In this paper, we identify the source of the low diversity
issue theoretically and propose a practical solution to solve the problem. We
show that the auxiliary classifier in AC-GAN imposes perfect separability, which
is disadvantageous when the supports of the class distributions have significant
overlap. To address the issue, we propose Twin Auxiliary Classifiers Generative
Adversarial Net (TAC-GAN) that further benefits from a new player that interacts
with other players (the generator and the discriminator) in GAN. Theoretically, we
demonstrate that TAC-GAN can effectively minimize the divergence between the
generated and real-data distributions. Extensive experimental results show that our
TAC-GAN can successfully replicate the true data distributions on simulated data,
and significantly improves the diversity of class-conditional image generation on
real datasets.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1] are a framework to learn the data generating distribution
implicitly. GANs mimic sampling from a target distribution by training a generator that maps samples
drawn from a canonical distribution to the data space. A distinctive feature of GANs is that the
discriminator that evaluates the separability of the real and generated data distributions [1–4]. If the
discriminator can hardly distinguish between real and generated data, the generator is likely to provide
a good approximation to the true data distribution. To generate high-fidelity images, much recent
research has focused on designing more advanced network architectures [5, 6], developing more
stable objective functions [7–9, 3], enforcing appropriate constraints on the discriminator [10–12], or
improving training techniques [7, 13].
Conditional GANs (cGANs) [14] are a variant of GANs that take advantage of extra information
(condition) and have been widely used for generation of class-conditioned images [15–18] and text [19,
20]. A major difference between cGANs and GANs is that the cGANs feed the condition to both the
generator and the discriminator to lean the joint distributions of images and the condition random
variables. Most methods feed the conditional information by concatenating it (or its embedding)
with the input or the feature vector at specific layers [14, 21, 15, 22, 23, 20]. Recently, ProjectioncGAN [24] improves the quality of the generated images using a specific discriminator that takes the
inner product between the embedding of the conditioning variable and the feature vector of the input
?

Equal Contribution
The code is available at https://github.com/batmanlab/twin_ac.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

