Learning Nearest Neighbor Graphs from Noisy
Distance Samples
Blake Mason ⇤
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
bmason3@wisc.edu

Ardhendu Tripathy ⇤
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
astripathy@wisc.edu

Robert Nowak
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
rdnowak@wisc.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning the nearest neighbor graph of a dataset of n
items. The metric is unknown, but we can query an oracle to obtain a noisy estimate
of the distance between any pair of items. This framework applies to problem
domains where one wants to learn people’s preferences from responses commonly
modeled as noisy distance judgments. In this paper, we propose an active algorithm
to find the graph with high probability and analyze its query complexity. In contrast
to existing work that forces Euclidean structure, our method is valid for general
metrics, assuming only symmetry and the triangle inequality. Furthermore, we
demonstrate efficiency of our method empirically and theoretically, needing only
2
O(n log(n) 2 ) queries in favorable settings, where
accounts for the effect
of noise. Using crowd-sourced data collected for a subset of the UT Zappos50K
dataset, we apply our algorithm to learn which shoes people believe are most
similar and show that it beats both an active baseline and ordinal embedding.

1

Introduction

In modern machine learning applications, we frequently seek to learn proximity/ similarity relationships between a set of items given only noisy access to pairwise distances. For instance, practitioners
wishing to estimate internet topology frequently collect one-way-delay measurements to estimate the
distance between a pair of hosts [9]. Such measurements are affected by physical constraints as well as
server load, and are often noisy. Researchers studying movement in hospitals from WiFi localization
data likewise contend with noisy distance measurements due to both temporal variability and varying
signal strengths inside the building [4]. Additionally, human judgments are commonly modeled as
noisy distances [26, 23]. As an example, Amazon Discover asks customers their preferences about
different products and uses this information to recommend new items it believes are similar based
on this feedback. We are often primarily interested in the closest or most similar item to a given
one– e.g., the closest server, the closest doctor, the most similar product. The particular item of
interest may not be known a priori. Internet traffic can fluctuate, different patients may suddenly need
attention, and customers may be looking for different products. To handle this, we must learn the
closest/ most similar item for each item. This paper introduces the problem of learning the Nearest
Neighbor Graph that connects each item to its nearest neighbor from noisy distance measurements.
Problem Statement: Consider a set of n points X = {x1 , · · · , xn } in a metric space. The metric
is unknown, but we can query a stochastic oracle for an estimate of any pairwise distance. In as few
queries as possible, we seek to learn a nearest neighbor graph of X that is correct with probability
1
, where each xi is a vertex and has a directed edge to its nearest neighbor xi⇤ 2 X \ {xi }.
⇤

Authors contributed equally to this paper and are listed alphabetically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

