Almost Horizon-Free Structure-Aware
Best Policy Identification with a Generative Model

Andrea Zanette
Institute for Computational and Mathematical Engineering,
Stanford University, CA
zanette@stanford.edu
Mykel J. Kochenderfer
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Stanford University, CA
mykel@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill
Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University, CA
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper focuses on the problem of computing an ǫ-optimal policy in a discounted
Markov Decision Process (MDP) provided that we can access the reward and
transition function through a generative model. We propose an algorithm that is
initially agnostic to the MDP but that can leverage the specific MDP structure,
expressed in terms of variances of the rewards and next-state value function, and
gaps in the optimal action-value function to reduce the sample complexity needed
to find a good policy, precisely highlighting the contribution of each state-action
pair to the final sample complexity. A key feature of our analysis is that it removes
all horizon dependencies in the sample complexity of suboptimal actions except
for the intrinsic scaling of the value function and a constant additive term.

1

Introduction

A key goal is to design reinforcement learning (RL) agents that can leverage problem structure to
efficiently learn a good policy, especially in problems with very long time horizons. Ideally the RL
algorithm should be able to adjust without apriori information about the problem structure. Formal
analyses that characterize the performance of such algorithms yielding instance-dependent bound
help to advance our core understanding of the characteristics that govern the hardness of learning to
make good decisions under uncertainty.
Though there is relatively limited work in reinforcement learning, strong problem-dependent guarantees are available for multi-armed bandits. In particular, well known bounds for online learning
scale as a function of the gap between the expected reward of a particular action and the optimal
action [ABF02] and also on the variance of the rewards [AMS09]. In the pure exploration setting
in bandits, which is related to the setting we consider in this paper, there exist multiple algorithms
with problem-dependent bounds [EMM06; MM94; MSA08; Jam+14; BMS09; ABM10; GGL12;
KKS13] of this form. Ideally the complexity of learning to make good decisions in reinforcement
learning tasks would scale with previously identified quantities of gap and variance over the next
value function. As a step towards this, in this paper we introduce an algorithm for an RL agent
operating in a discrete state and action space that has access to a generative model and can leverage
problem-dependent structure to have strong instance-dependent PAC sample complexity bounds
that are a function of the variance of the rewards and next state value functions, as well as the gaps
between the optimal and suboptimal state-action values. While the sequential setting brings additional
difficulties due to possibly long horizon, our bounds also show that in the dominant terms, our
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

