Learning-Based Low-Rank Approximations

Piotr Indyk
CSAIL, MIT
indyk@mit.edu

Ali Vakilian∗
University of Wisconsin - Madison
vakilian@wisc.edu

Yang Yuan∗
Tsinghua University
yuanyang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We introduce a “learning-based” algorithm for the low-rank decomposition problem: given an n × d matrix A, and a parameter k, compute a rank-k matrix A0 that
minimizes the approximation loss kA − A0 kF . The algorithm uses a training set of
input matrices in order to optimize its performance. Specifically, some of the most
efficient approximate algorithms for computing low-rank approximations proceed
by computing a projection SA, where S is a sparse random m × n “sketching
matrix”, and then performing the singular value decomposition of SA. We show
how to replace the random matrix S with a “learned” matrix of the same sparsity
to reduce the error.
Our experiments show that, for multiple types of data sets, a learned sketch matrix
can substantially reduce the approximation loss compared to a random matrix S,
sometimes by one order of magnitude. We also study mixed matrices where only
some of the rows are trained and the remaining ones are random, and show that
matrices still offer improved performance while retaining worst-case guarantees.
Finally, to understand the theoretical aspects of our approach, we study the special
case of m = 1. In particular, we give an approximation algorithm for minimizing
the empirical loss, with approximation factor depending on the stable rank of
matrices in the training set. We also show generalization bounds for the sketch
matrix learning problem.

1

Introduction

The success of modern machine learning made it applicable to problems that lie outside of the
scope of “classic AI”. In particular, there has been a growing interest in using machine learning
to improve the performance of “standard” algorithms, by fine-tuning their behavior to adapt to the
properties of the input distribution, see e.g., [Wang et al., 2016, Khalil et al., 2017, Kraska et al., 2018,
Balcan et al., 2018, Lykouris and Vassilvitskii, 2018, Purohit et al., 2018, Gollapudi and Panigrahi,
2019, Mitzenmacher, 2018, Mousavi et al., 2015, Baldassarre et al., 2016, Bora et al., 2017, Metzler
et al., 2017, Hand and Voroninski, 2018, Khani et al., 2019, Hsu et al., 2019]. This “learning-based”
approach to algorithm design has attracted a considerable attention over the last few years, due to its
potential to significantly improve the efficiency of some of the most widely used algorithmic tasks.
Many applications involve processing streams of data (video, data logs, customer activity etc) by
executing the same algorithm on an hourly, daily or weekly basis. These data sets are typically not
“random” or “worst-case”; instead, they come from some distribution which does not change rapidly
from execution to execution. This makes it possible to design better algorithms tailored to the specific
data distribution, trained on past instances of the problem.
The method has been particularly successful in the context of compressed sensing. In the latter
framework, the goal is to recover an approximation to an n-dimensional vector x, given its “linear
measurement” of the form Sx, where S is an m × n matrix. Theoretical results [Donoho, 2006,
∗

This work was mostly done when the second and third authors were at MIT.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

