Correlation Clustering
with Adaptive Similarity Queries

Marco Bressan
Department of Computer Science
University of Rome Sapienza

Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Department of Computer Science & DSRC
Università degli Studi di Milano

Andrea Paudice
Department of Computer Science
Università degli Studi di Milano & IIT

Fabio Vitale
Department of Computer Science
University of Lille & Inria

Abstract
In correlation clustering, we are given n objects together with a binary similarity
score between each pair of them. The goal is to partition the objects into clusters
so to minimise the disagreements with the scores. In this work we investigate
correlation clustering as an active learning problem: each similarity score can be
learned by making a query, and the goal is to minimise both the disagreements
and the total number of queries. On the one hand, we describe simple active
learning algorithms, which provably achieve an almost optimal trade-off while
giving cluster recovery guarantees, and we test them on different datasets. On the
other hand, we prove information-theoretical bounds on the number of queries
necessary to guarantee a prescribed disagreement bound. These results give a rich
characterization of the trade-off between queries and clustering error.

1

Introduction

Clustering is a central problem in unsupervised learning. A clustering problem is typically represented
by a set of elements together with a notion of similarity (or dissimilarity) between them. When the
elements are points in a metric space, dissimilarity can be measured via a distance function. In more
general settings, when the elements to be clustered are members of an abstract set V , similarity is
defined by an arbitrary symmetric function σ defined on pairs of distinct elements in V . Correlation
Clustering (CC) [4] is a well-known special case where σ is a {−1, +1}-valued function establishing
whether any two distinct elements of V are similar or not. The objective of CC is to cluster the points
in V so to maximize the correlation with σ. More precisely, CC seeks a clustering minimizing the
number of errors, where an error is given by any pair of elements having similarity −1 and belonging
to the same cluster, or having similarity +1 and belonging to different clusters. Importantly, there
are no a priori limitations on the number of clusters or their sizes: all partitions of V , including
the trivial ones, are valid. Given V and σ, the error achieved by an optimal clustering is known as
the Correlation Clustering index, denoted by OPT. A convenient way of representing σ is through
a graph G = (V, E) where {u, v} ∈ E iff σ(u, v) = +1. Note that OPT = 0 is equivalent to a
perfectly clusterable graph (i.e., G is the union of disjoint cliques). Since its introduction, CC has
attracted a lot of interest in the machine learning community, and has found numerous applications in
entity resolution [16], image analysis [18], and social media analysis [25]. Known problems in data
integration [14] and biology [5] can be cast into the framework of CC [26].
From a machine learning viewpoint, we are interested in settings when the similarity function σ is
not available beforehand, and the algorithm must learn σ by querying for its value on pairs of objects.
This setting is motivated by scenarios in which the similarity information is costly to obtain. For
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

