GPipe: Efficient Training of Giant Neural Networks
using Pipeline Parallelism

Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Mia Xu Chen, Dehao Chen,
HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam, Quoc V. Le, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen
{huangyp,ylc,ankurbpn,orhanf,miachen,dehao
hyouklee,jngiam,qvl,yonghui,zhifengc}
@google.com

Abstract
Scaling up deep neural network capacity has been known as an effective approach
to improving model quality for several different machine learning tasks. In many
cases, increasing model capacity beyond the memory limit of a single accelerator has required developing special algorithms or infrastructure. These solutions
are often architecture-specific and do not transfer to other tasks. To address the
need for efficient and task-independent model parallelism, we introduce GPipe, a
pipeline parallelism library that allows scaling any network that can be expressed
as a sequence of layers. By pipelining different sub-sequences of layers on separate accelerators, GPipe provides the flexibility of scaling a variety of different
networks to gigantic sizes efficiently. Moreover, GPipe utilizes a novel batchsplitting pipelining algorithm, resulting in almost linear speedup when a model
is partitioned across multiple accelerators. We demonstrate the advantages of
GPipe by training large-scale neural networks on two different tasks with distinct
network architectures: (i) Image Classification: We train a 557-million-parameter
AmoebaNet model and attain a top-1 accuracy of 84.4% on ImageNet-2012, (ii)
Multilingual Neural Machine Translation: We train a single 6-billion-parameter,
128-layer Transformer model on a corpus spanning over 100 languages and achieve
better quality than all bilingual models.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has seen great progress over the last decade, partially thanks to the development of
methods that have facilitated scaling the effective capacity of neural networks. This trend has been
most visible for image classification, as demonstrated by the accuracy improvements on ImageNet
with the increase in model capacity (Figure 1a). A similar phenomenon can also be observed in
the context of natural language processing (Figure 1b) where simple shallow models of sentence
representations [1, 2] are outperformed by their deeper and larger counterparts [3, 4].
While larger models have brought remarkable quality improvements to several fields, scaling neural
networks introduces significant practical challenges. Hardware constraints, including memory
limitations and communication bandwidths on accelerators (GPU or TPU), force users to divide larger
models into partitions and to assign different partitions to different accelerators. However, efficient
model parallelism algorithms are extremely hard to design and implement, which often requires the
practitioner to make difficult choices among scaling capacity, flexibility (or specificity to particular
tasks and architectures) and training efficiency. As a result, most efficient model-parallel algorithms
are architecture and task-specific. With the growing number of applications of deep learning, there is
an ever-increasing demand for reliable and flexible infrastructure that allows researchers to easily
scale neural networks for a large variety of machine learning tasks.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

