A Structured Prediction Approach for Generalization
in Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Nicolas Carion
Facebook, Paris
Lamsade, Univ. Paris Dauphine
alcinos@fb.com

Gabriel Synnaeve
Facebook, NYC
gab@fb.com

Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook, Paris
lazaric@fb.com

Nicolas Usunier
Facebook, Paris
usunier@fb.com

Abstract
Effective coordination is crucial to solve multi-agent collaborative (MAC) problems. While centralized reinforcement learning methods can optimally solve small
MAC instances, they do not scale to large problems and they fail to generalize
to scenarios different from those seen during training. In this paper, we consider
MAC problems with some intrinsic notion of locality (e.g., geographic proximity)
such that interactions between agents and tasks are locally limited. By leveraging this property, we introduce a novel structured prediction approach to assign
agents to tasks. At each step, the assignment is obtained by solving a centralized
optimization problem (the inference procedure) whose objective function is parameterized by a learned scoring model. We propose different combinations of
inference procedures and scoring models able to represent coordination patterns of
increasing complexity. The resulting assignment policy can be efficiently learned
on small problem instances and readily reused in problems with more agents and
tasks (i.e., zero-shot generalization). We report experimental results on a toy search
and rescue problem and on several target selection scenarios in StarCraft: Brood
War1 , in which our model significantly outperforms strong rule-based baselines on
instances with 5 times more agents and tasks than those seen during training.

1

Introduction

Multi-agent collaboration (MAC) problems often decompose into several intermediate tasks that need
to be completed to achieve a global goal. A common measure of size, or difficulty, of MAC problems
is the number of agents and tasks: more tasks usually require longer-term planning, the joint action
space grows exponentially with the number of agents, and the joint state space is exponential in both
the numbers of tasks and agents. While general-purpose reinforcement learning (RL) methods [26]
are theoretically able to solve (centralized) MAC problems, their learning (e.g., estimating the optimal
action-value function) and computational (e.g., deriving the greedy policy from an action-value
function) complexity grows exponentially with the dimension of the problem. A way to address this
limitation is to learn in problems with few agents and a small planning horizon and then generalize
the solution to more complex instances. Unfortunately, standard RL methods are not able to perform
any meaningful generalization to scenarios different from those seen during training. In this paper
we study problems whose structure can be exploited to learn policies in small instances that can be
efficiently generalized across scenarios of different size.
1

StarCraft and its expansion StarCraft: Brood War are trademarks of Blizzard EntertainmentTM .

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

