Sequence Modeling with
Unconstrained Generation Order
Dmitrii Emelianenko1,2

Elena Voita1,3

Pavel Serdyukov1

1

2

Yandex, Russia
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Russia
3
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
{dimdi-y, lena-voita, pavser}@yandex-team.ru

Abstract
The dominant approach to sequence generation is to produce a sequence in some
predefined order, e.g. left to right. In contrast, we propose a more general model
that can generate the output sequence by inserting tokens in any arbitrary order.
Our model learns decoding order as a result of its training procedure. Our experiments show that this model is superior to fixed order models on a number
of sequence generation tasks, such as Machine Translation, Image-to-LaTeX and
Image Captioning.1

1

Introduction

Neural approaches to sequence generation have seen a variety of applications such as language
modeling [1], machine translation [2, 3], music generation [4] and image captioning [5]. All these
tasks involve modeling a probability distribution over sequences of some kind of tokens.
Usually, sequences are generated in the left-to-right manner, by iteratively adding tokens to the
end of an unfinished sequence. Although this approach is widely used due to its simplicity, such
decoding restricts the generation process. Generating sequences in the left-to-right manner reduces
output diversity [6] and could be unsuited for the target sequence structure [7]. To alleviate this
issue, previous studies suggested exploiting prior knowledge about the task (e.g. the semantic roles of
words in a natural language sentence or the concept of language branching) to select the preferable
generation order [6, 7, 8]. However, these approaches are still limited by predefined generation order,
which is the same for all input instances.

Figure 1: Examples of different decoding orders: left-to-right, alternative and right-to-left orders
respectively. Each line represents one decoding step.
In this work, we propose INTRUS: INsertion TRansformer for Unconstrained order Sequence
modeling. Our model has no predefined order constraint and generates sequences by iteratively
adding tokens to a subsequence in any order, not necessarily in the order they appear in the final
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
1

The source code is available at https://github.com/TIXFeniks/neurips2019_intrus.

