Model-Based Reinforcement Learning with
Adversarial Training for Online Recommendation

Xueying Bai∗‡ , Jian Guan∗ § , Hongning Wang†
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
§
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
†
Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia
xubai@cs.stonybrook.edu, j-guan19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
hw5x@virginia.edu
‡

Abstract
Reinforcement learning is well suited for optimizing policies of recommender
systems. Current solutions mostly focus on model-free approaches, which require
frequent interactions with the real environment, and thus are expensive in model
learning. Offline evaluation methods, such as importance sampling, can alleviate
such limitations, but usually request a large amount of logged data and do not
work well when the action space is large. In this work, we propose a model-based
reinforcement learning solution which models user-agent interaction for offline
policy learning via a generative adversarial network. To reduce bias in the learned
model and policy, we use a discriminator to evaluate the quality of generated data
and scale the generated rewards. Our theoretical analysis and empirical evaluations
demonstrate the effectiveness of our solution in learning policies from the offline
and generated data.

1

Introduction

Recommender systems have been successful in connecting users with their most interested content in
a variety of application domains. However, because of users’ diverse interest and behavior patterns,
only a small fraction of items are presented to each user, with even less feedback recorded. This gives
relatively little information on user-system interactions for such a large state and action space [2], and
thus brings considerable challenges to construct a useful recommendation policy based on historical
interactions. It is important to develop solutions to learn users’ preferences from sparse user feedback
such as clicks and purchases [11, 13] to further improve the utility of recommender systems.
Users’ interests can be short-term or long-term and reflected by different types of feedback [35]. For
example, clicks are generally considered as short-term feedback which reflects users’ immediate
interests during the interaction, while purchase reveals users’ long-term interests which usually
happen after several clicks. Considering both users’ short-term and long-term interests, we frame the
recommender system as a reinforcement learning (RL) agent, which aims to maximize users’ overall
long-term satisfaction without sacrificing the recommendations’ short-term utility [28].
Classical model-free RL methods require collecting large quantities of data by interacting with
the environment, e.g., a population of users. Therefore, without interacting with real users, a
recommender cannot easily probe for reward in previously unexplored regions in the state and action
space. However, it is prohibitively expensive for a recommender to interact with users for reward
and model updates, because bad recommendations (e.g., for exploration) hurt user satisfaction and
increase the risk of user drop out. In this case, it is preferred for a recommender to learn a policy by
fully utilizing the logged data that is acquired from other policies (e.g., previously deployed systems)
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

