Bayesian Batch Active Learning as
Sparse Subset Approximation

Robert Pinsler
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
rp586@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Gordon
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
jg801@cam.ac.uk

Eric Nalisnick
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
etn22@cam.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Leveraging the wealth of unlabeled data produced in recent years provides great
potential for improving supervised models. When the cost of acquiring labels is
high, probabilistic active learning methods can be used to greedily select the most
informative data points to be labeled. However, for many large-scale problems
standard greedy procedures become computationally infeasible and suffer from
negligible model change. In this paper, we introduce a novel Bayesian batch
active learning approach that mitigates these issues. Our approach is motivated by
approximating the complete data posterior of the model parameters. While naive
batch construction methods result in correlated queries, our algorithm produces
diverse batches that enable efficient active learning at scale. We derive interpretable
closed-form solutions akin to existing active learning procedures for linear models,
and generalize to arbitrary models using random projections. We demonstrate the
benefits of our approach on several large-scale regression and classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Much of machine learning’s success stems from leveraging the wealth of data produced in recent
years. However, in many cases expert knowledge is needed to provide labels, and access to these
experts is limited by time and cost constraints. For example, cameras could easily provide images
of the many fish that inhabit a coral reef, but an ichthyologist would be needed to properly label
each fish with the relevant biological information. In such settings, active learning (AL) [1] enables
data-efficient model training by intelligently selecting points for which labels should be requested.
Taking a Bayesian perspective, a natural approach to AL is to choose the set of points that maximally
reduces the uncertainty in the posterior over model parameters [2]. Unfortunately, solving this combinatorial optimization problem is NP-hard. Most AL methods iteratively solve a greedy approximation,
e.g. using maximum entropy [3] or maximum information gain [2, 4]. These approaches alternate
between querying a single data point and updating the model, until the query budget is exhausted.
However, as we discuss below, sequential greedy methods have severe limitations in modern machine
learning applications, where datasets are massive and models often have millions of parameters.
A possible remedy is to select an entire batch of points at every AL iteration. Batch AL approaches
dramatically reduce the computational burden caused by repeated model updates, while resulting in
much more significant learning updates. It is also more practical in applications where the cost of
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

