Classification-by-Components: Probabilistic
Modeling of Reasoning over a Set of Components

Sascha Saralajew1,∗ Lars Holdijk1,∗ Maike Rees1 Ebubekir Asan1 Thomas Villmann2,∗
1
Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Weissach, Germany,
sascha.saralajew@porsche.de
2
University of Applied Sciences Mittweida, Mittweida, Germany,
thomas.villmann@hs-mittweida.de

Abstract
Neural networks are state-of-the-art classification approaches but are generally
difficult to interpret. This issue can be partly alleviated by constructing a precise decision process within the neural network. In this work, a network architecture, denoted as Classification-By-Components network (CBC), is proposed.
It is restricted to follow an intuitive reasoning based decision process inspired
by B IEDERMAN’s recognition-by-components theory from cognitive psychology.
The network is trained to learn and detect generic components that characterize
objects. In parallel, a class-wise reasoning strategy based on these components is
learned to solve the classification problem. In contrast to other work on reasoning,
we propose three different types of reasoning: positive, negative, and indefinite.
These three types together form a probability space to provide a probabilistic classifier. The decomposition of objects into generic components combined with the
probabilistic reasoning provides by design a clear interpretation of the classification decision process. The evaluation of the approach on MNIST shows that
CBCs are viable classifiers. Additionally, we demonstrate that the inherent interpretability offers a profound understanding of the classification behavior such that
we can explain the success of an adversarial attack. The method’s scalability is
successfully tested using the I MAGE N ET dataset.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) dominate the field of machine learning in terms of image classification
accuracy. Due to their design, considered as black boxes, it is however hard to gain insights into
their decision making process and to interpret why they sometimes behave unexpectedly. In general,
the interpretability of NNs is under controversial discussion [1–4] and pushed researchers to new
methods to improve the weaknesses [5–7]. This is also highlighted in the topic of robustness of NNs
against adversarial examples [8]. Prototype-based classifiers like Learning Vector Quantizers [9, 10]
are more interpretable and can provide insights into their classification processes. Unfortunately,
they are still hindered by their low base accuracies.
The method proposed in this work aims to answer the question of interpretability by drawing inspirations from B IEDERMAN’s theory recognition-by-components [11] from the field of cognitive
psychology. Roughly speaking, B IEDERMAN’s theory describes how humans recognize complex
objects by assuming that objects can be decomposed into generic parts that operate as structural
primitives, called components. Objects are then classified by matching the extracted decomposition
plan with a class Decomposition Plan (DP) for each potential object class. Intuitively, the class DPs
∗

Authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

