Attentive State-Space Modeling of
Disease Progression

Ahmed M. Alaa
ECE Department
UCLA
ahmedmalaa@ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
UCLA, University of Cambridge, and
Alan Turing Institute
{mv472@cam.ac.uk,mihaela@ee.ucla.edu}

Abstract
Models of disease progression are instrumental for predicting patient outcomes
and understanding disease dynamics. Existing models provide the patient with
pragmatic (supervised) predictions of risk, but do not provide the clinician with
intelligible (unsupervised) representations of disease pathology. In this paper, we
develop the attentive state-space model, a deep probabilistic model that learns
accurate and interpretable structured representations for disease trajectories. Unlike
Markovian state-space models, in which state dynamics are memoryless, our model
uses an attention mechanism to create “memoryful” dynamics, whereby attention
weights determine the dependence of future disease states on past medical history.
To learn the model parameters from medical records, we develop an inference algorithm that jointly learns a compiled inference network and the model parameters,
leveraging the attentive representation to construct a variational approximation of
the posterior state distribution. Experiments on data from the UK Cystic Fibrosis
registry show that our model demonstrates superior predictive accuracy, in addition
to providing insights into disease progression dynamic.

1

Introduction

Chronic diseases — such as cardiovascular disease, cancer and diabetes — progress slowly throughout
a patient’s lifetime, causing increasing burden to the patients, their carers, and the healthcare delivery
system [1]. The advent of modern electronic health records (EHR) provides an opportunity for
building models of disease progression that can predict individual-level disease trajectories, and
distill intelligible and actionable representations of disease dynamics [2]. Models that are both
highly accurate and capable of extracting knowledge from data are important for informing practice
guidelines and identifying the patients’ needs and interactions with health services [3, 4, 5, 6].
In this paper, we develop a deep probabilistic model of disease progression that capitalizes on both
the interpretable structured representations of probabilistic models and the predictive strength of deep
learning methods. Our model uses a state-space representation to segment a patient’s disease trajectory
into “stages” of progression that manifest through clinical observations. But unlike conventional
state-space models, which are predominantly Markovian, our model uses recurrent neural networks
(RNN) to capture more complex state dynamics. The proposed model learns hidden disease states
from observational data in an unsupervised fashion, and hence it is suitable for EHR data where a
patient’s record is seldom annotated with “labels” indicating their true health state [7].
Our model uses an attention mechanism to capture state dynamics, hence we call it an attentive statespace model. The attention mechanism observes the patient’s clinical history, and maps it to attention
weights that determine how much influence previous disease states have on future state transitions. In
that sense, attention weights generated for an individual patient explain the causative and associative
relationships between the hidden disease states and the past clinical events for that patient. Because
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

