Differentially Private Covariance Estimation
Kareem Amin
kamin@google.com
Google Research NY

Travis Dick
tdick@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University

Andrés Muñoz Medina
ammedina@google.com
Google Research NY

Alex Kulesza
kulesza@google.com
Google Research NY

Sergei Vassilvitskii
sergeiv@google.com
Google Research NY

Abstract
The task of privately estimating a covariance matrix is a popular one due to its
applications to regression and PCA. While there are known methods for releasing
private covariance matrices, these algorithms either achive only (✏, )-differential
privacy or require very complicated sampling schemes, ultimately performing
poorly in real data. In this work we propose a new ✏-differentially private algorithm for computing the covariance matrix of a dataset that addresses both of
these limitations. We show that it has lower error than existing state-of-the-art
approaches, both analytically and empirically. In addition, the algorithm is significantly less complicated than other methods and can be efficiently implemented
with rejection sampling.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy has emerged as a standard framework for thinking about user privacy in the
context of large scale data analysis [Dwork et al., 2014a]. While differential privacy does not protect
against all attack vectors, it does provide formal guarantees about possible information leakage. A
key feature of differential privacy is its robustness to post-processing: once a mechanism is certified
as differentially private, arbitrary post-processing can be performed on its outputs without additional
privacy impact.
The past decade has seen the emergence of a wide range of techniques for modifying classical
learning algorithms to be differentially private [McSherry and Mironov, 2009, Chaudhuri et al.,
2011, Jain et al., 2012, Abadi et al., 2016]. These algorithms typically train directly on the raw data,
but inject carefully designed noise in order to produce differentially private outputs. A more general
(and challenging) alternative approach is to first preprocess the dataset using a differentially private
mechanism and then freely choose among standard off-the-shelf algorithms for learning. This not
only provides more flexibility in the design of the learning system, but also removes the need for
access to sensitive raw data (except for the initial preprocessing step). This approach thus falls
under the umbrella of data release: since the preprocessed dataset is differentially private, it can, in
principle, be released without leaking any individual’s data.
In this work we consider the problem of computing, in a differentially private manner, a specific
preprocessed representation of a dataset: its covariance matrix. Formally, given a data matrix X 2
Rd⇥n , where each column corresponds to a data point, we aim to compute a private estimate of
C = XX> that can be used in place of the raw data, for example, as the basis for standard linear
regression algorithms. Our methods provide privacy guarantees for the columns of X.
There are many existing techniques that can be applied to this problem. We distinguish ✏differentially private algorithms, which promise what is sometimes referred to as pure differential
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

