Modular Universal Reparameterization:
Deep Multi-task Learning Across Diverse Domains
Elliot Meyerson
Cognizant
elliot.meyerson@cognizant.com

Risto Miikkulainen1,2
Cognizant1
The University of Texas at Austin2
risto@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
As deep learning applications continue to become more diverse, an interesting
question arises: Can general problem solving arise from jointly learning several
such diverse tasks? To approach this question, deep multi-task learning is extended
in this paper to the setting where there is no obvious overlap between task architectures. The idea is that any set of (architecture,task) pairs can be decomposed into a
set of potentially related subproblems, whose sharing is optimized by an efficient
stochastic algorithm. The approach is first validated in a classic synthetic multi-task
learning benchmark, and then applied to sharing across disparate architectures for
vision, NLP, and genomics tasks. It discovers regularities across these domains,
encodes them into sharable modules, and combines these modules systematically
to improve performance in the individual tasks. The results confirm that sharing
learned functionality across diverse domains and architectures is indeed beneficial,
thus establishing a key ingredient for general problem solving in the future.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods and applications continue to become more diverse. They now solve problems
that deal with fundamentally different kinds of data, including those of human behavior, such as
vision, language, and speech, as well as those of natural phenomena, such as biological, geological,
and astronomical processes.
Across these domains, deep learning architectures are painstakingly customized to different problems.
However, despite this extreme customization, a crucial amount of functionality is shared across
solutions. For one, architectures are all made of the same ingredients: some creative composition
and concatenation of high-dimensional linear maps and elementwise nonlinearities. They also share
a common set of training techniques, including popular initialization schemes and gradient-based
optimization methods. The fact that the same small toolset is successfully applied to all these
problems implies that the problems have a lot in common. Sharing these tools across problems
exploits some of these commonalities, i.e., by setting a strong prior on the kinds of methods that will
work. Such sharing is methodological, with humans determining what is shared.
This observation begs the question: Are there commonalities across these domains that methodological sharing cannot capture? Note that this question is different from that addressed by previous
work in deep multi-task learning (DMTL), where the idea is to share knowledge across tasks in the
same domain or modality, such as within vision [5, 30, 33, 39, 57, 61] or language [9, 13, 16, 31, 34].
In contrast, this question is fundamental to general problem solving: Can it be beneficial to share
learned functionality across a diverse set of tasks, such as a 2D convolutional vision network, an
LSTM model for natural language, and a 1D convolutional model for genomics? Specifically, this
paper considers the following problem: Given an arbitrary set of (architecture,task) pairs, can learned
functionality be shared across architectures to improve performance in each task?
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

