Regularizing Trajectory Optimization
with Denoising Autoencoders

Rinu Boney∗
Aalto University & Curious AI
rinu.boney@aalto.fi

Norman Di Palo∗
Sapienza University of Rome
normandipalo@gmail.com

Alexander Ilin
Aalto University & Curious AI

Juho Kannala
Aalto University

Mathias Berglund
Curious AI

Antti Rasmus
Curious AI

Harri Valpola
Curious AI

Abstract
Trajectory optimization using a learned model of the environment is one of the
core elements of model-based reinforcement learning. This procedure often suffers
from exploiting inaccuracies of the learned model. We propose to regularize
trajectory optimization by means of a denoising autoencoder that is trained on the
same trajectories as the model of the environment. We show that the proposed
regularization leads to improved planning with both gradient-based and gradientfree optimizers. We also demonstrate that using regularized trajectory optimization
leads to rapid initial learning in a set of popular motor control tasks, which suggests
that the proposed approach can be a useful tool for improving sample efficiency.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art reinforcement learning (RL) often requires a large number of interactions with the
environment to learn even relatively simple tasks [11]. It is generally believed that model-based RL
can provide better sample-efficiency [9, 2, 5] but showing this in practice has been challenging. In
this paper, we propose a way to improve planning in model-based RL and show that it can lead to
improved performance and better sample efficiency.
In model-based RL, planning is done by computing the expected result of a sequence of future actions
using an explicit model of the environment. Model-based planning has been demonstrated to be
efficient in many applications where the model (a simulator) can be built using first principles. For
example, model-based control is widely used in robotics and has been used to solve challenging tasks
such as human locomotion [34, 35] and dexterous in-hand manipulation [21].
In many applications, however, we often do not have the luxury of an accurate simulator of the
environment. Firstly, building even an approximate simulator can be very costly even for processes
whose dynamics is well understood. Secondly, it can be challenging to align the state of an existing
simulator with the state of the observed process in order to plan. Thirdly, the environment is often
non-stationary due to, for example, hardware failures in robotics, change of the input feed and
deactivation of materials in industrial process control. Thus, learning the model of the environment is
the only viable option in many applications and learning needs to be done for a live system. And since
many real-world systems are very complex, we are likely to need powerful function approximators,
such as deep neural networks, to learn the dynamics of the environment.
However, planning using a learned (and therefore inaccurate) model of the environment is very
difficult in practice. The process of optimizing the sequence of future actions to maximize the
∗

Equal contribution, rest in alphabetical order

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

