Multi-task Learning for Aggregated Data using
Gaussian Processes
Fariba Yousefi

Michael Thomas Smith

Mauricio A. Álvarez

Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield
{f.yousefi, m.t.smith, mauricio.alvarez}@sheffield.ac.uk

Abstract
Aggregated data is commonplace in areas such as epidemiology and demography.
For example, census data for a population is usually given as averages defined over
time periods or spatial resolutions (cities, regions or countries). In this paper, we
present a novel multi-task learning model based on Gaussian processes for joint
learning of variables that have been aggregated at different input scales. Our model
represents each task as the linear combination of the realizations of latent processes
that are integrated at a different scale per task. We are then able to compute the
cross-covariance between the different tasks either analytically or numerically. We
also allow each task to have a potentially different likelihood model and provide a
variational lower bound that can be optimised in a stochastic fashion making our
model suitable for larger datasets. We show examples of the model in a synthetic
example, a fertility dataset and an air pollution prediction application.

1

Introduction

Many datasets in fields like ecology, epidemiology, remote sensing, sensor networks and demography
appear naturally aggregated, that is, variables in these datasets are measured or collected in intervals,
areas or supports of different shapes and sizes. For example, census data are usually sampled or
collected as aggregated at different administrative divisions, e.g. borough, town, postcode or city
levels. In sensor networks, correlated variables are measured at different resolutions or scales. In the
near future, air pollution monitoring across cities and regions could be done using a combination of a
few high-quality low time-resolution sensors and several low-quality (low-cost) high time-resolution
sensors. Joint modelling of the variables registered in the census data or the variables measured using
different sensor configurations at different scales can improve predictions at the point or support
levels.
In this paper, we are interested in providing a general framework for multi-task learning on these
types of datasets. Our motivation is to use multi-task learning to jointly learn models for different
tasks where each task is defined at (potentially) a different support of any shape and size and has a
(potentially) different nature, i.e. it is a continuous, binary, categorical or count variable. We appeal
to the flexibility of Gaussian processes (GPs) for developing a prior over such type of datasets and
we also provide a scalable approach for variational Bayesian inference.
Gaussian processes have been used before for aggregated data [Smith et al., Law et al., 2018, Tanaka
et al., 2019] and also in the context of the related field of multiple instance learning [Kim and De la
Torre, 2010, Kandemir et al., 2016, Haußmann et al., 2017]. In multiple instance learning, each
instance in the dataset consists of a set (or bag) of inputs with only one output (or label) for that
whole set. The aim is to provide predictions at the level of individual inputs. Smith et al. provide
a new kernel function to handle single regression tasks defined at different supports. They use
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

