Learning Mixtures of Plackett-Luce Models from
Structured Partial Orders
Lirong Xia
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
xial@cs.rpi.edu

Zhibing Zhao
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
zhaoz6@rpi.edu

Abstract
Mixtures of ranking models have been widely used for heterogeneous preferences.
However, learning a mixture model is highly nontrivial, especially when the dataset
consists of partial orders. In such cases, the parameter of the model may not be even
identifiable. In this paper, we focus on three popular structures of partial orders:
ranked top-l1 , l2 -way, and choice data over a subset of alternatives. We prove that
when the dataset consists of combinations of ranked top-l1 and l2 -way (or choice
data over up to l2 alternatives), mixture of k Plackett-Luce models is not identifiable
when l1 +l2 ≤ 2k−1 (l2 is set to 1 when there are no l2 -way orders). We also prove
that under some combinations, including ranked top-3, ranked top-2 plus 2-way,
and choice data over up to 4 alternatives, mixtures of two Plackett-Luce models
are identifiable. Guided by our theoretical results, we propose efficient generalized
method of moments (GMM) algorithms to learn mixtures of two Plackett-Luce
models, which are proven consistent. Our experiments demonstrate the efficacy of
our algorithms. Moreover, we show that when full rankings are available, learning
from different marginal events (partial orders) provides tradeoffs between statistical
efficiency and computational efficiency.

1

Introduction

Suppose a group of four friends want to choose one of the four restaurants {a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 } for dinner.
The first person ranks all four restaurants as a2  a3  a4  a1 , where a2  a3 means that “a2 is
strictly preferred to a3 ”. The second person says “a4 and a3 are my top two choices, among which I
prefer a4 to a3 ”. The third person ranks a3  a4  a1 but has no idea about a2 . The fourth person
has no idea about a4 , and would choose a3 among {a1 , a2 , a3 }. How should they aggregate their
preferences to choose the best restaurant?
Similar rank aggregation problems exist in social choice, crowdsourcing [20, 6], recommender
systems [5, 3, 14, 24], information retrieval [1, 17], etc. Rank aggregation can be cast as the
following statistical parameter estimation problem: given a statistical model for rank data and the
agents’ preferences, the parameter of the model is estimated to make decisions. Among the most
widely-applied statistical models for rank aggregation are the Plackett-Luce model [19, 28] and its
mixtures [8, 9, 17, 23, 30, 23]. In a Plackett-Luce model over a set of alternatives A, each alternative
is parameterized by a strictly positive number that represents its probability to be ranked higher than
other alternatives. A mixture of k Plackett-Luce models, denoted by k-PL, combines k component
Plackett-Luce models via the mixing coefficients ~
α = (α1 , . . . , αk ) ∈ Rk≥0 with ~
α · ~1 = 1, such that
for any r ≤ k, with probability αr , a data point is generated from the r-th Plackett-Luce component.
One critical limitation of Plackett-Luce model and its mixtures is that their sample space consists of
linear orders over A. In other words, each data point must be a full ranking of all alternatives in A.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

