Beyond temperature scaling:
Obtaining well-calibrated multiclass probabilities
with Dirichlet calibration
Meelis Kull
Department of Computer Science
University of Tartu
meelis.kull@ut.ee

Miquel Perello-Nieto
Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol
miquel.perellonieto@bris.ac.uk

Markus Kängsepp
Department of Computer Science
University of Tartu
markus.kangsepp@ut.ee

Telmo Silva Filho
Department of Statistics
Universidade Federal da Paraíba
telmo@de.ufpb.br

Hao Song
Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol
hao.song@bristol.ac.uk

Peter Flach
Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol and
The Alan Turing Institute
peter.flach@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Class probabilities predicted by most multiclass classifiers are uncalibrated, often
tending towards over-confidence. With neural networks, calibration can be improved by temperature scaling, a method to learn a single corrective multiplicative
factor for inputs to the last softmax layer. On non-neural models the existing
methods apply binary calibration in a pairwise or one-vs-rest fashion. We propose
a natively multiclass calibration method applicable to classifiers from any model
class, derived from Dirichlet distributions and generalising the beta calibration
method from binary classification. It is easily implemented with neural nets since it
is equivalent to log-transforming the uncalibrated probabilities, followed by one linear layer and softmax. Experiments demonstrate improved probabilistic predictions
according to multiple measures (confidence-ECE, classwise-ECE, log-loss, Brier
score) across a wide range of datasets and classifiers. Parameters of the learned
Dirichlet calibration map provide insights to the biases in the uncalibrated model.

1

Introduction

A probabilistic classifier is well-calibrated if among test instances receiving a predicted probability
vector p, the class distribution is (approximately) distributed as p. This property is of fundamental
importance when using a classifier for cost-sensitive classification, for human decision making, or
within an autonomous system. Due to overfitting, most machine learning algorithms produce overconfident models, unless dedicated procedures are applied, such as Laplace smoothing in decision
trees [8]. The goal of (post-hoc) calibration methods is to use hold-out validation data to learn a
calibration map that transforms the model’s predictions to be better calibrated. Meteorologists were
among the first to think about calibration, with [3] introducing an evaluation measure for probabilistic
forecasts, which we now call Brier score; [21] proposing reliability diagrams, which allow us
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

