On Differentially Private Graph Sparsification and
Applications
Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Jalaj Upadhyay
Rutgers University
jalaj.kumar.upadhyay@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study private sparsification of graphs. In particular, we give an
algorithm that given an input graph, returns a sparse graph which approximates
the spectrum of the input graph while ensuring differential privacy. This allows
one to solve many graph problems privately yet efficiently and accurately. This is
exemplified with application of the proposed meta-algorithm to graph algorithms
for privately answering cut-queries, as well as practical algorithms for computing
MAX-CUT and SPARSEST-CUT with better accuracy than previously known.
We also give an efficient private algorithm to learn Laplacian eigenmap on a graph.

1

Introduction

Data from social and communication networks have become a rich source to gain useful insights
into the social, behavioral, and information sciences. Such data is naturally modeled as observations
on a graph, and encodes rich, fine-grained, and structured information. At the same time, due to
the seamless nature of data acquisition, often collected through personal devices, the individual
information content in network data is often highly sensitive. This raises valid privacy concerns
pertaining the analysis and release of such data. We address these concerns in this paper by presenting
a novel algorithm that can be used to publish a succinct differentially private representation of network
data with minimal degradation in accuracy for various graph related tasks.
There are several notions of differential privacy one can consider in the setting described above.
Depending on privacy requirements, one can consider edge level privacy that renders two graphs
that differ in a single edge as in-distinguishable based on the algorithm’s output; this is the setting
studied in many recent works [9, 19, 25, 54]. Alternatively, one can require node-level privacy which
preserves privacy of each node, which has been the focus in [10, 11, 28, 44]. In this paper, we
consider settings where nodes are known public entities and the edges represent sensitive or private
events and attributes relating two nodes.
In particular, we consider the following notion of differential privacy. We say that an algorithm that
takes a graph as input and returns a graph, is differentially private if given any two graphs that differ
in a single edge by weight at most one 1 , the output of the algorithm does not change by much (see
Section 3 for a formal definition).
Given the ubiquitous nature of the problem, several recent works have studied various graph problems
within the framework of differential privacy. These include the works on differentially private
algorithms for computing degree distribution [28, 27, 44], on subgraph counting [40, 45], on private
M IN -C UT [22] and on estimating parameters of generative graphical models [39]. Each of the works
referenced above present algorithms that are tailor-made for a specific graph problems. We, on the
1
This is the standard neighboring relation used in Blocki et al. [9] (and references therein). The underlying
reason for considering this privacy notion is as follows: since we do not restrict the weight on the graph, presence
or absence of an edge, as required in standard edge-level privacy, can change the output drastically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

