Small ReLU networks are powerful memorizers:
a tight analysis of memorization capacity

Chulhee Yun
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
chulheey@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
suvrit@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
jadbabai@mit.edu

Abstract
We study finite sample expressivity, i.e., memorization power of ReLU networks.
Recent results require N hidden nodes to memorize/interpolate arbitrary N data
points.
√ In contrast, by exploiting depth, we show that 3-layer ReLU networks with
Ω( N ) hidden nodes
√ can perfectly memorize most datasets with N points. We also
prove that width Θ( N ) is necessary and sufficient for memorizing N data points,
proving tight bounds on memorization capacity. The sufficiency result can be
extended to deeper networks; we show that an L-layer network with W parameters
in the hidden layers can memorize N data points if W = Ω(N ). Combined
with a recent upper bound O(W L log W ) on VC dimension, our construction is
nearly tight for any fixed L. Subsequently, we analyze memorization capacity
of residual networks under a general position assumption; we prove results that
substantially reduce the known requirement of N hidden nodes. Finally, we study
the dynamics of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), and show that when initialized
near a memorizing global minimum of the empirical risk, SGD quickly finds a
nearby point with much smaller empirical risk.

1

Introduction

Recent results in deep learning indicate that over-parameterized neural networks can memorize
arbitrary datasets [2, 53]. This phenomenon is closely related to the expressive power of neural
networks, which have been long studied as universal approximators [12, 18, 21]. These results
suggest that sufficiently large neural networks are expressive enough to fit any dataset perfectly.
With the widespread use of deep networks, recent works have focused on better understanding the
power of depth [13, 17, 30, 33, 37, 38, 44, 45, 49, 50]. However, most existing results consider
expressing functions (i.e., infinitely many points) rather than finite number of observations; thus, they
do not provide a precise understanding the memorization ability of finitely large networks.
When studying finite sample memorization, several questions arise: Is a neural network capable of
memorizing arbitrary datasets of a given size? How large must a neural network be to possess such
capacity? These questions are the focus of this paper, and we answer them by studying universal
finite sample expressivity and memorization capacity; these concepts are formally defined below.
Definition 1.1. We define (universal) finite sample expressivity of a neural network fθ (·)
(parametrized by θ) as the network’s ability to satisfy the following condition:
dx ×N
dy ×N
For all inputs {xi }N
and for all {yi }N
, there
i=1 ∈ R
i=1 ∈ [−1, +1]
exists a parameter θ such that fθ (xi ) = yi for 1 ≤ i ≤ N .

We define memorization capacity of a network to be the maximum value of N for which the network
has finite sample expressivity when dy = 1.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

