When to use parametric models
in reinforcement learning?

Hado van Hasselt
DeepMind
London, UK
hado@google.com

Matteo Hessel
DeepMind
London, UK
mtthss@google.com

John Aslanides
DeepMind
London, UK
jaslanides@google.com

Abstract
We examine the question of when and how parametric models are most useful in
reinforcement learning. In particular, we look at commonalities and differences
between parametric models and experience replay. Replay-based learning algorithms share important traits with model-based approaches, including the ability
to plan: to use more computation without additional data to improve predictions
and behaviour. We discuss when to expect benefits from either approach, and
interpret prior work in this context. We hypothesise that, under suitable conditions,
replay-based algorithms should be competitive to or better than model-based algorithms if the model is used only to generate fictional transitions from observed
states for an update rule that is otherwise model-free. We validated this hypothesis
on Atari 2600 video games. The replay-based algorithm attained state-of-the-art
data efficiency, improving over prior results with parametric models. Additionally,
we discuss different ways to use models. We show that it can be better to plan
backward than to plan forward when using models to perform credit assignment
(e.g., to directly learn a value or policy), even though the latter seems more common. Finally, we argue and demonstrate that it can be beneficial to plan forward
for immediate behaviour, rather than for credit assignment.
The general setting we consider is learning to make decisions from finite interactions with an
environment. Although the distinction is not fully unambiguous, there exist two prototypical families
of algorithms: those that learn without an explicit model of the environment (model free), and those
that first learn a model and then use it to plan a solution (model based).
There are good reasons for building the capability to learn some sort of model of the world into
artificial agents. Models may allow transfer of knowledge in ways that policies and scalar value predictions do not, and may allow agents to acquire rich knowledge about the world before knowing how
this knowledge is best used. In addition, models can be used to plan: to use additional computation,
without requiring additional experience, to improve the agent’s predictions and decisions.
In this paper, we discuss commonalities and differences between parametric models and experience
replay [Lin, 1992]. Although replay-based agents are not always thought of as model-based, replay
shares many characteristics that we often associate with parametric models. In particular, we can
‘plan’ with the experience stored in the replay memory in the sense that we can use additional
computation to improve the agent’s predictions and policies in between interactions with the real
environment.
Our work was partially inspired by recent work by Kaiser et al. [2019], who showed that planning
with a parametric model allows for data-efficient learning on several Atari video games. A main
comparison was to Rainbow DQN [Hessel et al., 2018a], which uses replay. We explain why their
results may perhaps be considered surprising, and show that in a like-for-like comparison Rainbow
DQN outperformed the scores of the model-based agent, with less experience and computation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

