Exploration Bonus for Regret Minimization in
Discrete and Continuous Average Reward MDPs

Jian Qian, Ronan Fruit
Sequel Team - Inria Lille
jian.qian@ens.fr, ronan.fruit@inria.fr

Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric
Facebook AI Research
{pirotta, lazaric}@fb.com

Abstract
The exploration bonus is an effective approach to manage the explorationexploitation trade-off in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). While it has been
analyzed in infinite-horizon discounted and finite-horizon problems, we focus on
designing and analysing the exploration bonus in the more challenging infinitehorizon undiscounted setting. We first introduce SCAL+ , a variant of SCAL [1],
that uses a suitable exploration bonus to solve any discrete unknown weaklycommunicating MDP for which an upper bound c on the span of the optimal bias
function is known. We prove that SCAL+ enjoys the same regret guarantees as
SCAL, which relies on the less efficient extended value iteration approach. Furthermore, we leverage the flexibility provided by the exploration bonus scheme
to generalize SCAL+ to smooth MDPs with continuous state space and discrete
actions. We show that the resulting algorithm (SCCAL+ ) achieves the same regret
bound as UCCRL [2] while being the first implementable algorithm for this setting.

1

Introduction

While learning in an unknown environment, a reinforcement learning (RL) agent must trade off the
exploration needed to collect information about the dynamics and reward, and the exploitation of
the experience gathered so far to gain reward. An effective strategy to trade off exploration and
exploitation is the optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) principle. A popular technique to
ensure optimism is to use an exploration bonus. This approach has been successfully implemented in
H-step finite-horizon and infinite-horizon γ-discounted settings with provable guarantees in finite
MDPs. Furthermore, its simple structure (i.e., it only requires solving an estimated MDP with a
reward increased by the bonus) allowed it to be integrated in deep RL algorithms [e.g., 3, 4, 5, 6].
As the exploration bonus is designed to bound estimation errors on the value function, it requires
knowing the maximum reward rmax and the intrinsic horizon of the problem [e.g., 7, 8, 9] (e.g.,
H in finite-horizon and 1/(1 − γ) in discounted problems). Here we consider the challenging
infinite-horizon undiscounted setting [10, Chap. 8], which generalizes the two previous settings when
H → ∞ and γ → 1. While several algorithms implementing the OFU principle in this setting have
been proposed [11, 2, 12, 1, 13], none of them exploits the idea of an exploration bonus.
In this paper we study the problem of defining and analysing an exploration bonus approach in the
infinite-horizon undiscounted setting. Contrary to the other settings, in average reward there is no
information about the intrinsic horizon. As a consequence, we follow the approach in [14, 1] and we
assume that an upper-bound c on the range of the optimal bias (i.e., value√
function) is known. We
+
e
define SCAL and we show that its regret is bounded by O max{c, rmax } ΓSAT w.h.p. for any
MDP with S states, A actions and Γ possible next states. We prove that the bonus used by SCAL+
ensures optimism using a novel technical argument. We no longer use an inclusion argument (i.e.,
the true MDP is contained in a set of plausible MDPs) but we reason directly at the level of the
Bellman operator. We show that the optimistic Bellman operator defined by the empirical MDP with
optimistic reward rb(s, a) + b(s, a) dominates the Bellman operator of the true MDP when applied to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

