An Algorithmic Framework For Differentially Private
Data Analysis on Trusted Processors

Joshua Allen
Harsha Nori

Bolin Ding∗
Olga Ohrimenko

Janardhan Kulkarni
Sergey Yekhanin

Microsoft

Abstract
Differential privacy has emerged as the main definition for private data analysis and
machine learning. The global model of differential privacy, which assumes that
users trust the data collector, provides strong privacy guarantees and introduces
small errors in the output. In contrast, applications of differential privacy in
commercial systems by Apple, Google, and Microsoft, use the local model. Here,
users do not trust the data collector, and hence randomize their data before sending
it to the data collector. Unfortunately, local model is too strong for several important
applications and hence is limited in its applicability. In this work, we propose
a framework based on trusted processors and a new definition of differential
privacy called Oblivious Differential Privacy, which combines the best of both
local and global models. The algorithms we design in this framework show
interesting interplay of ideas from the streaming algorithms, oblivious algorithms,
and differential privacy.

1

Introduction

Most large IT companies rely on access to raw data from their users to train machine learning models.
However, it is well known that models trained on a dataset can release private information about the
users that participate in the dataset [13, 50]. With new GDPR regulations and also ever increasing
awareness about privacy issues in the general public, doing private and secure machine learning
has become a major challenge to IT companies. To make matters worse, while it is easy to spot a
violation of privacy when it occurs, it is much more tricky to give a rigorous definition of it.
Differential privacy (DP), introduced in the seminal work of Dwork et al. [20], is arguably the only
mathematically rigorous definition of privacy in the context of machine learning and big data analysis.
Over the past decade, DP has established itself as the defacto standard of privacy with a vast body
of research and growing acceptance in industry. Among its many strengths, the promise of DP is
intuitive to explain: No matter what the adversary knows about the data, the privacy of a single user
is protected from output of the data-analysis. A differentially private algorithm guarantees that the
output does not change significantly, as quantified by a parameter , if the data of any single user is
omitted from the computation, which is formalized as follows.
Definition 1.1. A randomized algorithm A is (, δ)-differentially private if for any two neighboring
databases D1 , D2 any subset of possible outputs S ⊆ Z, we have:
Pr [A(D1 ) ∈ S] ≤ e · Pr [A(D2 ) ∈ S] + δ.

∗

Current affiliation: Alibaba Group. Work done while at Microsoft.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

