General Proximal Incremental Aggregated Gradient
Algorithms: Better and Novel Results under General
Scheme∗
Tao Sun
College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
nudtsuntao@163.com
Dongsheng Li†
College of Computer
National University of Defense Technology
Changsha, Hunan 410073, China
dsli@nudt.edu.cn

Yuejiao Sun
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
sunyj@math.ucla.edu

Qing Liao
Department of Computer Science & Technology
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China
liaoqing@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
The incremental aggregated gradient algorithm is popular in network optimization
and machine learning research. However, the current convergence results require
the objective function to be strongly convex. And the existing convergence rates
are also limited to linear convergence. Due to the mathematical techniques, the
stepsize in the algorithm is restricted by the strongly convex constant, which may
make the stepsize be very small (the strongly convex constant may be small).
In this paper, we propose a general proximal incremental aggregated gradient algorithm, which contains various existing algorithms including the basic incremental
aggregated gradient method. Better and new convergence results are proved even
with the general scheme. The novel results presented in this paper, which have not
appeared in previous literature, include: a general scheme, nonconvex analysis, the
sublinear convergence rates of the function values, much larger stepsizes that guarantee the convergence, the convergence when noise exists, the line search strategy
of the proximal incremental aggregated gradient algorithm and its convergence.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning and network optimization can be formulated as
min {F (x) = f (x) + g(x)} ,
x

(1)

Pm
where f (x) = i=1 fi (x), x ∈ Rn , fi is differentiable, ∇fi is Lipschitz continuous with Li , for
i = 1, 2, . . . , m, and g is proximable. A state-of-the-art method for this problem is the proximal
gradient method [10], which requires to compute the full gradient of f in each iteration. However,
when the number of the component functions fi is very large, i.e. m  1, it is costly to obtain the full
∗

This work is sponsored in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant No.
2018YFB0204300 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants (61932001 and
61906200).
†
Dongsheng Li is the corresponding author.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

