Graph-based Discriminators: Sample Complexity
and Expressiveness

Roi Livni
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Yishay Mansour
Tel Aviv University and Google
mansour.yishay@gmail.com

Abstract
A basic question in learning theory is to identify if two distributions are identical
when we have access only to examples sampled from the distributions. This
basic task is considered, for example, in the context of Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs), where a discriminator is trained to distinguish between a reallife distribution and a synthetic distribution. Classically, we use a hypothesis class
H and claim that the two distributions are distinct if for some h ∈ H the expected
value on the two distributions is (significantly) different.
Our starting point is the following fundamental problem: "is having the hypothesis
dependent on more than a single random example beneficial". To address this
challenge we define k-ary based discriminators, which have a family of Boolean
k-ary functions G. Each function g ∈ G naturally defines a hyper-graph, indicating
whether a given hyper-edge exists. A function g ∈ G distinguishes between two
distributions, if the expected value of g, on a k-tuple of i.i.d examples, on the two
distributions is (significantly) different.
We study the expressiveness of families of k-ary functions, compared to the classical hypothesis class H, which is k = 1. We show a separation in expressiveness
of k + 1-ary versus k-ary functions. This demonstrate the great benefit of having
k ≥ 2 as distinguishers.
For k ≥ 2 we introduce a notion similar to the VC-dimension, and show that it
controls the sample complexity. We proceed and provide upper and lower bounds
as a function of our extended notion of VC-dimension.

1

Introduction

The task of discrimination consists of a discriminator that receives finite samples from two distributions, say p1 and p2 , and needs to certify whether the two distributions are distinct. Discrimination has
a central role within the framework of Generative Adversarial Networks [12], where a discriminator
trains a neural net to distinguish between samples from a real-life distribution and samples generated
synthetically by another neural network, called a generator.
A possible formal setup for discrimination identifies the discriminator with some distinguishing class
D = {f : X → R} of distinguishing functions. In turn, the discriminator wishes to find the best
d ∈ D that distinguishes between the two distributions. Formally, she wishes to find d ∈ D such that1
E [d(x)] − E [d(x)] > sup

x∼p1

x∼p2

∗

∗

E [d (x)] − E [d (x)] − .

d∗ ∈D x∼p1

x∼p2

(1)

1
Note that with such d at hand, with an order of O(1/2 ) examples one can verify if any discriminator in the
class certifies that the two distributions are distinct.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

