Fast and Provable ADMM for
Learning with Generative Priors

Fabian Latorre, Armin Eftekhari and Volkan Cevher
Laboratory for information and inference systems (LIONS)
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this work, we propose a (linearized) Alternating Direction Method-of-Multipliers
(ADMM) algorithm for minimizing a convex function subject to a nonconvex
constraint. We focus on the special case where such constraint arises from the
specification that a variable should lie in the range of a neural network. This is
motivated by recent successful applications of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) in tasks like compressive sensing, denoising and robustness against adversarial examples. The derived rates for our algorithm are characterized in terms
of certain geometric properties of the generator network, which we show hold for
feedforward architectures, under mild assumptions. Unlike gradient descent (GD),
it can efficiently handle non-smooth objectives as well as exploit efficient partial
minimization procedures, thus being faster in many practical scenarios.

1

Introduction

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [Goodfellow et al., 2014] show great promise for faithfully
modeling complex data distributions, such as natural images [Radford et al., 2015, Brock et al.,
2019] or audio signals [Engel et al., 2019, Donahue et al., 2019]. Understanding and improving the
theoretical and practical aspects of their training has thus attracted significant interest [Lucic et al.,
2018, Mescheder et al., 2018, Daskalakis et al., 2018, Hsieh et al., 2018, Gidel et al., 2019].
Researchers have also begun to leverage the modeling power of GANs and other generative models
like Variational Auto-encoders [Kingma and Welling, 2013] in applications ranging from compressive
sensing [Bora et al., 2017], to image denoising [Lipton and Tripathi, 2017, Tripathi et al., 2018], to
robustness against adversarial examples [Ilyas et al., 2017, Samangouei et al., 2018].
These and other [Dhar et al., 2018, Ulyanov et al., 2018] applications model high-dimensional data
as the output of the generator network associated with a generative model, and often lead to a highly
non-convex optimization problem of the form minz f (G(z)), where the the generator G is nonlinear
and f is convex. We then find the optimal latent vector z, as illustrated in Section 5 with several
examples.
This optimization problem involving a generative model poses various difficulties for existing firstorder algorithms. Indeed, to our knowledge, the only existing provable algorithm for solving (1)
relies on the existence of a projection oracle, and is limited to the special case of compressive sensing
with a generative prior [Shah and Hegde, 2018, Hegde, 2018], see Section 4 for the details. The
main computational bottleneck is of course the non-convex projection step, for which no convergence
analysis in terms of the geometry of the underlying generator G currently exists.
On the other hand, Gradient Descent (GD) and its adaptive variants [Kingma and Ba, 2014] cannot
efficiently handle non-smooth objective functions, as they are entirely oblivious to the composite
structure of the problem [Nesterov, 2013b]. A simple example is denoising with the `∞ -norm,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

