Differentially Private Bagging: Improved utility and
cheaper privacy than subsample-and-aggregate

James Jordon
University of Oxford
james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

Jinsung Yoon
University of California, Los Angeles
jsyoon0823@g.ucla.edu

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
University of California, Los Angeles
Alan Turing Institute
mv472@cam.ac.uk, mihaela@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract
Differential Privacy is a popular and well-studied notion of privacy. In the era of
big data that we are in, privacy concerns are becoming ever more prevalent and thus
differential privacy is being turned to as one such solution. A popular method for
ensuring differential privacy of a classifier is known as subsample-and-aggregate,
in which the dataset is divided into distinct chunks and a model is learned on each
chunk, after which it is aggregated. This approach allows for easy analysis of the
model on the data and thus differential privacy can be easily applied. In this paper,
we extend this approach by dividing the data several times (rather than just once)
and learning models on each chunk within each division. The first benefit of this
approach is the natural improvement of utility by aggregating models trained on
a more diverse range of subsets of the data (as demonstrated by the well-known
bagging technique). The second benefit is that, through analysis that we provide in
the paper, we can derive tighter differential privacy guarantees when several queries
are made to this mechanism. In order to derive these guarantees, we introduce
the upwards and downwards moments accountants and derive bounds for these
moments accountants in a data-driven fashion. We demonstrate the improvements
our model makes over standard subsample-and-aggregate in two datasets (Heart
Failure (private) and UCI Adult (public)).

1

Introduction

In the era of big data that we live in today, privacy concerns are becoming ever more prevalent. It
falls to the researchers using the data to ensure that adequate measures are taken to ensure any results
that are put into the public domain (such as the parameters of a model learned on the data) do not
disclose sensitive attributes of the real data. For example, it is well known that the high capacity
of deep neural networks can cause the networks to "memorize" training data; if such a network’s
parameters were made public, it may be possible to deduce some of the training data that was used to
train the model, thus resulting in real data being leaked to the public.
Several attempts have been made at rigorously defining what it means for an algorithm, or an
algorithm’s output, to be "private". One particularly attractive and well-researched notion is that of
differential privacy [1]. Differential privacy is a formal definition that requires that the distribution of
the output of a (necessarily probabilistic) algorithm not be too different when a single data point is
included in the dataset or not. Typical methods for enforcing differential privacy involve bounding
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

