Solving Interpretable Kernel Dimension Reduction

Chieh Wu, Jared Miller, Yale Chang, Mario Sznaier, and Jennifer Dy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept., Northeastern University, Boston, MA

Abstract
Kernel dimensionality reduction (KDR) algorithms find a low dimensional representation of the original data by optimizing kernel dependency measures that
are capable of capturing nonlinear relationships. The standard strategy is to first
map the data into a high dimensional feature space using kernels prior to a projection onto a low dimensional space. While KDR methods can be easily solved
by keeping the most dominant eigenvectors of the kernel matrix, its features are
no longer easy to interpret. Alternatively, Interpretable KDR (IKDR) is different
in that it projects onto a subspace before the kernel feature mapping, therefore,
the projection matrix can indicate how the original features linearly combine to
form the new features. Unfortunately, the IKDR objective requires a non-convex
manifold optimization that is difficult to solve and can no longer be solved by
eigendecomposition. Recently, an efficient iterative spectral (eigendecomposition)
method (ISM) has been proposed for this objective in the context of alternative
clustering. However, ISM only provides theoretical guarantees for the Gaussian
kernel. This greatly constrains ISM’s usage since any kernel method using ISM
is now limited to a single kernel. This work extends the theoretical guarantees of
ISM to an entire family of kernels, thereby empowering ISM to solve any kernel
method of the same objective. In identifying this family, we prove that each kernel
within the family has a surrogate Φ matrix and the optimal projection is formed
by its most dominant eigenvectors. With this extension, we establish how a wide
range of IKDR applications across different learning paradigms can be solved by
ISM. To support reproducible results, the source code is made publicly available
on https://github.com/chieh-neu/ISM_supervised_DR.

1

Introduction

The most important information for a given dataset often lies in a low dimensional space [1; 2; 3; 4;
5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12; 13; 14]. Due to the ability of kernel dependence measures for capturing both
linear and nonlinear relationships, they are powerful criteria for nonlinear DR [15; 16]. The standard
approach is to first map the data into a high dimensional feature space prior to a projection onto
a low dimensional space [17]. This approach has been preferred because it captures the nonlinear
relationship with an established solution, i.e., the most dominant eigenvectors of the kernel matrix.
However, since the high dimensional feature space maps the original featues nonlinearly, it is no
longer interpretable. Alternatively, if the projection onto a subspace precedes the feature mapping,
the projection matrix can be obtained to inform how the original features linearly combine to form
the new features. Exploiting this insight, many formulations have leveraged kernel alignment or
Hilbert Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [18] to model this approach [19; 8; 16; 20; 15; 1;
21; 22; 23; 12]. Together, we refer to these approaches as Interpretable Kernel Dimension Reduction
(IKDR). Unfortunately, this formulation can no longer be solved via eigendecomposition, instead, it
becomes a highly non-convex manifold optimization that is computationally expensive.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

