Compacting, Picking and Growing for Unforgetting
Continual Learning

Steven C. Y. Hung, Cheng-Hao Tu, Cheng-En Wu, Chien-Hung Chen,
Yi-Ming Chan, and Chu-Song Chen
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
{brent12052003, andytu455176}@gmail.com,
{chengen, redsword26, yiming, song}@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Continual lifelong learning is essential to many applications. In this paper, we
propose a simple but effective approach to continual deep learning. Our approach
leverages the principles of deep model compression, critical weights selection,
and progressive networks expansion. By enforcing their integration in an iterative
manner, we introduce an incremental learning method that is scalable to the number
of sequential tasks in a continual learning process. Our approach is easy to implement and owns several favorable characteristics. First, it can avoid forgetting (i.e.,
learn new tasks while remembering all previous tasks). Second, it allows model
expansion but can maintain the model compactness when handling sequential tasks.
Besides, through our compaction and selection/expansion mechanism, we show
that the knowledge accumulated through learning previous tasks is helpful to build a
better model for the new tasks compared to training the models independently with
tasks. Experimental results show that our approach can incrementally learn a deep
model tackling multiple tasks without forgetting, while the model compactness is
maintained with the performance more satisfiable than individual task training.

1

Introduction

Continual lifelong learning [42, 28] has received much attention in recent deep learning studies. In
this research track, we hope to learn a model capable of handling unknown sequential tasks while
keeping the performance of the model on previously learned tasks. In continual lifelong learning, the
training data of previous tasks are assumed non-available for the newly coming tasks. Although the
model learned can be used as a pre-trained model, fine-tuning a model for the new task will force the
model parameters to fit new data, which causes catastrophic forgetting [24, 31] on previous tasks.
To lessen the effect of catastrophic forgetting, techniques leveraging on regularization of gradients
or weights during training have been studied [14, 49, 19, 35]. In Kirkpatrick et al. [14] and Zenke
et al. [49], the proposed algorithms regularize the network weights and hope to search a common
convergence for the current and previous tasks. Schwarz et al. [40] introduce a network-distillation
method for regularization, which imposes constraints on the neural weights adapted from the teacher to
the student network and applies the elastic-weight-consolidation (EWC) [14] for incremental training.
The regularization-based approaches reduce the affection of catastrophic forgetting. However, as the
training data of previous tasks are missing during learning and the network capacity is fixed (and
limited), the regularization approaches often forget the learned skills gradually. Earlier tasks tend to
be forgotten more catastrophically in general. Hence, they would not be a favorable choice when the
number of sequential tasks is unlimited.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

