Flexible Modeling of Diversity with Strongly
Log-Concave Distributions

Joshua Robinson
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
joshrob@mit.edu

Suvrit Sra
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
suvrit@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
stefje@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Strongly log-concave (SLC) distributions are a rich class of discrete probability
distributions over subsets of some ground set. They are strictly more general than
strongly Rayleigh (SR) distributions such as the well-known determinantal point
process. While SR distributions offer elegant models of diversity, they lack an easy
control over how they express diversity. We propose SLC as the right extension
of SR that enables easier, more intuitive control over diversity, illustrating this via
examples of practical importance. We develop two fundamental tools needed to
apply SLC distributions to learning and inference: sampling and mode finding.
For sampling we develop an MCMC sampler and give theoretical mixing time
bounds. For mode finding, we establish a weak log-submodularity property for
SLC functions and derive optimization guarantees for a distorted greedy algorithm.

1

Introduction

A variety of machine learning tasks involve selecting diverse subsets of items. How we model
diversity is, therefore, a key concern with possibly far-reaching consequences. Recently popular
probabilisitic models of diversity include determinantal point processes [32, 39], and more generally,
strongly Rayleigh (SR) distributions [8, 35]. These models have been successfully deployed for subset
selection in applications such as video summarization [44], fairness [13], model compression [46],
anomaly detection [49], the Nyström method [41], generative models [24, 40], and accelerated
coordinate descent [51]. While valuable and broadly applicable, SR distributions have one main
drawback: it is difficult to control the strength and nature of diversity they model.
We counter this drawback by leveraging strongly log-concave (SLC) distributions [3–5]. These
distributions are strictly more general than SR measures, and possess key properties that enable easier,
more intuitive control over diversity. They derive their name from SLC polynomials introduced by
Gurvits already a decade ago [30]. More recently they have shot into prominence due to their key
role in developing deep connections between discrete and continuous convexity, with subsequent
applications in combinatorics [1, 10, 33]. In particular, they lie at the heart of recent breakthrough
results such as a proof of Mason’s conjecture [4] and obtaining a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme for counting the number of bases of arbitrary matroids [3, 5]. We remark that all these works
assume homogeneous SLC polynomials.
We build on this progress to develop fundamental tools for general SLC distributions, namely,
sampling and mode finding. We highlight the flexibility of SLC distributions through two settings of
importance in practice: (i) raising any SLC distribution to a power α ∈ [0, 1]; and (ii) incorporating a
constraint that allows sampling sets of any size up to a budget. In contrast to similar modifications
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

