Divergence-Augmented Policy Optimization

Qing Wang ∗
Huya AI
Guangzhou, China

Yingru Li
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shenzhen, China

Jiechao Xiong
Tencent AI Lab
Shenzhen, China

Tong Zhang
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong, China

Abstract
In deep reinforcement learning, policy optimization methods need to deal with
issues such as function approximation and the reuse of off-policy data. Standard
policy gradient methods do not handle off-policy data well, leading to premature
convergence and instability. This paper introduces a method to stabilize policy
optimization when off-policy data are reused. The idea is to include a Bregman
divergence between the behavior policy that generates the data and the current
policy to ensure small and safe policy updates with off-policy data. The Bregman
divergence is calculated between the state distributions of two policies, instead of
only on the action probabilities, leading to a divergence augmentation formulation.
Empirical experiments on Atari games show that in the data-scarce scenario where
the reuse of off-policy data becomes necessary, our method can achieve better
performance than other state-of-the-art deep reinforcement learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

In recent years, many algorithms based on policy optimization have been proposed for deep reinforcement learning (DRL), leading to great successes in Go, video games, and robotics (Silver et al., 2016;
Mnih et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2015, 2017b). Real-world applications of policy-based methods
commonly involve function approximation and data reuse. Typically, the reused data are generated
with an earlier version of the policy, leading to off-policy learning. It is known that these issues may
cause premature convergence and instability for policy gradient methods (Sutton et al., 2000; Sutton
and Barto, 2017).
A standard technique that allows policy optimization methods to handle off-policy data is to use
importance sampling to correct trajectories from the behavior policy that generates the data to the
target policy (e.g. Retrace (Munos et al., 2016) and V-trace (Espeholt et al., 2018)). The efficiency of
these methods depends on the divergence between the behavior policy and the target policy. Moreover,
to improve stability of training, one may introduce a regularization term (e.g. Shannon-Gibbs entropy
in (Mnih et al., 2016)), or use a proximal objective of the original policy gradient loss (e.g. clipping
in (Schulman et al., 2017b; Wang et al., 2016a)). Although the well-adopted method of entropy
regularization can stabilize the optimization process (Mnih et al., 2016), this additional entropy
regularization alters the learning objective, and prevent the algorithm from converging to the optimal
action for each state. Even for the simple case of bandit problems, the monotonic diminishing
regularization may fail to converge to the best arm (Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017).
In this work, we propose a method for policy optimization by adding a Bregman divergence term,
which leads to more stable and sample efficient off-policy learning. The Bregman divergence
∗

The work was done when the first author was at Tencent AI Lab.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

