Hierarchical Optimal Transport
for Document Representation

Mikhail Yurochkin1,3
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Sebastian Claici2,3
sclaici@mit.edu

Farzaneh Mirzazadeh1,3
farzaneh@ibm.com

Edward Chien2,3
edchien@mit.edu

Justin Solomon2,3
jsolomon@mit.edu

IBM Research,1 MIT CSAIL,2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab3

Abstract
The ability to measure similarity between documents enables intelligent summarization and analysis of large corpora. Past distances between documents suffer
from either an inability to incorporate semantic similarities between words or from
scalability issues. As an alternative, we introduce hierarchical optimal transport
as a meta-distance between documents, where documents are modeled as distributions over topics, which themselves are modeled as distributions over words. We
then solve an optimal transport problem on the smaller topic space to compute a
similarity score. We give conditions on the topics under which this construction
defines a distance, and we relate it to the word mover’s distance. We evaluate our
technique for k-NN classification and show better interpretability and scalability
with comparable performance to current methods at a fraction of the cost.1

1

Introduction

Topic models like latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003) are major workhorses for
summarizing document collections. Typically, a topic model represents topics as distributions over
the vocabulary (i.e., unique words in the corpus); documents are then modeled as distributions over
topics. In this approach, words are vertices of a simplex whose dimension equals the vocabulary size
and for which the distance between any pair of words is the same. More recently, word embeddings
map words into high-dimensional space such that co-occurring words tend to be closer to each other
than unrelated words (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014). Kusner et al. (2015) combine
the geometry of word embedding space with optimal transport to propose the word mover’s distance
(WMD), a powerful document distance metric limited mostly by computational complexity.
As an alternative to WMD, in this paper we combine hierarchical latent structures from topic models
with geometry from word embeddings. We propose hierarchical optimal topic transport (HOTT)
document distances, which combine language information from word embeddings with corpusspecific, semantically-meaningful topic distributions from latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) (Blei
et al., 2003). This document distance is more efficient and more interpretable than WMD.
We give conditions under which HOTT gives a metric and show how it relates to WMD. We test
against existing metrics on k-NN classification and show that it outperforms others on average. It
performs especially well on corpora with longer documents and is robust to the number of topics and
word embedding quality. Additionally, we consider two applications requiring pairwise distances.
1

Code: https://github.com/IBM/HOTT

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

