Interval timing in deep reinforcement learning agents

Ben Deverett
DeepMind
bendeverett@google.com

Ryan Faulkner
DeepMind
rfaulk@google.com

Greg Wayne
DeepMind
gregwayne@google.com

Meire Fortunato
DeepMind
meirefortunato@google.com
Joel Z. Leibo
DeepMind
jzl@google.com

Abstract
The measurement of time is central to intelligent behavior. We know that both
animals and artificial agents can successfully use temporal dependencies to select
actions. In artificial agents, little work has directly addressed (1) which architectural
components are necessary for successful development of this ability, (2) how this
timing ability comes to be represented in the units and actions of the agent, and
(3) whether the resulting behavior of the system converges on solutions similar to
those of biology. Here we studied interval timing abilities in deep reinforcement
learning agents trained end-to-end on an interval reproduction paradigm inspired
by experimental literature on mechanisms of timing. We characterize the strategies
developed by recurrent and feedforward agents, which both succeed at temporal
reproduction using distinct mechanisms, some of which bear specific and intriguing
similarities to biological systems. These findings advance our understanding of
how agents come to represent time, and they highlight the value of experimentally
inspired approaches to characterizing agent abilities.

1

Introduction

To exploit the rewards available in our environment, we capitalize on relationships between environmental causes and effects that exhibit precise temporal dependencies. For example, to avoid a
dangerous threat moving towards you, you may estimate its speed by observing its displacement
over a fixed time interval, extrapolate its future position over another time interval, and condition
your escape behavior on your estimated time of contact with the threat. This ability to measure
time and use it to guide behavior is necessary and prevalent in both animals and artificial agents.
However, owing to basic differences in their implementation, artificial intelligence (AI) and biology
have different relationships to time. Nevertheless, it is likely that consideration of the temporal
measurement problem across these domains may yield valuable insights for both.
In biological systems, time measurements are necessary at a variety of temporal scales, ranging from
milliseconds to years. The mechanisms underlying these timing abilities differ according to time
scale, and many are well characterized at the level of the neural circuits [8, 24]. On the scale of
seconds, interval timing paradigms are used in animals to study the behavioral and neural properties
of time measurement. For example, an animal might be taught to measure out the elapsed interval
between two events, then to report or reproduce that interval to the best of their ability in order to
obtain a reward [3]. Humans, non-human primates, and rodents exhibit a number of characteristic
behaviors on these tasks [5, 14, 13] that may reflect biological constraints on mechanisms that remain
incompletely understood.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

