Implicitly Learning to Reason in First-Order Logic

Vaishak Belle
University of Edinburgh & Alan Turing Institute
vaishak@ed.ac.uk

Brendan Juba
Washington University in St. Louis
bjuba@wustl.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of answering queries about formulas of first-order logic
based on background knowledge partially represented explicitly as other formulas,
and partially represented as examples independently drawn from a fixed probability distribution. PAC semantics, introduced by Valiant, is one rigorous, general
proposal for learning to reason in formal languages: although weaker than classical
entailment, it allows for a powerful model theoretic framework for answering
queries while requiring minimal assumptions about the form of the distribution
in question. To date, however, the most significant limitation of that approach,
and more generally most machine learning approaches with robustness guarantees,
is that the logical language is ultimately essentially propositional, with finitely
many atoms. Indeed, the theoretical findings on the learning of relational theories
in such generality have been resoundingly negative. This is despite the fact that
first-order logic is widely argued to be most appropriate for representing human
knowledge. In this work, we present a new theoretical approach to robustly learning
to reason in first-order logic, and consider universally quantified clauses over a
countably infinite domain. Our results exploit symmetries exhibited by constants in
the language, and generalize the notion of implicit learnability to show how queries
can be computed against (implicitly) learned first-order background knowledge.

1

Introduction

The tension between deduction and induction is perhaps the most fundamental issue in areas such as
philosophy, cognition and artificial intelligence. The deduction camp concerns itself with questions
about the expressiveness of formal languages for capturing knowledge about the world, together with
proof systems for reasoning from such knowledge bases. The learning camp attempts to generalize
from examples about partial descriptions about the world. In an influential paper, Valiant [31]
recognized that the challenge of learning should be integrated with deduction. In particular, he
proposed a semantics to capture the quality possessed by the output of (probably approximately
correct) PAC-learning algorithms when formulated in a logic. Although weaker than classical
entailment, it allows for a powerful model theoretic framework for answering queries.
From the standpoint of learning an expressive logical knowledge base and reasoning with it, most
PAC results are somewhat discouraging. For example, in agnostic learning [12] where one does not
require examples (drawn from an arbitrary distribution) to be fully consistent with learned sentences,
efficient algorithms for learning conjunctions would yield an efficient algorithm for PAC-learning
DNF (also over arbitrary distributions), which current evidence suggests to be intractable [6]. Thus,
it is not surprising that when it comes to first-order logic (FOL), very little work tackles the problem
in a general manner. This is despite the fact that FOL is widely argued to be most appropriate for
representing human knowledge (e.g., [23, 26, 18]). For example, [4] consider the problem of the
learnability of description logics with equality constraints. While description logics are already
restricted fragments of FOL in only allowing unary and some binary predicates, it is shown that
such a fragment cannot be tractably learned, leading to the identification of syntactic restrictions for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

