Scalable Deep Generative Relational Models
with High-Order Node Dependence
Xuhui Fan1 , Bin Li2 , Scott A. Sisson1 , Caoyuan Li3 , and Ling Chen3
1

School of Mathematics & Statistics, University of New South Wales, Sydney
Shanghai Key Lab of IIP & School of Computer Science, Fudan University
3
Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology, Sydney
{xuhui.fan, scott.sisson}@unsw.edu.au; libin@fudan.edu.cn

2

Abstract
We propose a probabilistic framework for modelling and exploring the latent structure of relational data. Given feature information for the nodes in a network, the
scalable deep generative relational model (SDREM) builds a deep network architecture that can approximate potential nonlinear mappings between nodes’ feature
information and the nodes’ latent representations. Our contribution is two-fold:
(1) We incorporate high-order neighbourhood structure information to generate
the latent representations at each node, which vary smoothly over the network.
(2) Due to the Dirichlet random variable structure of the latent representations,
we introduce a novel data augmentation trick which permits efficient Gibbs sampling. The SDREM can be used for large sparse networks as its computational
cost scales with the number of positive links. We demonstrate its competitive performance through improved link prediction performance on a range of real-world
datasets.

1

Introduction

Bayesian relational models, which describe the pairwise interactions between nodes in a network, have gained tremendous attention in recent years, with numerous methods developed to
model the complex dependencies within relational data; in particular, probabilistic Bayesian methods [27, 18, 1, 25, 7, 6]. Such models have been applied to community detection [27, 17], collaborative filtering [29, 23], knowledge graph completion [14] and protein-to-protein interactions [16].
In general, the goal of these Bayesian relational models is to discover the complex latent structure
underlying the relational data and predict the unknown pairwise links [9, 8].
Despite improving the understanding of complex networks, existing models typically have one or
more weaknesses: (1) While data commonly exhibit high-order node dependencies within the network, such dependencies are rarely modelled due to limited model capabilities; (2) Although a
node’s feature information closely informs its latent representation, existing models are not sufficiently flexible to describe these (potentially nonlinear) mappings well; (3) While some scalable
network modelling techniques (e.g. Ber-Poisson link functions [30, 36]) can help to reduce the
computational complexity to the number of positive links, they require the elements of latent representations to be independently generated and cannot be used for modelling dependent variables
(e.g. membership distributions on communities).
In order to address these challenges, we develop a probabilistic framework using a deep network architecture on the nodes to model the relational data. The proposed scalable deep generative relational
model (SDREM) builds a deep network architecture to efficiently map the nodes’ feature information to their latent representations. In particular, the latent representations are modelled via Dirichlet
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

