Weighted Linear Bandits for Non-Stationary
Environments
Yoan Russac
CNRS, Inria, ENS, Université PSL
yoan.russac@ens.fr

Claire Vernade
Deepmind
vernade@google.com

Olivier Cappé
CNRS, Inria, ENS, Université PSL
olivier.cappe@cnrs.fr

Abstract
We consider a stochastic linear bandit model in which the available actions correspond to arbitrary context vectors whose associated rewards follow a non-stationary
linear regression model. In this setting, the unknown regression parameter is allowed to vary in time. To address this problem, we propose D-LinUCB, a novel
optimistic algorithm based on discounted linear regression, where exponential
weights are used to smoothly forget the past. This involves studying the deviations of the sequential weighted least-squares estimator under generic assumptions.
As a by-product, we obtain novel deviation results that can be used beyond nonstationary environments. We provide theoretical guarantees on the behavior of
D-LinUCB in both slowly-varying and abruptly-changing environments. We ob1/3
tain an upper bound on the dynamic regret that is of order d2/3 BT T 2/3 , where
BT is a measure of non-stationarity (d and T being, respectively, dimension and
horizon). This rate is known to be optimal. We also illustrate the empirical performance of D-LinUCB and compare it with recently proposed alternatives in simulated
environments.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed bandits offer a class of models to address sequential learning tasks that involve
exploration-exploitation trade-offs. In this work we are interested in structured bandit models,
known as stochastic linear bandits, in which linear regression is used to predict rewards [1, 2, 22].
A typical application of bandit algorithms based on the linear model is online recommendation where
actions are items to be, for instance, efficiently arranged on personalized web pages to maximize some
conversion rate. However, it is unlikely that customers’ preferences remain stable and the collected
data becomes progressively obsolete as the interest for the items evolve. Hence, it is essential to
design adaptive bandit agents rather than restarting the learning from scratch on a regular basis. In
this work, we consider the use of weighted least-squares as an efficient method to progressively forget
past interactions. Thus, we address sequential learning problems in which the parameter of the linear
bandit is evolving with time.
Our first contribution consists in extending existing deviation inequalities to sequential weighted
least-squares. Our result applies to a large variety of bandit problems and is of independent interest.
In particular, it extends the recent analysis of heteroscedastic environments by [18]. It can also be
useful to deal with class imbalance situations, or, as we focus on here, in non-stationary environments.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

