Limitations of Lazy Training of
Two-layers Neural Networks

Behrooz Ghorbani
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
ghorbani@stanford.edu
Theodor Misiakiewicz
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
misiakie@stanford.edu

Song Mei
ICME
Stanford University
songmei@stanford.edu
Andrea Montanari
Department of Electrical Engineering
and Department of Statistics
Stanford University
montanar@stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the supervised learning problem under either of the following two models:
(1) Feature vectors xi are d-dimensional Gaussians and responses are yi = f∗ (xi )
for f∗ an unknown quadratic function;
(2) Feature vectors xi are distributed as a mixture of two d-dimensional centered
Gaussians, and yi ’s are the corresponding class labels.
We use two-layers neural networks with quadratic activations, and compare three
different learning regimes: the random features (RF) regime in which we only
train the second-layer weights; the neural tangent (NT) regime in which we train
a linearization of the neural network around its initialization; the fully trained
neural network (NN) regime in which we train all the weights in the network. We
prove that, even for the simple quadratic model of point (1), there is a potentially
unbounded gap between the prediction risk achieved in these three training regimes,
when the number of neurons is smaller than the ambient dimension. When the number of neurons is larger than the number of dimensions, the problem is significantly
easier and both NT and NN learning achieve zero risk.

1

Introduction

Consider the supervised learning problem in which we are given i.i.d. data {(xi , yi )}i≤n , where
xi ∼ P a probability distribution over Rd , and yi = f∗ (xi ). 1 We would like to learn the unknown
function f∗ as to minimize the prediction risk E{(f (x) − f∗ (x))2 }. We will assume throughout
f∗ ∈ L2 (Rd , P), i.e. E{f∗ (x)2 } < ∞.
The function class of two-layers neural networks (with N neurons) is defined by:
N
n
o
X
FNN,N = f (x) = c +
ai σ(hwi , xi) : c, ai ∈ R, wi ∈ Rd , i ∈ [N ] .

(1)

i=1

Classical universal approximation results [9] imply that any f∗ ∈ L2 (Rd , P) can be approximated
arbitrarily well by an element in FNN = ∪N FNN,N (under mild conditions). At the same time,
1

For simplicity, we focus our introductory discussion on the case in which the response yi is a noiseless
function of the feature vector xi : some of our results go beyond this setting.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

