Provable Gradient Variance Guarantees for
Black-Box Variational Inference
Justin Domke
College of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Massachusetts Amherst
domke@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Recent variational inference methods use stochastic gradient estimators whose
variance is not well understood. Theoretical guarantees for these estimators are
important to understand when these methods will or will not work. This paper
gives bounds for the common “reparameterization” estimators when the target is
smooth and the variational family is a location-scale distribution. These bounds
are unimprovable and thus provide the best possible guarantees under the stated
assumptions.

1

Introduction

Take a distribution p(z, x) representing relationships between data x and latent variables z. After
observing x, one might wish to approximate the marginal probability p(x) or the posterior p(z|x).
Variational inference (VI) is based on the simple observation that for any distribution q(z),
p(z, x)
log p(x) = E log
+KL (q(z)kp(z|x)) .
z⇠q
q(z)
|
{z
}

(1)

ELBO(q)

VI algorithms typically choose an approximating family qw and maximize ELBO(qw ) over w.
Since log p(x) is fixed, this simultaneously tightens a lower-bound on log p(x) and minimizes the
divergence from qw (z) to the posterior p(z|x).
Traditional VI algorithms suppose p and qw are simple enough for certain expectations to have closed
forms, leading to deterministic coordinate-ascent type algorithms [6, 1, 20]. Recent work has turned
towards stochastic optimization. There are two motivations for this. First, stochastic data subsampling
can give computational savings [7]. Second, more complex distributions can be addressed if p is
treated as a “black box”, with no expectations available [9, 15, 19]. In both cases, one can still
estimate a stochastic gradient of the ELBO [17] and thus use stochastic gradient optimization. It is
possible to address very complex and large-scale problems using this strategy [10].
These improvements in scale and generality come at a cost: Stochastic optimization is typically less
reliable than deterministic coordinate ascent. Convergence is often a challenge, and methods typically
use heuristics for parameters like step-sizes. Failures do frequently occur in practice [22, 11, 4].
To help understand when black-box VI can be expected to work, this paper investigates the variance
of gradient estimates. This is a major issue in practice, and many ideas have been proposed to attempt
to reduce the variance [8, 5, 12, 2, 18, 13, 14, 16]. Despite all this, few rigorous guarantees on the
variance of gradient estimators seem to be known (Sec. 5.1).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

