Stacked Capsule Autoencoders

Adam R. Kosiorek ∗ † ‡
adamk@robots.ox.ac.uk
‡

Applied AI Lab
Oxford Robotics Institute
University of Oxford

Sara Sabour§

†

Yee Whye Teh∇

Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

§

Geoffrey E. Hinton§

Google Brain
Toronto

∇

DeepMind
London

Abstract
Objects are composed of a set of geometrically organized parts. We introduce
an unsupervised capsule autoencoder (SCAE), which explicitly uses geometric
relationships between parts to reason about objects. Since these relationships do
not depend on the viewpoint, our model is robust to viewpoint changes. S CAE
consists of two stages. In the first stage, the model predicts presences and poses of
part templates directly from the image and tries to reconstruct the image by appropriately arranging the templates. In the second stage, SCAE predicts parameters of
a few object capsules, which are then used to reconstruct part poses. Inference in
this model is amortized and performed by off-the-shelf neural encoders, unlike in
previous capsule networks. We find that object capsule presences are highly informative of the object class, which leads to state-of-the-art results for unsupervised
classification on SVHN (55%) and MNIST (98.7%).

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) work better than networks
without weight-sharing because of their inductive bias: if a local
feature is useful in one image location, the same feature is likely to
be useful in other locations. It is tempting to exploit other effects
of viewpoint changes by replicating features across scale, orientation and other affine degrees of freedom, but this quickly leads to
cumbersome, high-dimensional feature maps.
An alternative to replicating features across the non-translational
degrees of freedom is to explicitly learn transformations between
the natural coordinate frame of a whole object and the natural coordinate frames of each of its parts. Computer graphics relies on such
object→part coordinate transformations to represent the geometry
of an object in a viewpoint-invariant manner. Moreover, there is
strong evidence that, unlike standard CNNs, human vision also relies
on coordinate frames: imposing an unfamiliar coordinate frame on
a familiar object makes it challenging to recognize the object or its
geometry (Rock, 1973; G. E. Hinton, 1979).

Figure 1: S CAEs learn to explain different object classes with
separate object capsules, thereby
doing unsupervised classification.
Here, we show TSNE embeddings
A neural system can learn to reason about transformations between of object capsule presence probobjects, their parts and the viewer, but each kind of transforma- abilities for 10000 MNIST digits.
tion will likely need to be represented differently. An object-part- Individual points are color-coded
to the corresponding
relationship (OP) is viewpoint-invariant, approximately constant and according
digit class.

could be easily coded by learned weights. The relative coordinates

∗

This work was done during an internship at Google Brain.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

