A unified variance-reduced accelerated gradient
method for convex optimization

Guanghui Lan
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial & Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
george.lan@isye.gatech.edu
Zhize Li
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
zz-li14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yi Zhou
IBM Almaden Research Center
San Jose, CA 95120
yi.zhou@ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a novel randomized incremental gradient algorithm, namely, VArianceReduced Accelerated Gradient (Varag ), for finite-sum optimization. Equipped
with a unified step-size policy that adjusts itself to the value of the condition
number, Varag exhibits the unified optimal rates of convergence for solving smooth
convex finite-sum problems directly regardless of their strong convexity. Moreover,
Varag is the first accelerated randomized incremental gradient method that benefits
from the strong convexity of the data-fidelity term to achieve the optimal linear
convergence. It also establishes an optimal linear rate of convergence for solving
a wide class of problems only satisfying a certain error bound condition rather
than strong convexity. Varag can also be extended to solve stochastic finite-sum
problems.

1

Introduction

The problem of interest in this paper is the convex programming (CP) problem given in the form of

Pm
1
ψ ∗ := min ψ(x) := m
(1.1)
i=1 fi (x) + h(x) .
x∈X

n

Here, X ⊆ R is a closed convex set, the component function fi : X → R, i = 1, . . . , m, are
smooth and convex function with Li -Lipschitz continuous gradients over X, i.e., ∃Li ≥ 0 such that
k∇fi (x1 ) − ∇fi (x2 )k∗ ≤ Li kx1 − x2 k, ∀x1 , x2 ∈ X,

(1.2)

and h : X → R is a relatively simple
Pmbut possibly nonsmooth
Pmconvex function. For notational
1
1
convenience, we denote f (x) := m
f
(x)
and
L
:=
i
i=1
i=1 Li . It is easy to see that f has
m
L-Lipschitz continuous gradients, i.e., for some Lf ≥ 0, k∇f (x1 ) − ∇f (x2 )k∗ ≤ Lf kx1 − x2 k ≤
Lkx1 − x2 k, ∀x1 , x2 ∈ X. It should be pointed out that it is not necessary to assume h being
strongly convex. Instead, we assume that f is possibly strongly convex with modulus µ ≥ 0.
We also consider a class of stochastic finite-sum optimization problems given by

Pm
1
ψ ∗ := min ψ(x) := m
i=1 Eξi [Fi (x, ξi )] + h(x) ,
x∈X

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(1.3)

