Online Forecasting of Total-Variation-bounded
Sequences

Dheeraj Baby
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
dheeraj@ucsb.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
Department of Computer Science
UC Santa Barbara
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of online forecasting of sequences of length n with
total-variation at most Cn using observations contaminated by independent σsubgaussian noise. We design an O(n log n)-time algorithm that achieves a cu2/3
mulative square error of Õ(n1/3 Cn σ 4/3 + Cn2 ) with high probability. We also
prove a lower bound that matches the upper bound in all parameters (up to a log(n)
factor). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first polynomial-time algorithm that
achieves the optimal O(n1/3 ) rate in forecasting total variation bounded sequences
and the first algorithm that adapts to unknown Cn . Our proof techniques leverage
the special localized structure of Haar wavelet basis and the adaptivity to unknown
smoothness parameters in the classical wavelet smoothing [Donoho et al., 1998].
We also compare our model to the rich literature of dynamic regret minimization
and nonstationary stochastic optimization, where our problem can be treated as
a special case. We show that the workhorse in those settings — online gradient
descent and its variants with a fixed restarting schedule — are instances of a class
√
of linear forecasters that require a suboptimal regret of Ω̃( n). This implies that
the use of more adaptive algorithms is necessary to obtain the optimal rate.

1

Introduction

Nonparametric regression is a fundamental class of problems that has been studied for more than half
a century in statistics and machine learning [Nadaraya, 1964, De Boor et al., 1978, Wahba, 1990,
Donoho et al., 1998, Mallat, 1999, Scholkopf and Smola, 2001, Rasmussen and Williams, 2006]. It
solves the following problem:
• Let yi = f (ui ) + Noise for i = 1, ..., n. How can we estimate a function f using data points
(u1 , y1 ), ..., (un , yn ) and the knowledge that f belongs to a function class F?
Function class F typically imposes only weak regularity assumptions on the function f such as
boundedness and smoothness, which makes nonparametric regression widely applicable to many
real-life applications especially those with unknown physical processes.
A recent and successful class of nonparametric regression technique called trend filtering [Steidl et al.,
2006, Kim et al., 2009, Tibshirani, 2014, Wang et al., 2014] was shown to have the property of local
adaptivity [Mammen and van de Geer, 1997] in both theory and practice. We say a nonparametric
regression technique is locally adaptive if it can cater to local differences in smoothness, hence
allowing more accurate estimation of functions with varying smoothness and abrupt changes. For
example, for functions with bounded total variation (when F is a total variation class), standard
nonparametric regression techniques such as kernel smoothing and smoothing splines have a mean
square error (MSE) of O(n−1/2 ) while trend filtering has the optimal O(n−2/3 ).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

