Efficient Communication in Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning via Variance Based Control

Sai Qian Zhang
Harvard University

Qi Zhang
Amazon Inc.

Jieyu Lin
University of Toronto

Abstract
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has recently received considerable attention due to its applicability to a wide range of real-world applications. However,
achieving efficient communication among agents has always been an overarching
problem in MARL. In this work, we propose Variance Based Control (VBC), a
simple yet efficient technique to improve communication efficiency in MARL. By
limiting the variance of the exchanged messages between agents during the training
phase, the noisy component in the messages can be eliminated effectively, while the
useful part can be preserved and utilized by the agents for better performance. Our
evaluation using multiple MARL benchmarks indicates that our method achieves
2 − 10× lower in communication overhead than state-of-the-art MARL algorithms,
while allowing agents to achieve better overall performance.

1

Introduction

Many real-world applications (e.g., autonomous driving [16], game playing [12] and robotics control [9]) today require reinforcement learning tasks to be carried out in multi-agent settings. In MARL,
multiple agents interact with each other in a shared environment. Each agent only has access to partial
observations of the environment, and needs to make local decisions based on partial observations as
well as both direct and indirect interactions with the other agents. This complex interaction model has
introduced numerous challenges for MARL. In particular, during the training phase, each agent may
dynamically change its strategy, causing dynamics in the surrounding environment and instability in
the training process. Worse still, each agent can easily overfit its strategy to the behaviours of other
agents [11], which may seriously deteriorate the overall performance.
In the research literature, there have been three lines of research that try to mitigate the instability
and inefficiency caused by decentralized execution. The most common approach is independent
Q-learning (IQL) [20], which breaks down a multi-agent learning problem into multiple independent
single-agent learning problems, thus allowing each agent to learn and act independently. Unfortunately, this approach does not account for instability caused by environment dynamics, and therefore
often suffer from the problem of poor convergence. The second approach adopts the centralized training and decentralized execution [18] paradigm, where a joint action value function is learned during
the training phase to better coordinate the agents’ behaviours. During execution, each agent acts
independently without direct communication. The third approach introduces communication among
agents during execution [17, 3]. This approach allows each agent to dynamically adjusts its strategy
based on its local observation along with the information received from the other agents. Nonetheless,
it introduces additional communication overhead in terms of latency and bandwidth during execution,
and its effectiveness is heavily dependent on the usefulness of the received information.
In this work, we leverage the advantages of both the second and third approaches. Specifically,
we consider a fully cooperative scenario where multiple agents collaborate to achieve a common
objective. The agents are trained in a centralized fashion within the multi-agent Q-learning framework,
and are allowed to communicate with each other during execution. However, unlike previous work,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

