Exponential Family Estimation via
Adversarial Dynamics Embedding
⇤

Bo Dai1 , ⇤Zhen Liu2 , ⇤ Hanjun Dai1 , Niao He3 , Arthur Gretton4 , Le Song5,6 , Dale Schuurmans1,7
1
Google Research, Brain Team, 2 Mila, University of Montreal,
3
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 4 University College London,
5
Georgia Institute of Technology, 6 Ant Financial, 7 University of Alberta

Abstract
We present an efficient algorithm for maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) of
exponential family models, with a general parametrization of the energy function
that includes neural networks. We exploit the primal-dual view of the MLE with
a kinetics augmented model to obtain an estimate associated with an adversarial
dual sampler. To represent this sampler, we introduce a novel neural architecture,
dynamics embedding, that generalizes Hamiltonian Monte-Carlo (HMC). The
proposed approach inherits the flexibility of HMC while enabling tractable entropy
estimation for the augmented model. By learning both a dual sampler and the
primal model simultaneously, and sharing parameters between them, we obviate
the requirement to design a separate sampling procedure once the model has
been trained, leading to more effective learning. We show that many existing
estimators, such as contrastive divergence, pseudo/composite-likelihood, score
matching, minimum Stein discrepancy estimator, non-local contrastive objectives,
noise-contrastive estimation, and minimum probability flow, are special cases of the
proposed approach, each expressed by a different (fixed) dual sampler. An empirical
investigation shows that adapting the sampler during MLE can significantly improve
on state-of-the-art estimators1 .

1

Introduction

The exponential family is one of the most important classes of distributions in statistics and machine
learning, encompassing undirected graphical models (Wainwright and Jordan, 2008) and energybased models (LeCun et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2018), which include, for example, Markov random
fields (Kinderman and Snell, 1980), conditional random fields (Lafferty et al., 2001) and language
models (Mnih and Teh, 2012). Despite the flexibility of this family and the many useful properties it
possesses (Brown, 1986), most such distributions are intractable because the partition function does
not possess an analytic form. This leads to difficulty in evaluating, sampling and learning exponential
family models, hindering their application in practice. In this paper, we consider a longstanding
question:
Can a simple yet effective algorithm be developed for estimating general exponential family distributions?
There has been extensive prior work addressing this question. Many approaches focus on approximating maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), since it is well studied and known to possess desirable
statistical properties, such as consistency, asymptotic unbiasedness, and asymptotic normality (Brown,
1986). One prominent example is contrastive divergence (CD) (Hinton, 2002) and its variants (Tieleman and Hinton, 2009; Du and Mordatch, 2019). It approximates the gradient of the log-likelihood by
a stochastic estimator that uses samples generated from a few Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
steps. This approach has two shortcomings: first and foremost, the stochastic gradient is biased,
⇤

1

indicates equal contribution. Email: {bodai, hadai}@google.com, zhen.liu.2@umontreal.ca.
The code repository is available at https://github.com/lzzcd001/ade-code.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

