Quadratic Video Interpolation

Xiangyu Xu∗†
Carnegie Mellon University
xuxiangyu2014@gmail.com

Li Siyao∗
SenseTime Research
lisiyao1@sensetime.com

Qian Yin
Beijing Normal University
yinqian@bnu.edu.cn

Wenxiu Sun
SenseTime Research
sunwenxiu@sensetime.com

Ming-Hsuan Yang
University of California, Merced Google
mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Video interpolation is an important problem in computer vision, which helps
overcome the temporal limitation of camera sensors. Existing video interpolation
methods usually assume uniform motion between consecutive frames and use linear
models for interpolation, which cannot well approximate the complex motion in
the real world. To address these issues, we propose a quadratic video interpolation
method which exploits the acceleration information in videos. This method allows
prediction with curvilinear trajectory and variable velocity, and generates more
accurate interpolation results. For high-quality frame synthesis, we develop a flow
reversal layer to estimate flow fields starting from the unknown target frame to the
source frame. In addition, we present techniques for flow refinement. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach performs favorably against the existing
linear models on a wide variety of video datasets.

1

Introduction

Video interpolation aims to synthesize intermediate frames between the original input images, which
can temporally upsample low-frame rate videos to higher-frame rates. It is a fundamental problem in
computer vision as it helps overcome the temporal limitations of camera sensors and can be used in
numerous applications, such as motion deblurring [5, 35], video editing [25, 38], virtual reality [1],
and medical imaging [11].
Most state-of-the-art video interpolation methods [2, 3, 9, 14, 17] explicitly or implicitly assume
uniform motion between consecutive frames, where the objects move along a straight line at a
constant speed. As such, these approaches usually adopt linear models for synthesizing intermediate
frames. However, the motion in real scenarios can be complex and non-uniform, and the uniform
assumption may not always hold in the input videos, which often leads to inaccurate interpolation
results. Moreover, the existing models are mainly developed based on two consecutive frames for
interpolation, and the higher-order motion information of the video (e.g., acceleration) has not been
well exploited. An effective frame interpolation algorithm should use additional input frames and
estimate the higher-order information for more accurate motion prediction.
To this end, we propose a quadratic video interpolation method to exploit additional input frames
to overcome the limitations of linear models. Specifically, we develop a data-driven model which
integrates convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13, 24] and quadratic models [15] for accurate
motion estimation and image synthesis. The proposed algorithm is acceleration-aware, and thus
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

