Neural Diffusion Distance for Image Segmentation

Jian Sun and Zongben Xu
School of Mathematics and Statistics
Xi’an Jiaotong University, P. R. China
{jiansun,zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion distance is a spectral method for measuring distance among nodes on
graph considering global data structure. In this work, we propose a spec-diff-net
for computing diffusion distance on graph based on approximate spectral decomposition. The network is a differentiable deep architecture consisting of feature
extraction and diffusion distance modules for computing diffusion distance on
image by end-to-end training. We design low resolution kernel matching loss
and high resolution segment matching loss to enforce the network’s output to
be consistent with human-labeled image segments. To compute high-resolution
diffusion distance or segmentation mask, we design an up-sampling strategy by
feature-attentional interpolation which can be learned when training spec-diff-net.
With the learned diffusion distance, we propose a hierarchical image segmentation
method outperforming previous segmentation methods. Moreover, a weakly supervised semantic segmentation network is designed using diffusion distance and
achieved promising results on PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation dataset.

1

Introduction

Spectral analysis is a popular technique for diverse applications in computer vision and machine
learning, such as semi-supervised learning on graph [39], image segmentation [17, 31], image
matting [21], 3D shape analysis [36], etc. Spectral clustering and diffusion distance are two typical
spectral techniques that rely on affinity matrix over a graph. By decomposing the affinity matrix
using spectral decomposition, the corresponding eigenvectors encode the global structure of data, and
can be utilized for spectral clustering, diffusion distance computation, image segmentation, etc.
Computing affinity matrix on graph for identifying the relations of each node w.r.t. other nodes
is a fundamental task with potential applications in image segmentation [31], interactive image
labeling [11] , object semantic segmentation [18, 22], video recognition [35], etc. Traditionally, the
affinity matrix is either based on hand-crafted features [11, 31] or directly computed based on pairwise
feature similarity of graph nodes without considering global structure of underlying graph [35, 37].
In this work, we propose neural diffusion distance (NDD) on image inspired by diffusion distance [7,
8], which is a spectral method for computing pairwise distance considering global data structure by
spectral analysis. We propose to compute neural diffusion distance on image using a novel deep
architecture, dubbed as spec-diff-net. This network consists of a feature extraction module, and a
diffusion distance module including the computations of probabilistic transition matrix, spectral
decomposition and diffusion distance, in an end-to-end trainable system.
To enable computation of spectral decomposition in an efficient and differentiable way, we use
simultaneous iteration [12, 32] for approximating the eigen-decomposition of transition matrix. Since
the neural diffusion distance is computed on the feature grid with lower resolution than full image,
we propose a learnable up-sampling strategy in spec-diff-net using feature-attentional interpolation
for interpolating diffusion distance or segmentation map. The spec-diff-net is trained to constrain that
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

