Fast-rate PAC-Bayes Generalization Bounds via
Shifted Rademacher Processes
Jun Yang∗
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute
jun@utstat.toronto.edu

Shengyang Sun∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute
ssy@cs.toronto.edu

Daniel M. Roy
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Toronto,
Vector Institute
droy@utstat.toronto.edu

Abstract
The developments of Rademacher complexity and PAC-Bayesian theory have
been largely independent. One exception is the PAC-Bayes theorem of Kakade,
Sridharan, and Tewari [21], which is established via Rademacher complexity theory by viewing Gibbs classifiers as linear operators. The goal of this paper is
to extend this bridge between Rademacher complexity and state-of-the-art PACBayesian theory. We first demonstrate that one can match the fast rate of Catoni’s
PAC-Bayes bounds [8] using shifted Rademacher processes [27, 43, 44]. We then
derive a new fast-rate PAC-Bayes bound in terms of the “flatness” of the empirical
risk surface on which the posterior concentrates. Our analysis establishes a new
framework for deriving fast-rate PAC-Bayes bounds and yields new insights on
PAC-Bayesian theory.

1

Introduction

PAC-Bayes theory [33, 38] was developed to provide probably approximately correct (PAC) guarantees for supervised learning algorithms whose outputs can be expressed as a weighted majority
vote. Its uses have expanded considerably since [3, 6, 14, 17, 18, 28, 39, 40]. See [12, 25, 32]
for gentle introductions. Indeed, there has been a surge of interest and work in PAC-Bayes theory and its application to large-scale neural networks, especially towards studying generalization in
overparametrized neural networks trained by variants of gradient descent [9–11, 30, 36, 37].
PAC-Bayes bounds are one of several tools available for the study of the generalization and risk
properties of learning algorithms. One advantage of the PAC-Bayes framework is its ease of use: one
can obtain high-probability risk bounds for arbitrary (“posterior”) Gibbs classifiers provided one can
compute or bound relative entropies with respect to some fixed (“prior”) Gibbs classifier. Another
tool for studying generalization is Rademacher complexity, a distribution-dependent complexity
measure for classes of real-valued functions [4, 5, 23, 29, 34, 44].
The literature on PAC-Bayes bounds and bounds based on Rademacher complexity are essentially
disjoint. One point of contact is the work of Kakade, Sridharan, and Tewari [21], which builds the
first bridge between PAC-Bayes theory and Rademacher complexity. By viewing Gibbs classifiers as
∗ These authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

