Fixing the train-test resolution discrepancy
Hugo Touvron, Andrea Vedaldi, Matthijs Douze, Hervé Jégou
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Data-augmentation is key to the training of neural networks for image classification. This paper first shows that existing augmentations induce a significant
discrepancy between the size of the objects seen by the classifier at train and test
time: in fact, a lower train resolution improves the classification at test time!
We then propose a simple strategy to optimize the classifier performance, that
employs different train and test resolutions. It relies on a computationally cheap
fine-tuning of the network at the test resolution. This enables training strong classifiers using small training images, and therefore significantly reduce the training
time. For instance, we obtain 77.1% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with a ResNet50 trained on 128⇥128 images, and 79.8% with one trained at 224⇥224.
A ResNeXt-101 32x48d pre-trained with weak supervision on 940 million
224⇥224 images and further optimized with our technique for test resolution
320⇥320 achieves 86.4% top-1 accuracy (top-5: 98.0%). To the best of our
knowledge this is the highest ImageNet single-crop accuracy to date.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks [18] (CNNs) are used extensively in computer vision tasks such as
image classification [17], object detection [27], inpainting [37], style transfer [9] and even image
compression [28]. In order to obtain the best possible performance from these models, the training
and testing data distributions should match. However, often data pre-processing procedures are
different for training and testing. For instance, in image recognition the current best training practice
is to extract a rectangle with random coordinates from the image, to artificially increase the amount
of training data. This region, which we call the Region of Classification (RoC), is then resized to
obtain an image, or crop, of a fixed size (in pixels) that is fed to the CNN. At test time, the RoC
is instead set to a square covering the central part of the image, which results in the extraction of a
center crop. This reflects the bias of photographers who tend center important visual content. Thus,
while the crops extracted at training and test time have the same size, they arise from different RoCs,
which skews the distribution of data seen by the CNN.
Over the years, training and testing pre-processing procedures have evolved to improve the performance of CNNs, but so far they have been optimized separately [7]. In this paper, we first show
that this separate optimization has led to a significant distribution shift between training and testing
regimes with a detrimental effect on the test-time performance of models. We then show that this
problem can be solved by jointly optimizing the choice of resolutions and scales at training and test
time, while keeping the same RoC sampling. Our strategy only requires to fine-tune two layers in
order to compensate for the shift in statistics caused by changing the crop size. This retains the
advantages of existing pre-processing protocols for training and testing, including augmenting the
training data, while compensating for the distribution shift.
Our approach is based on a rigorous analysis of the effect of pre-processing on the statistics of natural
images, which shows that increasing the size of the crops used at test time compensates for randomly
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

