Cold Case: the Lost MNIST Digits
Chhavi Yadav
New York University
New York, NY
chhavi@nyu.edu

Léon Bottou
Facebook AI Research
and New York University
New York, NY
leon@bottou.org

Abstract
Although the popular MNIST dataset [LeCun et al., 1994] is derived from the
NIST database [Grother and Hanaoka, 1995], the precise processing steps for
this derivation have been lost to time. We propose a reconstruction that is accurate enough to serve as a replacement for the MNIST dataset, with insignificant
changes in accuracy. We trace each MNIST digit to its NIST source and its rich
metadata such as writer identifier, partition identifier, etc. We also reconstruct
the complete MNIST test set with 60,000 samples instead of the usual 10,000.
Since the balance 50,000 were never distributed, they can be used to investigate
the impact of twenty-five years of MNIST experiments on the reported testing
performances. Our limited results unambiguously confirm the trends observed
by Recht et al. [2018, 2019]: although the misclassification rates are slightly off,
classifier ordering and model selection remain broadly reliable. We attribute this
phenomenon to the pairing benefits of comparing classifiers on the same digits.

1

Introduction

The MNIST dataset [LeCun et al., 1994, Bottou et al., 1994] has been used as a standard machine
learning benchmark for more than twenty years. During the last decade, many researchers have
expressed the opinion that this dataset has been overused. In particular, the small size of its test
set, merely 10,000 samples, has been a cause of concern. Hundreds of publications report increasingly good performance on this same test set. Did they overfit the test set? Can we trust any new
conclusion drawn on this dataset? How quickly do machine learning datasets become useless?
The first partitions of the large NIST handwritten character collection [Grother and Hanaoka, 1995]
had been released one year earlier, with a training set written by 2000 Census Bureau employees and
a substantially more challenging test set written by 500 high school students. One of the objectives
of LeCun, Cortes, and Burges was to create a dataset with similarly distributed training and test sets.
The process they describe produces two sets of 60,000 samples. The test set was then downsampled
to only 10,000 samples, possibly because manipulating such a dataset with the computers of the
times could be annoyingly slow. The remaining 50,000 test samples have since been lost.
The initial purpose of this work was to recreate the MNIST preprocessing algorithms in order to
trace back each MNIST digit to its original writer in NIST. This reconstruction was first based on the
available information and then considerably improved by iterative refinements. Section 2 describes
this process and measures how closely our reconstructed samples match the official MNIST samples.
The reconstructed training set contains 60,000 images matching each of the MNIST training images.
Similarly, the first 10,000 images of the reconstructed test set match each of the MNIST test set
images. The next 50,000 images are a reconstruction of the 50,000 lost MNIST test images.1
1

Code and data are available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/qmnist.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

