Transferable Normalization: Towards Improving
Transferability of Deep Neural Networks

Ximei Wang, Ying Jin, Mingsheng Long (B)∗, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I. Jordan]
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
Research Center for Big Data, Tsinghua University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Software
]
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{wxm17,jiny18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {mingsheng,jimwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) excel at learning representations when trained on
large-scale datasets. Pre-trained DNNs also show strong transferability when finetuned to other labeled datasets. However, such transferability becomes weak when
the target dataset is fully unlabeled as in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA).
We envision that the loss of transferability mainly stems from the intrinsic limitation
of the architecture design of DNNs. In this paper, we delve into the components of
DNN architectures and propose Transferable Normalization (TransNorm) in place
of existing normalization techniques. TransNorm is an end-to-end trainable layer to
make DNNs more transferable across domains. As a general method, TransNorm
can be easily applied to various deep neural networks and domain adaption methods,
without introducing any extra hyper-parameters or learnable parameters. Empirical
results justify that TransNorm not only improves classification accuracies but also
accelerates convergence for mainstream DNN-based domain adaptation methods.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have dramatically advanced the state of the art in machine learning and
excel at learning discriminative representations that are useful for a wide range of tasks [24, 3, 44].
However, in real-world scenarios where gaining sufficient labeled data through manual labeling is
intolerably time-consuming and labor-exhausting, DNNs may be confronted with challenges when
generalizing the pre-trained model to a different unlabeled dataset. This dilemma has motivated the
research on domain adaptation [25], aiming to establish versatile algorithms that transfer knowledge
from a different but related dataset by leveraging its readily-available labeled data.
Early domain adaptation methods strived to learn domain-invariant representations [25, 6] or instance
importances [11, 5] to bridge the source and target domains. Since deep neural networks (DNNs)
became successful, domain adaptation methods also leveraged them for representation learning.
Disentangling explanatory factors of variations, DNNs are able to learn more transferable features
[24, 3, 44, 47]. Recent works in deep domain adaptation embed discrepancy measures into deep
architectures to align feature distributions across domains. Commonly, they minimize the distribution
discrepancy between feature distributions [38, 17, 19, 20, 16] or adversarially learn transferable
feature representations to fool a domain discriminator in a two-player game [36, 4, 37, 26, 18, 41, 46].
To date there have been extensive works that tackle domain adaptation by reducing the domain shift
from the perspective of loss function designs. They are admittedly quite effective but constitute only
∗

Corresponding author: Mingsheng Long (mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn)

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

