Seeing the Wind:
Visual Wind Speed Prediction with a Coupled
Convolutional and Recurrent Neural Network
Jennifer L. Cardona
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
jcard27@stanford.edu

Michael F. Howland
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
mhowland@stanford.edu

John O. Dabiri
Graduate Aerospace Laboratories (GALCIT)
and Mechanical Engineering
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA 91125
jodabiri@caltech.edu

Abstract
Wind energy resource quantification, air pollution monitoring, and weather forecasting all rely on rapid, accurate measurement of local wind conditions. Visual
observations of the effects of wind—the swaying of trees and flapping of flags, for
example—encode information regarding local wind conditions that can potentially
be leveraged for visual anemometry that is inexpensive and ubiquitous. Here, we
demonstrate a coupled convolutional neural network and recurrent neural network
architecture that extracts the wind speed encoded in visually recorded flow-structure
interactions of a flag and tree in naturally occurring wind. Predictions for wind
speeds ranging from 0.75-11 m/s showed agreement with measurements from a cup
anemometer on site, with a root-mean-squared error approaching the natural wind
speed variability due to atmospheric turbulence. Generalizability of the network
was demonstrated by successful prediction of wind speed based on recordings of
other flags in the field and in a controlled wind tunnel test. Furthermore, physicsbased scaling of the flapping dynamics accurately predicts the dependence of the
network performance on the video frame rate and duration.

1

Introduction

The ability to accurately measure wind speeds is important across several applications including
locating optimal sites for wind turbines, estimating pollution dispersion, and storm tracking. Currently,
taking these measurements requires installing a physical instrument at the exact location of interest,
which can be cost prohibitive and in some cases unfeasible. Knowledge of the wind resource in cities
is of particular interest as urbanization draws a larger portion of the world’s population to such areas,
driving the need for more distributed energy generation closer to densely populated regions [20].
There is also burgeoning interest in the use of drones for delivery, which would greatly benefit from
instantaneous knowledge of the local wind conditions to minimize energy consumption and ensure
safety [34]. Here we demonstrate a technique that enables wind speed measurements to be made
from a video of a flapping flag or swaying tree. This facilitates visual anemometry using pre-existing
features in an environment, which would be non-intrusive and cost effective for wind mapping.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

