Learning about an exponential amount of
conditional distributions
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi1,2
ishmael.belghazi@gmail.com

Maxime Oquab1
qas@fb.com

Yann Lecun1
yann@fb.com

David Lopez-Paz1
dlp@fb.com
1
Facebook AI Research, Paris, France
2
Montréal Institute for Learning Algorithms, Montréal, Canada

Abstract
We introduce the Neural Conditioner (NC), a self-supervised machine able to learn
about all the conditional distributions of a random vector X. The NC is a function
NC(x · a, a, r) that leverages adversarial training to match each conditional distribution P (Xr |Xa = xa ). After training, the NC generalizes to sample conditional
distributions never seen, including the joint distribution. The NC is also able to
auto-encode examples, providing data representations useful for downstream classification tasks. In sum, the NC integrates different self-supervised tasks (each being
the estimation of a conditional distribution) and levels of supervision (partially
observed data) seamlessly into a single learning experience.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning estimates the conditional distribution of a target variable given values for a feature
variable [63]. Supervised learning is the backbone to build state-of-the-art prediction models using
large amounts of labeled data, with unprecedented success in domains spanning image classification,
speech recognition, and language translation [35]. Unfortunately, collecting large amounts of labeled
data is an expensive task painstakingly performed by humans (for instance, consider labeling the
objects appearing in millions of images). If our ambition to transition from machine learning to
artificial intelligence is to be met, we must build algorithms capable of learning effectively from
inexpensive unlabeled data without human supervision (for instance, millions of unlabeled images).
Furthermore, we are interested in the case where the available unlabeled data is partially observed.
Thus, the goal of this paper is unsupervised learning, defined as understanding the underlying process
generating some partially observed unlabeled data.
Currently, unsupervised learning strategies come in many flavors, including component analysis,
clustering, energy modeling, and density estimation [23]. Each of these strategies targets the
estimation of a particular statistic from high-dimensional data. For example, principal component
analysis extracts a set of directions under which the data exhibits maximum variance [28]. However,
powerful unsupervised learning should not commit to the estimation of a particular statistic from
data, but extract general-purpose features useful for downstream tasks.
An emerging, more general strategy to unsupervised learning is the one of self-supervised learning
[24, for instance]. The guiding principle behind self-supervised learning is to set up a supervised
learning problem based on unlabeled data, such that solving that supervised learning problem leads
to partial understanding about the data generating process [32]. More specifically, self-supervised
learning algorithms transform the unlabeled data into one set of input features and one set of output
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

