Multiple Futures Prediction

Yichuan Charlie Tang
Apple Inc.
yichuan_tang@apple.com

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Apple Inc.
rsalakhutdinov@apple.com

Abstract
Temporal prediction is critical for making intelligent and robust decisions in complex dynamic environments. Motion prediction needs to model the inherently
uncertain future which often contains multiple potential outcomes, due to multiagent interactions and the latent goals of others. Towards these goals, we introduce
a probabilistic framework that efficiently learns latent variables to jointly model
the multi-step future motions of agents in a scene. Our framework is data-driven
and learns semantically meaningful latent variables to represent the multimodal
future, without requiring explicit labels. Using a dynamic attention-based state
encoder, we learn to encode the past as well as the future interactions among
agents, efficiently scaling to any number of agents. Finally, our model can be used
for planning via computing a conditional probability density over the trajectories
of other agents given a hypothetical rollout of the ‘self’ agent. We demonstrate
our algorithms by predicting vehicle trajectories of both simulated and real data,
demonstrating the state-of-the-art results on several vehicle trajectory datasets.

1

Introduction

The ability to make good predictions lies at the heart of robust and safe decision making. It is
especially critical to be able to predict the future motions of all relevant agents in complex and
dynamic environments. For example, in the autonomous driving domain, motion prediction is central
both to the ability to make high level decisions, such as when to perform maneuvers, as well as to
low level path planning optimizations [34, 28].
Motion prediction is a challenging problem due to the various needs of a good predictive model.
The varying objectives, goals, and behavioral characteristics of different agents can lead to multiple
possible futures or modes. Agents’ states do not evolve independently from one another, but rather
they interact with each other. As an illustration, we provide some examples in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1(a),
there are a few different possible futures for the blue vehicle approaching an intersection. It can
either turn left, go straight, or turn right, forming different modes in trajectory space. In Fig. 1(b),
interactions between the two vehicles during a merge scenario show that their trajectories influence
each other, depending on who yields to whom. Besides multimodal interactions, prediction needs
to scale efficiently with an arbitrary number of agents in a scene and take into account auxiliary
and contextual information, such as map and road information. Additionally, the ability to measure
uncertainty by computing probability over likely future trajectories of all agents in closed-form (as
opposed to Monte Carlo sampling) is of practical importance.
Despite a large body of work in temporal motion predictions [24, 7, 13, 26, 16, 2, 30, 8, 39], existing
state-of-the-art methods often only capture a subset of the aforementioned features. For example,
algorithms are either deterministic, not multimodal, or do not fully capture both past and future
interactions. Multimodal techniques often require the explicit labeling of modes prior to training.
Models which perform joint prediction often assume the number of agents present to be fixed [36, 31].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

