Constrained Reinforcement Learning Has Zero
Duality Gap

Santiago Paternain, Luiz F. O. Chamon, Miguel Calvo-Fullana and Alejandro Ribeiro
Electrical and Systems Engineering
University of Pennsylvania
{spater,luizf,cfullana,aribeiro}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Autonomous agents must often deal with conflicting requirements, such as completing tasks using the least amount of time/energy, learning multiple tasks, or
dealing with multiple opponents. In the context of reinforcement learning (RL),
these problems are addressed by (i) designing a reward function that simultaneously describes all requirements or (ii) combining modular value functions that encode them individually. Though effective, these methods have critical downsides.
Designing good reward functions that balance different objectives is challenging,
especially as the number of objectives grows. Moreover, implicit interference
between goals may lead to performance plateaus as they compete for resources,
particularly when training on-policy. Similarly, selecting parameters to combine
value functions is at least as hard as designing an all-encompassing reward, given
that the effect of their values on the overall policy is not straightforward. The
later is generally addressed by formulating the conflicting requirements as a constrained RL problem and solved using Primal-Dual methods. These algorithms
are in general not guaranteed to converge to the optimal solution since the problem is not convex. This work provides theoretical support to these approaches by
establishing that despite its non-convexity, this problem has zero duality gap, i.e.,
it can be solved exactly in the dual domain, where it becomes convex. Finally, we
show this result basically holds if the policy is described by a good parametrization (e.g., neural networks) and we connect this result with primal-dual algorithms
present in the literature and we establish the convergence to the optimal solution.

1

Introduction

Autonomous agents must often deal with conflicting requirements, such as completing a task in the
least amount of time/energy, learning multiple tasks or contexts, dealing with multiple opponents or
with several specifications that are designed to guide the agent in the learning process. In the context
of reinforcement learning [1], these problems are generally addressed by combining modular value
functions that encode them individually, by multiplying each signal by its own coefficient, which
controls the emphasis placed on it [2–4]. Although effective, the multi-objective problem [5] has
several downsides. First, for each set of penalty coefficients, there exists a different, optimal solution,
also known as Pareto optimality [6]. In practice, the exact coefficient is selected through a time
consuming and a computationally intensive process of hyper-parameter tuning that often times are
domain dependent, as showed in [7–9]. Moreover, implicit interference between the goals may lead
to training plateaus as they compete for resources in the policy [10].
An alternative, is to embed all conflicting requirements in a constrained RL problem and to use a
primal-dual algorithm as in [7, 11] that chooses the parameters automatically. The main advantage of
this approach is that constraints ensure satisfying behavior without the need for manually selecting
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

