Hyper-Graph-Network Decoders for Block Codes

Eliya Nachmani and Lior Wolf
Facebook AI Research and Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Neural decoders were shown to outperform classical message passing techniques
for short BCH codes. In this work, we extend these results to much larger families of
algebraic block codes, by performing message passing with graph neural networks.
The parameters of the sub-network at each variable-node in the Tanner graph are
obtained from a hypernetwork that receives the absolute values of the current
message as input. To add stability, we employ a simplified version of the arctanh
activation that is based on a high order Taylor approximation of this activation
function. Our results show that for a large number of algebraic block codes, from
diverse families of codes (BCH, LDPC, Polar), the decoding obtained with our
method outperforms the vanilla belief propagation method as well as other learning
techniques from the literature.

1

Introduction

Decoding algebraic block codes is an open problem and learning techniques have recently been
introduced to this field. While the first networks were fully connected (FC) networks, these were
replaced with recurrent neural networks (RNNs), which follow the steps of the belief propagation
(BP) algorithm. These RNN solutions weight the messages that are being passed as part of the BP
method with fixed learnable weights.
In this work, we add compute to the message passing iterations, by turning the message graph into
a graph neural network, in which one type of nodes, called variable nodes, processes the incoming
messages with a FC network g. Since the space of possible messages is large and its underlying
structure random, training such a network is challenging. Instead, we propose to make this network
adaptive, by training a second network f to predict the weights θg of network g.
This “hypernetwork” scheme, in which one network predicts the weights of another, allows us to
control the capacity, e.g., we can have a different network per node or per group of nodes. Since
the nodes in the decoding graph are naturally stratified and since a per-node capacity is too high for
this problem, the second option is selected. Unfortunately, training such a hypernetwork still fails to
produce the desired results, without applying two additional modifications. The first modification
is to apply an absolute value to the input of network f , thus allowing it to focus on the confidence
in each message rather than on the content of the messages. The second is to replace the arctanh
activation function that is employed by the check nodes with a high order Taylor approximation of
this function, which avoids its asymptotes.
When applying learning solutions to algebraic block codes, the exponential size of the input space
can be mitigated by ensuring that certain symmetry conditions are met. In this case, it is sufficient
to train the network on a noisy version of the zero codeword. As we show, the architecture of the
hypernetwork we employ is selected such that these conditions are met.
Applied to a wide variety of codes, our method outperforms the current learning based solutions,
as well as the classical BP method, both for a finite number of iterations and at convergence of the
message passing iterations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

