E2-Train: Training State-of-the-art CNNs with Over
80% Less Energy
Yue Wang,∗, Ziyu Jiang†,∗, Xiaohan Chen†,∗, Pengfei Xu , Yang Zhao ,
Yingyan Lin and Zhangyang Wang†
†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University
†
{jiangziyu, chernxh, atlaswang}@tamu.edu

{yw68, px5, zy34, yingyan.lin}@rice.edu
https://rtml.eiclab.net/?page_id=120

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been increasingly deployed to edge
devices. Hence, many efforts have been made towards efficient CNN inference
in resource-constrained platforms. This paper attempts to explore an orthogonal
direction: how to conduct more energy-efficient training of CNNs, so as to enable
on-device training? We strive to reduce the energy cost during training, by dropping
unnecessary computations, from three complementary levels: stochastic mini-batch
dropping on the data level; selective layer update on the model level; and sign
prediction for low-cost, low-precision back-propagation, on the algorithm level.
Extensive simulations and ablation studies, with real energy measurements from an
FPGA board, confirm the superiority of our proposed strategies and demonstrate
remarkable energy savings for training. For example, when training ResNet-74
on CIFAR-10, we achieve aggressive energy savings of >90% and >60%, while
incurring a top-1 accuracy loss of only about 2% and 1.2%, respectively. When
training ResNet-110 on CIFAR-100, an over 84% training energy saving is achieved
without degrading inference accuracy.

1

Introduction

The increasing penetration of intelligent sensors has revolutionized how Internet of Things (IoT)
works. For visual data analytics, we have witnessed the record-breaking predictive performance
achieved by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [1, 2, 3]. Although such high performance CNN
models are initially learned in data centers and then deployed to IoT devices, we have witnessed
increasing necessity for the model to continue learning and updating itself in situ, such as for
personalization for different users, or incremental/lifelong learning. Ideally, this learning/retraining
process should take place on device. Comparing to cloud-based retraining, training locally helps
avoid transferring data back and forth between data centers and IoT devices, reduce communication
cost/latency, and enhance privacy.
However, training on IoT devices is non-trivial, more consuming yet much less explored than inference. IoT devices, such as smart phones and wearables, have limited computation and energy
resources, that are even stringent for inference. Training CNNs consumes magnitudes higher computations than one inference. For example, training ResNet-50 for only one 224 × 224 image can
take up to 12 GFLOPs (vs. 4GFLOPS for inference), which can easily drain a mobile phone battery
when training with batch images [4]. This mismatch between the limited resources of IoT devices
and the high complexity of CNNs is only getting worse because the network structures are getting
more complex as they are designed to solve harder and larger-scale tasks [5].
∗

The first three authors (Yue Wang, Ziyu Jiang, Xiaohan Chen) contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

