Minimal Variance Sampling in Stochastic Gradient
Boosting

Bulat Ibragimov
Yandex, Moscow, Russia
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
ibrbulat@yandex.ru

Gleb Gusev
Sberbank∗, Moscow, Russia
gusev.g.g@sberbank.ru

Abstract
Stochastic Gradient Boosting (SGB) is a widely used approach to regularization
of boosting models based on decision trees. It was shown that, in many cases, random sampling at each iteration can lead to better generalization performance of
the model and can also decrease the learning time. Different sampling approaches
were proposed, where probabilities are not uniform, and it is not currently clear
which approach is the most effective. In this paper, we formulate the problem
of randomization in SGB in terms of optimization of sampling probabilities to
maximize the estimation accuracy of split scoring used to train decision trees.
This optimization problem has a closed-form nearly optimal solution, and it leads
to a new sampling technique, which we call Minimal Variance Sampling (MVS).
The method both decreases the number of examples needed for each iteration of
boosting and increases the quality of the model significantly as compared to the
state-of-the art sampling methods. The superiority of the algorithm was confirmed
by introducing MVS as a new default option for subsampling in CatBoost, a gradient boosting library achieving state-of-the-art quality on various machine learning
tasks.

1

Introduction

Gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT) [16] is one of the most popular machine learning algorithms
as it provides high-quality models in a large number of machine learning problems containing heterogeneous features, noisy data, and complex dependencies [31]. There are many fields where gradient boosting achieves state-of-the-art results, e.g., search engines [34, 3], recommendation systems
[30], and other applications [36, 4].
One problem of GBDT is the computational cost of the learning process. GBDT may be described as
an iterative process of constructing decision tree models, each of which estimates negative gradients
of examples’ errors. At each step, GBDT greedily builds a tree. GBDT scores every possible feature
split and chooses the best one, which requires computational time proportional to the number of
data instances. Since most GBDT models consist of an ensemble of many trees, as the number of
examples grows, more learning time is required, what imposes restrictions on using GBDT models
for large industry datasets.
Another problem is the trade-off between the capacity of the GBDT model and its generalization
ability. One of the most critical parameters that influence the capacity of boosting is the number of
iterations or the size of the ensemble. The more components are used in the algorithm, the more
complex dependencies can be modeled. However, an increase in the number of models in the ensemble does not always lead to an increase in accuracy and, moreover, can decrease its generalization
∗

The study was done while working at Yandex

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

