Graph Neural Tangent Kernel:
Fusing Graph Neural Networks with Graph Kernels

Simon S. Du
Institute for Advanced Study
ssdu@ias.edu

Kangcheng Hou
Zhejiang University
kangchenghou@gmail.com

Barnabás Póczos
Carnegie Mellon University
bapoczos@cs.cmu.edu

Ruosong Wang
Carnegie Mellon University.
ruosongw@andrew.cmu.edu

Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University
rsalakhu@cs.cmu.edu

Keyulu Xu
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
keyulu@mit.edu

Abstract
While graph kernels (GKs) are easy to train and enjoy provable theoretical guarantees, their practical performances are limited by their expressive power, as the
kernel function often depends on hand-crafted combinatorial features of graphs.
Compared to graph kernels, graph neural networks (GNNs) usually achieve better
practical performance, as GNNs use multi-layer architectures and non-linear activation functions to extract high-order information of graphs as features. However,
due to the large number of hyper-parameters and the non-convex nature of the
training procedure, GNNs are harder to train. Theoretical guarantees of GNNs are
also not well-understood. Furthermore, the expressive power of GNNs scales with
the number of parameters, and thus it is hard to exploit the full power of GNNs
when computing resources are limited. The current paper presents a new class
of graph kernels, Graph Neural Tangent Kernels (GNTKs), which correspond to
inﬁnitely wide multi-layer GNNs trained by gradient descent. GNTKs enjoy the
full expressive power of GNNs and inherit advantages of GKs. Theoretically, we
show GNTKs provably learn a class of smooth functions on graphs. Empirically,
we test GNTKs on graph classiﬁcation datasets and show they achieve strong performance.

1

Introduction

Learning on graph-structured data such as social networks and biological networks requires one to
design methods that effectively exploit the structure of graphs. Graph Kernels (GKs) and Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are two major classes of methods for learning on graph-structured data. GKs,
explicitly or implicitly, build feature vectors based on combinatorial properties of input graphs. Popular choices of GKs include Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree kernel [Shervashidze et al., 2011], graphlet
kernel [Shervashidze et al., 2009] and random walk kernel [Vishwanathan et al., 2010, Gärtner et al.,
2003]. GKs inherit all beneﬁts of kernel methods. GKs are easy to train, since the corresponding optimization problem is convex. Moreover, the kernel function often has explicit expressions,
and thus we can analyze their theoretical guarantees using tools in learning theory. The downside
of GKs, however, is that hand-crafted features may not be powerful enough to capture high-order
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

