Staying up to Date with Online Content Changes
Using Reinforcement Learning for Scheduling

Andrey Kolobov
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA-98052
akolobov@microsoft.com
Cheng Lu
Microsoft Bing
Bellevue, WA-98004
Cheng.Lu@microsoft.com

Yuval Peres
yperes@gmail.com

Eric Horvitz
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA-98052
horvitz@microsoft.com

Abstract
From traditional Web search engines to virtual assistants and Web accelerators,
services that rely on online information need to continually keep track of remote
content changes by explicitly requesting content updates from remote sources
(e.g., web pages). We propose a novel optimization objective for this setting that
has several practically desirable properties, and efficient algorithms for it with
optimality guarantees even in the face of mixed content change observability and
initially unknown change model parameters. Experiments on 18.5M URLs crawled
daily for 14 weeks show significant advantages of this approach over prior art.

1

Introduction

As the Web becomes more and more dynamic, services that rely on web data face the increasingly
challenging problem of keeping up with online content changes. Whether it be a continuous-query
system [26], a virtual assistant like Cortana or Google Now, or an Internet search engine, such a
service tracks many remote sources of information – web pages or data streams [27]. Users expect
these services, which we call trackers, to surface the latest information from the sources. This is
easy if sources push content updates to the tracker, but few sources do. Instead, major trackers such
as search engines must continually decide when to re-pull (crawl) data from sources to pick up the
changes. A policy that makes these decisions well solves the freshness crawl scheduling problem.
Freshness crawl scheduling has several challenging aspects. For most sources, the tracker finds
out whether they have changed only when it crawls them. To guess when the changes happen, and
hence should be downloaded, the tracker needs a predictive model whose parameters are initially
unknown. Thus, the tracker needs to learn these models and optimize a freshness-related objective
when scheduling crawls. For some web pages, however, sitemap polling and other means can provide
trustworthy near-instantaneous signals that the page has changed in a meaningful way, though not
what the change is exactly. But even with these remote change observations and known change model
parameters, freshness crawl scheduling remains highly nontrivial because the tracker cannot react
to every individual predicted or actual change. The tracker’s infrastructure imposes a bandwidth
constraint on the average daily number of crawls, usually just a fraction of the change event volume.
Last but not least, Google and Bing track many billions of pages [32] with vastly different importance
and change frequency characteristics. The sheer size of this constrained learning and optimization
problem makes low-polynomial algorithms for it a must, despite the availability of big-data platforms.
This paper presents a holistic approach to freshness crawl scheduling that handles all of the above
aspects in a computationally efficient manner with optimality guarantees using a type of reinforcement
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

