Shadowing Properties of Optimization Algorithms
Antonio Orvieto
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland ⇤

Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Ordinary differential equation (ODE) models of gradient-based optimization methods can provide insights into the dynamics of learning and inspire the design of new
algorithms. Unfortunately, this thought-provoking perspective is weakened by the
fact that — in the worst case — the error between the algorithm steps and its ODE
approximation grows exponentially with the number of iterations. In an attempt to
encourage the use of continuous-time methods in optimization, we show that, if
some additional regularity on the objective is assumed, the ODE representations of
Gradient Descent and Heavy-ball do not suffer from the aforementioned problem,
once we allow for a small perturbation on the algorithm initial condition. In the
dynamical systems literature, this phenomenon is called shadowing. Our analysis
relies on the concept of hyperbolicity, as well as on tools from numerical analysis.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of minimizing a smooth function f : Rd ! R. This is commonly solved
using gradient-based algorithms due to their simplicity and provable convergence guarantees. Two of
these approaches — that prevail in machine learning — are: 1) Gradient Descent (GD), that computes
a sequence (xk )1
k=0 of approximations to the minimizer recursively:
xk+1 = xk

⌘rf (xk ),

(GD)

given an initial point x0 and a learning rate ⌘ > 0; and 2) Heavy-ball (HB)[43] that computes a
different sequence of approximations (zk )1
k=0 such that
zk+1 = zk + (zk

zk 1 )

⌘rf (zk ),

(HB)

given an initial point z0 = z 1 and a momentum 2 [0, 1). A method related to HB is Nesterov’s
accelerated gradient (NAG), for which rf is evaluated at a different point (see Eq. 2.2.22 in [38]).

Analyzing the convergence properties of these algorithms can be complex, especially for NAG whose
convergence proof relies on algebraic tricks that reveal little detail about the acceleration phenomenon,
i.e. the celebrated optimality of NAG in convex smooth optimization. Instead, an alternative approach
is to view these methods as numerical integrators of some ordinary differential equations (ODEs). For
instance, GD performs the explicit Euler method on ẏ = rf (y) and HB the semi-implicit Euler
method on q̈ + ↵q + rf (q) = 0 [43, 47]. This connection goes beyond the study of the dynamics of
learning algorithms, and has recently been used to get a useful and thought-provoking viewpoint on
the computations performed by residual neural networks [10, 12].
In optimization, the relation between discrete algorithms and ordinary differential equations is not
new at all: the first contribution in this direction dates back to, at least, 1958 [18]. This connection
has recently been revived by the work of [49, 28], where the authors show that the continuous-time
limit of NAG is a second order differential equation with vanishing viscosity. This approach provides
an interesting perspective on the somewhat mysterious acceleration phenomenon, connecting it to
⇤

Correspondence to orvietoa@ethz.ch

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

