Initialization of ReLUs for Dynamical Isometry

Rebekka Burkholz
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
655 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115
rburkholz@hsph.harvard.edu

Alina Dubatovka
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Universitätstrasse 6, 8092 Zurich
alina.dubatovka@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Deep learning relies on good initialization schemes and hyperparameter choices
prior to training a neural network. Random weight initializations induce random
network ensembles, which give rise to the trainability, training speed, and sometimes also generalization ability of an instance. In addition, such ensembles provide
theoretical insights into the space of candidate models of which one is selected
during training. The results obtained so far rely on mean field approximations
that assume infinite layer width and that study average squared signals. We derive
the joint signal output distribution exactly, without mean field assumptions, for
fully-connected networks with Gaussian weights and biases, and analyze deviations
from the mean field results. For rectified linear units, we further discuss limitations
of the standard initialization scheme, such as its lack of dynamical isometry, and
propose a simple alternative that overcomes these by initial parameter sharing.

1

Introduction

Deep learning relies critically on good parameter initialization prior to training. Two approaches are
commonly employed: random network initialization [4, 7, 14] and transfer learning [26] (including
unsupervised pre-training), where a network that was trained for a different task or a part of it
is retrained and extended by additional network layers. While the latter can speed up training
considerably and also improve the generalization ability of the new model, its bias towards the
original task can also hinder successful training if the learned features barely relate to the new task.
Random initialization of parameters, meanwhile, requires careful tuning of the distributions from
which neural network weights and biases are drawn. While heterogeneity of network parameters is
needed to produce meaningful output, a too big variance can also dilute the original signal. To avoid
exploding or vanishing gradients, the distributions can be adjusted to preserve signal variance from
layer to layer. This enables the training of very deep networks by simple stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) without the need of computationally intensive corrections as batch normalization [8] or variants
thereof [12]. This approach is justified by the similar update rules of gradient back-propagation and
signal forward propagation [20]. In addition to trainability, good parameter initializations also seem
to support the generalization ability of the trained, overparametrized network. According to [3], the
parameter values remain close to the initialized ones, which has a regularization effect.
An early example of approximate signal variance preservation is proposed in [4] for fully connected
feed forward neural networks, an important building block of most common neural architectures.
Inspired by those derivations, He et al. [7] found that for rectified linear units (ReLUs) and Gaussian
weight initialization w ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ) the optimal choice is zero mean µ = 0, variance σ 2 = 2/N and
zero bias b = 0, where N refers to the number of neurons in a layer. These findings are confirmed by
mean field theory, which assumes infinitely wide network layers to employ the central limit theorem
and focus on normal distributions. Similar results have been obtained for tanh [16, 18, 20], residual
networks with different activation functions [24], and convolutional neural networks [23]. The same
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

