Model Similarity Mitigates Test Set Overuse

Horia Mania
UC Berkeley
hmania@berkeley.edu

John Miller
UC Berkeley
miller_john@berkeley.edu

Moritz Hardt
UC Berkeley
hardt@berkeley.edu

Ludwig Schmidt
UC Berkeley
ludwig@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Recht
UC Berkeley
brecht@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Excessive reuse of test data has become commonplace in today’s machine learning workflows. Popular benchmarks, competitions, industrial scale tuning, among
other applications, all involve test data reuse beyond guidance by statistical confidence bounds. Nonetheless, recent replication studies give evidence that popular
benchmarks continue to support progress despite years of extensive reuse. We
proffer a new explanation for the apparent longevity of test data: Many proposed
models are similar in their predictions and we prove that this similarity mitigates
overfitting. Specifically, we show empirically that models proposed for the ImageNet ILSVRC benchmark agree in their predictions well beyond what we can
conclude from their accuracy levels alone. Likewise, models created by large
scale hyperparameter search enjoy high levels of similarity. Motivated by these
empirical observations, we give a non-asymptotic generalization bound that takes
similarity into account, leading to meaningful confidence bounds in practical settings.

1

Introduction

Be it validation sets for model tuning, popular benchmark data, or machine learning competitions,
the holdout method is central to the scientific and industrial activities of the machine learning community. As compute resources scale, a growing number of practitioners evaluate an unprecedented
number of models against various holdout sets. These practices, collectively, put significant pressure on the statistical guarantees of the holdout method. Theory suggests that for k models chosen
independently of n test data points, the holdout
pmethod provides valid risk estimates for each of
these models up to a deviation on the order of log(k)/n [5]. But this bound is the consequence
of an unrealistic assumption. In practice, models incorporate prior information about the available
test data since human analysts choose models in a manner guided by previous results. Adaptive
hyperparameter search algorithms similarly evolve models on the basis of past trials [12].
Adaptivity significantly complicates the theoretical guarantees of the holdout method. A simple
adaptive strategy, resembling
the practice of selectively ensembling k models, can bias the holdout
p
method by as much as k/n [5]. If this bound were attained in practice, holdout data across the
board would rapidly lose its value over time. Nonetheless, recent replication studies give evidence
that popular benchmarks continue to support progress despite years of extensive reuse [15, 20].
In this work, we contribute a new explanation for why the adaptive bound is not attained in practice and why even the standard non-adaptive bound is more pessimistic than it needs to be. Our
explanation centers around the phenomenon of model similarity. Practitioners evaluate models that
incorporate common priors, past experiences, and standard practices. As we show empirically, this
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

