Connections Between Mirror Descent, Thompson
Sampling and the Information Ratio

Julian Zimmert
DeepMind, London/
University of Copenhagen
zimmert@di.ku.dk

Tor Lattimore
DeepMind, London
lattimore@google.com

Abstract
The information-theoretic analysis by Russo and Van Roy [25] in combination
with minimax duality has proved a powerful tool for the analysis of online learning
algorithms in full and partial information settings. In most applications there
is a tantalising similarity to the classical analysis based on mirror descent. We
make a formal connection, showing that the information-theoretic bounds in most
applications can be derived from existing techniques for online convex optimisation.
Besides this, for k-armed adversarial bandits we provide an efficient algorithm
with regret that matches the best information-theoretic upper bound and improve
best known regret guarantees for online linear optimisation on `p -balls and bandits
with graph feedback.

1

Introduction

The combination of minimax duality and the information-theoretic machinery by Russo and Van Roy
[25] has proved a powerful tool in the analysis of online learning algorithms. This has led to short
and insightful analysis for k-armed bandits, linear bandits, convex bandits and partial monitoring, all
improving on prior best known results. The downside is that the approach is non-constructive. The
application of minimax duality demonstrates the existence of an algorithm with a given bound in the
adversarial setting, but provides no way of constructing that algorithm.
The fundamental quantity in the information-theoretic analysis is the ‘information ratio’ in round t,
which informally is
information ratiot =

(expected regret in round t)2
,
expected information gain in round t

where the information gain is either measured using the mutual information [25] or a generalisation
based on a Bregman divergence [21]. Proving the information ratio is small corresponds to showing
that either the learner is suffering small regret in round t or gaining information, which ultimately
leads to a bound on the cumulative regret. The aforementioned generalisation by Lattimore and
Szepesvári [21] (restated in the supplementary) lead to a short analysis for k-armed adversarial
bandits that is minimax optimal except for small constant factors. The authors speculated that the
new idea should lead to improved bounds for a range of online learning problems and suggested a
number of applications, including bandits with graph feedback [3] and linear bandits on `p -balls [11].
We started to follow this plan, successfully improving existing minimax bounds for bandits with
graph feedback and online linear optimisation for `p -balls with full information (the bandit setting
remains a mystery). Along the way, however, we noticed a striking connection between the analysis
techniques for bounding the information ratio and controlling the stability of online stochastic mirror
descent (OSMD), which is a classical algorithm for online convex optimisation. A connection was
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

