Sinkhorn Barycenters with Free Support via
Frank-Wolfe Algorithm
Giulia Luise1 , Saverio Salzo2 , Massimiliano Pontil1,2 , Carlo Ciliberto3

g.luise.16@ucl.ac.uk, saverio.salzo@iit.it, m.pontil@cs.ucl.ac.uk,c.ciliberto@ic.ac.uk
1
Department of Computer Science, University College London, UK
2
CSML, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy
3
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, UK

Abstract
We present a novel algorithm to estimate the barycenter of arbitrary probability
distributions with respect to the Sinkhorn divergence. Based on a Frank-Wolfe
optimization strategy, our approach proceeds by populating the support of the
barycenter incrementally, without requiring any pre-allocation. We consider discrete as well as continuous distributions, proving convergence rates of the proposed
algorithm in both settings. Key elements of our analysis are a new result showing that the Sinkhorn divergence on compact domains has Lipschitz continuous
gradient with respect to the Total Variation and a characterization of the sample
complexity of Sinkhorn potentials. Experiments validate the effectiveness of our
method in practice.

1

Introduction

Aggregating and summarizing collections of probability measures is a key task in several machine
learning scenarios. Depending on the metric adopted, the properties of the resulting average (or
barycenter) of a family of probability measures vary significantly. By design, optimal transport
metrics are better suited at capturing the geometry of the distribution than Euclidean distance or
f -divergences [14]. In particular, Wasserstein barycenters have been successfully used in settings
such as texture mixing [40], Bayesian inference [49], imaging [26], or model ensemble [18].
The notion of barycenter in Wasserstein space was first introduced by [2] and then investigated
from the computational perspective for the original Wasserstein distance [12, 50, 54] as well as its
entropic regularizations (e.g. Sinkhorn) [6, 14, 20]. Two main challenges in this regard are: i) how to
efficiently identify the support of the candidate barycenter and ii) how to deal with continuous (or
infinitely supported) probability measures. The first problem is typically addressed by either fixing
the support of the barycenter a-priori [20, 50] or by adopting an alternating minimization procedure
to iteratively optimize the support point locations and their weights [12, 14]. While fixed-support
methods enjoy better theoretical guarantees, free-support algorithms are more memory efficient and
practicable in high dimensional settings. The problem of dealing with continuous distributions has
been mainly approached by adopting stochastic optimization methods to minimize the barycenter
functional [12, 20, 50].
In this work we propose a novel method to compute the barycenter of a set of probability distributions
with respect to the Sinkhorn divergence [25] that does not require to fix the support beforehand.
We address both the cases of discrete and continuous probability measures. In contrast to previous
free-support methods, our algorithm does not perform an alternate minimization between support and
weights. Instead, we adopt a Frank-Wolfe (FW) procedure to populate the support by incrementally
adding new points and updating their weights at each iteration, similarly to kernel herding strategies
[5]. We prove the convergence of the proposed optimization scheme for both finitely and infinitely
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

