Perceiving the arrow of time in autoregressive motion

Dominik Janzing
Amazon Research Tübingen
Tübingen, Germany
janzind@amazon.com

Kristof Meding
University of Tübingen
Neural Information Processing Group
Tübingen, Germany
kristof.meding@uni-tuebingen.de
Bernhard Schölkopf*
Max-Planck-Institute for Intelligent Systems
Empirical Inference Department
Tübingen, Germany
bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

Felix A. Wichmann*
University of Tübingen
Neural Information Processing Group
Tübingen, Germany
felix.wichmann@uni-tuebingen.de

*joint senior authors

Abstract
Understanding the principles of causal inference in the visual system has a long
history at least since the seminal studies by Albert Michotte. Many cognitive
and machine learning scientists believe that intelligent behavior requires agents to
possess causal models of the world. Recent ML algorithms exploit the dependence
structure of additive noise terms for inferring causal structures from observational
data, e.g. to detect the direction of time series; the arrow of time. This raises
the question whether the subtle asymmetries between the time directions can
also be perceived by humans. Here we show that human observers can indeed
discriminate forward and backward autoregressive motion with non-Gaussian
additive independent noise, i.e. they appear sensitive to subtle asymmetries between
the time directions. We employ a so-called frozen noise paradigm enabling us to
compare human performance with four different algorithms on a trial-by-trial basis:
A causal inference algorithm exploiting the dependence structure of additive noise
terms, a neurally inspired network, a Bayesian ideal observer model as well as a
simple heuristic. Our results suggest that all human observers use similar cues or
strategies to solve the arrow of time motion discrimination task, but the human
algorithm is significantly different from the three machine algorithms we compared
it to. In fact, our simple heuristic appears most similar to our human observers.

1

Introduction

Discriminative convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have produced impressive results in machine
learning, but certain striking failures of generalisation have been pointed out as well in terms
of adversarial examples [1–3] or the recent findings of Geirhos and colleagues that CNNs show
surprisingly large generalisation errors under image degradations [4, 5]. Many cognitive and machine
learning scientists maintain that flexible and robust intelligent behaviour in the real world requires
agents to possess generative or causal models of the world [6]. The importance of causality for
cognitive science and psychology has long been recognized [7–16]. In visual perception, for example,
it is fundamental to identify the causal structure in a visual scene: are objects moving or standing
still, are some objects causing the movement of other objects [17–19], are the movements caused by
(intentional) actors or rather by forces of nature? [20, 21] On a cognitive rather than perceptual level
progress has been made to understand how we intuitively understand physics [22], how humans learn
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

