Efficient Identification in Linear Structural
Causal Models with Instrumental Cutsets
Daniel Kumor
Purdue University
dkumor@purdue.edu

Bryant Chen
Brex Inc.
bryant@brex.com

Elias Bareinboim
Columbia University
eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One of the most common mistakes made when performing data analysis is attributing causal meaning to regression coefficients. Formally, a causal effect can
only be computed if it is identifiable from a combination of observational data and
structural knowledge about the domain under investigation (Pearl, 2000, Ch. 5).
Building on the literature of instrumental variables (IVs), a plethora of methods
has been developed to identify causal effects in linear systems. Almost invariably,
however, the most powerful such methods rely on exponential-time procedures.
In this paper, we investigate graphical conditions to allow efficient identification
in arbitrary linear structural causal models (SCMs). In particular, we develop
a method to efficiently find unconditioned instrumental subsets, which are generalizations of IVs that can be used to tame the complexity of many canonical
algorithms found in the literature. Further, we prove that determining whether an
effect can be identified with TSID (Weihs et al., 2017), a method more powerful
than unconditioned instrumental sets and other efficient identification algorithms,
is NP-Complete. Finally, building on the idea of flow constraints, we introduce a
new and efficient criterion called Instrumental Cutsets (IC), which is able to solve
for parameters missed by all other existing polynomial-time algorithms.

1

Introduction

Predicting the effects of interventions is one of the fundamental tasks in the empirical sciences.
Controlled experimentation is considered the “gold standard” in which one physically intervenes in a
system to learn about the corresponding effects. In practice, however, experimentation is not always
possible due costs, ethical constraints, or technical feasibility – e.g., a self-driving car should not need
to crash to recognize that doing so has negative consequences. In such cases, an agent must determine
the effect of an action using observational data and knowledge of the environment’s structure. This is
known as the problem of identification (Pearl, 2000; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016).
Structural knowledge is usually represented as a structural causal model (SCM)1 (Pearl, 2000), which
represents the set of observed and unobserved variables and their corresponding causal relations as a
system of equations. We focus on the problem of generic identification in linear, acyclic SCMs. In
such systems, the value of each observed variable is determined by a linear combination of the values
of its direct causes along with a latent error term . This leads to a system of equations X = ΛT X + ,
where X is the vector of variables, ΛT is a lower triangular matrix whose ijth element λij – called
structural parameter – is 0 whenever xi is not a direct cause of xj , and  is a vector of latent variables.
Methods for identification in linear SCMs generally assume that variables are normally distributed
(Chen & Pearl, 2014), meaning that the observational data can be summarized with a covariance
matrix Σ. This covariance matrix can be linked to the underlying structural parameters through the
1

Such models are also referred to as structural equation models, or SEM, in the literature.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

