Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation

Maxime Bucher
valeo.ai
maxime.bucher@valeo.com

Tuan-Hung Vu
valeo.ai
tuan-hung.vu@valeo.com

Matthieu Cord
Sorbonne Université
valeo.ai
matthieu.cord@lip6.fr

Patrick Pérez
valeo.ai
patrick.perez@valeo.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation models are limited in their ability to scale to large numbers
of object classes. In this paper, we introduce the new task of zero-shot semantic
segmentation: learning pixel-wise classifiers for never-seen object categories with
zero training examples. To this end, we present a novel architecture, ZS3Net,
combining a deep visual segmentation model with an approach to generate visual
representations from semantic word embeddings. By this way, ZS3Net addresses
pixel classification tasks where both seen and unseen categories are faced at test
time (so called “generalized” zero-shot classification). Performance is further
improved by a self-training step that relies on automatic pseudo-labeling of pixels
from unseen classes. On the two standard segmentation datasets, Pascal-VOC and
Pascal-Context, we propose zero-shot benchmarks and set competitive baselines.
For complex scenes as ones in the Pascal-Context dataset, we extend our approach
by using a graph-context encoding to fully leverage spatial context priors coming
from class-wise segmentation maps.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation has achieved great progress using convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
Early CNN-based approaches classify region proposals to generate segmentation predictions [17].
FCN [28] was the first framework adopting fully convolutional networks to address the task in an endto-end manner. Most recent state-of-the-art models like UNet [37], SegNet [3], DeepLabs [10, 11],
PSPNet [50] are FCN-based. An effective strategy for semantic segmentation is to augment CNN
features with contextual information, e.g. using atrous/dilated convolution [10, 46], pyramid context
pooling [50] or a context encoding module [47].
Segmentation approaches are mainly supervised, but there is an increasing interest in weaklysupervised segmentation models using annotations at the image-level [33, 34] or box-level [13]. We
propose in this paper to investigate a complementary learning problem where part of the classes are
missing altogether during the training. Our goal is to re-engineer existing recognition architectures
to effortlessly accommodate these never-seen, a.k.a. unseen, categories of scenes and objects. No
manual annotations or real samples, only unseen labels are needed during training. This line of works
is usually coined zero-shot learning (ZSL).
ZSL for image classification has been actively studied in recent years. Early approaches address it as
an embedding problem [1, 2, 6, 8, 16, 24, 32, 36, 39, 42, 43, 48]. They learn how to map image data
and class descriptions into a common space where semantic similarity translates into spacial proximity.
There are different variants in the literature on how the projections or the similarity measure are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

