Geometry-Aware Neural Rendering

OpenAI Robotics∗
OpenAI

Josh Tobin
OpenAI & UC Berkeley
josh@openai.com

Pieter Abbeel
Covariant.AI & UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Understanding the 3-dimensional structure of the world is a core challenge in
computer vision and robotics. Neural rendering approaches learn an implicit 3D
model by predicting what a camera would see from an arbitrary viewpoint. We
extend existing neural rendering to more complex, higher dimensional scenes than
previously possible. We propose Epipolar Cross Attention (ECA), an attention
mechanism that leverages the geometry of the scene to perform efficient non-local
operations, requiring only O(n) comparisons per spatial dimension instead of
O(n2 ). We introduce three new simulated datasets inspired by real-world robotics
and demonstrate that ECA significantly improves the quantitative and qualitative
performance of Generative Query Networks (GQN) [7].

1

Introduction

The ability to understand 3-dimensional structure has long been a fundamental topic of research in
computer vision [10, 22, 26, 34]. Advances in 3D understanding, driven by geometric methods [14]
and deep neural networks [7, 31, 40, 43, 44] have improved technologies like 3D reconstruction,
augmented reality, and computer graphics. 3D understanding is also important in robotics. To interact
with their environments, robots must reason about the spatial structure of the world around them.
Agents can learn 3D structure implicitly (e.g., using end-to-end reinforcement learning [24, 25]), but
these techniques can be data-inefficient and the representations often have limited reuse. An explicit
3D representation can be created using keypoints and geometry [14] or neural networks [44, 43, 30],
but these can lead to inflexible, high-dimensional representations. Some systems forego full scene
representations by choosing a lower-dimensional state representation. However, not all scenes admit
a compact state representation and learning state estimators often requires expensive labeling.
Previous work demonstrated that Generative Query Networks (GQN) [7] can perform neural rendering
for scenes with simple geometric objects. However, robotic manipulation applications require precise
representations of high degree-of-freedom (DoF) systems with complex objects. The goal of this
paper is to explore the use of neural rendering in such environments.
To this end, we introduce an attention mechanism that leverages the geometric relationship between
camera viewpoints called Epipolar Cross-Attention (ECA). When rendering an image, ECA computes
a response at a given spatial position as a weighted sum at all relevant positions of feature maps from
the context images. Relevant features are those on the epipolar line in the context viewpoint.
∗
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Alex Paino, Arthur Petron, Matthias
Plappert, Raphael Ribas, Jonas Schneider, Jerry Tworek, Nik Tezak, Peter Welinder, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan,
Wojciech Zaremba, Lei Zhang

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

