Learning Non-Convergent Non-Persistent Short-Run
MCMC Toward Energy-Based Model

Erik Nijkamp
UCLA Department of Statistics
enijkamp@ucla.edu

Mitch Hill
UCLA Department of Statistics
mkhill@ucla.edu

Song-Chun Zhu
UCLA Department of Statistics
sczhu@stat.ucla.edu

Ying Nian Wu
UCLA Department of Statistics
ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
This paper studies a curious phenomenon in learning energy-based model (EBM)
using MCMC. In each learning iteration, we generate synthesized examples by
running a non-convergent, non-mixing, and non-persistent short-run MCMC toward
the current model, always starting from the same initial distribution such as uniform
noise distribution, and always running a fixed number of MCMC steps. After
generating synthesized examples, we then update the model parameters according
to the maximum likelihood learning gradient, as if the synthesized examples are fair
samples from the current model. We treat this non-convergent short-run MCMC
as a learned generator model or a flow model. We provide arguments for treating
the learned non-convergent short-run MCMC as a valid model. We show that
the learned short-run MCMC is capable of generating realistic images. More
interestingly, unlike traditional EBM or MCMC, the learned short-run MCMC is
capable of reconstructing observed images and interpolating between images, like
generator or flow models. The code can be found in the Appendix.

1

Introduction

1.1

Learning Energy-Based Model by MCMC Sampling

The maximum likelihood learning of the energy-based model (EBM) [32, 55, 22, 44, 33, 37, 8, 35,
52, 53, 25, 9, 51] follows what Grenander [17] called “analysis by synthesis” scheme. Within each
learning iteration, we generate synthesized examples by sampling from the current model, and then
update the model parameters based on the difference between the synthesized examples and the
observed examples, so that eventually the synthesized examples match the observed examples in
terms of some statistical properties defined by the model. To sample from the current EBM, we need
to use Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), such as the Gibbs sampler [14], Langevin dynamics,
or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [36]. Recent work that parametrizes the energy function by modern
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [31, 29] suggests that the “analysis by synthesis” process
can indeed generate highly realistic images [52, 13, 24, 12].
Although the “analysis by synthesis” learning scheme is intuitively appealing, the convergence of
MCMC can be impractical, especially if the energy function is multi-modal, which is typically the
case if the EBM is to approximate the complex data distribution, such as that of natural images. For
such EBM, the MCMC usually does not mix, i.e., MCMC chains from different starting points tend
to get trapped in different local modes instead of traversing modes and mixing with each other.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

