Value Function in Frequency Domain
and the Characteristic Value Iteration Algorithm

Amir-massoud Farahmand∗
Vector Institute & University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
farahmand@vectorinstitute.ai

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of estimating the distribution of returns in reinforcement learning, i.e., distributional RL problem. It presents a new representational framework to maintain the uncertainty of returns and provides mathematical
tools to compute it. We show that instead of representing a probability distribution
function of returns, one can represent their characteristic function, the Fourier
transform of their distribution. We call the new representation Characteristic Value
Function (CVF). The CVF satisfies a Bellman-like equation, and its corresponding
Bellman operator is contraction with respect to certain metrics. The contraction
property allows us to devise an iterative procedure to compute the CVF, which
we call Characteristic Value Iteration (CVI). We analyze CVI and its approximate
variant and show how approximation errors affect the quality of the computed
CVF.

1

Introduction

The object of focus of the conventional RL is the expected return of following a policy, i.e., the value
function [Sutton and Barto, 2019]. The goal is to find a policy that maximizes that expectation over
all states, i.e., the optimal policy. This leads to agents that do not consider the distribution of returns
in their decision making, but only its first moment. This might be of concern in scenarios where the
risk is of paramount importance. Estimating the distribution of the return facilitates designing agents
that consider objectives more general than maximizing the expected return, such as various notions
of risk [Tamar et al., 2012, Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh, 2013, García and Fernández, 2015, Chow
et al., 2018].
The Distributional RL (DistRL) literature [Engel et al., 2005, Morimura et al., 2010b, Bellemare
et al., 2017, Barth-Maron et al., 2018, Lyle et al., 2019], on the other hand, moves away from
the conventional goal of estimating the expectation of return and attempts to estimate a richer
representation of the return, such as the distribution itself [Morimura et al., 2010b,a] or some
statistical functional of it [Rowland et al., 2018, Dabney et al., 2018, Rowland et al., 2019]. It is
notable that so far the focus of the DistRL literature has mostly been on designing better performing
agents according to the expected return, and not any risk-related performance measure, but it is
conceivable that those methods can be be used for designing risk-aware agents too.
This paper develops a new framework for maintaining the information available in the distribution of
returns. Instead of estimating the distribution function itself, we maintain the Characteristic Function
(CF) of the returns. The CF of a random variable (r.v.) is the Fourier transform of its probability
distribution function (PDF). Similar to PDF, the CF of a r.v. contains all the information available
about the distribution of that r.v., i.e., CF and PDF have a bijection relationship. They are nonetheless
∗

Homepage: http://academic.sologen.net.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

