From deep learning to mechanistic understanding in
neuroscience: the structure of retinal prediction
Hidenori Tanaka1,2,† , Aran Nayebi3 , Niru Maheswaranathan3,5 , Lane McIntosh3 , Stephen A.
Baccus4 , and Surya Ganguli2,5,†
1

Physics & Informatics Laboratories, NTT Research, Inc., East Palo Alto, CA, USA
2
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
3
Neurosciences PhD Program, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
4
Department of Neurobiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
5
Google Brain, Google, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA
†
{tanaka8,sganguli}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recently, deep feedforward neural networks have achieved considerable success in
modeling biological sensory processing, in terms of reproducing the input-output
map of sensory neurons. However, such models raise profound questions about the
very nature of explanation in neuroscience. Are we simply replacing one complex
system (a biological circuit) with another (a deep network), without understanding
either? Moreover, beyond neural representations, are the deep network’s computational mechanisms for generating neural responses the same as those in the brain?
Without a systematic approach to extracting and understanding computational
mechanisms from deep neural network models, it can be difficult both to assess the
degree of utility of deep learning approaches in neuroscience, and to extract experimentally testable hypotheses from deep networks. We develop such a systematic
approach by combining dimensionality reduction and modern attribution methods
for determining the relative importance of interneurons for specific visual computations. We apply this approach to deep network models of the retina, revealing a
conceptual understanding of how the retina acts as a predictive feature extractor
that signals deviations from expectations for diverse spatiotemporal stimuli. For
each stimulus, our extracted computational mechanisms are consistent with prior
scientific literature, and in one case yields a new mechanistic hypothesis. Thus
overall, this work not only yields insights into the computational mechanisms
underlying the striking predictive capabilities of the retina, but also places the
framework of deep networks as neuroscientific models on firmer theoretical foundations, by providing a new roadmap to go beyond comparing neural representations
to extracting and understand computational mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have emerged as state of the art models of a variety
of visual brain regions in sensory neuroscience, including the retina [1, 2], primary visual cortex
(V1), [3, 4, 5, 6], area V4 [3], and inferotemporal cortex (IT) [3, 4]. Their success has so far been
primarily evaluated by their ability to explain reasonably large fractions of variance in biological
neural responses across diverse visual stimuli. However, fraction of variance explained is not of
course the same thing as scientific explanation, as we may simply be replacing one inscrutable black
box (the brain), with another (a potentially overparameterized deep network).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

