Variational Bayesian Decision-making
for Continuous Utilities
Tomasz Kuśmierczyk Joseph Sakaya Arto Klami
Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
{tomasz.kusmierczyk,joseph.sakaya,arto.klami}@helsinki.fi

Abstract
Bayesian decision theory outlines a rigorous framework for making optimal decisions based on maximizing expected utility over a model posterior. However,
practitioners often do not have access to the full posterior and resort to approximate inference strategies. In such cases, taking the eventual decision-making task
into account while performing the inference allows for calibrating the posterior
approximation to maximize the utility. We present an automatic pipeline that
co-opts continuous utilities into variational inference algorithms to account for
decision-making. We provide practical strategies for approximating and maximizing the gain, and empirically demonstrate consistent improvement when calibrating
approximations for specific utilities.

1

Introduction

A considerable proportion of research on Bayesian machine learning concerns itself with the task
of inference, developing techniques for an efficient and accurate approximation of the posterior
distribution p(θ|D) of the model parameters θ conditional on observed data D. However, in most
cases, this is not the end goal in itself. Instead, we eventually want to solve a decision problem of
some kind and merely use the posterior as a summary of the information provided by the data and the
modeling assumptions. For example, we may want to decide to automatically shut down a process to
avoid costs associated with its potential failure, and do not care about the exact posterior as long as
we can make good decisions that still account for our uncertainty of the parameters.
Focusing on inference is justified by Bayesian decision theory [2] formalizing the notion that the
posterior is sufficient for making optimal decisions. This is achieved by selecting decisions that
maximize the expected utility, computed by integrating over the posterior. The theory, however, only
applies when integrating over the true posterior which can be computed only for simple models. With
approximate posteriors it is no longer optimal to separate inference from decision-making. Standard
approximation algorithms try to represent the full posterior accurately, yet lack guarantees for high
accuracy for parameter regions that are critical for decision-making. This holds for both distributional
techniques, such as variational approximation [4] and expectation propagation [10, 18], as well as
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) – even though the latter are asymptotically exact, a finite set of
samples is still an approximation and it is often difficult to sample from the correct distribution.
Loss-calibrated inference refers to techniques that adapt the inference process to better capture the
posterior regions relevant to the decision-making task. First proposed by Lacoste-Julien et al. [16] in
the context of variational approximation, the principle has been used also for calibrating MCMC [1],
and recently for Bayesian neural networks [7]. The core idea of loss calibration is to maximize the
expected utility computed over the approximating distribution, instead of maximizing the approximation accuracy, while still retaining a reasonable posterior approximation. Figure 1 demonstrates
how the calibration process shifts an otherwise sub-optimal approximation to improve the decisions,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

