Ultra Fast Medoid Identification
via Correlated Sequential Halving
Tavor Z. Baharav
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
tavorb@stanford.edu

David Tse
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
dntse@stanford.edu

Abstract
The medoid of a set of n points is the point in the set that minimizes the sum of
distances to other points. It can be determined exactly in O(n2 ) time by computing
the distances between all pairs of points. Previous works show that one can
significantly reduce the number of distance computations needed by adaptively
querying distances [1]. The resulting randomized algorithm is obtained by a direct
conversion of the computation problem to a multi-armed bandit statistical inference
problem. In this work, we show that we can better exploit the structure of the
underlying computation problem by modifying the traditional bandit sampling
strategy and using it in conjunction with a suitably chosen multi-armed bandit
algorithm. Four to five orders of magnitude gains over exact computation are
obtained on real data, in terms of both number of distance computations needed
and wall clock time. Theoretical results are obtained to quantify such gains in terms
of data parameters. Our code is publicly available online at https://github.
com/TavorB/Correlated-Sequential-Halving.

1

Introduction

In large datasets, one often wants to find a single element that is representative of the dataset as a
whole. While the mean, a point potentially outside the dataset, may suffice in some problems, it will
be uninformative when the data is sparse in some domain; taking the mean of an image dataset will
yield visually random noise [2]. In such instances the medoid is a more appropriate representative,
where the medoid is defined as the point in a dataset which minimizes the sum of distances to other
points. For one dimensional data under `1 distance, this is equivalent to the median. This has seen
use in algorithms such as k-medoid clustering due to its reduced sensitivity to outliers [3].
Formally, let x1 , ..., xn 2 U , where the underlying space U is equipped with some distance function
d : U ⇥ U 7! R+ . It is convenient to think of U = Rd and d(x, y) = kx yk2 for concreteness, but
other spaces and distance functions (which need not be symmetric or satisfy the triangle inequality)
can be substituted. The medoid of {xi }ni=1 , assumed here to be unique, is defined as xi⇤ where
n

⇤

i = argmin ✓i
i2[n]

:

1X
✓i ,
d(xi , xj )
n j=1

(1)

Note that for non-adversarially constructed data, the medoid will almost certainly be unique. Unfortunately, brute force computation of the medoid becomes infeasible for large datasets, e.g. RNA-Seq
datasets with n = 100k points [4].
This issue has been addressed in recent works by noting that in most problem instances solving for
the value of each ✓i exactly is unnecessary, as we are only interested in identifying xi⇤ and not in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

