State Aggregation Learning from Markov Transition
Data
Yaqi Duan
Princeton University
yaqid@princeton.edu

Zheng Tracy Ke
Harvard University
zke@fas.harvard.edu

Mengdi Wang
Princeton University
mengdiw@princeton.edu

Abstract
State aggregation is a popular model reduction method rooted in optimal control.
It reduces the complexity of engineering systems by mapping the system’s states
into a small number of meta-states. The choice of aggregation map often depends
on the data analysts’ knowledge and is largely ad hoc. In this paper, we propose
a tractable algorithm that estimates the probabilistic aggregation map from the
system’s trajectory. We adopt a soft-aggregation model, where each meta-state has
a signature raw state, called an anchor state. This model includes several common
state aggregation models as special cases. Our proposed method is a simple twostep algorithm: The first step is spectral decomposition of empirical transition
matrix, and the second step conducts a linear transformation of singular vectors
to find their approximate convex hull. It outputs the aggregation distributions and
disaggregation distributions for each meta-state in explicit forms, which are not
obtainable by classical spectral methods. On the theoretical side, we prove sharp
error bounds for estimating the aggregation and disaggregation distributions and
for identifying anchor states. The analysis relies on a new entry-wise deviation
bound for singular vectors of the empirical transition matrix of a Markov process,
which is of independent interest and cannot be deduced from existing literature.
The application of our method to Manhattan traffic data successfully generates a
data-driven state aggregation map with nice interpretations.

1

Introduction

State aggregation is a long-existing approach for model reduction of complicated systems. It is
widely used as a heuristic to reduce the complexity of control systems and reinforcement learning
(RL). The earliest idea of state aggregation is to aggregate “similar” states into a small number of
subsets through a partition map. However, the partition is often handpicked by practitioners based on
domain-specific knowledge or exact knowledge about the dynamical system [31, 6]. Alternatively,
the partition can be chosen via discretization of the state space in accordance with some priorly
known similarity metric or feature functions [33]. Prior knowledge of the dynamical system is often
required in order to handpick the aggregation without deteriorating its performance. There lacks a
principled approach to find the best state aggregation structure from data.
In this paper, we propose a model-based approach to learning probabilistic aggregation structure.
We adopt the soft state aggregation model, a flexible model for Markov systems. It allows one to
represent each state using a membership distribution over latent variables (see Section 2 for details).
Such models have been used for modeling large Markov decision processes, where the membership
can be used as state features to significantly reduce its complexity [32, 36]. When the membership
distributions are degenerate, it reduces to the more conventional hard state aggregation model, and
so our method is also applicable to finding a hard partition of the state space.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

