Thompson Sampling with Information Relaxation
Penalties
Seungki Min
Columbia Business School

Costis Maglaras
Columbia Business School

Ciamac C. Moallemi
Columbia Business School

Abstract
We consider a finite-horizon multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem in a Bayesian
setting, for which we propose an information relaxation sampling framework.
With this framework, we define an intuitive family of control policies that include
Thompson sampling (TS) and the Bayesian optimal policy as endpoints. Analogous
to TS, which, at each decision epoch pulls an arm that is best with respect to
the randomly sampled parameters, our algorithms sample entire future reward
realizations and take the corresponding best action. However, this is done in
the presence of “penalties” that seek to compensate for the availability of future
information.
We develop several novel policies and performance bounds for MAB problems that
vary in terms of improving performance and increasing computational complexity
between the two endpoints. Our policies can be viewed as natural generalizations
of TS that simultaneously incorporate knowledge of the time horizon and explicitly
consider the exploration-exploitation trade-off. We prove associated structural
results on performance bounds and suboptimality gaps. Numerical experiments
suggest that this new class of policies perform well, in particular in settings where
the finite time horizon introduces significant exploration-exploitation tension into
the problem.

1

Introduction

Dating back to the earliest work [2, 10], multi-armed bandit (MAB) problems have been considered
within a Bayesian framework, in which the unknown parameters are modeled as random variables
drawn from a known prior distribution. In this setting, the problem can be viewed as a Markov
decision process (MDP) with a state that is an information state describing the beliefs of unknown
parameters that evolve stochastically upon each play of an arm according to Bayes’ rule.
Under the objective of expected performance, where the expectation is taken with respect to the
prior distribution over unknown parameters, the (Bayesian) optimal policy (O PT) is characterized
by Bellman equations immediately following from the MDP formulation. In the discounted infinitehorizon setting, the celebrated Gittins index [10] determines an optimal policy, despite the fact that
its computation is still challenging. In the non-discounted finite-horizon setting, which we consider,
the problem becomes more difficult [1], and except for some special cases, the Bellman equations
are neither analytically nor numerically tractable, due to the curse of dimensionality. In this paper,
we focus on the Bayesian setting, and attempt to apply ideas from dynamic programming (DP) to
develop tractable policies with good performance.
To this end, we apply the idea of information relaxation [4], a technique that provides a systematic
way of obtaining the performance bounds on the optimal policy. In multi-period stochastic DP
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

