A unified theory for the origin of grid cells through
the lens of pattern formation
Ben Sorscher*1 , Gabriel C. Mel*2 , Surya Ganguli1 , Samuel A. Ocko1
1
Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University
2
Neurosciences PhD Program, Stanford University

Abstract
Grid cells in the brain fire in strikingly regular hexagonal patterns across space.
There are currently two seemingly unrelated frameworks for understanding these
patterns. Mechanistic models account for hexagonal firing fields as the result of
pattern-forming dynamics in a recurrent neural network with hand-tuned centersurround connectivity. Normative models specify a neural architecture, a learning
rule, and a navigational task, and observe that grid-like firing fields emerge due to
the constraints of solving this task. Here we provide an analytic theory that unifies
the two perspectives by casting the learning dynamics of neural networks trained
on navigational tasks as a pattern forming dynamical system. This theory provides insight into the optimal solutions of diverse formulations of the normative
task, and shows that symmetries in the representation of space correctly predict
the structure of learned firing fields in trained neural networks. Further, our theory
proves that a nonnegativity constraint on firing rates induces a symmetry-breaking
mechanism which favors hexagonal firing fields. We extend this theory to the case
of learning multiple grid maps and demonstrate that optimal solutions consist of a
hierarchy of maps with increasing length scales. These results unify previous accounts of grid cell firing and provide a novel framework for predicting the learned
representations of recurrent neural networks.

1

Introduction

How does the brain construct an internal map of space? One such map is generated by grid cells in
the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC), which exhibit regular hexagonal spatial firing fields, forming a
periodic, low-dimensional representation of space [1]. Grid cells are clustered into discrete modules
sharing a periodicity and an orientation, but varying randomly in phase [1, 2]. A complementary
map is generated by place cells in the adjacent hippocampus, which exhibit localized spatial firing
fields, forming a sparser representation of space [3].
Early mechanistic models of grid cells corresponded to recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with
hand-tuned connectivity designed specifically to reproduce hexagonal grid cell firing patterns [4, 5,
6]. Such continuous attractor models can robustly integrate and store 2D positional information via
path integration [7]. Recent enhancements to such attractor networks that incorporate plastic inputs
from landmark cells can explain why grid cells deform in irregular environments [8], and when
they either phase shift or remap in altered virtual reality environments [9]. However, none of these
recurrent network models show that grid-like firing patterns are required to solve navigational tasks.
Thus they cannot demonstrate that hexagonal firing patterns naturally arise as the optimal solution
to any computational problem, precisely because the hexagonal patterns are simply assumed in the
first place by hand-tuning the recurrent connectivity.
More recent normative models have shown that neural networks trained on tasks that involve encoding a representation of spatial position learn grid-like responses in their hidden units. For example,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

