Multi-View Reinforcement Learning
Minne Li ⇤
University College London
London, United Kingdom
minne.li@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Lisheng Wu ⇤
University College London
London, United Kingdom
lisheng.wu.17@ucl.ac.uk

Haitham Bou Ammar †
University College London
London, United Kingdom
haitham.bouammar71@googlemail.com

Jun Wang
University College London
London, United Kingdom
junwang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper is concerned with multi-view reinforcement learning (MVRL), which
allows for decision making when agents share common dynamics but adhere to
different observation models. We define the MVRL framework by extending
partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs) to support more than
one observation model and propose two solution methods through observation
augmentation and cross-view policy transfer. We empirically evaluate our method
and demonstrate its effectiveness in a variety of environments. Specifically, we
show reductions in sample complexities and computational time for acquiring
policies that handle multi-view environments.

1

Introduction

In reinforcement learning (RL), tasks are defined as Markov decision processes (MDPs) with state and
action spaces, transition models, and reward functions. The dynamics of an RL agent commence by
executing an action in a state of the environment according to some policy. Based on the action choice,
the environment responds by transitioning the agent to a new state and providing an instantaneous
reward quantifying the quality of the executed action. This process repeats until a terminal condition
is met. The goal of the agent is to learn an optimal action-selection rule that maximizes total-expected
returns from any initial state. Though minimally supervised, this framework has become a profound
tool for decision making under uncertainty, with applications ranging from computer games [24, 30]
to neural architecture search [42], robotics [3, 25, 27], and multi-agent systems [22, 34, 38, 40].
Common RL algorithms, however, only consider observations from one view of the state space [17].
Such an assumption can become too restrictive in real-life scenarios. To illustrate, imagine designing
an autonomous vehicle that is equipped with multiple sensors. For such an agent to execute safe
actions, data-fusion is necessary so as to account for all available information about the world.
Consequently, agent policies have now to be conditioned on varying state descriptions, which in turn,
lead to challenging representation and learning questions. In fact, acquiring good-enough policies in
the multi-view setting is more complex when compared to standard RL due to the increase in sample
complexities needed to reason about varying views. If solved, however, multi-view RL will allow for
data-fusion, fault-tolerance to sensor deterioration, and policy generalization across domains.
Numerous algorithms for multi-view learning in supervised tasks have been proposed. Interested
readers are referred to the survey in [23, 39, 41], and references therein for a detailed exposition.
⇤
†

Equal contributions.
Honorary Lecturer at University College London

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

