Kernel Instrumental Variable Regression
Rahul Singh
MIT Economics
rahul.singh@mit.edu

Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Unit, UCL
maneesh@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Arthur Gretton
Gatsby Unit, UCL
arthur.gretton@gmail.com

Abstract
Instrumental variable (IV) regression is a strategy for learning causal relationships
in observational data. If measurements of input X and output Y are confounded,
the causal relationship can nonetheless be identified if an instrumental variable
Z is available that influences X directly, but is conditionally independent of Y
given X and the unmeasured confounder. The classic two-stage least squares
algorithm (2SLS) simplifies the estimation problem by modeling all relationships
as linear functions. We propose kernel instrumental variable regression (KIV), a
nonparametric generalization of 2SLS, modeling relations among X, Y , and Z as
nonlinear functions in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces (RKHSs). We prove the
consistency of KIV under mild assumptions, and derive conditions under which
convergence occurs at the minimax optimal rate for unconfounded, single-stage
RKHS regression. In doing so, we obtain an efficient ratio between training
sample sizes used in the algorithm’s first and second stages. In experiments, KIV
outperforms state of the art alternatives for nonparametric IV regression.

1

Introduction

Instrumental variable regression is a method in causal statistics for estimating the counterfactual effect
of input X on output Y using observational data [60]. If measurements of (X, Y ) are confounded,
the causal relationship–also called the structural relationship–can nonetheless be identified if an
instrumental variable Z is available, which is independent of Y conditional on X and the unmeasured
confounder. Intuitively, Z only influences Y via X, identifying the counterfactual relationship of
interest.
Economists and epidemiologists use instrumental variables to overcome issues of strategic interaction,
imperfect compliance, and selection bias. The original application is demand estimation: supply cost
shifters (Z) only influence sales (Y ) via price (X), thereby identifying counterfactual demand even
though prices reflect both supply and demand market forces [68, 11]. Randomized assignment of a
drug (Z) only influences patient health (Y ) via actual consumption of the drug (X), identifying the
counterfactual effect of the drug even in the scenario of imperfect compliance [3]. Draft lottery number
(Z) only influences lifetime earnings (Y ) via military service (X), identifying the counterfactual
effect of military service on earnings despite selection bias in enlistment [2].
The two-stage least squares algorithm (2SLS), widely used in economics, simplifies the IV estimation problem by assuming linear relationships: in stage 1, perform linear regression to obtain the
conditional means x̄(z) := EX|Z=z (X); in stage 2, linearly regress outputs Y on these conditional
means. 2SLS works well when the underlying assumptions hold. In practice, the relation between Y
and X may not be linear, nor may be the relation between X and Z.
In the present work, we introduce kernel instrumental variable regression (KIV), an easily implemented nonlinear generalization of 2SLS (Sections 3 and 4).1 In stage 1 we learn a conditional
1

Code: https://github.com/r4hu1-5in9h/KIV

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

