DiskANN: Fast Accurate Billion-point Nearest
Neighbor Search on a Single Node

Suhas Jayaram Subramanya∗
Devvrit∗
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Texas at Austin
suhas@cmu.edu
devvrit.03@gmail.com
Ravishankar Krishaswamy
Microsoft Research India
rakri@microsoft.com

Rohan Kadekodi∗
University of Texas at Austin
rak@cs.texas.edu

Harsha Vardhan Simhadri
Microsoft Research India
harshasi@microsoft.com

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art approximate nearest neighbor search (ANNS) algorithms
generate indices that must be stored in main memory for fast high-recall search.
This makes them expensive and limits the size of the dataset. We present a
new graph-based indexing and search system called DiskANN that can index,
store, and search a billion point database on a single workstation with just 64GB
RAM and an inexpensive solid-state drive (SSD). Contrary to current wisdom,
we demonstrate that the SSD-based indices built by DiskANN can meet all three
desiderata for large-scale ANNS: high-recall, low query latency and high density
(points indexed per node). On the billion point SIFT1B bigann dataset, DiskANN
serves > 5000 queries a second with < 3ms mean latency and 95%+ 1-recall@1
on a 16 core machine, where state-of-the-art billion-point ANNS algorithms with
similar memory footprint like FAISS [18] and IVFOADC+G+P [8] plateau at
around 50% 1-recall@1. Alternately, in the high recall regime, DiskANN can
index and serve 5 − 10x more points per node compared to state-of-the-art graphbased methods such as HNSW [21] and NSG [13]. Finally, as part of our overall
DiskANN system, we introduce Vamana, a new graph-based ANNS index that is
more versatile than the existing graph indices even for in-memory indices.

1

Introduction

In the nearest neighbor search problem, we are given a dataset P of points in some space. The goal is
to design a data structure of small size, such that, for any query q in the same metric space, and target
k, we can retrieve the k nearest neighbors of q from the dataset P quickly. This is a fundamental
problem in algorithms research, and also a commonly used sub-routine in a diverse set of areas
such as computer vision, document retrieval and recommendation systems, to name a few. In these
applications, the actual entities — images, documents, user profiles — are embedded into a hundred
or thousand dimensional space such that a desired notion of the entities’ similarity is encoded as
distance between their embeddings.
Unfortunately, it is often impossible to retrieve the exact nearest neighbors without essentially
resorting to a linear scan of the data (see, e.g., [15, 23]) due to a phenomenon known as the curse of
dimensionality [10]. As a result, one resorts to finding the approximate nearest neighbors (ANN)
where the goal is to retrieve k neighbors which are close to being optimal. More formally, consider a
query q, and suppose the algorithm outputs a set X of k candidate near neighbors, and suppose G is
∗

Work done while at Microsoft Research India

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

