Error Correcting Output Codes Improve Probability
Estimation and Adversarial Robustness of Deep
Neural Networks
Gunjan Verma
CCDC Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783
gunjan.verma.civ@mail.mil

Ananthram Swami
CCDC Army Research Laboratory
Adelphi, MD 20783
ananthram.swami.civ@mail.mil

Abstract
Modern machine learning systems are susceptible to adversarial examples; inputs
which clearly preserve the characteristic semantics of a given class, but whose
classification is (usually confidently) incorrect. Existing approaches to adversarial
defense generally rely on modifying the input, e.g. quantization, or the learned
model parameters, e.g. via adversarial training. However, recent research has
shown that most such approaches succumb to adversarial examples when different
norms or more sophisticated adaptive attacks are considered. In this paper, we
propose a fundamentally different approach which instead changes the way the
output is represented and decoded. This simple approach achieves state-of-the-art
robustness to adversarial examples for L2 and L∞ based adversarial perturbations
on MNIST and CIFAR10. In addition, even under strong white-box attacks, we find
that our model often assigns adversarial examples a low probability; those with high
probability are often interpretable, i.e. perturbed towards the perceptual boundary
between the original and adversarial class. Our approach has several advantages:
it yields more meaningful probability estimates, is extremely fast during training
and testing, requires essentially no architectural changes to existing discriminative
learning pipelines, is wholly complementary to other defense approaches including
adversarial training, and does not sacrifice benign test set performance.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) achieve state-of-the-art performance on image classification, speech
recognition, and game-playing, among many other applications. However, they are also vulnerable
to adversarial examples, inputs with carefully chosen perturbations that are misclassified despite
containing no semantic changes [1]. Often, these perturbations are “small” in some sense, e.g. some
Lp norm. From a scientific perspective, the existence of adversarial examples demonstrates that
machine learning models that achieve superhuman performance on benign, “naturally occurring”
data sets in fact possess potentially dangerous failure modes. The existence of these failure modes
threatens the reliable deployment of machine learning in automation of tasks [2]. A myriad of
defenses have been proposed to make DNNs more robust to adversarial examples; virtually all have
been shown to have serious limitations, however, and at present a solution remains elusive [3].
Adversarial defenses that have been proposed to date can broadly be taxonomized by which part
of the learning pipeline they aim to protect. Input-based defenses seek to explicitly modify the
input directly. These are comprised of three main classes of methods: i) manifold-based, which
projects the input into a different space ([4] in which the adversarial perturbation is presumably
mitgiated, ii) quantization-based, which alters input data resolution [5] or encoding. [6], and iii)
randomization-based, in which portions of the input and/or hidden layer activations are randomized
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

