Empirically Measuring Concentration:
Fundamental Limits on Intrinsic Robustness
Saeed Mahloujifar∗, Xiao Zhang∗ , Mohammad Mahmoody, and David Evans
University of Virginia
[saeed, shawn, mohammad, evans]@virginia.edu

Abstract
Many recent works have shown that adversarial examples that fool classifiers can be
found by minimally perturbing a normal input. Recent theoretical results, starting
with Gilmer et al. (2018b), show that if the inputs are drawn from a concentrated
metric probability space, then adversarial examples with small perturbation are
inevitable. A concentrated space has the property that any subset with Ω(1) (e.g.,
1/100) measure, according to the imposed distribution, has small distance to almost
all (e.g., 99/100) of the points in the space. It is not clear, however, whether
these theoretical results apply to actual distributions such as images. This paper
presents a method for empirically measuring and bounding the concentration of a
concrete dataset which is proven to converge to the actual concentration. We use
it to empirically estimate the intrinsic robustness to `∞ and `2 perturbations of
several image classification benchmarks. Code for our experiments is available at
https://github.com/xiaozhanguva/Measure-Concentration.

1

Introduction

Despite achieving exceptionally high accuracy on natural inputs, state-of-the-art machine learning
models have been shown to be vulnerable to adversaries who use small perturbations to fool the
classifier (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015). This phenomenon, known as adversarial
examples, has motivated numerous studies (Papernot et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2018; Biggio & Roli,
2018; Gilmer et al., 2018a) to develop heuristic defenses that aim to improve classifier robustness.
However, most defense mechanisms have been quickly broken by adaptive attacks (Carlini & Wagner,
2017; Athalye et al., 2018). Although certification methods (Raghunathan et al., 2018; Wong &
Kolter, 2018; Sinha et al., 2018; Wong et al., 2018; Gowal et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2018; Zhang
et al., 2019) have been proposed aiming to end such arms race and continuous efforts have been
made to develop better robust models, both the robustness guarantees and efficiency achieved by
state-of-the-art robust classifiers are far from satisfying.
This motivates a fundamental information-theoretic question: what are the inherent limitations
of developing robust classifiers? Several recent works (Gilmer et al., 2018b; Fawzi et al., 2018;
Mahloujifar et al., 2019; Shafahi et al., 2019; Bhagoji et al., 2019) have shown that under certain
assumptions regarding the data distribution and the perturbation metric, adversarial examples are
theoretically inevitable. As a result, for a broad set of theoretically natural metric probability spaces
of inputs, there is no classifier for the data distribution that achieves adversarial robustness. For
example, Gilmer et al. (2018b) assumed that the input data are sampled uniformly from n-spheres and
proved a model-independent theoretical bound connecting the risk to the average Euclidean distance
to the “caps” (i.e., round regions on a sphere). Mahloujifar et al. (2019) generalized this result to any
concentrated metric probability space of inputs and showed, for example, that if the inputs come from
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

