LiteEval: A Coarse-to-Fine Framework for Resource
Efficient Video Recognition

Zuxuan Wu1∗ , Caiming Xiong2 , Yu-Gang Jiang3 , Larry S. Davis1
1
University of Maryland, 2 Salesforce Research, 3 Fudan University

Abstract
This paper presents LiteEval, a simple yet effective coarse-to-fine framework for
resource efficient video recognition, suitable for both online and offline scenarios.
Exploiting decent yet computationally efficient features derived at a coarse scale
with a lightweight CNN model, LiteEval dynamically decides on-the-fly whether
to compute more powerful features for incoming video frames at a finer scale to
obtain more details. This is achieved by a coarse LSTM and a fine LSTM operating
cooperatively, as well as a conditional gating module to learn when to allocate
more computation. Extensive experiments are conducted on two large-scale video
benchmarks, FCVID and ActivityNet, and the results demonstrate LiteEval requires
substantially less computation while offering excellent classification accuracy for
both online and offline predictions.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated stunning progress in several computer vision tasks like image classification [11, 39, 14], object detection [28, 10], video classification [34, 33],
etc, sometimes even surpassing human-level performance [11] when recognizing fine-grained categories. The astounding performance of CNN models, while making them appealing for deployment
in many practical applications such as autonomous vehicles, navigation robots and image recognition services, results from complicated model design, which in turn limits their use in real-world
scenarios that are often resource-constrained. To remedy this, extensive studies have been conducted
to compress neural networks [2, 26, 20] and design compact architectures suitable for mobile devices [13, 16]. However, they produce one-size-fits-all models that require the same amount of
computation for all samples.
Although computationally efficient models usually exhibit good accuracy when recognizing the
majority of samples, computationally expensive models, if not ensembles of models, are needed
to additionally recognize corner cases that lie in the tail of the data distribution, offering top-notch
performance on standard benchmarks like ImageNet [3] and COCO [21]. In addition to network
design, the computational cost of CNNs is directly affected by input resolution—74% of computation
can be saved (measured by floating point operations) when evaluating a ResNet-101 model on
images with half of the original resolution, while still offering reasonable accuracy. Motivated by
these observations, a natural question arises: can we have a network with components of different
complexity operating on different scales and derive policies conditioned on inputs to switch among
these components to save computation? Intuitively, during inference, lightweight modules are run by
default to recognize easy samples (e.g., images with canonical views) with coarse scale inputs and
high-precision components will be activated to further obtain finer details to recognize hard samples
* Part of the work is done when the author was an intern at Salesforce Research.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

