Selective Sampling-based Scalable Sparse Subspace
Clustering

Shin Matsushima
University of Tokyo
smatsus@graco.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Maria Brbić
Stanford University
mbrbic@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Sparse subspace clustering (SSC) represents each data point as a sparse linear
combination of other data points in the dataset. In the representation learning step
SSC finds a lower dimensional representation of data points, while in the spectral
clustering step data points are clustered according to the underlying subspaces.
However, both steps suffer from high computational and memory complexity, preventing the application of SSC to large-scale datasets. To overcome this limitation,
we introduce Selective Sampling-based Scalable Sparse Subspace Clustering (S5 C)
algorithm which selects subsamples based on the approximated subgradients and
linearly scales with the number of data points in terms of time and memory requirements. Along with the computational advantages, we derive theoretical guarantees
for the correctness of S5 C. Our theoretical result presents novel contribution for
SSC in the case of limited number of subsamples. Extensive experimental results
demonstrate effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Subspace clustering algorithms rely on the assumption that high-dimensional data points can be well
represented as lying in the union of low-dimensional subspaces. Based on this assumption, the task of
subspace clustering is to identify the subspaces and assign data points according to the corresponding
subspaces [1]. The clustering task is usually performed in two steps: (i) representation learning; and
(ii) spectral clustering. In the representation learning step the goal is to find a representation of data
points according to the underlying low-dimensional subspaces. The obtained representation is then
used to construct the affinity matrix whose entries define similarity between data points. Ideally,
the affinity matrix is block diagonal and non-zero values are assigned only to data points lying in
the same subspace. Given an affinity matrix as an input, spectral clustering [2] assigns subspace
membership to data points. In particular, spectral clustering defines clustering problem as a minimum
cut problem on a graph and minimizes relaxed versions of the originally NP-hard normalized cut
(NCut) [3, 4] or ratio cut (RCut) [5] objective functions.
Subspace clustering algorithms often differ in regularizations imposed on the representation matrix,
such as sparsity [6–8], low-rankness [9, 10], or their combination [11–13]. In this paper we are
interested in the Sparse Subspace Clustering (SSC), proposed by Elhamifar and Vidal [7]. SSC
imposes sparsity constraint on data representation matrix by solving the `1 norm regularized objective.
SSC enjoys strong theoretical guarantees and can succeed in the noiseless case even when subspaces
intersect [14]. Moreover, SSC is provably effective with noisy data as long as the magnitude of noise
does not exceed a certain threshold [15]. Tsakiris and Vidal [16] recently established guarantees for
SSC with missing data.
Despite the strong theoretical guarantees [14, 15] and superior performance [7], a key challenge
towards the wide applicability of SSC lies in the development of methods able to handle large-scale
data. In particular, learning representation matrix takes O(N 3 ) operations in ADMM-based solver
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

