Transfer Learning via Minimizing the Performance
Gap Between Domains

Boyu Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Jorge A. Mendez
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
mendezme@seas.upenn.edu

Ming Bo Cai
Princeton Neuroscience Insititute
Princeton University
mcai@princeton.edu

Eric Eaton
Department of Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
eeaton@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
We propose a new principle for transfer learning, based on a straightforward
intuition: if two domains are similar to each other, the model trained on one domain
should also perform well on the other domain, and vice versa. To formalize this
intuition, we define the performance gap as a measure of the discrepancy between
the source and target domains. We derive generalization bounds for the instance
weighting approach to transfer learning, showing that the performance gap can be
viewed as an algorithm-dependent regularizer, which controls the model complexity.
Our theoretical analysis provides new insight into transfer learning and motivates a
set of general, principled rules for designing new instance weighting schemes for
transfer learning. These rules lead to gapBoost, a novel and principled boosting
approach for transfer learning. Our experimental evaluation on benchmark data sets
shows that gapBoost significantly outperforms previous boosting-based transfer
learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning is based on the idea that learning a new concept is easier after having learned one or
more similar concepts. By extracting knowledge from a set of related concepts (source domains) and
then leveraging this knowledge upon learning the concept of interest (target domain), the learning
performance can be improved. This is especially beneficial when there is insufficient data to learn
solely from the target domain, but enough knowledge from the source domains is available. Transfer
learning has become increasingly relevant over the last two decades, and consequently during that
time various algorithms have been proposed [10, 17, 39, 22, 24, 11], accompanied by theoretical and
empirical justifications [4, 25, 3, 21, 18, 19, 26].
In order to successfully transfer information from one domain to another, it is critical to understand
the similarities and differences between the domains. Intuitively, the more similar the two domains
are, the more information can be transferred. When the domains are considerably different, but still
related, a common strategy to correct this difference is to minimize some measure of divergence
between the empirical source and target data distributions. Most prior work in this area has focused
on defining discrepancy measures that motivate the design of algorithms that effectively reduce the
dissimilarity between domains as much as possible [16, 17, 35, 6, 2, 34, 3, 25, 7, 14, 1, 33]. These
works have mainly considered the problem of domain adaptation, where examples from the target
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

