Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with
Advantage-Based Auxiliary Rewards
Siyuan Li⇤
IIIS, Tsinghua University
sy-li17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Minxue Tang
Tsinghua University
tangmx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Rui Wang⇤
Tsinghua University
rui1@stanford.edu
Chongjie Zhang
IIIS, Tsinghua University
chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) is a promising approach to solving
long-horizon problems with sparse and delayed rewards. Many existing HRL
algorithms either use pre-trained low-level skills that are unadaptable, or require
domain-specific information to define low-level rewards. In this paper, we aim
to adapt low-level skills to downstream tasks while maintaining the generality of
reward design. We propose an HRL framework which sets auxiliary rewards for
low-level skill training based on the advantage function of the high-level policy.
This auxiliary reward enables efficient, simultaneous learning of the high-level
policy and low-level skills without using task-specific knowledge. In addition, we
also theoretically prove that optimizing low-level skills with this auxiliary reward
will increase the task return for the joint policy. Experimental results show that
our algorithm dramatically outperforms other state-of-the-art HRL methods in
Mujoco domains2 . We also find both low-level and high-level policies trained by
our algorithm transferable.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) [1] has achieved considerable successes in domains such as games
[2, 3] and continuous control for robotics [4, 5]. Learning policies in long-horizon tasks with
delayed rewards, such as robot navigation, is one of the major challenges for RL. Hierarchicallystructured policies, which allow for control at multiple time scales, have shown their strengths in
these challenging tasks [6]. In addition, Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning (HRL) methods also
provide a promising way to support low-level skill reuse in transfer learning [7].
The subgoal-based HRL methods have recently been proposed and demonstrated great performance
in sparse reward problems, where the high-level policy specifies subgoals for low-level skills to learn
[8, 9, 10, 11]. However, the performances of these methods heavily depend on the careful goal space
design [12]. Another line of HRL research adopts a pre-training approach that first learns a set of
low-level skills with some form of proxy rewards, e.g., by maximizing velocity [13], by designing
some simple, atomic tasks [14], or by maximizing entropy-based diversity objective [15]. These
methods then proceed to learn a high-level policy to select pre-trained skills in downstream tasks, and
each selected skill is executed for a fixed number of steps. However, using fixed pre-trained skills
⇤

2

Denotes equal contribution
Videos available at: http://bit.ly/2JxA0eN

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

