A Meta-Analysis of Overfitting in Machine Learning

Rebecca Roelofs∗
UC Berkeley
roelofs@berkeley.edu

Sara Fridovich-Keil∗
UC Berkeley
sfk@berkeley.edu

John Miller
UC Berkeley
miller_john@berkeley.edu

Vaishaal Shankar
UC Berkeley
vaishaal@berkeley.edu

Moritz Hardt
UC Berkeley
hardt@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Recht
UC Berkeley
brecht@berkeley.edu

Ludwig Schmidt
UC Berkeley
ludwig@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We conduct the first large meta-analysis of overfitting due to test set reuse in the
machine learning community. Our analysis is based on over one hundred machine
learning competitions hosted on the Kaggle platform over the course of several
years. In each competition, numerous practitioners repeatedly evaluated their
progress against a holdout set that forms the basis of a public ranking available
throughout the competition. Performance on a separate test set used only once
determined the final ranking. By systematically comparing the public ranking
with the final ranking, we assess how much participants adapted to the holdout set
over the course of a competition. Our study shows, somewhat surprisingly, little
evidence of substantial overfitting. These findings speak to the robustness of the
holdout method across different data domains, loss functions, model classes, and
human analysts.

1

Introduction

The holdout method is central to empirical progress in the machine learning community. Competitions,
benchmarks, and large-scale hyperparameter search all rely on splitting a data set into multiple pieces
to separate model training from evaluation. However, when practitioners repeatedly reuse holdout
data, the danger of overfitting to the holdout data arises [6, 13].
Despite its importance, there is little empirical research into the manifested robustness and validity
of the holdout method in practical scenarios. Real-world use cases of the holdout method often
fall outside the guarantees of existing theoretical bounds, making questions of validity a matter of
guesswork.
Recent replication studies [16] demonstrated that the popular CIFAR-10 [10] and ImageNet [5, 18]
benchmarks continue to support progress despite years of intensive use. The longevity of these
benchmarks perhaps suggests that overfitting to holdout data is less of a concern than reasoning from
first principles might have suggested. However, this is evidence from only two, albeit important,
computer vision benchmarks. It remains unclear whether the observed phenomenon is specific to the
data domain, model class, or practices of vision researchers. Unfortunately, these replication studies
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

