Generalization in Generative Adversarial Networks:
A Novel Perspective from Privacy Protection

Bingzhe Wu1 , Shiwan Zhao2 , ChaoChao Chen3 , Haoyang Xu1
Li Wang3 , Xiaolu Zhang3 , Guangyu Sun1,4∗, Jun Zhou3
1
Peking University, 2 IBM Research, 3 Ant Financial,
4
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University
{wubingzhe, xuhaoyang, gsun}@pku.edu.cn
{zhaosw}@cn.ibm.com
{chaochao.ccc, aymond.wangl, yueyin.zxl, jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to understand the generalization properties of generative
adversarial networks (GANs) from a new perspective of privacy protection. Theoretically, we prove that a differentially private learning algorithm used for training
the GAN does not overfit to a certain degree, i.e., the generalization gap can be
bounded. Moreover, some recent works, such as the Bayesian GAN, can be reinterpreted based on our theoretical insight from privacy protection. Quantitatively,
to evaluate the information leakage of well-trained GAN models, we perform various membership attacks on these models. The results show that previous Lipschitz
regularization techniques are effective in not only reducing the generalization gap
but also alleviating the information leakage of the training dataset.

1

Introduction

In the past years, generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12] have achieved remarkable progress in
a wide range of applications including image translation [41, 17], image manipulation [40, 6], and
image super-resolution [37, 21], etc. More recently, numerous advanced techniques [1, 22, 23, 39]
are proposed for improving and stabilizing the training of GANs, leading to more realistic generated
images.
Despite the tremendous success, there are still numerous open problems to be fully solved, ranging
from the theoretical analysis of different regularization techniques [23, 29] to the visualization of
different objective functions of GANs [3]. Among these problems, a critical one is how to formally
characterize the generalization ability of GANs. Some recent studies attempted to explore this
problem in different contexts. For instance, a seminal work in this direction [2] proposed the neural
net distance, and the authors further showed the generalization properties of this distance. Qi et al.
[26] were motivated by the progress in the Lipschitz regularization and proposed a loss-sensitive
GAN. They then developed the Lipschitz regularization theory to analyze the generalization ability
of the loss-sensitive GAN.
Different from the prior works [26, 2], in this paper, we aim to study the generalization ability of
GANs in a relatively general setting from a novel perspective of privacy protection. Our study is
motivated by a well-known intuition [38], “reducing the generalization gap” and “protecting the
individual’s privacy” share the same goal of encouraging a neural network to learn the population’s
features instead of memorizing the features of each individual, i.e., the smaller the generalization gap
∗
Corresponding author. This work is supported by NSF China 61832020, NSF China 61572045, and Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

