Deep Generalized Method of Moments
for Instrumental Variable Analysis
Andrew Bennett⇤
Cornell University
awb222@cornell.edu

Nathan Kallus⇤
Cornell University
kallus@cornell.edu

Tobias Schnabel⇤
Microsoft Research
tbs49@cornell.edu

Abstract
Instrumental variable analysis is a powerful tool for estimating causal effects when
randomization or full control of confounders is not possible. The application of
standard methods such as 2SLS, GMM, and more recent variants are significantly
impeded when the causal effects are complex, the instruments are high-dimensional,
and/or the treatment is high-dimensional. In this paper, we propose the DeepGMM
algorithm to overcome this. Our algorithm is based on a new variational reformulation of GMM with optimal inverse-covariance weighting that allows us to efficiently
control very many moment conditions. We further develop practical techniques for
optimization and model selection that make it particularly successful in practice.
Our algorithm is also computationally tractable and can handle large-scale datasets.
Numerical results show our algorithm matches the performance of the best tuned
methods in standard settings and continues to work in high-dimensional settings
where even recent methods break.

1

Introduction

Unlike standard supervised learning that models correlations, causal inference seeks to predict the
effect of counterfactual interventions not seen in the data. For example, when wanting to estimate
the effect of adherence to a prescription of -blockers on the prevention of heart disease, supervised
learning may overestimate the true effect because good adherence is also strongly correlated with
health consciousness and therefore with good heart health [13]. Figure 1 shows a simple example of
this type and demonstrates how a standard neural network (in blue) fails to correctly estimate the true
treatment response curve (in orange) in a toy example. The issue is that standard supervised learning
assumes that the residual in the response from the prediction of interest is independent of the features.
One approach to account for this is by adjusting for all confounding factors that cause the dependence, such as via matching [24, 33] or regression, potentially using neural networks [23, 25, 34].
However, this requires that we actually observe all confounders so that treatment is as-if random
after conditioning on observables. This would mean that in the -blocker example, we would need to
perfectly measure all latent factors that determine both an individual’s adherence decision and their
general healthfulness which is often not possible in practice.
Instrumental variables (IVs) provide an alternative approach to causal-effect identification. If we
can find a latent experiment in another variable (the instrument) that influences the treatment (i.e., is
relevant) and does not directly affect the outcome (i.e., satisfies exclusion), then we can use this to
infer causal effects [3]. In the -blocker example [13], the authors used co-pay cost as an IV. Because
they enable analyzing natural experiments under mild assumptions, IVs have been one of the most
widely used tools for empirical research in a variety of fields [2]. An important direction of research
⇤

Alphabetical order.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

