Kernel Truncated Randomized Ridge Regression:
Optimal Rates and Low Noise Acceleration

Kwang-Sung Jun
The University of Arizona˚
kjun@cs.arizona.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Google Research
ashok@cutkosky.com

Francesco Orabona
Boston University
francesco@orabona.com

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the nonparametric least square regression in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS). We propose a new randomized algorithm that
has optimal generalization error bounds with respect to the square loss, closing a
long-standing gap between upper and lower bounds. Moreover, we show that our
algorithm has faster finite-time and asymptotic rates on problems where the Bayes
risk with respect to the square loss is small. We state our results using standard
tools from the theory of least square regression in RKHSs, namely, the decay of the
eigenvalues of the associated integral operator and the complexity of the optimal
predictor measured through the integral operator.

1

Introduction

Given a training set S “ txt , yt unt“1 of n samples drawn identically and independently distributed
from a fixed but unknown distribution ρ on X ˆ Y, the goal of nonparametric least square regression
is to find a function fˆ whose risk
ż
´
¯2
ˆ
Rpf q :“
fˆpxq ´ y dρ
XˆY

is close to the optimal risk
R‹ :“ inf Rpf q .
f

We focus on the kernel-based methods, which consider candidate functions from a Reproducing
Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) of functions and possibly their composition with elementary functions.
A classic kernel-based algorithm for nonparametric least squares is Kernel Ridge Regression (KRR),
which constructs the prediction function fˆ as
n
1 ÿ
fˆ “ argmin λ}f }2 `
pf pxt q ´ yt q2 ,
n t“1
f PHK

where HK is a RKHS associated with a kernel K and λ is the hyperparameter controlling the amount
of regularization.
It has been proved that, when the amount of regularization is chosen optimally and under similar
assumptions, KRR converges to the Bayes risk at the best known rate among kernel-based algorithms [Lin et al., 2018]. Despite this result, kernel-based learning is still not a solved problem: these
rates match the known lower bounds in Fischer and Steinwart [2017] only in some regimes, unless
additional assumptions are used [Steinwart et al., 2009]. Indeed, it was not even known if the lower
bound was optimal in all the regimes [Pillaud-Vivien et al., 2018].
˚

This work was done while the author was at Boston University.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

