PointDAN: A Multi-Scale 3D Domain Adaption
Network for Point Cloud Representation

Can Qin∗, 2 Haoxuan You∗, 1 Lichen Wang, 3 C.-C. Jay Kuo, 1,4 Yun Fu
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Department of Computer Science, Columbia University
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California
4
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University
qin.ca@husky.neu.edu, haoxuan.you@columbia.edu,
wanglichenxj@gmail.com, cckuo@sipi.usc.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
1

1

Abstract
Domain Adaptation (DA) approaches achieved significant improvements in a wide
range of machine learning and computer vision tasks (i.e., classification, detection,
and segmentation). However, as far as we are aware, there are few methods
yet to achieve domain adaptation directly on 3D point cloud data. The unique
challenge of point cloud data lies in its abundant spatial geometric information, and
the semantics of the whole object is contributed by including regional geometric
structures. Specifically, most general-purpose DA methods that struggle for global
feature alignment and ignore local geometric information are not suitable for 3D
domain alignment. In this paper, we propose a novel 3D Domain Adaptation
Network for point cloud data (PointDAN). PointDAN jointly aligns the global
and local features in multi-level. For local alignment, we propose Self-Adaptive
(SA) node module with an adjusted receptive field to model the discriminative
local structures for aligning domains. To represent hierarchically scaled features,
node-attention module is further introduced to weight the relationship of SA nodes
across objects and domains. For global alignment, an adversarial-training strategy
is employed to learn and align global features across domains. Since there is no
common evaluation benchmark for 3D point cloud DA scenario, we build a general
benchmark (i.e., PointDA-10) extracted from three popular 3D object/scene datasets
(i.e., ModelNet, ShapeNet and ScanNet) for cross-domain 3D objects classification
fashion. Extensive experiments on PointDA-10 illustrate the superiority of our
model over the state-of-the-art general-purpose DA methods.1

1

Introduction

3D vision has achieved promising outcomes in wide-ranging real-world applications (i.e., autonomous
cars, robots, and surveillance system). Enormous amounts of 3D point cloud data is captured by depth
cameras or LiDAR sensors nowadays. Sophisticated 3D vision and machine learning algorithms
are required to analyze its content for further exploitation. Recently, the advent of Deep Neural
Network (DNN) has greatly boosted the performance of 3D vision understanding including tasks
of classification, detection, and segmentation[22, 9, 37, 41]. Despite its impressive success, DNN
requires massive amounts of labeled data for training which is time-consuming and expensive to
collect. This issue significantly limits its promotion in the real world.
Domain adaptation (DA) solves this problem by building a model utilizing the knowledge of label-rich
dataset, i.e., source domain, which generalizes well on the label-scarce dataset, i.e., target domain.
1
∗

The PointDA-10 data and official code are uploaded on https://github.com/canqin001/PointDAN
Equal Contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

