Think Globally, Act Locally: A Deep Neural Network
Approach to High-Dimensional Time Series
Forecasting
Rajat Sen1 , Hsiang-Fu Yu1 , and Inderjit Dhillon2
2

1
Amazon
Amazon and UT Austin

Abstract
Forecasting high-dimensional time series plays a crucial role in many applications
such as demand forecasting and financial predictions. Modern datasets can have
millions of correlated time-series that evolve together, i.e they are extremely high
dimensional (one dimension for each individual time-series). There is a need
for exploiting global patterns and coupling them with local calibration for better
prediction. However, most recent deep learning approaches in the literature are
one-dimensional, i.e, even though they are trained on the whole dataset, during
prediction, the future forecast for a single dimension mainly depends on past values
from the same dimension. In this paper, we seek to correct this deficiency and
propose DeepGLO, a deep forecasting model which thinks globally and acts
locally. In particular, DeepGLO is a hybrid model that combines a global matrix
factorization model regularized by a temporal convolution network, along with
another temporal network that can capture local properties of each time-series and
associated covariates. Our model can be trained effectively on high-dimensional
but diverse time series, where different time series can have vastly different scales,
without a priori normalization or rescaling. Empirical results demonstrate that
DeepGLO can outperform state-of-the-art approaches; for example, we see more
than 25% improvement in WAPE over other methods on a public dataset that
contains more than 100K-dimensional time series.

1

Introduction

Time-series forecasting is an important problem with many industrial applications like retail demand
forecasting [21], financial predictions [15], predicting traffic or weather patterns [5]. In general
it plays a key role in automating business processes [17]. Modern data-sets can have millions of
correlated time-series over several thousand time-points. For instance, in an online shopping portal
like Amazon or Walmart, one may be interested in the future daily demands for all items in a category,
where the number of items may be in millions. This leads to a problem of forecasting n time-series
(one for each of the n items), given past demands over t time-steps. Such a time series data-set can
be represented as a matrix Y 2 Rn⇥t and we are interested in the high-dimensional setting where n
can be of the order of millions.
Traditional time-series forecasting methods operate on individual time-series or a small number of
time-series at a time. These methods include the well known AR, ARIMA, exponential smoothing [19], the classical Box-Jenkins methodology [4] and more generally the linear state-space
models [13]. However, these methods are not easily scalable to large data-sets with millions of
time-series, owing to the need for individual training. Moreover, they cannot benefit from shared
temporal patterns in the whole data-set while training and prediction.
Deep networks have gained popularity in time-series forecasting recently, due to their ability to
model non-linear temporal patterns. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN’s) [10] have been popular in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

