Bayesian Joint Estimation of
Multiple Graphical Models

Lingrui Gan, Xinming Yang, Naveen N. Nariestty, Feng Liang
Department of Statistics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{lgan6, xyang104, naveen, liangf}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel Bayesian group regularization method based on
the spike and slab Lasso priors for jointly estimating multiple graphical models. The
proposed method can be used to estimate common sparsity structure underlying
the graphical models while capturing potential heterogeneity of the precision
matrices corresponding to those models. Our theoretical results show that the
proposed method enjoys the optimal rate of convergence in `8 norm for estimation
consistency and has a strong structure recovery guarantee even when the signal
strengths over different graphs are heterogeneous. Through simulation studies
and an application to the capital bike-sharing network data, we demonstrate the
competitive performance of our method compared to existing alternatives.

1

Introduction

Gaussian graphical models (GGMs) are widely studied from both the frequentist [30, 9, 3, 18, 28]
and the Bayesian perspectives [4, 7, 26, 1, 19, 10, 14]. A GGM model assumes that a collection of
variables jointly follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution with an unknown precision matrix. It is
well known that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the sparsity pattern of the precision
matrix of a Gaussian distribution and the graph that describes the conditional dependence structure
among the variables: Non-zero entries in the precision matrix correspond to edges in the graph [6].
Due to this connection, given data from a GGM, we are interested in estimating not only the precision
matrix but also its support.
In many applications, observations are naturally grouped into different classes. For example, in
biological experiments, subjects are classified into categories based on their experimental conditions;
in social network data, users are grouped by users’ characteristics; and in gene expression analysis,
expression data are classified into different tissues or disease states. In such situations, it is restrictive
to assume that all observations follow the same graphical model, i.e., have the same precision matrix,
and it would be more suitable to assume that different classes have different precision matrices.
Meaningful insights can be more effectively extracted, if we utilize the cross-class similarities of the
precision matrices and estimate graphs for the multiple classes jointly.
Several approaches have been proposed for jointly estimating multiple GGMs. From the penalized
likelihood perspective, [12, 5, 13, 17] extended approaches for estimating a single graph to the
multiple-graph setting by introducing group-level penalty terms and studied the theoretical properties
of these approaches. From the Bayesian perspective, Peterson et al. [21] proposed a Markov random
field prior on multiple graphs to encourage the selection of common edges in related graphs. Tan
et al. [25] proposed to use a Chung-Lu random graph model as the prior for hierarchical modeling of
multiple GGMs. However, theoretical guarantees of the Bayesian methods are not available.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

