End to end learning and optimization on graphs

Bryan Wilder
Harvard University
bwilder@g.harvard.edu

Eric Ewing
University of Southern California
ericewin@usc.edu

Bistra Dilkina
University of Southern California
dilkina@usc.edu

Milind Tambe
Harvard University
milind_tambe@harvard.edu

Abstract
Real-world applications often combine learning and optimization problems on
graphs. For instance, our objective may be to cluster the graph in order to detect
meaningful communities (or solve other common graph optimization problems
such as facility location, maxcut, and so on). However, graphs or related attributes
are often only partially observed, introducing learning problems such as link
prediction which must be solved prior to optimization. Standard approaches treat
learning and optimization entirely separately, while recent machine learning work
aims to predict the optimal solution directly from the inputs. Here, we propose an
alternative decision-focused learning approach that integrates a differentiable proxy
for common graph optimization problems as a layer in learned systems. The main
idea is to learn a representation that maps the original optimization problem onto a
simpler proxy problem that can be efficiently differentiated through. Experimental
results show that our C LUSTER N ET system outperforms both pure end-to-end
approaches (that directly predict the optimal solution) and standard approaches
that entirely separate learning and optimization. Code for our system is available at
https://github.com/bwilder0/clusternet.

1

Introduction

While deep learning has proven enormously successful at a range of tasks, an expanding area of
interest concerns systems that can flexibly combine learning with optimization. Examples include
recent attempts to solve combinatorial optimization problems using neural architectures [45, 28, 8, 30],
as well as work which incorporates explicit optimization algorithms into larger differentiable systems
[3, 18, 47]. The ability to combine learning and optimization promises improved performance for
real-world problems which require decisions to be made on the basis of machine learning predictions
by enabling end-to-end training which focuses the learned model on the decision problem at hand.
We focus on graph optimization problems, an expansive subclass of combinatorial optimization.
While graph optimization is ubiquitous across domains, complete applications must also solve
machine learning challenges. For instance, the input graph is usually incomplete; some edges
may be unobserved or nodes may have attributes that are only partially known. Recent work has
introduced sophisticated methods for tasks such as link prediction and semi-supervised classification
[38, 29, 39, 25, 53], but these methods are developed in isolation of downstream optimization tasks.
Most current solutions use a two-stage approach which first trains a model using a standard loss
and then plugs the model’s predictions into an optimization algorithm ([50, 10, 5, 9, 42]). However,
predictions which minimize a standard loss function (e.g., cross-entropy) may be suboptimal for
specific optimization tasks, especially in difficult settings where even the best model is imperfect.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

