Efficient Smooth Non-Convex Stochastic
Compositional Optimization via Stochastic Recursive
Gradient Descent
Wenqing Hu
Missouri University of Science and Techology
huwen@mst.edu
Xiangru Lian
University of Rochester
admin@mail.xrlian.com

Chris Junchi Li
Tencent AI Lab
junchi.li.duke@gmail.com

Ji Liu
University of Rochester & Kwai Inc.
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Huizhuo Yuan∗
Peking University
hzyuan@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Stochastic compositional optimization arises in many important machine learning
applications. The objective function is the composition of two expectations of
stochastic functions, and is more challenging to optimize than vanilla stochastic
optimization problems. In this paper, we investigate the stochastic compositional
optimization in the general smooth non-convex setting. We employ a recently
developed idea of Stochastic Recursive Gradient Descent to design a novel algorithm named SARAH-Compositional, and prove a sharp Incremental First-order
Oracle (IFO) complexity upper bound for stochastic compositional optimization:
O((n + m)1/2 ε−2 ) in the finite-sum case and O(ε−3 ) in the online case. Such
a complexity is known to be the best one among IFO complexity results for
non-convex stochastic compositional optimization. Numerical experiments on riskadverse portfolio management validate the superiority of SARAH-Compositional
over a few rival algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider the general smooth, non-convex compositional optimization problem of minimizing the
composition of two expectations of stochastic functions:
min {Φ(x) ≡ (f ◦ g)(x)} ,

x∈Rd

(1)

where the outer and inner functions f : Rl → R, g : Rd → Rl are defined as f (y) := Ev [fv (y)],
g(x) := Ew [gw (y)], v and w are index random variables, and each component fv , gw are smooth
but not necessarily convex. Compositional optimization can be used to formulate many important
machine learning problems, e.g. reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998), risk management
(Dentcheva et al., 2017), multi-stage stochastic programming (Shapiro et al., 2009), deep neural net
(Yang et al., 2019), etc. We list a specific application instance that can be written in the stochastic
compositional form of (1), namely the risk-adverse portfolio management problem, formulated as
!2
T
T
T
1X
1X
1X
min −
hrt , xi +
hrt , xi −
hrs , xi ,
(2)
T t=1
T t=1
T s=1
x∈RN
∗
Partial work was performed when the author was an intern at Tencent AI Lab. Full version of this paper is
available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.13515

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

