Mutually Regressive Point Processes

Ifigeneia Apostolopoulou
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
iapostol@andrew.cmu.edu

Scott Linderman
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
scott.linderman@stanford.edu
Artur Dubrawski
AutonLab
Carnegie Mellon University
awd@cs.cmu.edu

Kyle Miller
AutonLab
Carnegie Mellon University
mille856@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Many real-world data represent sequences of interdependent events unfolding over
time. They can be modeled naturally as realizations of a point process. Despite
many potential applications, existing point process models are limited in their
ability to capture complex patterns of interaction. Hawkes processes admit many
efficient inference algorithms, but are limited to mutually excitatory effects. Nonlinear Hawkes processes allow for more complex influence patterns, but for their
estimation it is typically necessary to resort to discrete-time approximations that
may yield poor generative models. In this paper, we introduce the first general
class of Bayesian point process models extended with a nonlinear component that
allows both excitatory and inhibitory relationships in continuous time. We derive a fully Bayesian inference algorithm for these processes using Pólya-Gamma
augmentation and Poisson thinning. We evaluate the proposed model on single
and multi-neuronal spike train recordings. Results demonstrate that the proposed
model, unlike existing point process models, can generate biologically-plausible
spike trains, while still achieving competitive predictive likelihoods.

1

Introduction

Many natural phenomena and practical applications involve asynchronous and irregular events such
as social media dynamics, neuronal activity, or high frequency financial markets [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
Modeling correlations between events of various types may reveal informative patterns, help predict
next occurrences, or guide interventions to trigger or prevent future events. Point Processes [9] are
models for the distribution of sequences of events.
Cox processes or doubly stochastic processes [10] are generalizations of Poisson Processes [11],
where the intensity function is a stochastic process itself. Although there are efficient inference
algorithms for some of their variants [12, 13], Cox processes do not capture explicitly temporal
correlations between historical and future events. On the other hand, the Hawkes Process (HP)
[14, 15] and its variants [16, 17, 18] constitute a class of point process models where past events
linearly combine to increase the probability of future events. However, purely excitatory effects are
incapable of characterizing physiological patterns such as neuronal activity where inhibitory effects
are present and crucial for self-regulation [19, 20, 21]. The work in [22] can support temporal effects
beyond mutual excitation that HP misses. However, capturing model uncertainty is critical in many
applications [23, 24, 25, 26], especially when the size of the available data is limited compared to
the model complexity. Rich literature exists on HP-based learning tasks [27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32].
A nonlinear generalization of the HP allows for both excitatory and inhibitory interactions, but
evaluating the probability density of these models requires computing integrated intensity, which is
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

