Identifying Causal Effects
via Context-specific Independence Relations

Santtu Tikka
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
santtu.tikka@jyu.fi

Antti Hyttinen
HIIT, Department of Computer Science
University of Helsinki, Finland
antti.hyttinen@helsinki.fi

Juha Karvanen
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Jyvaskyla, Finland
juha.t.karvanen@jyu.fi

Abstract
Causal effect identification considers whether an interventional probability distribution can be uniquely determined from a passively observed distribution in
a given causal structure. If the generating system induces context-specific independence (CSI) relations, the existing identification procedures and criteria based
on do-calculus are inherently incomplete. We show that deciding causal effect
non-identifiability is NP-hard in the presence of CSIs. Motivated by this, we design
a calculus and an automated search procedure for identifying causal effects in
the presence of CSIs. The approach is provably sound and it includes standard
do-calculus as a special case. With the approach we can obtain identifying formulas that were unobtainable previously, and demonstrate that a small number of
CSI-relations may be sufficient to turn a previously non-identifiable instance to
identifiable.

1

Introduction

Statistical independence of random variables is a central concept in any data analysis and prediction
task. An important generalization of this concept is context-specific independence (CSI) [26, 6]. For
a simple example consider an antibiotic that normally has a dose–response effect on the number of
bacteria. A genetic mutation makes the bacteria resistant to the antibiotic meaning that in the context
of this mutation the dose and the number of bacteria are independent. CSI-relations have been utilized
to analyze, for example, gene expression data [2], dynamics of pneumonia [33], prognosis of heart
disease [22], proteins [15], parliament elections [22] and occurence of plants [22]. CSIs have also
been used to speed up exact probabilistic inference [8, 12] and to improve structure learning [9, 19].
However, CSIs have received much less attention in causal inference and in particular, causal effect
identifiability, despite their great potential in allowing for further identifiability results.
In the structural causal model (SCM) framework, the knowledge about causal mechanisms under investigation is represented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). When some nodes represent unobserved
latent variables, all information can be determined from a corresponding semi-Markovian graph.
Assuming the qualitative information given by the graph, the aim in causal effect identification is to
determine whether a causal effect P (Y | do(X), Z) can be uniquely determined from the available
passively observed distribution. The known causal structure, whichever formalism is used, specifies
(generalized) conditional independence properties of the system through d-separation. These warrant
the manipulation of interventional distributions with the rules of do-calculus and thus the derivation
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

