Universal Approximation of Input-Output Maps by
Temporal Convolutional Nets

Joshua Hanson
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
jmh4@illinois.edu

Maxim Raginsky
University of Illinois
Urbana, IL 61801
maxim@illinois.edu

Abstract
There has been a recent shift in sequence-to-sequence modeling from recurrent
network architectures to convolutional network architectures due to computational
advantages in training and operation while still achieving competitive performance.
For systems having limited long-term temporal dependencies, the approximation
capability of recurrent networks is essentially equivalent to that of temporal convolutional nets (TCNs). We prove that TCNs can approximate a large class of
input-output maps having approximately finite memory to arbitrary error tolerance.
Furthermore, we derive quantitative approximation rates for deep ReLU TCNs
in terms of the width and depth of the network and modulus of continuity of the
original input-output map, and apply these results to input-output maps of systems
that admit finite-dimensional state-space realizations (i.e., recurrent models).

1

Introduction

Until recently, recurrent networks have been considered the de facto standard for modeling inputoutput maps that transform sequences to sequences. Convolutional network architectures are becoming favorable alternatives for several applications due to reduced computational overhead incurred
during both training and regular operation, while often performing as well as or better than recurrent
architectures in practice. The computational advantage of convolutional networks follows from the
lack of feedback elements, which enables shifted copies of the input sequence to be processed in
parallel rather than sequentially [Gehring et al., 2017]. Convolutional architectures have demonstrated
exceptional accuracy in sequence modeling tasks that have typically been approached using recurrent
architectures, such as machine translation, audio generation, and language modeling [Dauphin et al.,
2017, Kalchbrenner et al., 2016, van den Oord et al., 2016, Wu et al., 2016, Gehring et al., 2017,
Johnson and Zhang, 2017].
One explanation for this shift is that both convolutional and recurrent architectures are inherently
suited to modeling systems with limited long-term dependencies. Recurrent models possess infinite
memory (the output at each time is a function of the initial conditions and the entire history of
inputs until that time), and thus are strictly more expressive than finite-memory autoregressive
models. However, in synthetic stress tests designed to measure the ability to model long-term
behavior, recurrent architectures often fail to learn long sequences [Bai et al., 2018]. Furthermore,
this unlimited memory property is usually unnecessary, which is supported in theory [Sharan et al.,
2018] and in practice [Chelba et al., 2017, Gehring et al., 2017]. In situations where it is only
important to learn finite-length sequences, feedforward architectures based on temporal convolutions
(temporal convolutional nets, or TCNs) can achieve similar results and even outperform recurrent
nets [Dauphin et al., 2017, Yin et al., 2017, Bai et al., 2018].
These results prompt a closer look at the conditions under which convolutional architectures provide
better approximation than recurrent architectures. Recent work by Miller and Hardt [2019] has shown
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

