Generalized Sliced Wasserstein Distances
Soheil Kolouri1∗, Kimia Nadjahi2∗ , Umut Şimşekli2,3 , Roland Badeau2 , Gustavo K. Rohde4
1: HRL Laboratories, LLC., Malibu, CA, USA, 90265
2: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
3: Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
4: University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA, 22904
skolouri@hrl.com, gustavo@virginia.edu
{kimia.nadjahi, umut.simsekli, roland.badeau}@telecom-paris.fr

Abstract
The Wasserstein distance and its variations, e.g., the sliced-Wasserstein (SW)
distance, have recently drawn attention from the machine learning community. The
SW distance, specifically, was shown to have similar properties to the Wasserstein
distance, while being much simpler to compute, and is therefore used in various
applications including generative modeling and general supervised/unsupervised
learning. In this paper, we first clarify the mathematical connection between the
SW distance and the Radon transform. We then utilize the generalized Radon
transform to define a new family of distances for probability measures, which
we call generalized sliced-Wasserstein (GSW) distances. We further show that,
similar to the SW distance, the GSW distance can be extended to a maximum
GSW (max-GSW) distance. We then provide the conditions under which GSW and
max-GSW distances are indeed proper metrics. Finally, we compare the numerical
performance of the proposed distances on the generative modeling task of SW
flows and report favorable results.

1

Introduction

The Wasserstein distance has its roots in optimal transport (OT) theory [1] and forms a metric between
two probability measures. It has attracted abundant attention in data sciences and machine learning
due to its convenient theoretical properties and applications on many domains [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8],
especially in implicit generative modeling such as OT-based generative adversarial networks (GANs)
and variational auto-encoders [9, 10, 11, 12].
While OT brings new perspectives and principled ways to formalize problems, the OT-based methods
usually suffer from high computational complexity. The Wasserstein distance is often the computational bottleneck and it turns out that evaluating it between multi-dimensional measures is numerically
intractable in general. This important computational burden is a major limiting factor in the application of OT distances to large-scale data analysis. Recently, several numerical methods have been
proposed to speed-up the evaluation of the Wasserstein distance. For instance, entropic regularization
techniques [13, 14, 15] provide a fast approximation to the Wasserstein distance by regularizing the
original OT problem with an entropy term. The linear OT approach, [16, 17] further simplifies this
computation for a given dataset by a linear approximation of pairwise distances with a functional
defined on distances to a reference measure. Other notable contributions towards computational
methods for OT include multi-scale and sparse approximation approaches [18, 19], and Newton-based
schemes for semi-discrete OT [20, 21].
There are some special favorable cases where solving the OT problem is easy and reasonably
cheap. In particular, the Wasserstein distance for one-dimensional probability densities has a closed∗

Denotes equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

