Planning with Goal-Conditioned Policies

Soroush Nasiriany∗, Vitchyr H. Pong∗, Steven Lin, Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley
{snasiriany,vitchyr,stevenlin598,svlevine@berkeley.edu}

Abstract
Planning methods can solve temporally extended sequential decision making problems by composing simple behaviors. However, planning requires suitable abstractions for the states and transitions, which typically need to be designed by hand.
In contrast, model-free reinforcement learning (RL) can acquire behaviors from
low-level inputs directly, but often struggles with temporally extended tasks. Can
we utilize reinforcement learning to automatically form the abstractions needed
for planning, thus obtaining the best of both approaches? We show that goalconditioned policies learned with RL can be incorporated into planning, so that a
planner can focus on which states to reach, rather than how those states are reached.
However, with complex state observations such as images, not all inputs represent
valid states. We therefore also propose using a latent variable model to compactly
represent the set of valid states for the planner, so that the policies provide an
abstraction of actions, and the latent variable model provides an abstraction of
states. We compare our method with planning-based and model-free methods
and find that our method significantly outperforms prior work when evaluated
on image-based robot navigation and manipulation tasks that require non-greedy,
multi-staged behavior.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning can acquire complex skills by learning through direct interaction with
the environment, sidestepping the need for accurate modeling and manual engineering. However,
complex and temporally extended sequential decision making requires more than just well-honed
reactions. Agents that generalize effectively to new situations and new tasks must reason about the
consequences of their actions and solve new problems via planning. Accomplishing this entirely with
model-free RL often proves challenging, as purely model-free learning does not inherently provide
for temporal compositionality of skills. Planning and trajectory optimization algorithms encode this
temporal compositionality by design, but require accurate models with which to plan. When these
models are specified manually, planning can be very powerful, but learning such models presents
major obstacles: in complex environments with high-dimensional observations such as images, direct
prediction of future observations presents a very difficult modeling problem [4, 43, 36, 6, 27, 3, 31],
and model errors accumulate over time [39], making their predictions inaccurate in precisely those
long-horizon settings where we most need the compositionality of planning methods. Can we obtain
the benefits temporal compositionality inherent in model-based planning, without the need to model
the environment at the lowest level, in terms of both time and state representation?
One way to avoid modeling the environment in detail is to plan over abstractions: simplified
representations of states and transitions on which it is easier to construct predictions and plans.
Temporal abstractions allow planning at a coarser time scale, skipping over the high-frequency details
and instead planning over higher-level subgoals, while state abstractions allow planning over a
∗

equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

