A Graph Theoretic Additive Approximation of
Optimal Transport

Nathaniel Lahn
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
lahnn@vt.edu

Deepika Mulchandani
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
deepikak@vt.edu

Sharath Raghvendra
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
sharathr@vt.edu

Abstract
Transportation cost is an attractive similarity measure between probability distributions due to its many useful theoretical properties. However, solving optimal transport exactly can be prohibitively expensive. Therefore, there has been significant
effort towards the design of scalable approximation algorithms. Previous combinatorial results [Sharathkumar, Agarwal STOC ’12, Agarwal, Sharathkumar STOC
’14] have focused primarily on the design of near-linear time multiplicative approximation algorithms. There has also been an effort to design approximate solutions
with additive errors [Cuturi NIPS ’13, Altschuler et al. NIPS ’17, Dvurechensky et
al. ICML ’18, Quanrud, SOSA ’19] within a time bound that is linear in the size of
the cost matrix and polynomial in C/δ; here C is the largest value in the cost matrix
and δ is the additive error. We present an adaptation of the classical graph algorithm
of Gabow and Tarjan and provide a novel analysis of this algorithm that bounds
2
2
its execution time by O( n δC + nC
δ 2 ). Our algorithm is extremely simple and
2C
executes, for an arbitrarily small constant ε, only b (1−ε)δ
c + 1 iterations, where
each iteration consists only of a Dijkstra-type search followed by a depth-first
search. We also provide empirical results that suggest our algorithm is competitive
with respect to a sequential implementation of the Sinkhorn algorithm in execution
time. Moreover, our algorithm quickly computes a solution for very small values
of δ whereas Sinkhorn algorithm slows down due to numerical instability.

1

Introduction

Transportation cost has been successfully used as a measure of similarity between data sets such as
point clouds, probability distributions, and images. Originally studied in operations research, the
transportation problem is a fundamental problem where we are given a set A of ‘demand’ nodes
and a set B of ‘supply’ nodes with a non-negative demand of da at node a ∈ A and a non-negative
supply sb at node b ∈ B. Let G(A, B) be a complete bipartite graph on A, B with n = |A| + |B|
where c(a, b) ≥ 0 denotes the cost of transporting one unit of supply from b to a; we assume that
C is the largest cost of any edge in the graph. We assume that the cost function is symmetric, i.e.,
c(a, b) = c(b, a). Due to symmetry in costs, without loss of
Pgenerality, we will assume throughout
that the total supply is at most the total demand. Let U = b∈B sb . A transport plan is a function
σ : A × B → R≥0 that assigns a non-negative value σ(a, b) to every edge (a, b) with the constraints
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

