Generalization Bounds for Neural Networks via
Approximate Description Length

Amit Daniely
Hebrew University and Google Research Tel-Aviv
amit.daniely@mail.huji.ac.il

Elad Granot
Hebrew University
elad.granot@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We investigate the sample complexity of networks with bounds on the magnitude
of its weights. In particular, we consider the class
N = {Wt ◦ ρ ◦ Wt−1 ◦ ρ . . . ◦ ρ ◦ W1 : W1 , . . . , Wt−1 ∈ Md×d , Wt ∈ M1,d }
where the spectral norm of each Wi is bounded by O(1), the Frobenius norm
ex
is bounded by R, and ρ is the sigmoid function 1+e
x or the smoothened ReLU
function ln (1 + ex ). We show that
for
any
depth
t,
if the inputs are in [−1, 1]d ,


the sample complexity of N is Õ

dR2
2

. This bound is optimal up to log-factors,
 2 2
and substantially improves over the previous state of the art of Õ d R
, that was
2
established in a recent line of work [9, 4, 7, 5, 2, 8].
We furthermore show that this bound remains valid if instead of considering the
magnitude of the Wi ’s, we consider the magnitude of Wi − Wi0 , where Wi0 are
some reference matrices, with spectral norm of O(1). By taking the Wi0 to be the
matrices at the onset of the training process, we get sample complexity bounds that
are sub-linear in the number of parameters, in many typical regimes of parameters.
To establish our results we develop a new technique to analyze the sample complexity of families H of predictors. We start by defining a new notion of a randomized
approximate description of functions f : X → Rd . We then show that if there is a
way to approximately describe functions in a class H using d bits, then d2 examples
suffices to guarantee uniform convergence. Namely, that the empirical loss of all
the functions in the class is -close to the true loss. Finally, we develop a set of
tools for calculating the approximate description length of classes of functions
that can be presented as a composition of linear function classes and non-linear
functions.

1

Introduction

We analyze the sample complexity of networks with bounds on the magnitude of their weights. Let
us consider a prototypical case, where the input space is X = [−1, 1]d , the output space is R, the
number of layers is t, all hidden layers has d neurons, and the activation function is ρ : R → R. The
class of functions computed by such an architecture is
N = {Wt ◦ ρ ◦ Wt−1 ◦ ρ . . . ◦ ρ ◦ W1 : W1 , . . . , Wt−1 ∈ Md×d , Wt ∈ M1,d }
As the class N is defined by (t − 1)d2 + d = O(d2 ) parameters, classical results (e.g. [1]) tell
us that order of d2 examples are sufficient and necessary in order to learn a function from N (in a
standard worst case analysis). However, modern networks often succeed to learn with substantially
less examples. One way to provide alternative results, and a potential explanation to the phenomena,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

