Preference-Based Batch and Sequential Teaching:
Towards a Unified View of Models
Farnam Mansouri†
†

Yuxin Chen‡

Ara Vartanian‹

Xiaojin Zhu‹

Adish Singla†

Max Planck Institute for Software Systems (MPI-SWS), {mfarnam, adishs}@mpi-sws.org,
‡
University of Chicago, chenyuxin@uchicago.edu,
‹
University of Wisconsin-Madison, {aravart, jerryzhu}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Algorithmic machine teaching studies the interaction between a teacher and a
learner where the teacher selects labeled examples aiming at teaching a target
hypothesis. In a quest to lower teaching complexity and to achieve more natural
teacher-learner interactions, several teaching models and complexity measures have
been proposed for both the batch settings (e.g., worst-case, recursive, preferencebased, and non-clashing models) as well as the sequential settings (e.g., local
preference-based model). To better understand the connections between these different batch and sequential models, we develop a novel framework which captures
the teaching process via preference functions Σ. In our framework, each function
σ P Σ induces a teacher-learner pair with teaching complexity as TDpσq. We show
that the above-mentioned teaching models are equivalent to specific types/families
of preference functions in our framework. This equivalence, in turn, allows us to
study the differences between two important teaching models, namely σ functions
inducing the strongest batch (i.e., non-clashing) model and σ functions inducing a weak sequential (i.e., local preference-based) model. Finally, we identify
preference functions inducing a novel family of sequential models with teaching
complexity linear in the VC dimension of the hypothesis class: this is in contrast to
the best known complexity result for the batch models which is quadratic in the
VC dimension.

1

Introduction

Algorithmic machine teaching studies the interaction between a teacher and a learner where the
teacher’s goal is to find an optimal training sequence to steer the learner towards a target hypothesis
[GK95, ZLHZ11, Zhu13, SBB` 14, Zhu15, ZSZR18]. An important quantity of interest is the
teaching dimension (TD) of the hypothesis class, representing the worst-case number of examples
needed to teach any hypothesis in a given class. Given that the teaching complexity depends on
what assumptions are made about teacher-learner interactions, different teaching models lead to
different notions of teaching dimension. In the past two decades, several such teaching models have
been proposed, primarily driven by the motivation to lower teaching complexity and to find models
for which the teaching complexity has better connections with learning complexity measured by
Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension (VCD) [VC71] of the class.
Most of the well-studied teaching models are for the batch setting (e.g., worst-case [GK95, Kuh99],
recursive [ZLHZ08, ZLHZ11, DFSZ14], preference-based [GRSZ17], and non-clashing [KSZ19]
models). In these batch models, the teacher first provides a set of examples to the learner and then
the learner outputs a hypothesis. In a quest to achieve more natural teacher-learner interactions and
enable richer applications, various different models have been proposed for the sequential setting
(e.g., local preference-based model for version space learners [CSMA` 18], models for gradient
learners [LDH` 17, LDL` 18, KDCS19], models inspired by control theory [Zhu18, LZZ19], models
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

