Robust Attribution Regularization
Jiefeng Chen ⇤ 1 Xi Wu ⇤ 2 Vaibhav Rastogi †2
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison

2

Yingyu Liang 1
Somesh Jha 1,3
3
Google
XaiPient

Abstract
An emerging problem in trustworthy machine learning is to train models that produce robust interpretations for their predictions. We take a step towards solving
this problem through the lens of axiomatic attribution of neural networks. Our
theory is grounded in the recent work, Integrated Gradients (IG) [STY17], in
axiomatically attributing a neural network’s output change to its input change.
We propose training objectives in classic robust optimization models to achieve
robust IG attributions. Our objectives give principled generalizations of previous
objectives designed for robust predictions, and they naturally degenerate to classic
soft-margin training for one-layer neural networks. We also generalize previous
theory and prove that the objectives for different robust optimization models are
closely related. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, and
also point to intriguing problems which hint at the need for better optimization
techniques or better neural network architectures for robust attribution training.

1

Introduction

Trustworthy machine learning has received considerable attention in recent years. An emerging
problem to tackle in this domain is to train models that produce reliable interpretations for their
predictions. For example, a pathology prediction model may predict certain images as containing
malignant tumor. Then one would hope that under visually indistinguishable perturbations of an
image, similar sections of the image, instead of entirely different ones, can account for the prediction. However, as Ghorbani, Abid, and Zou [GAZ17] convincingly demonstrated, for existing
models, one can generate minimal perturbations that substantially change model interpretations,
while keeping their predictions intact. Unfortunately, while the robust prediction problem of machine learning models is well known and has been extensively studied in recent years (for example,
[MMS+ 17a, SND18, WK18], and also the tutorial by Madry and Kolter [KM18]), there has only
been limited progress on the problem of robust interpretations.
In this paper we take a step towards solving this problem by viewing it through the lens of axiomatic attribution of neural networks, and propose Robust Attribution Regularization. Our theory
is grounded in the recent work, Integrated Gradients (IG) [STY17], in axiomatically attributing a
neural network’s output change to its input change. Specifically, given a model f , two input vectors x , x 0 , and an input coordinate i, IGfi (x , x 0 ) defines a path integration (parameterized by a curve
from x to x 0 ) that assigns a number to the i-th input as its “contribution” to the change of the model’s
output from f (x ) to f (x 0 ). IG enjoys several natural theoretical properties (such as the Axiom of
Completeness3 ) that other related methods violate.
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Work done while at UW-Madison.

Due to lack of space and for completeness, we put some definitions (such as coupling) to Section B.1. Code for this paper is publicly available at the following repository: https://github.com/jfc43/
robust-attribution-regularization
3
Axiom of Completeness says that summing up attributions of all components should give f (x 0 ) f (x ).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

