Poincaré Recurrence, Cycles and Spurious Equilibria
in Gradient-Descent-Ascent for Non-Convex
Non-Concave Zero-Sum Games
Lampros Flokas∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
lamflokas@cs.columbia.edu

Emmanouil V. Vlatakis-Gkaragkounis∗
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10025
emvlatakis@cs.columbia.edu

Georgios Piliouras
Engineering Systems and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
We study a wide class of non-convex non-concave min-max games that generalizes
over standard bilinear zero-sum games. In this class, players control the inputs of a
smooth function whose output is being applied to a bilinear zero-sum game. This
class of games is motivated by the indirect nature of the competition in Generative
Adversarial Networks, where players control the parameters of a neural network
while the actual competition happens between the distributions that the generator
and discriminator capture. We establish theoretically, that depending on the specific
instance of the problem gradient-descent-ascent dynamics can exhibit a variety of
behaviors antithetical to convergence to the game theoretically meaningful min-max
solution. Specifically, different forms of recurrent behavior (including periodicity
and Poincaré recurrence) are possible as well as convergence to spurious (non-minmax) equilibria for a positive measure of initial conditions. At the technical level,
our analysis combines tools from optimization theory, game theory and dynamical
systems.

1

Introduction

Min-max optimization is a problem of interest in several communities including Optimization, Game
Theory and Machine Learning. In its most general form, given an objective function r : Rn ×Rm → R
and we would like to solve the following problem
(θ ∗ , φ ∗ ) = arg min arg max r(θ , φ ).
θ ∈Rn

(1)

φ ∈Rm

This problem is much more complicated compared to classical minimization problems, as
even understanding under which conditions such a solution is meaning-full is far from trivial
[DP18, MPR+ 17, OSG+ 18, JNJ19]. What is even more demanding is understanding what kind
of algorithms/dynamics are able to solve this problem when a solution is well defined.
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

