Reliable training and estimation of variance networks

Nicki S. Detlefsen∗ †
nsde@dtu.dk

Martin Jørgensen* †
marjor@dtu.dk

Søren Hauberg †
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
We propose and investigate new complementary methodologies for estimating
predictive variance networks in regression neural networks. We derive a locally
aware mini-batching scheme that results in sparse robust gradients, and we show
how to make unbiased weight updates to a variance network. Further, we formulate
a heuristic for robustly fitting both the mean and variance networks post hoc. Finally,
we take inspiration from posterior Gaussian processes and propose a network
architecture with similar extrapolation properties to Gaussian processes. The
proposed methodologies are complementary, and improve upon baseline methods
individually. Experimentally, we investigate the impact of predictive uncertainty on
multiple datasets and tasks ranging from regression, active learning and generative
modeling. Experiments consistently show significant improvements in predictive
uncertainty estimation over state-of-the-art methods across tasks and datasets.

1

Introduction

The quality of mean predictions has dramatically increased in the last decade with the rediscovery of
neural networks [LeCun et al., 2015]. The predictive variance, however, has turned out to be a more
elusive target, with established solutions being subpar. The general finding is that neural networks
tend to make overconfident predictions [Guo et al., 2017] that can be harmful or offensive [Amodei
et al., 2016]. This may be explained by neural networks being general function estimators that does
not come with principled uncertainty estimates. Another explanation is that variance estimation is a
fundamentally different task than mean estimation, and that the tools for mean estimation perhaps do
not generalize. We focus on the latter hypothesis within regression.
To illustrate the main practical problems in variance estimation, we
consider a toy problem where data is generated as y = x · sin(x) +
0.3·1 +0.3·x·2 , with 1 , 2 ∼ N (0, 1) and x is uniform on [0, 10]
(Fig. 1). As is common, we do maximum likelihood estimation of
N (µ(x), σ 2 (x)), where µ and σ 2 are neural nets. While µ provides
an almost perfect fit to the ground truth, σ 2 shows two problems: σ 2
is significantly underestimated and σ 2 does not increase outside the
data support to capture the poor mean predictions.
Figure 1: Max. likelihood fit
These findings are general (Sec. 4), and alleviating them is the main
of N (µ(x), σ 2 (x)) to data.
purpose of the present paper. We find that this can be achieved by a
combination of methods that 1) change the usual mini-batching to be location aware; 2) only optimize
variance conditioned on the mean; 3) for scarce data, we introduce a more robust likelihood function;
and 4) enforce well-behaved interpolation and extrapolation of variances. Points 1 and 2 are achieved
through changes to the training algorithm, while 3 and 4 are changes to model specifications. We
empirically demonstrate that these new tools significantly improve on state-of-the-art across datasets
in tasks ranging from regression to active learning, and generative modeling.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Section for Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

