Gossip-based Actor-Learner Architectures for Deep
Reinforcement Learning
Mahmoud Assran
Facebook AI Research &
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
McGill University
mahmoud.assran@mail.mcgill.ca
Nicolas Ballas
Facebook AI Research
ballasn@fb.com

Joshua Romoff
Facebook AI Research &
Department of Computer Science
McGill University
joshua.romoff@mail.mcgill.ca

Joelle Pineau
Facebook AI Research
jpineau@fb.com

Michael Rabbat
Facebook AI Research
mikerabbat@fb.com

Abstract
Multi-simulator training has contributed to the recent success of Deep Reinforcement Learning by stabilizing learning and allowing for higher training throughputs.
We propose Gossip-based Actor-Learner Architectures (GALA) where several actorlearners (such as A 2 C agents) are organized in a peer-to-peer communication
topology, and exchange information through asynchronous gossip in order to take
advantage of a large number of distributed simulators. We prove that GALA agents
remain within an ✏-ball of one-another during training when using loosely coupled asynchronous communication. By reducing the amount of synchronization
between agents, GALA is more computationally efficient and scalable compared
to A 2 C, its fully-synchronous counterpart. GALA also outperforms A 3 C, being
more robust and sample efficient. We show that we can run several loosely coupled
GALA agents in parallel on a single GPU and achieve significantly higher hardware
utilization and frame-rates than vanilla A 2 C at comparable power draws.

1

Introduction

Deep Reinforcement Learning (Deep RL) agents have reached superhuman performance in a few
domains [Silver et al., 2016, 2018, Mnih et al., 2015, Vinyals et al., 2019], but this is typically at
significant computational expense [Tian et al., 2019]. To both reduce running time and stabilize
training, current approaches rely on distributed computation wherein data is sampled from many
parallel simulators distributed over parallel devices [Espeholt et al., 2018, Mnih et al., 2016]. Despite
the growing ubiquity of multi-simulator training, scaling Deep RL algorithms to a large number of
simulators remains a challenging task.
On-policy approaches train a policy by using samples generated from that same policy, in which case
data sampling (acting) is entangled with the training procedure (learning). To perform distributed
training, these approaches usually introduce multiple learners with a shared policy, and multiple
actors (each with its own simulator) associated to each learner. The shared policy can either be
updated in a synchronous fashion (e.g., learners synchronize gradients before each optimization
step [Stooke and Abbeel, 2018]), or in an asynchronous fashion [Mnih et al., 2016]. Both approaches
have drawbacks: synchronous approaches suffer from straggler effects (bottlenecked by the slowest
individual simulator), and therefore may not exhibit strong scaling efficiency; asynchronous methods
are robust to stragglers, but prone to gradient staleness, and may become unstable with a large number
of actors [Clemente et al., 2017].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

