Inverting Deep Generative models,
One layer at a time
Qi Lei† , Ajil Jalal† , Inderjit S. Dhillon†‡ , and Alexandros G. Dimakis†
†
UT Austin ‡ Amazon
{leiqi@oden., ajiljalal@, inderjit@cs.,
dimakis@austin.}utexas.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of inverting a deep generative model with ReLU activations.
Inversion corresponds to finding a latent code vector that explains observed measurements as much as possible. In most prior works this is performed by attempting
to solve a non-convex optimization problem involving the generator. In this paper
we obtain several novel theoretical results for the inversion problem.
We show that for the realizable case, single layer inversion can be performed
exactly in polynomial time, by solving a linear program. Further, we show that for
multiple layers, inversion is NP-hard and the pre-image set can be non-convex.
For generative models of arbitrary depth, we show that exact recovery is possible
in polynomial time with high probability, if the layers are expanding and the
weights are randomly selected. Very recent work analyzed the same problem for
gradient descent inversion. Their analysis requires significantly higher expansion
(logarithmic in the latent dimension) while our proposed algorithm can provably
reconstruct even with constant factor expansion. We also provide provable error
bounds for different norms for reconstructing noisy observations. Our empirical
validation demonstrates that we obtain better reconstructions when the latent
dimension is large.

1

Introduction

Modern deep generative models are demonstrating excellent performance as signal priors, frequently
outperforming the previous state of the art for various inverse problems including denoising, inpainting, reconstruction from Gaussian projections and phase retrieval (see e.g. [4, 6, 10, 5, 11, 25] and
references therein). Consequently, there is substantial work on improving compressed sensing with
generative adversarial network (GANs) [9, 17, 13, 18, 20]. Similar ideas have been recently applied
also for sparse PCA with a generative prior [2].
A central problem that appears when trying to solve inverse problems using deep generative models
is inverting a generator [4, 12, 24]. We are interested in deep generative models, parameterized
as feed-forward neural networks with ReLU/LeakyReLU activations. For a generator G(z) that
maps low-dimensional vectors in Rk to high dimensional vectors (e.g. images) in Rn , we want to
reconstruct the latent code z ∗ if we can observe x = G(z ∗ ) (realizable case) or a noisy version
x = G(z ∗ ) + e where e denotes some measurement noise. We are therefore interested in the
optimization problem
arg min kx − G(z)kp ,
(1)
z

for some p norm. With this procedure, we learn a concise image representation of a given image
x ∈ Rn as z ∈ Rk , k  n. This applies to image compressions and denoising tasks as studied in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

