Augmented Neural ODEs

Emilien Dupont
University of Oxford
dupont@stats.ox.ac.uk

Arnaud Doucet
University of Oxford
doucet@stats.ox.ac.uk

Yee Whye Teh
University of Oxford
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We show that Neural Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) learn representations that preserve the topology of the input space and prove that this implies the
existence of functions Neural ODEs cannot represent. To address these limitations, we introduce Augmented Neural ODEs which, in addition to being more
expressive models, are empirically more stable, generalize better and have a lower
computational cost than Neural ODEs.

1

Introduction

The relationship between neural networks and differential equations has been studied in several recent
works (Weinan, 2017; Lu et al., 2017; Haber & Ruthotto, 2017; Ruthotto & Haber, 2018; Chen et al.,
2018). In particular, it has been shown that Residual Networks (He et al., 2016) can be interpreted as
discretized ODEs. Taking the discretization step to zero gives rise to a family of models called Neural
ODEs (Chen et al., 2018). These models can be efficiently trained with backpropagation and have
shown great promise on a number of tasks including modeling continuous time data and building
normalizing flows with low computational cost (Chen et al., 2018; Grathwohl et al., 2018).
In this work, we explore some of the consequences of taking this continuous limit and the restrictions
this might create compared with regular neural nets. In particular, we show that there are simple
classes of functions Neural ODEs (NODEs) cannot represent. While it is often possible for NODEs
to approximate these functions in practice, the resulting flows are complex and lead to ODE problems
that are computationally expensive to solve. To overcome these limitations, we introduce Augmented
Neural ODEs (ANODEs) which are a simple extension of NODEs. ANODEs augment the space
on which the ODE is solved, allowing the model to use the additional dimensions to learn more
complex functions using simpler flows (see Fig. 1). In addition to being more expressive models,
ANODEs significantly reduce the computational cost of both forward and backward passes of the
model compared with NODEs. Our experiments also show that ANODEs generalize better, achieve
lower losses with fewer parameters and are more stable to train.

Neural ODE

Augmented Neural ODE

Figure 1: Learned flows for a Neural ODE and an Augmented Neural ODE. The flows (shown as lines
with arrows) map input points to linearly separable features for binary classification. Augmented
Neural ODEs learn simpler flows that are easier for the ODE solver to compute.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

