q-means: A quantum algorithm for unsupervised
machine learning

Iordanis Kerenidis
CNRS, IRIF, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France
jkeren@irif.fr
Jonas Landman
CNRS, IRIF, Universiteé Paris Diderot, Paris, France
Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France. landman@irif.fr
Alessandro Luongo
CNRS, IRIF, Universiteé Paris Diderot, Paris, France
Atos Quantum Lab - Les Clayes-sous-Bois, France
aluongo@irif.fr
Anupam Prakash
CNRS, IRIF, Universiteé Paris Diderot, Paris, France
anupam.prakash@irif.fr

Abstract
Quantum information is a promising new paradigm for fast computations that can
provide substantial speedups for many algorithms we use today. Among them,
quantum machine learning is one of the most exciting applications of quantum
computers. In this paper, we introduce q-means, a new quantum algorithm for
clustering. It is a quantum version of a robust k-means algorithm, with similar
convergence and precision guarantees. We also design a method to pick the initial
centroids equivalent to the classical k-means++ method. Our algorithm provides
currently an exponential speedup in the number of points of the dataset, compared
to the classical k-means algorithm. We also detail the running time of q-means
when applied to well-clusterable datasets. We provide a detailed runtime analysis
and numerical simulations for specific datasets. Along with the algorithm, the
theorems and tools introduced in this paper can be reused for various applications
in quantum machine learning.

1

Introduction

As the amount of data generated in our society is expected to grow faster than the growth in our
computational capabilities, more powerful ways of processing information are needed. Quantum
computation uses the fundamental properties of quantum physics to redefine the way computers create
and manipulate information. These properties imply a radically new way of computing, using qubits
instead of bits, and give the possibility of obtaining quantum algorithms that could be substantially
faster than classical algorithms. In recent years, there have been proposals for quantum machine
learning algorithms that have the potential to offer considerable speedups over the corresponding
classical algorithms, either exponential or large polynomial speedups [28, 23, 22, 8, 27, 3]. Of
course, in order to translate such theoretical results into advantages for real-world use cases one
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

