A necessary and sufficient stability notion for
adaptive generalization

Katrina Ligett
School of Computer Science & Engineering
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91904, Israel
katrina@cs.huji.ac.il

Moshe Shenfeld
School of Computer Science & Engineering
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Jerusalem 91904, Israel
moshe.shenfeld@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We introduce a new notion of the stability of computations, which holds under postprocessing and adaptive composition. We show that the notion is both necessary and
sufficient to ensure generalization in the face of adaptivity, for any computations
that respond to bounded-sensitivity linear queries while providing accuracy with
respect to the data sample set. The stability notion is based on quantifying the effect
of observing a computation’s outputs on the posterior over the data sample elements.
We show a separation between this stability notion and previously studied notion
and observe that all differentially private algorithms also satisfy this notion.

1

Introduction

A fundamental idea behind most forms of data-driven research and machine learning is the concept
of generalization–the ability to infer properties of a data distribution by working only with a sample
from that distribution. One typical approach is to invoke a concentration bound to ensure that, for a
sufficiently large sample size, the evaluation of the function on the sample set will yield a result that is
close to its value on the underlying distribution, with high probability. Intuitively, these concentration
arguments ensure that, for any given function, most sample sets are good “representatives” of the
distribution. Invoking a union bound, such a guarantee easily extends to the evaluation of multiple
functions on the same sample set.
Of course, such guarantees hold only if the functions to be evaluated were chosen independently
of the sample set. In recent years, grave concern has erupted in many data-driven fields, that
adaptive selection of computations is eroding statistical validity of scientific findings [Ioa05, GL14].
Adaptivity is not an evil to be avoided—it constitutes a natural part of the scientific process, wherein
previous findings are used to develop and refine future hypotheses. However, unchecked adaptivity
can (and does, as demonstrated by, e.g., [DFH+ 15b] and [RZ16]) often lead one to evaluate overfitting
functions—ones that return very different values on the sample set than on the distribution.
Traditional generalization guarantees do not necessarily guard against adaptivity; while generalization
ensures that the response to a query on a sample set will be close to that of the same query on the
distribution, it does not rule out the possibility that the probability to get a specific response will be
dramatically affected by the contents of the sample set. In the extreme, a generalizing computation
could encode the whole sample set in the low-order bits of the output, while maintaining high
accuracy with respect to the underlying distribution. Subsequent adaptive queries could then, by
post-processing the computation’s output, arbitrarily overfit to the sample set.
In recent years, an exciting line of work, starting with Dwork et al. [DFH+ 15b], has formalized
this problem of adaptive data analysis and introduced new techniques to ensure guarantees of
generalization in the face of an adaptively-chosen sequence of computations (what we call here
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

