Multiagent Evaluation under Incomplete Information

Mark Rowland1,∗

Shayegan Omidshafiei2,∗

Karl Tuyls2

markrowland@google.com

somidshafiei@google.com

karltuyls@google.com

Julien Pérolat1

Michal Valko2

Georgios Piliouras3

perolat@google.com

valkom@deepmind.com

georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Rémi Munos2
munos@google.com
1

DeepMind London

2

DeepMind Paris
∗

3

Singapore University of Technology and Design

Equal contributors

Abstract
This paper investigates the evaluation of learned multiagent strategies in the incomplete information setting, which plays a critical role in ranking and training of
agents. Traditionally, researchers have relied on Elo ratings for this purpose, with
recent works also using methods based on Nash equilibria. Unfortunately, Elo is
unable to handle intransitive agent interactions, and other techniques are restricted
to zero-sum, two-player settings or are limited by the fact that the Nash equilibrium
is intractable to compute. Recently, a ranking method called α-Rank, relying on a
new graph-based game-theoretic solution concept, was shown to tractably apply
to general games. However, evaluations based on Elo or α-Rank typically assume
noise-free game outcomes, despite the data often being collected from noisy simulations, making this assumption unrealistic in practice. This paper investigates
multiagent evaluation in the incomplete information regime, involving general-sum
many-player games with noisy outcomes. We derive sample complexity guarantees
required to confidently rank agents in this setting. We propose adaptive algorithms
for accurate ranking, provide correctness and sample complexity guarantees, then
introduce a means of connecting uncertainties in noisy match outcomes to uncertainties in rankings. We evaluate the performance of these approaches in several
domains, including Bernoulli games, a soccer meta-game, and Kuhn poker.

1

Introduction

This paper investigates evaluation of learned multiagent strategies given noisy game outcomes. The
Elo rating system is the predominant approach used to evaluate and rank agents that learn through,
e.g., reinforcement learning [12, 35, 42, 43]. Unfortunately, the main caveat with Elo is that it
cannot handle intransitive relations between interacting agents, and as such its predictive power is too
restrictive to be useful in non-transitive situations (a simple example being the game of Rock-PaperScissors). Two recent empirical game-theoretic approaches are Nash Averaging [3] and α-Rank [36].
Empirical Game Theory Analysis (EGTA) can be used to evaluate learning agents that interact in
large-scale multiagent systems, as it remains largely an open question as to how such agents can be
evaluated in a principled manner [36, 48, 49]. EGTA has been used to investigate this evaluation
problem by deploying empirical or meta-games [37, 38, 47, 51–54]. Meta-games abstract away the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

