Keeping Your Distance: Solving Sparse Reward Tasks
Using Self-Balancing Shaped Rewards

Alexander Trott
Salesforce Research
atrott@salesforce.com
Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
cxiong@salesforce.com

Stephan Zheng
Salesforce Research
stephan.zheng@salesforce.com
Richard Socher
Salesforce Research
rsocher@salesforce.com

Abstract
While using shaped rewards can be beneficial when solving sparse reward tasks,
their successful application often requires careful engineering and is problem
specific. For instance, in tasks where the agent must achieve some goal state,
simple distance-to-goal reward shaping often fails, as it renders learning vulnerable
to local optima. We introduce a simple and effective model-free method to learn
from shaped distance-to-goal rewards on tasks where success depends on reaching
a goal state. Our method introduces an auxiliary distance-based reward based
on pairs of rollouts to encourage diverse exploration. This approach effectively
prevents learning dynamics from stabilizing around local optima induced by the
naive distance-to-goal reward shaping and enables policies to efficiently solve
sparse reward tasks. Our augmented objective does not require any additional
reward engineering or domain expertise to implement and converges to the original
sparse objective as the agent learns to solve the task. We demonstrate that our
method successfully solves a variety of hard-exploration tasks (including maze
navigation and 3D construction in a Minecraft environment), where naive distancebased reward shaping otherwise fails, and intrinsic curiosity and reward relabeling
strategies exhibit poor performance.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) offers a powerful framework for teaching an agent to perform tasks
using only observations from its environment. Formally, the goal of RL is to learn a policy that will
maximize the reward received by the agent; for many real-world problems, this requires access to
or engineering a reward function that aligns with the task at hand. Designing a well-suited sparse
reward function simply requires defining the criteria for solving the task: reward is provided if the
criteria for completion are met and withheld otherwise. While designing a suitable sparse reward may
be straightforward, learning from it within a practical amount of time often is not, often requiring
exploration heuristics to help an agent discover the sparse reward (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al.,
2018b,a). Reward shaping (Mataric, 1994; Ng et al., 1999) is a technique to modify the reward signal,
and, for instance, can be used to relabel and learn from failed rollouts, based on which ones made
more progress towards task completion. This may simplify some aspects of learning, but whether
the learned behavior improves task performance depends critically on careful design of the shaped
reward (Clark & Amodei, 2016). As such, reward shaping requires domain-expertise and is often
problem-specific (Mataric, 1994).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

