Biases for Emergent Communication in
Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning

Tom Eccles
DeepMind
London, UK
eccles@google.com
Yoram Bachrach
DeepMind
London, UK
yorambac@google.com

Guy Lever
DeepMind
London, UK
guylever@google.com

Angeliki Lazaridou
DeepMind
London, UK
angeliki@google.com

Thore Graepel
DeepMind
London, UK
thore@google.com

Abstract
We study the problem of emergent communication, in which language arises
because speakers and listeners must communicate information in order to solve
tasks. In temporally extended reinforcement learning domains, it has proved hard
to learn such communication without centralized training of agents, due in part to
a difficult joint exploration problem. We introduce inductive biases for positive
signalling and positive listening, which ease this problem. In a simple one-step
environment, we demonstrate how these biases ease the learning problem. We
also apply our methods to a more extended environment, showing that agents
with these inductive biases achieve better performance, and analyse the resulting
communication protocols.

1

Introduction

Environments where multiple learning agents interact can model important real-world problems,
ranging from multi-robot or autonomous vehicle control to societal social dilemmas [4, 26, 22].
Further, such systems leverage implicit natural curricula, and can serve as building blocks in the
route for constructing aritficial general intelligence [21, 1]. Multi-agent games provide longstanding
grand-challenges for AI [16], with important recent successes such as learning a cooperative and
competitive multi-player first-person video game to human level [14]. An important unsolved problem
in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) is communication between independent agents. In
many domains, agents can benefit from sharing information about their beliefs, preferences and
intents with their peers, allowing them to coordinate joint plans or jointly optimize objectives.
A natural question that arises when agents inhibiting the same environment are given a communication
channel without an agreed protocol of communication is that of emergent communication [32, 35, 8]:
how would the agents learn a “language” over the joint channel, allowing them to maximize their
utility? The most naturalistic model for emergent communication in MARL is that used in Reinforced
Inter-Agent Learning (RIAL) [8] where agents optimize a message policy via reinforcement from the
environment’s reward signal. Unfortunately, straightforward implementations perform poorly [8],
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

