Off-Policy Evaluation via Off-Policy Classification
Alex Irpan1 , Kanishka Rao1 , Konstantinos Bousmalis2 ,
Chris Harris1 , Julian Ibarz1 , Sergey Levine1,3
1

Google Brain, Mountain View, USA
2
DeepMind, London, UK
3
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
{alexirpan,kanishkarao,konstantinos,ckharris,julianibarz,slevine}@google.com

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of model selection for deep reinforcement
learning (RL) in real-world environments. Typically, the performance of deep
RL algorithms is evaluated via on-policy interactions with the target environment.
However, comparing models in a real-world environment for the purposes of early
stopping or hyperparameter tuning is costly and often practically infeasible. This
leads us to examine off-policy policy evaluation (OPE) in such settings. We focus
on OPE for value-based methods, which are of particular interest in deep RL,
with applications like robotics, where off-policy algorithms based on Q-function
estimation can often attain better sample complexity than direct policy optimization.
Existing OPE metrics either rely on a model of the environment, or the use of
importance sampling (IS) to correct for the data being off-policy. However, for
high-dimensional observations, such as images, models of the environment can
be difficult to fit and value-based methods can make IS hard to use or even illconditioned, especially when dealing with continuous action spaces. In this paper,
we focus on the specific case of MDPs with continuous action spaces and sparse
binary rewards, which is representative of many important real-world applications.
We propose an alternative metric that relies on neither models nor IS, by framing
OPE as a positive-unlabeled (PU) classification problem with the Q-function
as the decision function. We experimentally show that this metric outperforms
baselines on a number of tasks. Most importantly, it can reliably predict the relative
performance of different policies in a number of generalization scenarios, including
the transfer to the real-world of policies trained in simulation for an image-based
robotic manipulation task.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning has seen significant advances in recent years, in part due to the use of large,
standardized datasets [6]. When researchers can evaluate real performance of their methods on the
same data via a standardized offline metric, the progress of the field can be rapid. Unfortunately,
such metrics have been lacking in reinforcement learning (RL). Model selection and performance
evaluation in RL are typically done by estimating the average on-policy return of a method in the
target environment. Although this is possible in most simulated environments [3, 4, 37], real-world
environments, like in robotics, make this difficult and expensive [36]. Off-policy evaluation (OPE)
has the potential to change that: a robust off-policy metric could be used together with realistic and
complex data to evaluate the expected performance of off-policy RL methods, which would enable
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

