A Mean Field Theory of Quantized Deep Networks:
The Quantization-Depth Trade-Off

Yaniv Blumenfeld
Technion, Israel
yanivblm6@gmail.com

Dar Gilboa
Columbia University
dargilboa@gmail.com

Daniel Soudry
Technion, Israel
daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Abstract
Reducing the precision of weights and activation functions in neural network training, with minimal impact on performance, is essential for the deployment of these
models in resource-constrained environments. We apply mean field techniques
to networks with quantized activations in order to evaluate the degree to which
quantization degrades signal propagation at initialization. We derive initialization
schemes which maximize signal propagation in such networks, and suggest why
this is helpful for generalization. Building on these results, we obtain a closed
form implicit equation for Lmax , the maximal trainable depth (and hence model
capacity), given N , the number of quantization levels in the activation function.
Solving this equation numerically, we obtain asymptotically: Lmax ∝ N 1.82 .

1

Introduction

As neural networks are increasingly trained and deployed on-device in settings with memory and space
constraints [12, 5], a better understanding of the trade-offs involved in the choice of architecture and
training procedure are gaining in importance. One widely used method to conserve resources is the
quantization (discretization) of the weights and/or activation functions during training [6, 25, 13, 3].
When choosing a quantized architecture, it is natural to expect depth to increase the flexibility of
the model class, yet choosing a deeper architecture can make the training process more difficult.
Additionally, due to resource constraints, when using a quantized activation function whose image
is a finite set of size N , one would like to choose the smallest possible N such that the model is
trainable and performance is minimally affected. There is a trade-off here between the capacity of the
network which depends on its depth and the ability to train it efficiently on the one hand — and the
parsimony of the activation function used on the other.
We quantify this trade-off between capacity/trainability and the degree of quantization by an analysis
of wide neural networks at initialization. This is achieved by studying signal propagation in deep
quantized networks, using techniques introduced in [24, 26] that have been applied to numerous
architectures. Signal propagation will refer to the propagation of correlations between inputs into the
hidden states of a deep network. Additionally, we consider the dynamics of training in this regime
and the effect of signal propagation on the change in generalization error during training.
In this paper,
• We suggest (section 3.2) that if the signal propagation conditions do not hold, generalization
error in early stages of training should not decrease at a typical test point, potentially
explaining the empirically observed benefit of signal propagation to generalization. This
is done using an analysis of learning dynamics in wide neural networks, and corroborated
numerically.
• We obtain (section 4.2) initialization schemes that maximize signal propagation in certain
classes of feed-forward networks with quantized activations.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

