Park: An Open Platform for Learning-Augmented
Computer Systems

Hongzi Mao, Parimarjan Negi, Akshay Narayan, Hanrui Wang, Jiacheng Yang,
Haonan Wang, Ryan Marcus, Ravichandra Addanki, Mehrdad Khani, Songtao He,
Vikram Nathan, Frank Cangialosi, Shaileshh Bojja Venkatakrishnan,
Wei-Hung Weng, Song Han, Tim Kraska, Mohammad Alizadeh
MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
park-project@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We present Park, a platform for researchers to experiment with Reinforcement
Learning (RL) for computer systems. Using RL for improving the performance
of systems has a lot of potential, but is also in many ways very different from,
for example, using RL for games. Thus, in this work we first discuss the unique
challenges RL for systems has, and then propose Park an open extensible platform,
which makes it easier for ML researchers to work on systems problems. Currently,
Park consists of 12 real world system-centric optimization problems with one
common easy to use interface. Finally, we present the performance of existing RL
approaches over those 12 problems and outline potential areas of future work.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a general and powerful approach to sequential
decision making problems in recent years. However, real-world applications of deep RL have thus far
been limited. The successes, while impressive, have largely been confined to controlled environments,
such as complex games [70, 78, 91, 97, 100] or simulated robotics tasks [45, 79, 84]. This paper
concerns applications of RL in computer systems, a relatively unexplored domain where RL could
provide significant real-world benefits.
Computer systems are full of sequential decision-making tasks that can naturally be expressed
as Markov decision processes (MDP). Examples include caching (operating systems), congestion
control (networking), query optimization (databases), scheduling (distributed systems), and more
(§2). Since real-world systems are difficult to model accurately, state-of-the-art systems often rely on
human-engineered heuristic algorithms that can leave significant room for improvement [69]. Further,
these algorithms can be complex (e.g., a commercial database query optimizer involves hundreds of
rules [14]), and are often difficult to adapt across different systems and operating environments [63,
66] (e.g., different workloads, different distribution of data in a database, etc.). Furthermore, unlike
control applications in physical systems, most computer systems run in software on readily-available
commodity machines. Hence the cost of experimentation is much lower than physical environments
such as robotics, making it relatively easy to generate abundant data to explore and train RL models.
This mitigates (but does not eliminate) one of the drawbacks of RL approaches in practice — their
high sample complexity [7]. The easy access to training data and the large potential benefits have
attracted a surge of recent interest in the systems community to develop and apply RL tools to various
problems [17, 24, 32, 34, 48, 51, 54, 61–63, 66, 68, 69].
From a machine learning perspective, computer systems present many challenging problems for RL.
The landscape of decision-making problems in systems is vast, ranging from centralized control
problems (e.g., a scheduling agent responsible for an entire computer cluster) to distributed multi33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

