Distributed estimation of the inverse Hessian by
determinantal averaging
Michał Dereziński
Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mderezin@berkeley.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
ICSI and Department of Statistics
University of California, Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In distributed optimization and distributed numerical linear algebra, we often
encounter an inversion bias: if we want to compute a quantity that depends on
the inverse of a sum of distributed matrices, then the sum of the inverses does not
equal the inverse of the sum. An example of this occurs in distributed Newton’s
method, where we wish to compute (or implicitly work with) the inverse Hessian
multiplied by the gradient. In this case, locally computed estimates are biased, and
so taking a uniform average will not recover the correct solution. To address this,
we propose determinantal averaging, a new approach for correcting the inversion
bias. This approach involves reweighting the local estimates of the Newton’s step
proportionally to the determinant of the local Hessian estimate, and then averaging
them together to obtain an improved global estimate. This method provides the first
known distributed Newton step that is asymptotically consistent, i.e., it recovers
the exact step in the limit as the number of distributed partitions grows to infinity.
To show this, we develop new expectation identities and moment bounds for the
determinant and adjugate of a random matrix. Determinantal averaging can be
applied not only to Newton’s method, but to computing any quantity that is a linear
transformation of a matrix inverse, e.g., taking a trace of the inverse covariance
matrix, which is used in data uncertainty quantification.

1

Introduction

Many problems in machine learning and optimization require that we produce an accurate estimate of a
square matrix H (such as the Hessian of a loss function or a sample covariance), while having access to
b such that E[H]
b = H. In these
many copies of some unbiased estimator of H, i.e., a random matrix H
cases, taking a uniform average of those independent copies provides a natural strategy for boosting
Pm b
1
the estimation accuracy, essentially by making use of the law of large numbers: m
t=1 Ht ! H.
For many other problems, however, we are more interested in the inverse (Hessian/covariance) matrix
b 1 as the estimator. Here, a naïve averaging
H 1 , and it is necessary or desirable to work with H
approach has certain fundamental limitations (described in more detail below). The basic reason for
b 1 ] 6= H 1 , i.e., that there is what may be called an inversion bias.
this is that E[H

In this paper, we propose a method to address this inversion bias challenge. The method uses a
weighted average, where the weights are carefully chosen to compensate for and correct the bias.
Our motivation comes from distributed Newton’s method (explained shortly), where combining
independent estimates of the inverse Hessian is desired, but our method is more generally applicable,
and so we first state our key ideas in a more general context.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

