Adaptive Cross-Modal Few-shot Learning

Chen Xing∗
College of Computer Science,
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
Element AI, Montreal, Canada

Negar Rostamzadeh
Element AI, Montreal, Canada

Boris N. Oreshkin
Element AI, Montreal, Canada

Pedro O. Pinheiro
Element AI, Montreal, Canada

Abstract
Metric-based meta-learning techniques have successfully been applied to fewshot classification problems. In this paper, we propose to leverage cross-modal
information to enhance metric-based few-shot learning methods. Visual and semantic feature spaces have different structures by definition. For certain concepts,
visual features might be richer and more discriminative than text ones. While
for others, the inverse might be true. Moreover, when the support from visual
information is limited in image classification, semantic representations (learned
from unsupervised text corpora) can provide strong prior knowledge and context
to help learning. Based on these two intuitions, we propose a mechanism that
can adaptively combine information from both modalities according to new image categories to be learned. Through a series of experiments, we show that by
this adaptive combination of the two modalities, our model outperforms current
uni-modality few-shot learning methods and modality-alignment methods by a
large margin on all benchmarks and few-shot scenarios tested. Experiments also
show that our model can effectively adjust its focus on the two modalities. The
improvement in performance is particularly large when the number of shots is very
small.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have achieved major advances in areas such as speech, language and vision [25]. These systems, however, usually require a large amount of labeled data, which can be
impractical or expensive to acquire. Limited labeled data lead to overfitting and generalization issues
in classical deep learning approaches. On the other hand, existing evidence suggests that human
visual system is capable of effectively operating in small data regime: humans can learn new concepts
from a very few samples, by leveraging prior knowledge and context [23, 30, 46]. The problem of
learning new concepts with small number of labeled data points is usually referred to as few-shot
learning [1, 6, 27, 22] (FSL).
Most approaches addressing few-shot learning are based on meta-learning paradigm [43, 3, 52, 13],
a class of algorithms and models focusing on learning how to (quickly) learn new concepts. Metalearning approaches work by learning a parameterized function that embeds a variety of learning
tasks and can generalize to new ones. Recent progress in few-shot image classification has primarily
been made in the context of unimodal learning. In contrast to this, employing data from another
modality can help when the data in the original modality is limited. For example, strong evidence
supports the hypothesis that language helps recognizing new visual objects in toddlers [15, 45]. This
∗

Work done when interning at Element AI. Contact through: xingchen1113@gmail.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

