A Polynomial Time Algorithm for Log-Concave
Maximum Likelihood via Locally Exponential
Families
Brian Axelrod
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
baxelrod@cs.stanford.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
Department of Computer Science
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ilias.diakonikolas@gmail.com

Anastasios Sidiropoulos
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Chicago
sidiropo@gmail.com

Alistair Stewart
Web3 Foundation
stewart.al@gmail.com

Gregory Valiant
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
gvaliant@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing the maximum likelihood multivariate logconcave distribution for a set of points. Specifically, we present an algorithm which,
given n points in Rd and an accuracy parameter ✏ > 0, runs in time poly(n, d, 1/✏),
and returns a log-concave distribution which, with high probability, has the property
that the likelihood of the n points under the returned distribution is at most an
additive ✏ less than the maximum likelihood that could be achieved via any logconcave distribution. This is the first computationally efficient (polynomial time)
algorithm for this fundamental and practically important task. Our algorithm rests
on a novel connection with exponential families: the maximum likelihood logconcave distribution belongs to a class of structured distributions which, while not
an exponential family, “locally” possesses key properties of exponential families.
This connection then allows the problem of computing the log-concave maximum
likelihood distribution to be formulated as a convex optimization problem, and
solved via an approximate first-order method. Efficiently approximating the (sub)
gradients of the objective function is a main technical challenge in this work.

1

Introduction

A distribution on Rd is log-concave if the logarithm of its probability density function is concave:
Definition 1 (Log-concave Density). A probability density function f : Rd ! R+ , d 2 Z+ , is called
log-concave if there exists an upper semi-continuous concave function : Rd ! [ 1, 1) such that
f (x) = e (x) for all x 2 Rd . We will denote by Fd the set of upper semi-continuous, log-concave
densities with respect to the Lebesgue measure on Rd .
This paper merges two independent works [4, 35]. Authors are in alphabetical order.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

