Ouroboros: On Accelerating Training of
Transformer-Based Language Models

Qian Yang1∗ , Zhouyuan Huo2 , Wenlin Wang1 , Heng Huang2 , Lawrence Carin1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
1
Duke University 2 University of Pittsburgh
qian.yang@duke.edu

Abstract
Language models are essential for natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such
as machine translation and text summarization. Remarkable performance has
been demonstrated recently across many NLP domains via a Transformer-based
language model with over a billion parameters, verifying the benefits of model size.
Model parallelism is required if a model is too large to fit in a single computing
device. Current methods for model parallelism either suffer from backward locking
in backpropagation or are not applicable to language models. We propose the first
model-parallel algorithm that speeds the training of Transformer-based language
models. We also prove that our proposed algorithm is guaranteed to converge to
critical points for non-convex problems. Extensive experiments on Transformer
and Transformer-XL language models demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
obtains a much faster speedup beyond data parallelism, with comparable or better
accuracy. Code to reproduce experiments is to be found at https://github.
com/LaraQianYang/Ouroboros.

1

Introduction

Natural language processing (NLP) tasks, such as machine translation [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], text summarization [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], or paraphrase generation [11, 12, 13] have achieved great success with
the development of neural networks. It has been demonstrated recently that Transformer networks
obtain superior performance [14, 15, 16] relative to recurrent neural networks or convolutional neural
networks. BERT [17] trains a deep bidirectional Transformer with 340M parameters and obtains
state-of-the-art results on 11 NLP tasks. Recently, OpenAI GPT-2 [18], which is a Transformer-based
language model with 1.5B parameters, achieves state-of-the-art results on 7 out of 8 tested language
modeling datasets, presenting impressive performance across many domains and datasets. Empirical
results demonstrate the superiority of Transformer networks and show that a larger model tends to
yield better performance. However, when a model is so large that it has to be allocated on multiple
GPUs, data parallelism over these GPUs is not applicable because it requires each GPU to have one
copy of the whole model. Meanwhile, model parallelization is still an open question when the model
is too large to fit in a single device when training.
When a model becomes too large to fit on a single computing device, the simplest solution is to
distribute model layers across multiple devices. In [19], the authors parallelize the model by splitting
filters or parameters of a layer across multiple GPUs. However, both of these methods suffer from
backward locking of the backpropagation algorithm, and cannot parallelize the computations between
layers. Backward locking denotes that the backpropagation algorithm requires gradients to be
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

