Ask not what AI can do, but what AI should do:
Towards a framework of task delegability

Brian Lubars
University of Colorado Boulder
brian.lubars@colorado.edu

Chenhao Tan
University of Colorado Boulder
chenhao.tan@colorado.edu

Abstract
While artificial intelligence (AI) holds promise for addressing societal challenges,
issues of exactly which tasks to automate and to what extent to do so remain understudied. We approach this problem of task delegability from a human-centered
perspective by developing a framework on human perception of task delegation to
AI. We consider four high-level factors that can contribute to a delegation decision: motivation, difficulty, risk, and trust. To obtain an empirical understanding
of human preferences in different tasks, we build a dataset of 100 tasks from academic papers, popular media portrayal of AI, and everyday life, and administer
a survey based on our proposed framework. We find little preference for full AI
control and a strong preference for machine-in-the-loop designs, in which humans play the leading role. Among the four factors, trust is the most correlated
with human preferences of optimal human-machine delegation. This framework
represents a first step towards characterizing human preferences of AI automation
across tasks. We hope this work encourages future efforts towards understanding such individual attitudes; our goal is to inform the public and the AI research
community rather than dictating any direction in technology development.

1

Introduction

Recent developments in machine learning have led to significant excitement about the promise of
artificial intelligence. Ng [35] claims that “artificial intelligence is the new electricity.” Artificial
intelligence indeed approaches or even outperforms human-level intelligence in critical domains
such as hiring, medical diagnosis, and judicial systems [7, 10, 12, 23, 29]. However, we also observe
growing concerns about which problems are appropriate applications of AI. For instance, a recent
study used deep learning to predict sexual orientation from images [45]. This study has caused
controversy [32, 34]: Glaad and the Human Rights Campaign denounced the study as “junk science”
that “threatens the safety and privacy of LGBTQ and non-LGBTQ people alike” [2]. In general,
researchers also worry about the impact on jobs and the future of employment [14, 42, 44].
Such excitement and concern begs a fundamental question at the interface of artificial intelligence
and human society: which tasks should be delegated to AI, and in what way? To answer this
question, we need to at least consider two dimensions. The first dimension is capability. Machines
may excel at some tasks, but struggle at others; this area has been widely explored since Fitts first
tackled function allocation in 1951 [13, 36, 38]. The goal of AI research has also typically focused
on pushing the boundaries of machine ability and exploring what AI can do.
The second dimension is human preferences, i.e., what role humans would like AI to play. The
automation of some tasks is celebrated, while others should arguably not be automated for reasons
beyond capability alone. For instance, automated civil surveillance may be disastrous from ethical,
privacy, and legal standpoints. Motivation is another reason: no matter the quality of machine
text generation, it is unlikely that an aspiring writer will derive the same satisfaction or value from
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

