Regularized Weighted Low Rank Approximation
Frank Ban
UC Berkeley / Google
fban@berkeley.edu

David Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang
UC Berkeley / Google
qiuyi@berkeley.edu

Abstract
The classical low rank approximation problem is to find a rank k matrix U V
(where U has k columns and V has k rows) that minimizes the Frobenius norm of
A U V . Although this problem can be solved efficiently, we study an NP-hard
variant of this problem that involves weights and regularization. A previous paper
of [Razenshteyn et al. ’16] derived a polynomial time algorithm for weighted low
rank approximation with constant rank. We derive provably sharper guarantees for
the regularized version by obtaining parameterized complexity bounds in terms of
the statistical dimension rather than the rank, allowing for a rank-independent
runtime that can be significantly faster. Our improvement comes from applying
sharper matrix concentration bounds, using a novel conditioning technique, and
proving structural theorems for regularized low rank problems.

1

Introduction

In the weighted low rank approximation problem, one is given a matrix M 2
W 2 n⇥d , and an integer parameter k, and would like to find factors U 2
so as to minimize
kW

(M

U · V )k2F =

n X
d
X

2
Wi,j
(Mi,j

i=1 j=1

n⇥d

, a weight matrix
and V 2 k⇥d

n⇥k

hUi,⇤ , V⇤,j i)2 ,

where Ui,⇤ denotes the i-th row of U and V⇤,j denotes the j-th column of V . W.l.o.g., we assume
n
d. This is a weighted version of the classical low rank approximation problem, which is a
special case when Wi,j = 1 for all i and j. One often considers the approximate version of this
problem, for which one is given an approximation parameter " 2 (0, 1) and would like to find
U 2 n⇥k and V 2 k⇥d so that
kW

(M

U · V )k2F  (1 + ")

U 02

min

n⇥k ,V 0 2

k⇥d

kW

(M

U 0 · V 0 )k2F .

(1)

Weighted low rank approximation extends the classical low rank approximation problem in many
ways. While in principal component analysis, one typically first subtracts off the mean to make
the matrix M have mean 0, this does not fix the problem of differing variances. Indeed, imagine
one of the columns of M has much larger variance than the others. Then in classical low rank
approximation with k = 1, it could suffice to simply fit this single high variance column and ignore
the remaining entries of M . Weighted low rank approximation, on the other hand, can correct for this
by re-weighting each of the entries of M to give them similar variance; this allows for the low rank
approximation U · V to capture more of the remaining data. This technique is often used in gene
expression analysis and co-occurrence matrices; we refer the reader to [SJ03] and the Wikipedia
entry on weighted low rank approximation1 . The well-studied problem of matrix completion is
1
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-rank_approximation#Weighted_low-rank_
approximation_problems

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

