Recurrent Space-time Graph Neural Networks
Andrei Nicolicioiu∗, Iulia Duta∗
Bitdefender, Romania
anicolicioiu, iduta@bitdefender.com
Marius Leordeanu
Bitdefender, Romania
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
University "Politehnica" of Bucharest
marius.leordeanu@imar.ro

Abstract

Learning in the space-time domain remains a very challenging problem in machine learning and
computer vision. Current computational models for understanding spatio-temporal visual data are
heavily rooted in the classical single-image based paradigm. It is not yet well understood how to
integrate information in space and time into a single, general model. We propose a neural graph
model, recurrent in space and time, suitable for capturing both the local appearance and the complex
higher-level interactions of different entities and objects within the changing world scene. Nodes
and edges in our graph have dedicated neural networks for processing information. Nodes operate
over features extracted from local parts in space and time and over previous memory states. Edges
process messages between connected nodes at different locations and spatial scales or between past
and present time. Messages are passed iteratively in order to transmit information globally and
establish long range interactions. Our model is general and could learn to recognize a variety of high
level spatio-temporal concepts and be applied to different learning tasks. We demonstrate, through
extensive experiments and ablation studies, that our model outperforms strong baselines and top
published methods on recognizing complex activities in video. Moreover, we obtain state-of-the-art
performance on the challenging Something-Something human-object interaction dataset.

1

Introduction

Video data is available almost everywhere. While image level recognition is better understood, visual
learning in space and time is far from being solved. The main challenge is how to model interactions
between objects and higher level concepts, within the large spatio-temporal context. For such a
difficult learning task it is important to efficiently model the local appearance, the spatial relationships
and the complex interactions and changes that take place over time.
Often, for different learning tasks, different models are preferred, such that they capture the specific
domain priors and biases of the problem [1]. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are preferred on
tasks involving strong local and stationary assumptions about the data. Recurrent models are chosen
when data is sequential in nature. Fully connected models could be preferred when there is no known
structure in the data. Our recurrent neural graph efficiently processes information in both space and
time and can be applied to different learning tasks in video.
We propose Recurrent Space-time Graph (RSTG) neural networks, in which each node receives
features extracted from a specific region in space-time using a backbone deep neural network.
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

