Offline Contextual Bandits with
High Probability Fairness Guarantees

Blossom Metevier1 Stephen Giguere1 Sarah Brockman1 Ari Kobren1
Yuriy Brun1
Emma Brunskill2
Philip S. Thomas1
1
2
College of Information and Computer Sciences
Computer Science Department
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Stanford University

Abstract
We present RobinHood, an offline contextual bandit algorithm designed to satisfy
a broad family of fairness constraints. Our algorithm accepts multiple fairness
definitions and allows users to construct their own unique fairness definitions for the
problem at hand. We provide a theoretical analysis of RobinHood, which includes
a proof that it will not return an unfair solution with probability greater than a
user-specified threshold. We validate our algorithm on three applications: a user
study with an automated tutoring system, a loan approval setting using the Statlog
German credit data set, and a criminal recidivism problem using data released
by ProPublica. To demonstrate the versatility of our approach, we use multiple
well-known and custom definitions of fairness. In each setting, our algorithm is
able to produce fair policies that achieve performance competitive with other offline
and online contextual bandit algorithms.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly being used in high-risk decision making settings,
such as financial loan approval [7], hiring [37], medical diagnostics [12], and criminal sentencing [3].
These algorithms are capable of unfair behavior, and when used to guide policy and practice, can cause
significant harm. This is not merely hypothetical: ML algorithms that influence criminal sentencing
and credit risk assessment have already exhibited racially-biased behavior [3; 4]. Prevention of unfair
behavior by these algorithms remains an open and challenging problem [14; 20; 24]. In this paper,
we address issues of unfairness in the offline contextual bandit setting, providing a new algorithm,
designed using the recently proposed Seldonian framework [47] and called RobinHood, which is
capable of satisfying multiple fairness definitions with high probability.
Ensuring fairness in the bandit setting is an understudied problem. While extensive research has
been devoted to studying fairness in classification, recent work has shown that the decisions made by
fair ML algorithms can affect the well-being of a population over time [34]. For example, criminal
sentencing practices affect criminal recidivism rates, and loan approval strategies can change the
amount of wealth and debt in a population. This delayed impact indicates that the feedback used
for training these algorithms or defining fairness is more evaluative in nature, i.e., training samples
quantify the (delayed) outcome of taking a particular action given a particular context. Therefore, it
is important that fairness can be ensured for methods that are designed to handle evaluative feedback,
such as contextual bandits. For example, instead of predicting the likelihood of violent recidivism,
these methods can consider what actions to take to minimize violent recidivism.
Within the bandit setting, prior work has mostly focused on ensuring fairness in the online setting [24;
25; 27; 35], in which an agent learns the quality of different actions by interacting with the system of
interest. However, for many fairness applications, e.g., medical treatment suggestion [29], the online
setting is not feasible, as direct interaction might be too costly, risky, or otherwise unrealistic. Instead,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

