Discrete Flows: Invertible Generative
Models of Discrete Data
Dustin Tran1

Keyon Vafa12∗ Kumar Krishna Agrawal1† Laurent Dinh1
1
Google Brain 2 Columbia University

Ben Poole1

Abstract
While normalizing flows have led to significant advances in modeling highdimensional continuous distributions, their applicability to discrete distributions
remains unknown. In this paper, we show that flows can in fact be extended to discrete events—and under a simple change-of-variables formula not requiring logdeterminant-Jacobian computations. Discrete flows have numerous applications.
We consider two flow architectures: discrete autoregressive flows that enable bidirectionality, allowing, for example, tokens in text to depend on both left-to-right
and right-to-left contexts in an exact language model; and discrete bipartite flows
that enable efficient non-autoregressive generation as in RealNVP. Empirically, we
find that discrete autoregressive flows outperform autoregressive baselines on synthetic discrete distributions, an addition task, and Potts models; and bipartite flows
can obtain competitive performance with autoregressive baselines on characterlevel language modeling for Penn Tree Bank and text8.

1

Introduction

There have been many recent advances in normalizing flows, a technique for constructing
high-dimensional continuous distributions from invertible transformations of simple distributions
(Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Tabak and Turner, 2013; Rippel and Adams, 2013). Applications for
high-dimensional continuous distributions are widespread: these include latent variable models with
expressive posterior approximations (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Ranganath et al., 2016; Kingma
et al., 2016a), parallel image generation (Dinh et al., 2017; Kingma and Dhariwal, 2018), parallel
speech synthesis (Oord et al., 2017; Ping et al., 2018; Prenger et al., 2018), and general-purpose
density estimation (Papamakarios et al., 2017).
Normalizing flows are based on the change-of-variables formula, which derives a density given an
invertible function applied to continuous events. There have not been analogous advances for discrete distributions, where flows are typically thought to not be applicable. Instead, most research for
discrete data has focused on building either latent-variable models with approximate inference (Bowman et al., 2015), or increasingly sophisticated autoregressive models that assume a fixed ordering
of the data (Bengio et al., 2003; Vaswani et al., 2017).
In this paper, we present an alternative for flexible modeling of discrete sequences by extending
continuous normalizing flows to the discrete setting. We construct discrete flows with two architectures:
1. Discrete autoregressive flows enable multiple levels of autoregressivity. For example, one
can design a bidirectional language model of text where each token depends on both leftto-right and right-to-left contexts while maintaining an exact likelihood and sampling.
∗
†

Work done as an intern at Google Brain. Supported by NSF grant DGE-1644869.
Work done as an AI resident.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

