Universal Invariant and Equivariant
Graph Neural Networks

Nicolas Keriven
École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
nicolas.keriven@ens.fr

Gabriel Peyré
CNRS and École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
gabriel.peyre@ens.fr

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNN) come in many flavors, but should always be either
invariant (permutation of the nodes of the input graph does not affect the output)
or equivariant (permutation of the input permutes the output). In this paper, we
consider a specific class of invariant and equivariant networks, for which we prove
new universality theorems. More precisely, we consider networks with a single
hidden layer, obtained by summing channels formed by applying an equivariant
linear operator, a pointwise non-linearity, and either an invariant or equivariant
linear output layer. Recently, Maron et al. (2019b) showed that by allowing higherorder tensorization inside the network, universal invariant GNNs can be obtained.
As a first contribution, we propose an alternative proof of this result, which relies
on the Stone-Weierstrass theorem for algebra of real-valued functions. Our main
contribution is then an extension of this result to the equivariant case, which
appears in many practical applications but has been less studied from a theoretical
point of view. The proof relies on a new generalized Stone-Weierstrass theorem
for algebra of equivariant functions, which is of independent interest. Additionally,
unlike many previous works that consider a fixed number of nodes, our results
show that a GNN defined by a single set of parameters can approximate uniformly
well a function defined on graphs of varying size.

1

Introduction

Designing Neural Networks (NN) to exhibit some invariance or equivariance to group operations is
a central problem in machine learning (Shawe-Taylor, 1993). Among these, Graph Neural Networks
(GNN) are primary examples that have gathered a lot of attention for a large range of applications.
Indeed, since a graph is not changed by permutation of its nodes, GNNs must be either invariant
to permutation, if they return a result that must not depend on the representation of the input, or
equivariant to permutation, if the output must be permuted when the input is permuted, for instance
when the network returns a signal over the nodes of the input graph. In this paper, we examine
universal approximation theorems for invariant and equivariant GNNs.
From a theoretical point of view, invariant GNNs have been much more studied than their equivariant
counterpart (see the following subsection). However, many practical applications deal with equivariance instead, such as community detection (Chen et al., 2019), recommender systems (Ying et al.,
2018), interaction networks of physical systems (Battaglia et al., 2016), state prediction (SanchezGonzalez et al., 2018), protein interface prediction (Fout et al., 2017), among many others. See (Zhou
et al., 2018; Bronstein et al., 2017) for thorough reviews. It is therefore of great interest to increase
our understanding of equivariant networks, in particular, by extending arguably one of the most
classical result on neural networks, namely the universal approximation theorem for multi-layers
perceptron (MLP) with a single hidden layer (Cybenko, 1989; Hornik et al., 1989; Pinkus, 1999).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

