Sampling Networks and Aggregate Simulation for
Online POMDP Planning

Hao Cui
Department of Computer Science
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155, USA
hao.cui@tufts.edu

Roni Khardon
Department of Computer Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, USA
rkhardon@iu.edu

Abstract
The paper introduces a new algorithm for planning in partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDP) based on the idea of aggregate simulation. The
algorithm uses product distributions to approximate the belief state and shows how
to build a representation graph of an approximate action-value function over belief
space. The graph captures the result of simulating the model in aggregate under
independence assumptions, giving a symbolic representation of the value function.
The algorithm supports large observation spaces using sampling networks, a representation of the process of sampling values of observations, which is integrated
into the graph representation. Following previous work in MDPs this approach
enables action selection in POMDPs through gradient optimization over the graph
representation. This approach complements recent algorithms for POMDPs which
are based on particle representations of belief states and an explicit search for
action selection. Our approach enables scaling to large factored action spaces in
addition to large state spaces and observation spaces. An experimental evaluation
demonstrates that the algorithm provides excellent performance relative to state of
the art in large POMDP problems.

1

Introduction

Planning in partially observable Markov decision processes is a central problem in AI which is known
to be computationally hard. Work over the last two decades produced significant algorithmic progress
that affords some scalability for solving large problems. Off-line approaches, typically aiming for
exact solutions, rely on the structure of the optimal value function to construct and prune such
representations [22, 10, 2], and PBVI and related algorithms (see [20]) carefully control this process
yielding significant speedup over early algorithms. In contrast, online algorithms interleave planning
and execution and are not allowed sufficient time to produce an optimal global policy. Instead they
focus on search for the best action for the current step. Many approaches in online planning rely on
an explicit search tree over the belief space of the POMDP and use sampling to reduce the size of the
tree [11] and most effective recent algorithms further use a particle based representation of the belief
states to facilitate fast search [21, 25, 23, 7].
Our work is motivated by the idea of aggregate simulation in MDPs [5, 4, 3]. This approach builds an
explicit symbolic computation graph that approximates the evolution of the distribution of state and
reward variables over time, conditioned on the current action and future rollout policy. The algorithm
then optimizes the choice of actions by gradient based search, using automatic differentiation [8] over
the explicit function represented by the computation graph. As recently shown [6] this is equivalent
to solving a marginal MAP inference problem where the expectation step is evaluated by belief
propagation (BP) [17], and the maximization step is performed using gradients.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

