Differentiable Cloth Simulation for Inverse Problems
Junbang Liang
Ming C. Lin
University of Maryland, College Park

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Abstract
We propose a differentiable cloth simulator that can be embedded as a layer in deep
neural networks. This approach provides an effective, robust framework for modeling cloth dynamics, self-collisions, and contacts. Due to the high dimensionality
of the dynamical system in modeling cloth, traditional gradient computation for
collision response can become impractical. To address this problem, we propose to
compute the gradient directly using QR decomposition of a much smaller matrix.
Experimental results indicate that our method can speed up backpropagation by
two orders of magnitude. We demonstrate the presented approach on a number of
inverse problems, including parameter estimation and motion control for cloth.

1

Introduction

Differentiable physics simulation is a powerful family of techniques that applies gradient-based
methods to learning and control of physical systems [7; 8; 29; 13; 25]. It can enable optimization for
control, and can also be integrated into neural network frameworks for performing complex tasks.
Our work focuses on cloth simulation, which relates to applications in robotics, computer vision, and
computer graphics [6; 19; 3; 31; 23; 16; 11]. Our goal is to enable differentiable cloth simulation,
which can provide a unified approach to a variety of inverse problems that involve cloth.
Differentiable cloth simulation is challenging due to a number of factors, which include the high
dimensionality of cloth (as compared for example to rigid bodies [7]) and the need to handle contacts
and collision. For example, a simple 16⇥16 grid-based cloth mesh has 289 vertices, 867 variables, and
512 faces when triangulated. Typical resolutions for garments would be at least many thousands, if
not millions, of vertices and faces. Previous work that tackled differentiable simulation with collisions
set up a static linear solver to account for all constraints [7]. In our simple example with cloth, the
number of pairwise constraints would be at least 289⇥512 = 140K for vertex-face collisions alone,
which renders existing methods impractical even for this simple system. Even if a dynamic solver
is applied upon collision, solving a dense linear system with such high dimensionality makes the
gradient computation infeasible.
In this paper, we propose a differentiable cloth simulation algorithm that overcomes the above
difficulties. First, we use dynamic collision detection since the actual collision pairs are very
sparse. The collision response is solved by quadratic optimization, for which we can use implicit
differentiation to compute the gradient. We directly solve the equations derived from implicit
differentiation by using the QR decomposition of the constraint matrix, which is much smaller than
the original linear system and is often of low rank. This approach reduces the gradient computation
to a linear system of a small upper triangular matrix (the R component of the decomposition), which
enables fast simulation and backpropagation.
Our experiments indicate that the presented method makes differentiable cloth simulation practical.
Using our method, the largest size of the linear system is 10x-20x smaller than the original solver
in the backpropagation of the collision response, and the solver is 60x-130x faster. We demonstrate
the potential of differentiable cloth simulation in a number of application scenarios, such as physical
parameter estimation and motion control of cloth. With only a few samples, the differentiable
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

