UniXGrad: A Universal, Adaptive Algorithm with
Optimal Guarantees for Constrained Optimization

Ali Kavis∗
EPFL
ali.kavis@epfl.ch

Kfir Y. Levy∗
Technion
kfirylevy@technion.ac.il

Francis Bach
INRIA
francis.bach@inria.fr

Volkan Cevher
EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel adaptive, accelerated algorithm for the stochastic constrained
convex optimization setting. Our method, which is inspired by the Mirror-Prox
method, simultaneously achieves the optimal rates for smooth/non-smooth problems with either deterministic/stochastic first-order oracles. This is done without
any prior knowledge of the smoothness nor the noise properties of the problem.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first adaptive, unified algorithm that
achieves the optimal rates in the constrained setting. We demonstrate the practical
performance of our framework through extensive numerical experiments.

1

Introduction

Stochastic constrained optimization with first-order oracles (SCO) is critical in machine learning.
Indeed, the scalability of classical machine learning tasks, such as support vector machines (SVMs),
linear/logistic regression and Lasso, rely on efficient stochastic optimization methods. Importantly,
generalization guarantees for such tasks often rely on constraining the set of possible solutions. The
latter induces simple solutions in the form of low norm or low entropy, which in trun enables to
establish generalization guarantees.
In the SCO setting, the√optimal convergence rates for√the cases of non-smooth and smooth objectives
are given by O(GD/ T ) and O(LD2 /T 2 + σD/ T ), respectively; where T is the total number
of (noisy) gradient queries, L is the smoothness constant of the objective, σ 2 is the variance of the
stochastic gradient estimates, D is the effective diameter of the decision set, and G is a bound on the
magnitude of gradient estimates. These rates cannot be improved without additional assumptions.
The optimal rate for the non-smooth case may be obtained by the current state-of-the-art optimization
algorithms, such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), AdaGrad [Duchi et al., 2011], Adam [Kingma
and Ba, 2014], and AmsGrad [Reddi et al., 2018]. However, in order to obtain the optimal rate for
the smooth case, one is required to use more involved accelerated methods such as [Hu et al., 2009,
Lan, 2012, Xiao, 2010, Diakonikolas and Orecchia, 2017, Cohen et al., 2018, Deng et al., 2018].
Unfortunately, all of these accelerated methods require a-priori knowledge of the smoothness parameter L, as well as the variance of the gradients σ 2 , creating a setup barrier for their use in practice. As
a result, accelerated methods are not very popular in machine learning tasks.
This work develops a new universal method for SCO that obtains the optimal rates in both smooth
and non-smooth cases, without any prior knowledge regarding the smoothness of the problem L, nor
∗

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

