Updates of Equilibrium Prop Match Gradients of
Backprop Through Time in an RNN with Static Input
Maxence Ernoult1,2 , Julie Grollier2 , Damien Querlioz1 , Yoshua Bengio3,4 , Benjamin Scellier3
1

Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, Université Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay
2
Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay
3
Mila, Université de Montréal
4
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research

Abstract
Equilibrium Propagation (EP) is a biologically inspired learning algorithm for
convergent recurrent neural networks, i.e. RNNs that are fed by a static input x and
settle to a steady state. Training convergent RNNs consists in adjusting the weights
until the steady state of output neurons coincides with a target y. Convergent RNNs
can also be trained with the more conventional Backpropagation Through Time
(BPTT) algorithm. In its original formulation EP was described in the case of
real-time neuronal dynamics, which is computationally costly. In this work, we
introduce a discrete-time version of EP with simplified equations and with reduced
simulation time, bringing EP closer to practical machine learning tasks. We first
prove theoretically, as well as numerically that the neural and weight updates of EP,
computed by forward-time dynamics, are step-by-step equal to the ones obtained by
BPTT, with gradients computed backward in time. The equality is strict when the
transition function of the dynamics derives from a primitive function and the steady
state is maintained long enough. We then show for more standard discrete-time
neural network dynamics that the same property is approximately respected and
we subsequently demonstrate training with EP with equivalent performance to
BPTT. In particular, we define the first convolutional architecture trained with EP
achieving ∼ 1% test error on MNIST, which is the lowest error reported with EP.
These results can guide the development of deep neural networks trained with EP.

1

Introduction

The remarkable development of deep learning over the past years [LeCun et al., 2015] has been
fostered by the use of backpropagation [Rumelhart et al., 1985] which stands as the most powerful
algorithm to train neural networks. In spite of its success, the backpropagation algorithm is not
biologically plausible [Crick, 1989], and its implementation on GPUs is energy-consuming [Editorial,
2018]. Hybrid hardware-software experiments have recently demonstrated how physics and dynamics
can be leveraged to achieve learning with energy efficiency [Romera et al., 2018, Ambrogio et al.,
2018]. Hence the motivation to invent novel learning algorithms where both inference and learning
could fully be achieved out of core physics.
Many biologically inspired learning algorithms have been proposed as alternatives to backpropagation
to train neural networks. Contrastive Hebbian learning (CHL) has been successfully used to train
recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with static input that converge to a steady state (or ‘equilibrium’),
such as Boltzmann machines [Ackley et al., 1985] and real-time Hopfield networks [Movellan,
1991]. CHL proceeds in two phases, each phase converging to a steady state, where the learning rule
accommodates the difference between the two equilibria. Equilibrium Propagation (EP) [Scellier
and Bengio, 2017] also belongs to the family of CHL algorithms to train RNNs with static input.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

