On Robustness of Principal Component Regression

Abstract
Consider the setting of Linear Regression where the observed response variables, in
expectation, are linear functions of the p-dimensional covariates. Then to achieve
vanishing prediction error, the number of required samples scales faster than pσ 2 ,
where σ 2 is a bound on the noise variance. In a high-dimensional setting where
p is large but the covariates admit a low-dimensional representation (say r  p),
then Principal Component Regression (PCR), cf. [36], is an effective approach;
here, the response variables are regressed with respect to the principal components
of the covariates. The resulting number of required samples to achieve vanishing
prediction error now scales faster than rσ 2 ( pσ 2 ). Despite the tremendous utility
of PCR, its ability to handle settings with noisy, missing, and mixed (discrete and
continuous) valued covariates is not understood and remains an important open
challenge, cf. [24]. As the main contribution of this work, we address this challenge
by rigorously establishing that PCR is robust to noisy, sparse, and possibly mixed
valued covariates. Specifically, under PCR, vanishing prediction error is achieved
with the number of samples scaling as r max(σ 2 , ρ−4 log5 (p)), where ρ denotes the
fraction of observed (noisy) covariates. We establish generalization error bounds
on the performance of PCR, which provides a systematic approach in selecting the
correct number of components r in a data-driven manner. The key to our result is a
simple, but powerful equivalence between (i) PCR and (ii) Linear Regression with
covariate pre-processing via Hard Singular Value Thresholding (HSVT). From a
technical standpoint, this work advances the state-of-the-art analysis for HSVT by
establishing stronger guarantees with respect to the k·k2,∞ -error for the estimated
matrix rather than the Frobenius norm/mean-squared error (MSE) as is commonly
done in the matrix estimation / completion literature.

1

Introduction

1.1 Background
In this paper, we are interested in developing a better understanding of a popular prediction method
known as Principal Component Regression (PCR). In a typical prediction problem setup, we are given
access to a labeled dataset {(Yi , Ai,· )} over i ≥ 1; here, Yi ∈ R represents the response variable
(also known as the label or target) we wish to predict and Ai,· ∈ R1×p represents the associated
covariate (or feature) to be utilized in the prediction process.
Linear Regression. In Linear Regression, the data is believed to be generated as per a latent linear
model and the goal is to learn the linear predictor. More precisely, for some β ∗ ∈ Rp and each
i ≥ 1, Yi = Ai,· β ∗ + i , where i denotes independent, zero-mean idiosyncratic noise with variance
bounded by σ 2 . Under generic noise distributions, the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimator learnt
using such observations yields an in-sample (or training) prediction error that vanishes to zero as long
as the number of observations scales faster than pσ 2 (e.g., see [53] and references therein). The same
result holds true for the generalization prediction error under reasonable restrictions on the model
class (e.g., see [53] and references therein).
Principal Component Regression. In the high-dimensional setting, the required number of samples
may be too great since it scales with the number of features p, which is large. However, this problem
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

