Statistical Model Aggregation via
Parameter Matching

Mikhail Yurochkin1,2
mikhail.yurochkin@ibm.com

Mayank Agarwal1,2
mayank.agarwal@ibm.com

Kristjan Greenewald1,2
kristjan.h.greenewald@ibm.com

Soumya Ghosh1,2,3
ghoshso@us.ibm.com

Trong Nghia Hoang1,2
nghiaht@ibm.com

IBM Research,1 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,2 Center for Computational Health3 .

Abstract
We consider the problem of aggregating models learned from sequestered, possibly heterogeneous datasets. Exploiting tools from Bayesian nonparametrics,
we develop a general meta-modeling framework that learns shared global latent
structures by identifying correspondences among local model parameterizations.
Our proposed framework is model-independent and is applicable to a wide range
of model types. After verifying our approach on simulated data, we demonstrate its
utility in aggregating Gaussian topic models, hierarchical Dirichlet process based
hidden Markov models, and sparse Gaussian processes with applications spanning
text summarization, motion capture analysis, and temperature forecasting.1

1

Introduction

One is often interested in learning from groups of heterogeneous data produced by related, but
unique, generative processes. For instance, consider the problem of discovering shared topics from a
collection of documents, or extracting common patterns from physiological signals of a cohort of
patients. Learning such shared representations can be relevant to many heterogeneous, federated, and
transfer learning tasks. Hierarchical Bayesian models [3, 12, 29] are widely used for performing such
analyses, as they are able to both naturally model heterogeneity in data and share statistical strength
across heterogeneous groups.
However, when the data is large and scattered across disparate silos, as is increasingly the case in
many real-world applications, use of standard hierarchical Bayesian machinery becomes fraught with
difficulties. In addition to costs associated with moving large volumes of data, the computational
cost of full Bayesian inference may be prohibitive. Moreover, pooling sequestered data may also
be undesirable owing to concerns such as privacy [11]. While distributed variants [18] have been
developed, they require frequent communication with a central server and hence are restricted to
situations where sufficient communication bandwidth is available. Yet others [26] have proposed
federated learning algorithms to deal with such scenarios. However, these algorithms tend to be
bespoke and can require significant modifications based on the models being federated.
Motivated by these challenges, in this paper we develop Bayesian nonparametric meta-models that
are able to coherently combine models trained on independent partitions of data (model fusion).
Relying on tools from Bayesian nonparametrics (BNP), our meta model treats the parameters of
the locally trained models as noisy realizations of latent global parameters, of which there can be
1

Code: https://github.com/IBM/SPAHM

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

