Neuropathic Pain Diagnosis Simulator for
Causal Discovery Algorithm Evaluation
Ruibo Tu
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
ruibo@kth.se

Kun Zhang
Carnegie Mellon University
kunz1@cmu.edu

Hedvig Kjellström
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
hedvig@kth.se

Bo Christer Bertilson
Karolinska Institute
bo.bertilson@ki.se

Cheng Zhang
Microsoft Research, Cambridge
Cheng.Zhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
Discovery of causal relations from observational data is essential for many disciplines of science and real-world applications. However, unlike other machine
learning algorithms, whose development has been greatly fostered by a large
amount of available benchmark datasets, causal discovery algorithms are notoriously difficult to be systematically evaluated because few datasets with known
ground-truth causal relations are available. In this work, we handle the problem of
evaluating causal discovery algorithms by building a flexible simulator in the medical setting. We develop a neuropathic pain diagnosis simulator, inspired by the fact
that the biological processes of neuropathic pathophysiology are well studied with
well-understood causal influences. Our simulator exploits the causal graph of the
neuropathic pain pathology and its parameters in the generator are estimated from
real-life patient cases. We show that the data generated from our simulator have
similar statistics as real-world data. As a clear advantage, the simulator can produce infinite samples without jeopardizing the privacy of real-world patients. Our
simulator provides a natural tool for evaluating various types of causal discovery
algorithms, including those to deal with practical issues in causal discovery, such
as unknown confounders, selection bias, and missing data. Using our simulator,
we have evaluated extensively causal discovery algorithms under various settings.

1

Introduction

Many real-life decision-making processes require an understanding of underlying causal relations. For
example, understanding the cause of symptoms is essential for physicians to make correct treatment
decisions; understanding the cause of observed environmental changes is critical to take action
against global warming. However, it is generally infeasible or even impossible to do interventions
or randomized experiments to verify these causal relations. Therefore, causal discovery from
observational data has attracted much attention [29, 31, 40, 49].
However, the evaluation of causal discovery algorithms has been a challenge [3]. The great application
demand also indicates that ground-truth causal relations in a complex scenario are often unknown to
humans. The lack of systematic evaluations of causal discovery algorithms has hindered both the
development of the field and the impact of these algorithms on solving real-life problems. Researchwise, it is hard to identify the advantages and disadvantages of causal discovery algorithms performing
in real-world scenarios. A systematic way to evaluate causal discovery algorithms is pressing.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

