SuperGLUE: A Stickier Benchmark for
General-Purpose Language Understanding Systems

Alex Wang∗
New York University
Amanpreet Singh∗
Facebook AI Research

Yada Pruksachatkun∗
New York University
Julian Michael
University of Washington

Felix Hill
DeepMind

Nikita Nangia∗
New York University
Omer Levy
Facebook AI Research

Samuel R. Bowman
New York University

Abstract
In the last year, new models and methods for pretraining and transfer learning have
driven striking performance improvements across a range of language understanding tasks. The GLUE benchmark, introduced a little over one year ago, offers
a single-number metric that summarizes progress on a diverse set of such tasks,
but performance on the benchmark has recently surpassed the level of non-expert
humans, suggesting limited headroom for further research. In this paper we present
SuperGLUE, a new benchmark styled after GLUE with a new set of more difficult language understanding tasks, a software toolkit, and a public leaderboard.
SuperGLUE is available at super.gluebenchmark.com.

1

Introduction

Recently there has been notable progress across many natural language processing (NLP) tasks, led
by methods such as ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), OpenAI GPT (Radford et al., 2018), and BERT
(Devlin et al., 2019). The unifying theme of these methods is that they couple self-supervised learning
from massive unlabelled text corpora with effective adapting of the resulting model to target tasks.
The tasks that have proven amenable to this general approach include question answering, textual
entailment, and parsing, among many others (Devlin et al., 2019; Kitaev et al., 2019, i.a.).
In this context, the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019a) has become a prominent evaluation
framework for research towards general-purpose language understanding technologies. GLUE is
a collection of nine language understanding tasks built on existing public datasets, together with
private test data, an evaluation server, a single-number target metric, and an accompanying expertconstructed diagnostic set. GLUE was designed to provide a general-purpose evaluation of language
understanding that covers a range of training data volumes, task genres, and task formulations. We
believe it was these aspects that made GLUE particularly appropriate for exhibiting the transferlearning potential of approaches like OpenAI GPT and BERT.
The progress of the last twelve months has eroded headroom on the GLUE benchmark dramatically.
While some tasks (Figure 1) and some linguistic phenomena (Figure 2 in Appendix B) measured
in GLUE remain difficult, the current state of the art GLUE Score as of early July 2019 (88.4 from
Yang et al., 2019) surpasses human performance (87.1 from Nangia and Bowman, 2019) by 1.3
points, and in fact exceeds this human performance estimate on four tasks. Consequently, while there
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence: glue-benchmark-admin@googlegroups.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

