Kernel Stein Tests for Multiple Model Comparison

Jen Ning Lim
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Makoto Yamada
Kyoto University, RIKEN AIP

jlim@tuebingen.mpg.de

makoto.yamada@riken.jp

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Wittawat Jitkrittum
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

bs@tuebingen.mpg.de

wittawat@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We address the problem of non-parametric multiple model comparison: given l
candidate models, decide whether each candidate is as good as the best one(s) or
worse than it. We propose two statistical tests, each controlling a different notion of
decision errors. The first test, building on the post selection inference framework,
provably controls the number of best models that are wrongly declared worse (false
positive rate). The second test is based on multiple correction, and controls the
proportion of the models declared worse but are in fact as good as the best (false
discovery rate). We prove that under appropriate conditions the first test can yield
a higher true positive rate than the second. Experimental results on toy and real
(CelebA, Chicago Crime data) problems show that the two tests have high true
positive rates with well-controlled error rates. By contrast, the naive approach of
choosing the model with the lowest score without correction leads to more false
positives.

1

Introduction

Given a sample (a set of i.i.d. observations), and a set of l candidate models M, we address the
problem of non-parametric comparison of the relative fit of these candidate models. The comparison
is non-parametric in the sense that the class of allowed candidate models is broad (mild assumptions
on the models). All the given candidate models may be wrong; that is, the true data generating
distribution may not be present in the candidate list. A widely used approach is to pre-select a
divergence measure which computes a distance between a model and the sample (e.g., Fréchet
Inception Distance (FID, [16]), Kernel Inception Distance [3] or others), and choose the model which
gives the lowest estimate of the divergence. An issue with this approach is that multiple equally good
models may give roughly the same estimate of the divergence, giving a wrong conclusion of the best
model due to noise from the sample (see Table 1 in [17] for an example of a misleading conclusion
resulted from direct comparison of two FID estimates).
It was this issue that motivates the development of a non-parametric hypothesis test of relative fit
(RelMMD) between two candidate models [4]. The test uses as its test statistic the difference of two
estimates of Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD, [14]), each measuring the distance between the
generated sample from each model and the observed sample. It is known that if the kernel function
used is characteristic [27, 11], the population MMD defines a metric on a large class of distributions.
As a result, the magnitude of the relative test statistic provides a measure of relative fit, allowing one
to decide a (significantly) better model when the statistic is sufficiently large. The key to avoiding
the previously mentioned issue of false detection is to appropriately choose the threshold based on
the null distribution, i.e., the distribution of the statistic when the two models are equally good. An
extension of RelMMD to a linear-time relative test was considered by Jitkrittum et al. [17].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

