Diffusion Improves Graph Learning

Johannes Gasteiger, Stefan Weißenberger, Stephan Günnemann
Technical University of Munich
{j.gasteiger,stefan.weissenberger,guennemann}@in.tum.de

Abstract
Graph convolution is the core of most Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and usually
approximated by message passing between direct (one-hop) neighbors. In this
work, we remove the restriction of using only the direct neighbors by introducing a
powerful, yet spatially localized graph convolution: Graph diffusion convolution
(GDC). GDC leverages generalized graph diffusion, examples of which are the
heat kernel and personalized PageRank. It alleviates the problem of noisy and often
arbitrarily defined edges in real graphs. We show that GDC is closely related to
spectral-based models and thus combines the strengths of both spatial (message
passing) and spectral methods. We demonstrate that replacing message passing
with graph diffusion convolution consistently leads to significant performance
improvements across a wide range of models on both supervised and unsupervised
tasks and a variety of datasets. Furthermore, GDC is not limited to GNNs but
can trivially be combined with any graph-based model or algorithm (e.g. spectral
clustering) without requiring any changes to the latter or affecting its computational
complexity. Our implementation is available online. 1

1

Introduction

When people started using graphs for evaluating chess tournaments in the middle of the 19th
century they only considered each player’s direct opponents, i.e. their first-hop neighbors. Only
later was the analysis extended to recursively consider higher-order relationships via A2 , A3 , etc.
and finally generalized to consider all exponents at once, using the adjacency matrix’s dominant
eigenvector [38, 75]. The field of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is currently in a similar state. Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) [33], also referred to as Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs)
[24] are the prevalent approach in this field but they only pass messages between neighboring nodes
in each layer. These messages are then aggregated at each node to form the embedding for the next
layer. While MPNNs do leverage higher-order neighborhoods in deeper layers, limiting each layer’s
messages to one-hop neighbors seems arbitrary. Edges in real graphs are often noisy or defined using
an arbitrary threshold [70], so we can clearly improve upon this approach.
Since MPNNs only use the immediate neigborhod information, they are often referred to as spatial
methods. On the other hand, spectral-based models do not just rely on first-hop neighbors and capture
more complex graph properties [16]. However, while being theoretically more elegant, these methods
are routinely outperformed by MPNNs on graph-related tasks [33, 74, 81] and do not generalize
to previously unseen graphs. This shows that message passing is a powerful framework worth
extending upon. To reconcile these two separate approaches and combine their strengths we propose
a novel technique of performing message passing inspired by spectral methods: Graph diffusion
convolution (GDC). Instead of aggregating information only from the first-hop neighbors, GDC
aggregates information from a larger neighborhood. This neighborhood is constructed via a new
graph generated by sparsifying a generalized form of graph diffusion. We show how graph diffusion
1

https://www.daml.in.tum.de/gdc

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

