Episodic Memory in Lifelong Language Learning

Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Sebastian Ruder, Lingpeng Kong, Dani Yogatama
DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
{cyprien,ruder,lingpenk,dyogatama}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce a lifelong language learning setup where a model needs to learn from
a stream of text examples without any dataset identifier. We propose an episodic
memory model that performs sparse experience replay and local adaptation to
mitigate catastrophic forgetting in this setup. Experiments on text classification and
question answering demonstrate the complementary benefits of sparse experience
replay and local adaptation to allow the model to continuously learn from new
datasets. We also show that the space complexity of the episodic memory module
can be reduced significantly (∼50-90%) by randomly choosing which examples to
store in memory with a minimal decrease in performance. We consider an episodic
memory component as a crucial building block of general linguistic intelligence
and see our model as a first step in that direction.

1

Introduction

The ability to continuously learn and accumulate knowledge throughout a lifetime and reuse it
effectively to adapt to a new problem quickly is a hallmark of general intelligence. State-of-the-art
machine learning models work well on a single dataset given enough training examples, but they
often fail to isolate and reuse previously acquired knowledge when the data distribution shifts (e.g.,
when presented with a new dataset)—a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey &
Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990).
The three main approaches to address catastrophic forgetting are based on: (i) augmenting the loss
function that is being minimized during training with extra terms (e.g., a regularization term, an
optimization constraint) to prevent model parameters learned on a new dataset from significantly
deviating from parameters learned on previously seen datasets (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Zenke et al.,
2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018), (ii) adding extra learning phases such as a knowledge distillation phase,
an experience replay (Schwarz et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019), and (iii) augmenting the model with
an episodic memory module (Sprechmann et al., 2018). Recent methods have shown that these
approaches can be combined—e.g., by defining optimization constraints using samples from the
episodic memory (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2019).
In language learning, progress in unsupervised pretraining (Peters et al., 2018; Howard & Ruder,
2018; Devlin et al., 2018) has driven advances in many language understanding tasks (Kitaev & Klein,
2018; Lee et al., 2018). However, these models have been shown to require a lot of in-domain training
examples, rapidly overfit to particular datasets, and are prone to catastrophic forgetting (Yogatama
et al., 2019), making them unsuitable as a model of general linguistic intelligence.
In this paper, we investigate the role of episodic memory for learning a model of language in a lifelong
setup. We propose to use such a component for sparse experience replay and local adaptation to allow
the model to continually learn from examples drawn from different data distributions. In experience
replay, we randomly select examples from memory to retrain on. Our model only performs experience
replay very sparsely to consolidate newly acquired knowledge with existing knowledge in the memory
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

