Estimating Convergence of Markov chains with
L-Lag Couplings

Niloy Biswas
Harvard University
niloy_biswas@g.harvard.edu

Pierre E. Jacob
Harvard University
pjacob@fas.harvard.edu

Paul Vanetti
University of Oxford
paul.vanetti@spc.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods generate samples that are asymptotically distributed from a target distribution of interest as the number of iterations
goes to infinity. Various theoretical results provide upper bounds on the distance
between the target and marginal distribution after a fixed number of iterations.
These upper bounds are on a case by case basis and typically involve intractable
quantities, which limits their use for practitioners. We introduce L-lag couplings to
generate computable, non-asymptotic upper bound estimates for the total variation
or the Wasserstein distance of general Markov chains. We apply L-lag couplings
to the tasks of (i) determining MCMC burn-in, (ii) comparing different MCMC algorithms with the same target, and (iii) comparing exact and approximate MCMC.
Lastly, we (iv) assess the bias of sequential Monte Carlo and self-normalized
importance samplers.

1

Introduction

Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms generate Markov chains that are invariant with
respect to probability distributions that we wish to approximate. Numerous works help understanding
the convergence of these chains to their invariant distributions, hereafter denoted by π. Denote
by πt the marginal distribution of the chain (Xt )t≥0 at time t. The discrepancy between πt and π
can be measured in different ways, typically the total variation (TV) distance or the Wasserstein
distance in the MCMC literature. Various results provide upper bounds on this distance, of the form
C(π0 )f (t), where C(π0 ) < ∞ depends on π0 but not on t, and where f (t) decreases to zero as t
goes to infinity, typically geometrically; see Section 3 in [48] for a gentle survey, and [17, 13, 18]
for recent examples. These results typically relate convergence rates to the dimension of the state
space or to various features of the target. Often these results do not provide computable bounds on
the distance between πt and π, as C(π0 ) and f (t) typically feature unknown constants; although see
[49] where these constants can be bounded analytically, and [12] for examples where they can be
numerically approximated.
Various tools have been developed to assess the quality of MCMC estimates. Some focus on the
behaviour of the chains assuming stationarity, comparing averages computed within and across chains,
or defining various notions of effective sample sizes based on asymptotic variance estimates (e.g.
[20, 21, 19, 56], [46, Chapter 8]). Few tools provide computable bounds on the distance between πt
and π for a fixed t; some are mentioned in [6] for Gibbs samplers with tractable transition kernels.
Notable exceptions, beyond [12] mentioned above, include the method of [31, 32] which relies on
coupled Markov chains. A comparison with our proposed method will be given in Section 2.4.
We propose to use L-lag couplings of Markov chains to estimate the distance between πt and π
for a fixed time t, building on 1-lag couplings used to obtain unbiased estimators in [23, 29]. The
discussion of [29] mentions that upper bounds on the TV between πt and π can be estimated with such
couplings. We generalize this idea to L-lag couplings, which provide sharper bounds, particularly
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

