Focused Quantization for Sparse CNNs

Yiren Zhao∗1

Xitong Gao∗2

Daniel Bates1

Robert Mullins1

Cheng-Zhong Xu3

1

2

University of Cambridge
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology
3
University of Macau

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are powerful tools for a wide range of
vision tasks, but the enormous amount of memory and compute resources required
by CNNs pose a challenge in deploying them on constrained devices. Existing
compression techniques, while excelling at reducing model sizes, struggle to be
computationally friendly. In this paper, we attend to the statistical properties of
sparse CNNs and present focused quantization, a novel quantization strategy based
on power-of-two values, which exploits the weight distributions after fine-grained
pruning. The proposed method dynamically discovers the most effective numerical
representation for weights in layers with varying sparsities, significantly reducing
model sizes. Multiplications in quantized CNNs are replaced with much cheaper
bit-shift operations for efficient inference. Coupled with lossless encoding, we
built a compression pipeline that provides CNNs with high compression ratios
(CR), low computation cost and minimal loss in accuracy. In ResNet-50, we
achieved a 18.08× CR with only 0.24% loss in top-5 accuracy, outperforming
existing compression methods. We fully compressed a ResNet-18 and found that it
is not only higher in CR and top-5 accuracy, but also more hardware efficient as it
requires fewer logic gates to implement when compared to other state-of-the-art
quantization methods assuming the same throughput.

1

Introduction

Despite deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) demonstrating state-of-the-art performance in
many computer vision tasks, their parameter-rich and compute-intensive nature substantially hinders
the efficient use of them in bandwidth- and power-constrained devices. To this end, recent years have
seen a surge of interest in minimizing the memory and compute costs of CNN inference.
Pruning algorithms compress CNNs by setting weights to zero, thus removing connections or neurons
from the models. In particular, fine-grained pruning [16, 6] provides the best compression by
removing connections at the finest granularity, i.e. individual weights. Quantization methods reduce
the number of bits required to represent each value, and thus further provide memory, bandwidth
and compute savings. Shift quantization of weights, which quantizes weight values in a model
to powers-of-two or zero, i.e. {0, ±1, ±2, ±4, . . .}, is of particular of interest, as multiplications
in convolutions become much-simpler bit-shift operations. The computational cost in hardware
can thus be significantly reduced without a detrimental impact on the model’s task accuracy [26].
Fine-grained pruning, however, is often in conflict with quantization, as pruning introduces various
degrees of sparsities to different layers [25, 19]. Linear quantization methods (integers) have uniform
quantization levels and non-linear quantizations (logarithmic, floating-point and shift) have fine levels
∗
Xitong Gao and Yiren Zhao contributed equally to this work.
(xt.gao@siat.ac.cn) and Yiren Zhao (yiren.zhao@cl.cam.ac.uk).

Correspondence to Xitong Gao

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

