Multivariate Sparse Coding of Nonstationary
Covariances with Gaussian Processes
Rui Li
Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences
Rochester Institute of Technology
Rochester, NY 14623
rxlics@rit.edu

Abstract
This paper studies statistical characteristics of multivariate observations with irregular changes in their covariance structures across input space. We propose
a unified nonstationary modeling framework to jointly encode the observation
correlations to generate a piece-wise representation with a hyper-level Gaussian
process (GP) governing the overall contour of the pieces. In particular, we couple
the encoding process with automatic relevance determination (ARD) to promote
sparsity to account for the inherent redundancy. The hyper GP enables us to share
statistical strength among the observation variables over a collection of GPs defined within the observation pieces to characterize the variables’ respective local
smoothness. Experiments conducted across domains show superior performances
over the state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

In many real-world applications, multivariate observations exhibit critical irregular changes in their
covariance smoothness with sharp transitions. For example, a major challenge to accurately locate
a seizure-onset zone (SOZ) through intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) recordings is to
detect different forms of sudden transient electrophysiologic events of SOZ signals [1, 2, 3]. Another
scenario is that regional outbursts and geographic features (e.g., parks, rivers) lead to complex
tempo-spatial variations of crime occurrences across regions over time [4, 5].
In these scenarios, some segments of the observations exhibit larger variability than others. The
stationary methods, assuming the same covariance structure throughout the entire input space, cannot
capture such change in covariance smoothness. Conventional nonstationary modeling methods are
limited to model univariate observation by two consecutive steps [6, 7, 8]. They first recursively
partition the input space into regions, and then define separate local Gaussian processes (GPs)
within each region. The GP inference step cannot capture long-range dependence or share statistical
information among the independent local GPs. A solution to alleviate the problem is to combine
the local GPs with a global GP which is fitted to the whole observation [9, 10]. However, it tends to
over-smooth the local covariance variability.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel nonstationary modeling framework that jointly
infers a piece-wise representation of the multivariate observations and a hyper-level GP governing
the overall contour of the pieces. In particular, we employ multilogit regression function to encode
the observation correlations coupled with automatic relevance determination (ARD) priors over the
coefficients to promote sparsity. This encoding process transforms the observations into a set of
disjoint pieces to model the variability in the covariance smoothness with the correlations providing
between-variable information. Since commonly only a portion of observations are informative for
such transformation, ARD shrinks the correlation dimensions towards zero to handle the inherent
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

