Combining Generative and Discriminative Models for
Hybrid Inference
Victor Garcia Satorras
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
v.garciasatorras@uva.nl

Zeynep Akata ⇤
Cluster of Excellence ML
University of Tübingen
Germany
zeynep.akata@uni-tuebingen.de

Max Welling
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
Netherlands
m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
A graphical model is a structured representation of the data generating process.
The traditional method to reason over random variables is to perform inference
in this graphical model. However, in many cases the generating process is only
a poor approximation of the much more complex true data generating process,
leading to suboptimal estimations. The subtleties of the generative process are
however captured in the data itself and we can “learn to infer”, that is, learn a direct
mapping from observations to explanatory latent variables. In this work we propose
a hybrid model that combines graphical inference with a learned inverse model,
which we structure as in a graph neural network, while the iterative algorithm as a
whole is formulated as a recurrent neural network. By using cross-validation we
can automatically balance the amount of work performed by graphical inference
versus learned inference. We apply our ideas to the Kalman filter, a Gaussian
hidden Markov model for time sequences, and show, among other things, that our
model can estimate the trajectory of a noisy chaotic Lorenz Attractor much more
accurately than either the learned or graphical inference run in isolation.

1

Introduction

Before deep learning, one of the dominant paradigms in machine learning was graphical models
[4, 27, 21]. Graphical models structure the space of (random) variables by organizing them into a
dependency graph. For instance, some variables are parents/children (directed models) or neighbors
(undirected models) of other variables. These dependencies are encoded by conditional probabilities
(directed models) or potentials (undirected models). While these interactions can have learnable
parameters, the structure of the graph imposes a strong inductive bias onto the model. Reasoning
in graphical models is performed by a process called probabilistic inference where the posterior
distribution, or the most probable state of a set of variables, is computed given observations of other
variables. Many approximate algorithms have been proposed to solve this problem efficiently, among
which are MCMC sampling [29, 33], variational inference [18] and belief propagation algorithms
[10, 21].
Graphical models are a kind of generative model where we specify important aspects of the generative
process. They excel in the low data regime because we maximally utilize expert knowledge (a.k.a.
inductive bias). However, human imagination often falls short of modeling all of the intricate details
of the true underlying generative process. In the large data regime there is an alternative strategy
which we could call “learning to infer”. Here, we create lots of data pairs {xn , yn } with {yn } the
observed variables and {xn } the latent unobserved random variables. These can be generated from
the generative model or are available directly in the dataset. Our task is now to learn a flexible
⇤

Majority of this work has been done when Zeynep Akata was at the University of Amsterdam.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

