Time/Accuracy Tradeoffs for Learning a ReLU with
respect to Gaussian Marginals

Surbhi Goel
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
surbhi@cs.utexas.edu

Sushrut Karmalkar
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
sushrutk@cs.utexas.edu

Adam R. Klivans
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of computing the best-ﬁtting ReLU with respect to
square-loss on a training set when the examples have been drawn according to
a spherical Gaussian distribution (the labels can be arbitrary). Let opt < 1 be the
population loss of the best-ﬁtting ReLU. We prove:
• Finding a ReLU with square-loss opt+ϵ is as hard as the problem of learning
sparse parities with noise, widely thought to be computationally intractable.
This is the ﬁrst hardness result for learning a ReLU with respect to Gaussian marginals, and our results imply –unconditionally– that gradient descent
cannot converge to the global minimum in polynomial time.
• There exists an efﬁcient approximation algorithm for ﬁnding the best-ﬁtting
ReLU that achieves error O(opt2/3 ). The algorithm uses a novel reduction
to noisy halfspace learning with respect to 0/1 loss.
Prior work due to Soltanolkotabi [Sol17] showed that gradient descent can ﬁnd the
best-ﬁtting ReLU with respect to Gaussian marginals, if the training set is exactly
labeled by a ReLU.

1

Introduction

A Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) is a function parameterized by a weight vector w ∈ Rd that maps
Rd → R as follows: ReLUw (x) = max(0, w · x). ReLUs are now the nonlinearity of choice in
modern deep networks. The computational complexity of learning simple neural networks that use
the ReLU activation is an intensely studied area, and many positive results rely on assuming that the
marginal distribution on the examples is a spherical Gaussian [ZYWG19, GLM18, ZSJ+ 17, MR18].
Recent work due to Soltanolkotabi [Sol17] shows that gradient descent will learn a single ReLU in
polynomial time, if the marginal distribution is Gaussian (see also [BG17]). His result, however,
requires that the training set is noiseless; i.e., there is a ReLU that correctly classiﬁes all elements of
the training set.
Here we consider the more realistic scenario of empirical risk minimization or learning a ReLU
with noise (often referred to as agnostically learning a ReLU). We assume that a learner has access to a training set from a joint distribution D on Rd × R where the marginal distribution
on Rd is Gaussian but the distribution on the labels can be arbitrary within [0, 1]. We deﬁne
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

