Explicit Disentanglement of Appearance and
Perspective in Generative Models

Nicki S. Detlefsen ∗
nsde@dtu.dk

Søren Hauberg ∗
sohau@dtu.dk

Abstract
Disentangled representation learning finds compact, independent and easy-tointerpret factors of the data. Learning such has been shown to require an inductive
bias, which we explicitly encode in a generative model of images. Specifically, we
propose a model with two latent spaces: one that represents spatial transformations
of the input data, and another that represents the transformed data. We find that the
latter naturally captures the intrinsic appearance of the data. To realize the generative model, we propose a Variationally Inferred Transformational Autoencoder
(VITAE) that incorporates a spatial transformer into a variational autoencoder. We
show how to perform inference in the model efficiently by carefully designing the
encoders and restricting the transformation class to be diffeomorphic. Empirically,
our model separates the visual style from digit type on MNIST, separates shape and
pose in images of human bodies and facial features from facial shape on CelebA.

1

Introduction

Disentangled Representation Learning (DRL) is a fundamental challenge in machine learning that is
currently seeing a renaissance within deep generative models. DRL approaches assume that an AI
agent can benefit from separating out (disentangle) the underlying structure of data into disjointed
parts of its representation. This can furthermore help interpretability of the decisions of the AI agent
and thereby make them more accountable.
Even though there have been attempts to find a single formalized notion of disentanglement [Higgins
et al., 2018], no such theory exists (yet) which is widely accepted. However, the intuition is that a
disentangled representation z should separate different informative factors of variation in the data
[Bengio et al., 2012]. This means that changing a single latent dimension zi should only change a
single interpretable feature in the data space X .
Within the DRL literature, there are two main approaches. The first is to hard-wire disentanglement
into the model, thereby creating an inductive bias. This is well known e.g. in convolutional neural
networks, where the convolution operator creates an inductive bias towards translation in data. The
second approach is to instead learn a representation that is faithful to the underlying data structure,
hoping that this is sufficient to disentangle the representation. However, there is currently little to no
agreement in the literature on how to learn such representations [Locatello et al., 2019].
We consider disentanglement of two explicit groups of factors, the appearance and the perspective.
We here define the appearance as being the factors of data that are left after transforming x by its
perspective. Thus, the appearance is the form or archetype of an object and the perspective represents
the specific realization of that archetype. Practically speaking, the perspective could correspond to
an image rotation that is deemed irrelevant, while the appearance is a representation of the rotated
image, which is then invariant to the perspective. This interpretation of the world goes back to
Plato’s allegory of the cave, from which we also borrow our terminology. This notion of removing
∗

Section for Cognitive Systems, Technical University of Denmark

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

