Minimizers of the Empirical Risk
and Risk Monotonicity

Marco Loog
Delft University of Technology & University of Copenhagen
Tom Viering
Delft University of Technology

Alexander Mey
Delft University of Technology

Abstract
Plotting a learner’s average performance against the number of training samples
results in a learning curve. Studying such curves on one or more data sets is a way
to get to a better understanding of the generalization properties of this learner. The
behavior of learning curves is, however, not very well understood and can display
(for most researchers) quite unexpected behavior. Our work introduces the formal
notion of risk monotonicity, which asks the risk to not deteriorate with increasing
training set sizes in expectation over the training samples. We then present the
surprising result that various standard learners, specifically those that minimize the
empirical risk, can act nonmonotonically irrespective of the training sample size.
We provide a theoretical underpinning for specific instantiations from classification,
regression, and density estimation. Altogether, the proposed monotonicity notion
opens up a whole new direction of research.

1

Introduction

Learning curves are an important diagnostic tool that provide researchers and practitioners with
insight into a learner’s generalization behavior [Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014]. Learning
curves plot the (estimated) true performance against the number of training samples. Among other
things, they can be used to compare different learners to each other. This can highlight the differences
due to their complexity, with the simpler learners performing better in the small sample regime, while
the more complex learners perform best with large sample sizes. In combination with a plot of their
(averaged) resubstitution error (or training error), they can also be employed to diagnose underfitting
and overfitting. Moreover, they can aid when it comes to making decision about collecting more data
or not by extrapolating them to sample sizes beyond the ones available.
It seems intuitive that learners become better (or at least do not deteriorate) with more training
data. With a bit more reservation, Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David [2014] state, for instance, that
the learning curve “must start decreasing once the training set size is larger than the VC-dimension”
(page 153). The large majority of researchers and practitioners (that we talked to) indeed take it for
granted that learning curves show improved performance with more data. Any deviations from this
they contribute to the way the experiments are set up, to the finite sample sizes one is dealing with, or
to the limited number of cross-validation or bootstrap repetitions one carried out. It is expected that if
one could sample a training set ad libitum and measure the learner’s true performance over all data,
such behavior disappears. That is, if one could indeed get to the performance in expectation over all
test data and over all training samples of a particular size, performance supposedly improves with
more data.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

