Generalization Bounds in the
Predict-then-Optimize Framework

Othman El Balghiti
Rayens Capital
Chicago, IL 60606
oe2161@columbia.edu

Adam N. Elmachtoub
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
adam@ieor.columbia.edu

Paul Grigas
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
pgrigas@berkeley.edu

Ambuj Tewari
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
The predict-then-optimize framework is fundamental in many practical settings:
predict the unknown parameters of an optimization problem, and then solve the
problem using the predicted values of the parameters. A natural loss function in
this environment is to consider the cost of the decisions induced by the predicted
parameters, in contrast to the prediction error of the parameters. This loss function
was recently introduced [7] and christened Smart Predict-then-Optimize (SPO) loss.
Since the SPO loss is nonconvex and noncontinuous, standard results for deriving
generalization bounds do not apply. In this work, we provide an assortment of
generalization bounds for the SPO loss function. In particular, we derive bounds
based on the Natarajan dimension that, in the case of a polyhedral feasible region,
scale at most logarithmically in the number of extreme points, but, in the case of
a general convex set, have poor dependence on the dimension. By exploiting the
structure of the SPO loss function and an additional strong convexity assumption on
the feasible region, we can dramatically improve the dependence on the dimension
via an analysis and corresponding bounds that are akin to the margin guarantees in
classification problems.

1

Introduction

A common application of machine learning is to predict-then-optimize, i.e., predict unknown parameters of an optimization problem and then solve the optimization problem using the predictions. For
instance, consider a navigation task that requires solving a shortest path problem. The key input
into this problem are the travel times on each edge, typically called edge costs. Although the exact
costs are not known at the time the problem is solved, the edge costs are predicted using a machine
learning model trained on historical data consisting of features (time of day, weather, etc.) and edge
costs (collected from app data). Fundamentally, a good model induces the optimization problem to
find good shortest paths, as measured by the true edge costs. In fact, recent work has been developed
to consider how to solve problems in similar environments [3, 13, 6]. In particular, recent work [7]
developed the Smart Predict-then-Optimize (SPO) loss function which exactly measures the quality
of a prediction by the decision error, in contrast to the prediction error as measured by standard loss
functions such as squared error. In this work, we seek to provide an assortment of generalization
bounds for the SPO loss function.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

