Deep Model Transferability from Attribution Maps

Jie Song1,3 , Yixin Chen1 , Xinchao Wang2 , Chengchao Shen1 , Mingli Song1,3
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
{sjie,chenyix,chengchaoshen,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn
xinchao.wang@stevens.edu

Abstract
Exploring the transferability between heterogeneous tasks sheds light on their
intrinsic interconnections, and consequently enables knowledge transfer from one
task to another so as to reduce the training effort of the latter. In this paper, we
propose an embarrassingly simple yet very efficacious approach to estimating the
transferability of deep networks, especially those handling vision tasks. Unlike
the seminal work of taskonomy that relies on a large number of annotations as
supervision and is thus computationally cumbersome, the proposed approach
requires no human annotations and imposes no constraints on the architectures
of the networks. This is achieved, specifically, via projecting deep networks
into a model space, wherein each network is treated as a point and the distances
between two points are measured by deviations of their produced attribution maps.
The proposed approach is several-magnitude times faster than taskonomy, and
meanwhile preserves a task-wise topological structure highly similar to the one
obtained by taskonomy. Code is available at https://github.com/zju-vipa/
TransferbilityFromAttributionMaps.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has brought about unprecedented advances in many if not all the major artificial
intelligence tasks, especially computer vision ones. The state-of-the-art performances, however, come
at the costs of the often burdensome training process that requires an enormous number of human
annotations and GPU hours, as well as the partially interpretable and thus the only intermittently
predictable black-box behaviors. Understanding the intrinsic relationships between such deeplearning tasks, if any, may on the one hand elucidate the rationale of the encouraging results achieved
by deep learning, and on the other hand allows for more predictable and explainable transfer learning
from one task to another, so that the training effort can be significantly reduced.
The seminal work of taskonomy [37] made the pioneering attempt towards disentangling the relationships between visual tasks through a computational approach. This is accomplished by training
first all the task models and then all the feasible transfers among models, in a fully supervised
manner. Based on the obtained transfer performances, an affinity matrix of transferability is derived,
upon which an Integer Program can be further imposed to compute the final budget-constrained
task-transferability graph. Despite the intriguing results achieved, the training cost, especially that
for the combinatorial-based transferability learning, makes taskonomy prohibitively expensive to
estimate. Even for the first-order transferability estimation, the training costs grow quadratically with
respect to the number of tasks involved; when adding a new task to the graph, the transferability has
to be explicitly trained between the new task and all those in the task dictionary.
In this paper, we propose an embarrassingly simple yet competent approach to estimating the
transferability between different tasks, with a focus on the computer vision ones. Unlike taskonomy
that relies on training the task-specific models and their transferability using human annotations, in
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

