Positional Normalization
Boyi Li1,2∗, Felix Wu1∗, Kilian Q. Weinberger1 , Serge Belongie1,2
1
Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech
{bl728, fw245, kilian, sjb344}@cornell.edu

Abstract
A popular method to reduce the training time of deep neural networks is to normalize activations at each layer. Although various normalization schemes have been
proposed, they all follow a common theme: normalize across spatial dimensions
and discard the extracted statistics. In this paper, we propose an alternative normalization method that noticeably departs from this convention and normalizes
exclusively across channels. We argue that the channel dimension is naturally appealing as it allows us to extract the first and second moments of features extracted
at a particular image position. These moments capture structural information about
the input image and extracted features, which opens a new avenue along which
a network can benefit from feature normalization: Instead of disregarding the
normalization constants, we propose to re-inject them into later layers to preserve
or transfer structural information in generative networks.

1

Introduction

A key innovation that enabled the undeniable success of
deep learning is the internal normalization of activations.
Although normalizing inputs had always been one of the
“tricks of the trade” for training neural networks [38], batch
normalization (BN) [28] extended this practice to every
layer, which turned out to have crucial benefits for deep
networks. While the success of normalization methods
was initially attributed to “reducing internal covariate shift”
in hidden layers [28, 40], an array of recent studies [1, 2, 4,
24, 47, 58, 67, 75] has provided evidence that BN changes
the loss surface and prevents divergence even with large
step sizes [4], which accelerates training [28].

Input

Conv1_2

Conv2_2

Conv3_4

Conv4_4

µ
σ
µ
σ

Multiple normalization schemes have been proposed, each
Figure 1: The mean µ and standard deviwith its own set of advantages: Batch normalization [28]
ation σ extracted by PONO at different
benefits training of deep networks primarily in computer
layers of VGG-19 capture structural invision tasks. Group normalization [72] is often the first
formation from the input images.
choice for small mini-batch settings such as object detection and instance segmentation tasks. Layer Normalization [40] is well suited to sequence models, common in natural language processing. Instance
normalization [66] is widely used in image synthesis owing to its apparent ability to remove style
information from the inputs. However, all aforementioned normalization schemes follow a common
theme: they normalize across spatial dimensions and discard the extracted statistics. The philosophy
behind their design is that the first two moments are considered expendable and should be removed.
In this paper, we introduce Positional Normalization (PONO), which normalizes the activations at
each position independently across the channels. The extracted mean and standard deviation capture
∗

: Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

