Latent Weights Do Not Exist: Rethinking Binarized
Neural Network Optimization
Koen Helwegen1 , James Widdicombe1 , Lukas Geiger1 , Zechun Liu2 , Kwang-Ting Cheng2 ,
and Roeland Nusselder1
1

Plumerai Research
{koen, james, lukas, roeland}@plumerai.com
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
zliubq@connect.ust.hk, timcheng@ust.hk

Abstract
Optimization of Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) currently relies on real-valued
latent weights to accumulate small update steps. In this paper, we argue that these
latent weights cannot be treated analogously to weights in real-valued networks.
Instead their main role is to provide inertia during training. We interpret current
methods in terms of inertia and provide novel insights into the optimization of
BNNs. We subsequently introduce the first optimizer specifically designed for
BNNs, Binary Optimizer (Bop), and demonstrate its performance on CIFAR-10 and
ImageNet. Together, the redefinition of latent weights as inertia and the introduction
of Bop enable a better understanding of BNN optimization and open up the way
for further improvements in training methodologies for BNNs. Code is available
at: https://github.com/plumerai/rethinking-bnn-optimization.

1

Introduction

Society can be transformed by utilizing the power of deep learning outside of data centers: self-driving
cars, mobile-based neural networks, smart edge devices, and autonomous drones all have the potential
to revolutionize everyday lives. However, existing neural networks have an energy budget which
is far beyond the scope for many of these applications. Binarized Neural Networks (BNNs) have
emerged as a promising solution to this problem. In these networks both weights and activations are
restricted to {−1, +1}, resulting in models which are dramatically less computationally expensive,
have a far lower memory footprint, and when executed on specialized hardware yield in a stunning
reduction in energy consumption. After the pioneering work on BinaryNet [1] demonstrated such
networks could be trained on a large task like ImageNet [2], numerous papers have explored new
architectures [3–7], improved training methods [8] and sought to develop a better understanding of
their properties [9].
The understanding of BNNs, in particular their training algorithms, have been strongly influenced
by knowledge of real-valued networks. Critically, all existing methods use “latent” real-valued
weights during training in order to apply traditional optimization techniques. However, many insights
and intuitions inspired by real-valued networks do not directly translate to BNNs. Overemphasizing the connection between BNNs and their real-valued counterparts may result in cumbersome
methodologies that obscure the training process and hinder a deeper understanding.
In this paper we develop an alternative interpretation of existing training algorithms for BNNs, and
subsequently, argue that latent weights are not necessary for gradient-based optimization of BNNs.
We introduce a new optimizer based on these insights, which, to the best of our knowledge is the first
optimizer designed specifically for BNNs, and empirically demonstrate its performance on CIFAR-10
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

