Nonparametric Regressive Point Processes Based on
Conditional Gaussian Processes
Milos Hauskrecht
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
milos@pitt.edu

Siqi Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
siqiliu@cs.pitt.edu

Abstract
Real-world event sequences consist of complex mixtures of different types of
events occurring in time. An event may depend on past events of the same type,
as well as, the other types. Point processes define a general class of models for
event sequences. “Regressive point processes” refer to point processes that directly
model the dependency between an event and any past event, an example of which
is a Hawkes process. In this work, we propose and develop a new nonparametric
regressive point process model based on Gaussian processes. We show that our
model can represent better many commonly observed real-world event sequences
and capture the dependencies between events that are difficult to model using
existing nonparametric Hawkes process variants. We demonstrate the improved
predictive performance of our model against state-of-the-art baselines on multiple
synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Event sequences consist of timestamps of events occurring over a period of time. They arise commonly
in our everyday life. Examples are spread of news in a social network, buying and selling actions in
a stock market, occurrences of earthquakes in a region, administration of medications for a patient,
and many others. Because of their wide applicability, event sequences and their models have become
popular in machine learning research.
Point processes [Daley and Vere-Jones, 2003, 2007] can model event sequences by representing
events as points in the one-dimensional space: time. In general, a point process defines a probabilistic
distribution of points in a space. For a (temporal) point process, the distribution is uniquely determined
by its intensity function, which defines the rate of event occurring at any instant.
Two main types of point process models have been developed independently over years. One type is
what we call “regressive point processes”, where the dependencies of the intensity function on the
past events are directly modeled. Hawkes processes [Hawkes, 1971] are the most studied and used
class of regressive point processes (e.g., [Zhou et al., 2013a],[Zhou et al., 2013b],[Bacry and Muzy,
2014],[Lee et al., 2016],[Wang et al., 2016],[Xu et al., 2016],[Eichler et al., 2017]). A benefit of the
regressive point processes is that they are easy to apply and interpret. They can be learned on a set
of sequences and then applied on another unseen set of sequences. Since the influence of each past
event on the intensity is explicitly modeled, it is easy to see how different types of events influence
each other over time.
Another type is what we call “latent-state point processes”, where the dependencies of the intensity
on the past events are indirectly modeled through a latent state. Based on the past latent state, we can
infer the future latent state and thereby predict future events. The most studied class of latent-state
point processes are Gaussian-process-modulated point processes (e.g., [Adams et al., 2009],[Lasko,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

