First Order Motion Model for Image Animation

Aliaksandr Siarohin
DISI, University of Trento
aliaksandr.siarohin@unitn.it

Sergey Tulyakov
Snap Inc.
stulyakov@snap.com

Stéphane Lathuilière
DISI, University of Trento
LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut polytechnique de Paris
stephane.lathuilire@telecom-paris.fr

Elisa Ricci
DISI, University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
e.ricci@unitn.it

Nicu Sebe
DISI, University of Trento
Huawei Technologies Ireland
niculae.sebe@unitn.it

Abstract
Image animation consists of generating a video sequence so that an object in a
source image is animated according to the motion of a driving video. Our framework addresses this problem without using any annotation or prior information
about the specific object to animate. Once trained on a set of videos depicting
objects of the same category (e.g. faces, human bodies), our method can be applied
to any object of this class. To achieve this, we decouple appearance and motion
information using a self-supervised formulation. To support complex motions,
we use a representation consisting of a set of learned keypoints along with their
local affine transformations. A generator network models occlusions arising during
target motions and combines the appearance extracted from the source image and
the motion derived from the driving video. Our framework scores best on diverse
benchmarks and on a variety of object categories. Our source code is publicly
available1 .

1

Introduction

Generating videos by animating objects in still images has countless applications across areas of
interest including movie production, photography, and e-commerce. More precisely, image animation
refers to the task of automatically synthesizing videos by combining the appearance extracted from
a source image with motion patterns derived from a driving video. For instance, a face image of a
certain person can be animated following the facial expressions of another individual (see Fig. 1). In
the literature, most methods tackle this problem by assuming strong priors on the object representation
(e.g. 3D model) [4] and resorting to computer graphics techniques [6, 33]. These approaches can
be referred to as object-specific methods, as they assume knowledge about the model of the specific
object to animate.
Recently, deep generative models have emerged as effective techniques for image animation and
video retargeting [2, 41, 3, 42, 27, 28, 37, 40, 31, 21]. In particular, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [14] and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) [20] have been used to transfer facial expressions [37] or motion patterns [3] between human subjects in videos. Nevertheless, these approaches
usually rely on pre-trained models in order to extract object-specific representations such as keypoint
locations. Unfortunately, these pre-trained models are built using costly ground-truth data annotations
[2, 27, 31] and are not available in general for an arbitrary object category. To address this issues,
recently Siarohin et al. [28] introduced Monkey-Net, the first object-agnostic deep model for image
1

https://github.com/AliaksandrSiarohin/first-order-model

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

