Learning Reward Machines for Partially
Observable Reinforcement Learning

Rodrigo Toro Icarte∗
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Ethan Waldie
University of Toronto

Toryn Q. Klassen
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Richard Valenzano
Element AI

Margarita P. Castro
University of Toronto

Sheila A. McIlraith
University of Toronto
Vector Institute

Abstract
Reward Machines (RMs) provide a structured, automata-based representation of a
reward function that enables a Reinforcement Learning (RL) agent to decompose
an RL problem into structured subproblems that can be efficiently learned via
off-policy learning. Here we show that RMs can be learned from experience,
instead of being specified by the user, and that the resulting problem decomposition
can be used to effectively solve partially observable RL problems. We pose the
task of learning RMs as a discrete optimization problem where the objective is
to find an RM that decomposes the problem into a set of subproblems such that
the combination of their optimal memoryless policies is an optimal policy for the
original problem. We show the effectiveness of this approach on three partially
observable domains, where it significantly outperforms A3C, PPO, and ACER, and
discuss its advantages, limitations, and broader potential.1

1

Introduction

The use of neural networks for function approximation has led to many recent advances in Reinforcement Learning (RL). Such deep RL methods have allowed agents to learn effective policies in
many complex environment including board games [30], video games [23], and robotic systems [2].
However, RL methods (including deep RL methods) often struggle when the environment is partially
observable. This is because agents in such environments usually require some form of memory to
learn optimal behaviour [31]. Recent approaches for giving memory to an RL agent either rely on
recurrent neural networks [24, 15, 37, 29] or memory-augmented neural networks [25, 18].
In this work, we show that Reward Machines (RMs) are another useful tool for providing memory in
a partially observable environment. RMs were originally conceived to provide a structured, automatabased representation of a reward function [33, 4, 14, 39]. Exposed structure can be exploited by the
Q-Learning for Reward Machines (QRM) algorithm [33], which simultaneously learns a separate
policy for each state in the RM. QRM has been shown to outperform standard and hierarchical deep
RL over a variety of discrete and continuous domains. However, QRM was only defined for fully
observable environments. Furthermore, the RMs were handcrafted.
In this paper, we propose a method for learning an RM directly from experience in a partially
observable environment, in a manner that allows the RM to serve as memory for an RL algorithm.
∗
1

Correspondence to: Rodrigo Toro Icarte <rntoro@cs.toronto.edu>.
Our code is available at https://bitbucket.org/RToroIcarte/lrm.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

