Uncertainty-based Continual Learning with
Adaptive Regularization

1

Hongjoon Ahn1∗, Sungmin Cha2∗, Donggyu Lee2 and Taesup Moon1,2
Department of Artificial Intelligence, 2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea 16419
{hong0805, csm9493, ldk308, tsmoon}@skku.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new neural network-based continual learning algorithm, dubbed
as Uncertainty-regularized Continual Learning (UCL), which builds on traditional
Bayesian online learning framework with variational inference. We focus on two
significant drawbacks of the recently proposed regularization-based methods: a)
considerable additional memory cost for determining the per-weight regularization
strengths and b) the absence of gracefully forgetting scheme, which can prevent
performance degradation in learning new tasks. In this paper, we show UCL can
solve these two problems by introducing a fresh interpretation on the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence term of the variational lower bound for Gaussian meanfield approximation. Based on the interpretation, we propose the notion of nodewise uncertainty, which drastically reduces the number of additional parameters
for implementing per-weight regularization. Moreover, we devise two additional
regularization terms that enforce stability by freezing important parameters for past
tasks and allow plasticity by controlling the actively learning parameters for a new
task. Through extensive experiments, we show UCL convincingly outperforms
most of recent state-of-the-art baselines not only on popular supervised learning
benchmarks, but also on challenging lifelong reinforcement learning tasks. The
source code of our algorithm is available at https://github.com/csm9493/UCL.

1

Introduction

Continual learning, also called as lifelong learning, is a long-standing open problem in machine
learning in which data from multiple tasks continuously arrive and the learning algorithm should
constantly adapt to new tasks as well as not forget what it has learned in the past. The main challenge
is to resolve the so-called stability-plasticity dilemma [2, 18]. Namely, a learning agent should be
able to preserve what it has learned, but focusing too much on the stability may hinder it from quickly
learning a new task. On the other hand, when the agent focuses too much on the plasticity, it tends
to quickly forget what it has learned. Particularly, for the artificial neural network (ANN)-based
models, which became the mainstream of the machine learning methods, it is well-known that they
are prone to such catastrophic forgetting phenomenon [17, 4]. As opposed to the ANNs, humans are
able to maintain the obtained knowledge while learning a new task, and the forgetting in human brain
happens gradually rather than drastically. This difference motivates active research in developing
neural network based continual learning algorithms.
As given in a comprehensive survey [20] on this topic, approaches for tackling the catastrophic
forgetting in neural network based continual learning can be roughly grouped into three categories:
regularization-based [14, 12, 30, 19], dynamic network architecture-based [23, 29], and dual memory
system-based [22, 15, 27, 10]. While each category has its own merit, of particular interest are the
∗

Equal contribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

