Asymptotics for Sketching in Least Squares

Edgar Dobriban
Department of Statistics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
dobriban@wharton.upenn.edu

Sifan Liu∗
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sfliu@stanford.edu

Abstract
We consider a least squares regression problem where the data has been generated from a linear model, and we are interested to learn the unknown regression
parameters. We consider "sketch-and-solve" methods that randomly project the
data first, and do regression after. Previous works have analyzed the statistical and
computational performance of such methods. However, the existing analysis is not
fine-grained enough to show the fundamental differences between various methods,
such as the Subsampled Randomized Hadamard Transform (SRHT) and Gaussian
projections. In this paper, we make progress on this problem, working in an asymptotic framework where the number of datapoints and dimension of features goes
to infinity. We find the limits of the accuracy loss (for estimation and test error)
incurred by popular sketching methods. We show separation between different
methods, so that SRHT is better than Gaussian projections. Our theoretical results
are verified on both real and synthetic data. The analysis of SRHT relies on novel
methods from random matrix theory that may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

To enable learning from large datasets, randomized algorithms such as sketching or random projections are an effective approach of wide applicability (Mahoney, 2011; Woodruff, 2014; Drineas
and Mahoney, 2016). In this work, we study the statistical performance of sketching algorithms
in linear regression. Various versions of this fundamental problem have been studied before (see
e.g., Drineas et al., 2006, 2011; Dhillon et al., 2013; Ma et al., 2015; Raskutti and Mahoney, 2016;
Thanei et al., 2017, and the references therein). Specifically, in a generative model where the data are
sampled from a linear regression model, Raskutti and Mahoney (2016) have recently compared the
statistical performance of various sketching algorithms, such as Gaussian projections and subsampled
randomized Hadamard transforms (SRHT) (introduced earlier in Sarlos (2006); Ailon and Chazelle
(2006)).
However, the known results are not precise enough to enable us to distinguish between the various
sketching methods. For instance, the statistical performance of Gaussian projections and SRHT is
predicted to be the same (Raskutti and Mahoney, 2016), whereas the SRHT has been observed to
work better in practice (Mahoney, 2011; Woodruff, 2014; Drineas and Mahoney, 2016). To address
this issue, in this paper we introduce a new approach to studying sketching in least squares linear
regression. As a key difference from prior work we adopt a "large-data" asymptotic limit, where
the relevant dimensions and sample sizes tend to infinity, and can have arbitrary aspect ratios. By
leveraging very recent results from asymptotic random matrix theory and free probability theory, we
get more accurate results for the performance of sketching.
∗

The bulk of this work was performed while SL was a student at Tsinghua University.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

