Model Compression with Adversarial Robustness:
A Unified Optimization Framework
Shupeng Gui,∗, Haotao Wang†,∗, Haichuan Yang , Chen Yu ,
Zhangyang Wang† and Ji Liu‡


†

Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Texas A&M University
‡
Ytech Seattle AI lab, FeDA lab, AI platform, Kwai Inc
†
{htwang, atlaswang}@tamu.edu

{sgui2, hyang36, cyu28}@ur.rochester.edu
‡
ji.liu.uwisc@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep model compression has been extensively studied, and state-of-the-art methods
can now achieve high compression ratios with minimal accuracy loss. This paper
studies model compression through a different lens: could we compress models
without hurting their robustness to adversarial attacks, in addition to maintaining
accuracy? Previous literature suggested that the goals of robustness and compactness might sometimes contradict. We propose a novel Adversarially Trained Model
Compression (ATMC) framework. ATMC constructs a unified constrained optimization formulation, where existing compression means (pruning, factorization,
quantization) are all integrated into the constraints. An efficient algorithm is then
developed. An extensive group of experiments are presented, demonstrating that
ATMC obtains remarkably more favorable trade-off among model size, accuracy
and robustness, over currently available alternatives in various settings. The codes
are publicly available at: https://github.com/shupenggui/ATMC.

1

Introduction

Background: CNN Model Compression As more Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices come online,
they are equipped with the ability to ingest and analyze information from their ambient environments
via sensor inputs. Over the past few years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to rapid
advances in the predictive performance in a large variety of tasks [1]. It is appealing to deploy CNNs
onto IoT devices to interpret big data and intelligently react to both user and environmental events.
However, the model size, together with inference latency and energy cost, have become critical
hurdles [2–4]. The enormous complexity of CNNs remains a major inhibitor for their more extensive
applications in resource-constrained IoT systems. Therefore, model compression [5] is becoming
increasingly demanded and studied [6–9]. We next briefly review three mainstream compression
methods: pruning, factorization, and quantization.
Pruning refers to sparsifying the CNN by zeroing out non-significant weights, e.g., by thresholding
the weights magnitudes [10]. Various forms of sparsity regularization were explicitly incorporated in
the training process [6, 7], including structured sparsity, e.g., through channel pruning [8, 11, 12].
Most CNN layers consist of large tensors to store their parameters [13–15], in which large redundancy
exists due to the highly-structured filters or columns [13–15]. Matrix factorization was thus adopted
∗

The first two authors Gui and Wang contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

