Doubly-Robust Lasso Bandit

Gi-Soo Kim
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
gisoo1989@snu.ac.kr

Myunghee Cho Paik
Department of Statistics
Seoul National University
myungheechopaik@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Contextual multi-armed bandit algorithms are widely used in sequential decision
tasks such as news article recommendation systems, web page ad placement algorithms, and mobile health. Most of the existing algorithms have regret proportional
to a polynomial function of the context dimension, d. In many applications however, it is often the case that contexts are high-dimensional with only a sparse
subset of size s0 ( d) being correlated with the reward. We consider the stochastic linear contextual bandit problem and propose a novel algorithm, namely the
Doubly-Robust Lasso Bandit algorithm, which exploits the sparse structure of the
regression parameter as in Lasso, while blending the doubly-robust technique used
in missing data literature. The high-probability upper bound of the regret incurred
by the proposed algorithm does not depend on the number of arms and scales with
log(d) instead of a polynomial function of d. The proposed algorithm shows good
performance when contexts of different arms are correlated and requires less tuning
parameters than existing methods.

1

Introduction

Many sequential decision problems can be framed as the multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem
(Robbins, 1952; Lai and Robbins, 1985), where a learner sequentially pulls arms and receives random
rewards that possibly differ by arms. While the reward compensation mechanism is unknown, the
learner can adapt his (her) decision to the past reward feedback so as to maximize the sum of
rewards. Since the rewards of the unchosen arms remain unobserved, the learner should carefully
balance between “exploitation", pulling the best arm based on information accumulated so far, and
“exploration", pulling the arm that will assist in future choices, although it does not seem to be the best
option at the moment. Application areas include the mobile healthcare system (Tewari and Murphy,
2017), web page ad placement algorithms (Langford et al., 2008), news article placement algorithms
(Li et al., 2010), revenue management (Ferreira et al., 2018), marketing (Schwartz et al., 2017), and
recommendation systems (Kawale et al., 2015).
Contextual MAB algorithms make use of side information, called context, given in the form of
finite-dimensional covariates. For example, in the news article recommendation example, information
on the visiting user as well as the articles are given in the form of a context vector. In 2010, the Yahoo!
team (Li et al., 2010) proposed a contextual MAB algorithm which assumes a linear relationship
between the context and reward of each arm. This algorithm achieved a 12.5% click lift compared to
a context-free MAB algorithm. Many other bandit algorithms have been proposed for linear reward
models (Auer, 2002; Dani et al., 2008; Chu et al., 2011; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011; Agrawal and
Goyal, 2013).
The aforementioned methods require the dimension of the context not be too large. This is because in
these algorithms, the cumulative gap between the rewards of the optimal arm and the chosen arm,
namely regret, is shown to be proportional to a polynomial function of the dimension of the context, d.
In modern applications however, it is often the case that the web or mobile-based contextual variables
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

