Counting the Optimal Solutions in Graphical Models

Radu Marinescu
IBM Research
Dublin, Ireland
radu.marinescu@ie.ibm.com

Rina Dechter
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697, USA
dechter@ics.uci.edu

Abstract
We introduce #opt, a new inference task for graphical models which calls for
counting the number of optimal solutions of the model. We describe a novel
variable elimination based approach for solving this task, as well as a depth-first
branch and bound algorithm that traverses the AND/OR search space of the model.
The key feature of the proposed algorithms is that their complexity is exponential
in the induced width of the model only. It does not depend on the actual number of
optimal solutions. Our empirical evaluation on various benchmarks demonstrates
the effectiveness of the proposed algorithms compared with existing depth-first and
best-first search based approaches that enumerate explicitly the optimal solutions.

1

Introduction

Graphical models such as belief networks, Markov networks, constraint networks or influence
diagrams provide a powerful framework for reasoning with probabilistic and deterministic information.
Combinatorial optimization tasks such as finding the minimum or maximum cost solutions arise in
many applications and often can be efficiently solved by search or variable elimination schemes.
Although finding the optimal solution is paramount in many practical situations, we argue that it is
important to also know how many optimal solutions there are and, possibly to enumerate all or just
a fraction thereof. Indeed, in genetic linkage analysis finding the number of maximum likelihood
haplotype configurations may shed additional light on how the genetic information is transmitted
from ancestors to descendants in a pedigree [1]. In computational protein design finding the number
of optimal protein side-chain resonance assignments could be indicative for the protein structure
determination [2]. Similarly, knowing the number of optimal frequency assignments to the radio links
in a communication network could help the engineers produce more reliable network designs [3]. In
post-optimality analysis we may be interested in estimating the distribution of optimal solutions over
the values of a certain target variable, for which we clearly require the count of optimal solutions.
The number of optimal solutions may also be used as a feature for explaining the hardness of finding
an optimal solution to a problem instance. It thus may be employed to guide a random problem
generator to produce hard problem instances for optimization.
One approach that gained attention in the past decade has focused on knowledge compilation
techniques that produce a more compact representation of all optimal solutions [4, 5]. In particular,
[5] described an efficient way to compile a graphical model into a compact AND/OR Multi-Valued
Decision Diagram (AOMDD) which represents all its optimal solutions. More recently, [6] introduced
a collection of depth-first and best-first search algorithms for computing the set of m-best solutions
of a graphical model. However, both compilation based approaches or specialized m-best algorithms
will yield a count of the optimal solutions by enumeration. In particular, the compilation based
techniques typically count the number of optimal solutions during a secondary pass over the compiled
decision diagram, whereas the m-best algorithms must rely on a sequence of searches each with
a different value of m in order to recover the actual number of optimal solutions. In contrast, the
algorithms we will present and explore are not dependent on the number of optimal solutions.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

