Exact Combinatorial Optimization
with Graph Convolutional Neural Networks

Maxime Gasse
Mila, Polytechnique Montréal
maxime.gasse@polymtl.ca

Didier Chételat
Polytechnique Montréal
didier.chetelat@polymtl.ca

Nicola Ferroni
University of Bologna
n.ferroni@specialvideo.it

Laurent Charlin
Mila, HEC Montréal
laurent.charlin@hec.ca

Andrea Lodi
Mila, Polytechnique Montréal
andrea.lodi@polymtl.ca

Abstract
Combinatorial optimization problems are typically tackled by the branch-andbound paradigm. We propose a new graph convolutional neural network model for
learning branch-and-bound variable selection policies, which leverages the natural
variable-constraint bipartite graph representation of mixed-integer linear programs.
We train our model via imitation learning from the strong branching expert rule,
and demonstrate on a series of hard problems that our approach produces policies
that improve upon state-of-the-art machine-learning methods for branching and
generalize to instances significantly larger than seen during training. Moreover, we
improve for the first time over expert-designed branching rules implemented in a
state-of-the-art solver on large problems. Code for reproducing all the experiments
can be found at https://github.com/ds4dm/learn2branch.

1

Introduction

Combinatorial optimization aims to find optimal configurations in discrete spaces where exhaustive
enumeration is intractable. It has applications in fields as diverse as electronics, transportation,
management, retail, and manufacturing [42], but also in machine learning, such as in structured
prediction and maximum a posteriori inference [51; 34; 49]. Such problems can be extremely difficult
to solve, and in fact most classical NP-hard computer science problems are examples of combinatorial
optimization. Nonetheless, there exists a broad range of exact combinatorial optimization algorithms,
which are guaranteed to find an optimal solution despite a worst-case exponential time complexity
[52]. An important property of such algorithms is that, when interrupted before termination, they can
usually provide an intermediate solution along with an optimality bound, which can be a valuable
information in theory and in practice. For example, after one hour of computation, an exact algorithm
may give the guarantee that the best solution found so far lies within 2% of the optimum, even without
knowing what the actual optimum is. This quality makes exact methods appealing and practical, and
as such they constitute the core of modern commercial solvers.
In practice, most combinatorial optimization problems can be formulated as mixed-integer linear
programs (MILPs), in which case branch-and-bound (B&B) [35] is the exact method of choice.
Branch-and-bound recursively partitions the solution space into a search tree, and computes relaxation
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

