Global Guarantees for Blind Demodulation with
Generative Priors
Paul Hand
Dept. of Mathematics and College of Computer Science and Information
Northeastern University, MA
p.hand@northeastern.edu
Babhru Joshi
Dept. of Mathematics
University of British Columbia, BC
b.joshi@math.ubc.ca

Abstract
We study a deep learning inspired formulation for the blind demodulation problem, which is the task of recovering two unknown vectors from their entrywise
multiplication. We consider the case where the unknown vectors are in the range
of known deep generative models, G (1) : Rn ! R` and G (2) : Rp ! R` . In the
case when the networks corresponding to the generative models are expansive,
the weight matrices are random and the dimension of the unknown vectors satisfy
` = ⌦(n2 + p2 ), up to log factors, we show that the empirical risk objective has a
favorable landscape for optimization. That is, the objective function has a descent
direction at every point outside of a small neighborhood around four hyperbolic
curves. We also characterize the local maximizers of the empirical risk objective
and, hence, show that there does not exist any other stationary points outside of
these neighborhood around four hyperbolic curves and the set of local maximizers.
We also implement a gradient descent scheme inspired by the geometry of the
landscape of the objective function. In order to converge to a global minimizer,
this gradient descent scheme exploits the fact that exactly one of the hyperbolic
curve corresponds to the global minimizer, and thus points near this hyperbolic
curve have a lower objective value than points close to the other spurious hyperbolic curves. We show that this gradient descent scheme can effectively remove
distortions synthetically introduced to the MNIST dataset.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of recovering two unknown vectors x0 2 R` and w0 2 R` from observations
y 0 2 R` of the form
y 0 = w 0 x0 ,
(1)
where is entrywise multiplication. This bilinear inverse problem (BIP) is known as the blind
demodulation problem. BIPs, in general, have been extensively studied and include problems
such as blind deconvolution/demodulation [Ahmed et al., 2014, Stockham et al., 1975, Kundur and
Hatzinakos, 1996, Aghasi et al., 2016, 2019], phase retrieval [Fienup, 1982, Candès and Li, 2012,
Candès et al., 2013], dictionary learning [Tosic and Frossard, 2011], matrix factorization [Hoyer,
2004, Lee and Seung, 2001], and self-calibration [Ling and Strohmer, 2015]. A significant challenge
of BIP is the ambiguity of solutions. These ambiguities are challenging because they cause the set of
solutions to be non-convex.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

