Random Projections with Asymmetric Quantization

Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research USA
Bellevue, WA 98004
liping11@baidu.com

Xiaoyun Li
Department of Statistics
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ 08854
xiaoyun.li@rutgers.edu

Abstract
The method of random projection has been a popular tool for data compression,
similarity search, and machine learning. In many practical scenarios, applying
quantization on randomly projected data could be very helpful to further reduce
storage cost and facilitate more efficient retrievals, while only suffering from
little loss in accuracy. In real-world applications, however, data collected from
different sources may be quantized under different schemes, which calls for a need
to study the asymmetric quantization problem. In this paper, we investigate the
cosine similarity estimators derived in such setting under the Lloyd-Max (LM)
quantization scheme. We thoroughly analyze the biases and variances of a series of
estimators including the basic simple estimators, their normalized versions, and
their debiased versions. Furthermore, by studying the monotonicity, we show that
the expectation of proposed estimators increases with the true cosine similarity,
on a broader family of stair-shaped quantizers. Experiments on nearest neighbor
search justify the theory and illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed estimators.

1

Introduction

The method of random projections (RP) [35] has become a popular technique to reduce data dimensionality while preserving distances between data points, as guaranteed by the celebrated JohnsonLindenstrauss (J-L) Lemma and variants [24, 12, 1]. Given a high dimensional dataset, the algorithm
projects each data point onto a lower-dimensional random subspace. There is a very rich literature of
research on the theory and applications of random projections, such as clustering, classification, near
neighbor search, bio-informatics, compressed sensing, etc. [22, 10, 4, 6, 8, 17, 18, 28, 15, 7, 19, 11, 9].
In recent years, “random projections + quantization” has been an active research topic. That is, the
projected data, which are in general real-valued (i.e., infinite precision), are quantized into integers in
a small number of bits. Applying quantization on top of random projections has at least two major
advantages: (i) the storage cost is further (substantially) reduced; and (ii) some important applications
such as hashing-table-based near neighbor search, require using quantized data for indexing purposes.
The pioneering example of quantized random projections should be the so-called “1-bit” (sign)
random projections, initially used for analyzing the MaxCut problem [20] and then was adopted for
near neighbor search [8] and compressed sensing [5, 23, 25]. As one would expect, storing merely
1-bit per projected data value in many situations might suffer from a substantial loss of accuracy,
compared to using random projections with full (infinite) precision. There have been various studies
on (symmetrically) quantized random projections beyond the 1-bit scheme, e.g., [13, 37, 26, 29, 31].
In this paper, we further move to studying “asymmetric quantization” of random projections, a
relatively new problem arising from practical scenarios which is also mathematically very interesting.
Everyday, the process of data collection is taking place in every possible place that one can think
of, but it is often impractical to cast a universal encoding strategy on data storage methods for every
place. As a consequence, it becomes a meaningful task to look into the estimation problems with
data encoded by different algorithms, or namely, the asymmetric case. In this paper, we provide
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

