An Adaptive Empirical Bayesian Method for Sparse
Deep Learning

Wei Deng
Department of Mathematics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
deng106@purdue.edu

Xiao Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
zhang923@purdue.edu

Faming Liang
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
fmliang@purdue.edu

Guang Lin
Departments of Mathematics, Statistics
and School of Mechanical Engineering
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
guanglin@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel adaptive empirical Bayesian (AEB) method for sparse deep
learning, where the sparsity is ensured via a class of self-adaptive spike-and-slab
priors. The proposed method works by alternatively sampling from an adaptive
hierarchical posterior distribution using stochastic gradient Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) and smoothly optimizing the hyperparameters using stochastic
approximation (SA). We further prove the convergence of the proposed method to
the asymptotically correct distribution under mild conditions. Empirical applications of the proposed method lead to the state-of-the-art performance on MNIST
and Fashion MNIST with shallow convolutional neural networks (CNN) and the
state-of-the-art compression performance on CIFAR10 with Residual Networks.
The proposed method also improves resistance to adversarial attacks.

1

Introduction

MCMC, known for its asymptotic properties, has not been fully investigated in deep neural networks
(DNNs) due to its unscalability in dealing with big data. Stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics
(SGLD) [Welling and Teh, 2011], the first stochastic gradient MCMC (SG-MCMC) algorithm, tackled
this issue by adding noise to the stochastic gradient, smoothing the transition between optimization
and sampling and making MCMC scalable. Chen et al. [2014] proposed using stochastic gradient
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (SGHMC), the second-order SG-MCMC, which was shown to converge
faster. In addition to modeling uncertainty, SG-MCMC also has remarkable non-convex optimization
abilities. Raginsky et al. [2017], Xu et al. [2018] proved that SGLD, the first-order SG-MCMC,
is guaranteed to converge to an approximate global minimum of the empirical risk in finite time.
Zhang et al. [2017] showed that SGLD hits the approximate local minimum of the population risk
in polynomial time. Mangoubi and Vishnoi [2018] further demonstrated SGLD with simulated
annealing has a higher chance to obtain the global minima on a wider class of non-convex functions.
However, all the analyses fail when DNN has too many parameters, and the over-specified model
tends to have a large prediction variance, resulting in poor generalization and causing over-fitting.
Therefore, a proper model selection is on demand at this situation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

