Universal Boosting Variational Inference

Xinglong Li
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
xinglong.li@stat.ubc.ca

Trevor Campbell
Department of Statistics
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4
trevor@stat.ubc.ca

Abstract
Boosting variational inference (BVI) approximates an intractable probability density by iteratively building up a mixture of simple component distributions one at a
time, using techniques from sparse convex optimization to provide both computational scalability and approximation error guarantees. But the guarantees have
strong conditions that do not often hold in practice, resulting in degenerate component optimization problems; and we show that the ad-hoc regularization used
to prevent degeneracy in practice can cause BVI to fail in unintuitive ways. We
thus develop universal boosting variational inference (UBVI), a BVI scheme that
exploits the simple geometry of probability densities under the Hellinger metric to
prevent the degeneracy of other gradient-based BVI methods, avoid difficult joint
optimizations of both component and weight, and simplify fully-corrective weight
optimizations. We show that for any target density and any mixture component
family, the output of UBVI converges to the best possible approximation in the mixture family, even when the mixture family is misspecified. We develop a scalable
implementation based on exponential family mixture components and standard
stochastic optimization techniques. Finally, we discuss statistical benefits of the
Hellinger distance as a variational objective through bounds on posterior probability, moment, and importance sampling errors. Experiments on multiple datasets
and models show that UBVI provides reliable, accurate posterior approximations.

1

Introduction

Bayesian statistical models provide a powerful framework for learning from data, with the ability to
encode complex hierarchical dependence structures and prior domain expertise, as well as coherently
capture uncertainty in latent parameters. The two predominant methods for Bayesian inference
are Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [1, 2]—which obtains approximate posterior samples by
simulating a Markov chain—and variational inference (VI) [3, 4]—which obtains an approximate
distribution by minimizing some divergence to the posterior within a tractable family. The key
strengths of MCMC are its generality and the ability to perform a computation-quality tradeoff: one
can obtain a higher quality approximation by simulating the chain for a longer period [5, Theorem
4 & Fact 5]. However, the resulting Monte Carlo estimators have an unknown bias or random
computation time [6], and statistical distances between the discrete sample posterior approximation
and a diffuse true posterior are vacuous, ill-defined, or hard to bound without restrictive assumptions
or a choice of kernel [7–9]. Designing correct MCMC schemes in the large-scale data setting
is also a challenging task [10–12]. VI, on the other hand, is both computationally scalable and
widely applicable due to advances from stochastic optimization and automatic differentiation [13–
17]. However, the major disadvantage of the approach—and the fundamental reason that MCMC
remains the preferred method in statistics—is that the variational family typically does not contain the
posterior, fundamentally limiting the achievable approximation quality. And despite recent results in
the asymptotic theory of variational methods [18–22], it is difficult to assess the effect of the chosen
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

