Don’t take it lightly: Phasing optical random
projections with unknown operators

Sidharth Gupta
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
gupta67@illinois.edu
Laurent Daudet
LightOn, Paris
laurent@lighton.ai

Rémi Gribonval
Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA
remi.gribonval@inria.fr

Ivan Dokmanić
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
dokmanic@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of recovering the phase of complex linear
measurements when only magnitude information is available and we control the
input. We are motivated by the recent development of dedicated optics-based
hardware for rapid random projections which leverages the propagation of light
in random media. A signal of interest ξ ∈ RN is mixed by a random scattering
medium to compute the projection y = Aξ, with A ∈ CM ×N being a realization
of a standard complex Gaussian iid random matrix. Such optics-based matrix
multiplications can be much faster and energy-efficient than their CPU or GPU
2
counterparts, yet two difficulties must be resolved: only the intensity |y| can be
recorded by the camera, and the transmission matrix A is unknown. We show
that even without knowing A, we can recover the unknown phase of y for some
equivalent transmission matrix with the same distribution as A. Our method is
based on two observations: first, conjugating or changing the phase of any row
of A does not change its distribution; and second, since we control the input
we can interfere ξ with arbitrary reference signals. We show how to leverage
these observations to cast the measurement phase retrieval problem as a Euclidean
distance geometry problem. We demonstrate appealing properties of the proposed
algorithm in both numerical simulations and real hardware experiments. Not
only does our algorithm accurately recover the missing phase, but it mitigates the
effects of quantization and the sensitivity threshold, thus improving the measured
magnitudes.

1

Introduction

Random projections are at the heart of many algorithms in machine learning, signal processing and
numerical linear algebra. Recent developments ranging from classification with random features [16],
kernel approximation [25] and sketching for matrix optimization [24, 27], to sublinear-complexity
transforms [26] and randomized linear algebra are all enabled by random projections. Computing
random projections for realistic signals such as images, videos, and modern big data streams is
computation- and memory-intensive. Thus, from a practical point of view, any increase in the size
and speed at which one can do the required processing is highly desirable.
This fact has motivated work on using dedicated hardware based on physics rather than traditional
CPU and GPU computation to obtain random projections. A notable example is the scattering of
light in random media (Figure 1 (left)) with an optical processing unit (OPU). The OPU enables
rapid (20 kHz) projections of high-dimensional data such as images, with input dimension scaling up
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

