A First-Order Algorithmic Framework for Wasserstein
Distributionally Robust Logistic Regression

Jiajin Li, Sen Huang, Anthony Man-Cho So
Department of Systems Engineering & Engineering Management
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N. T., Hong Kong
{jjli,hsen,manchoso}@se.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Wasserstein distance-based distributionally robust optimization (DRO) has received
much attention lately due to its ability to provide a robustness interpretation of
various learning models. Moreover, many of the DRO problems that arise in the
learning context admits exact convex reformulations and hence can be tackled
by off-the-shelf solvers. Nevertheless, the use of such solvers severely limits the
applicability of DRO in large-scale learning problems, as they often rely on general
purpose interior-point algorithms. On the other hand, there are very few works
that attempt to develop fast iterative methods to solve these DRO problems, which
typically possess complicated structures. In this paper, we take a first step towards
resolving the above difficulty by developing a first-order algorithmic framework
for tackling a class of Wasserstein distance-based distributionally robust logistic
regression (DRLR) problem. Specifically, we propose a novel linearized proximal
ADMM to solve the DRLR problem, whose objective is convex but consists of a
smooth term plus two non-separable non-smooth terms. We prove that our method
enjoys a sublinear convergence rate. Furthermore, we conduct three different
experiments to show its superb performance on both synthetic and real-world
datasets. In particular, our method can achieve the same accuracy up to 800+ times
faster than the standard off-the-shelf solver.

1

Introduction

One of the basic principles for dealing with the overfitting phenomenon in statistical learning is
regularization [23]. Recently, there has been a flurry of works that aim to interpret regularization
from a distributionally robust optimization (DRO) perspective; see, e.g., [19, 1, 7, 20, 18] and the
references therein. The results in these works not only provide a probabilistic justification of existing
regularization techniques but also offer a powerful alternative approach to tackle risk minimization
problems. Indeed, it has been shown that the DRO formulations of various statistical learning
problems admit polynomial-time solvable and exact convex reformulations [19, 7, 2, 21, 20], which
can be tackled by off-the-shelf solvers (e.g., YALMIP). Nevertheless, the use of such solvers severely
limits the applicability of the DRO approach in large-scale learning problems, as they often rely on
general-purpose interior-point algorithms. On the other hand, there are very few works that address
the design of fast iterative methods for solving the convex reformulations of DRO problems. This is
in part due to the complicated structures that are often possessed by such reformulations. In fact, it is
only recently that researchers have proposed stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms for DRO
with f -divergence-based ambiguity sets [17]. However, f -divergence measures can only compare
distributions with the same support, while the Wasserstein distances do not have such a restriction.
On another front, the works [15, 11] propose cutting-surface methods to deal with Wasserstein
distance-based DRO problems. However, they tend to suffer a large computational burden.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

