Information-Theoretic Confidence Bounds for
Reinforcement Learning

Xiuyuan Lu
Stanford University
lxy@stanford.edu

Benjamin Van Roy
Stanford University
bvr@stanford.edu

Abstract
We integrate information-theoretic concepts into the design and analysis of optimistic algorithms and Thompson sampling. By making a connection between
information-theoretic quantities and confidence bounds, we obtain results that
relate the per-period performance of the agent with its information gain about the
environment, thus explicitly characterizing the exploration-exploitation tradeoff.
The resulting cumulative regret bound depends on the agent’s uncertainty over
the environment and quantifies the value of prior information. We show applicability of this approach to several environments, including linear bandits, tabular
MDPs, and factored MDPs. These examples demonstrate the potential of a general information-theoretic approach for the design and analysis of reinforcement
learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider an online decision problem where an agent repeatedly interacts with an uncertain
environment and observes outcomes. The agent has a reward function that specifies its preferences
over outcomes. The objective of the agent is to sequentially select actions so as to maximize the
long-term expected cumulative reward. One classic example is the multi-armed bandit problem,
where the agent observes only the reward of the action selected during each period. Another example
is episodic reinforcement learning, where the agent selects a policy at the beginning of each episode,
and observes a trajectory of states and rewards realized over the episode.
The agent’s uncertainty about the environment gives rise to a need to trade off between exploration
and exploitation. Exploring parts of the environment that are poorly understood could lead to better
performance in the future, while exploiting current knowledge of the environment could lead to
higher reward in the short term. Thompson sampling [18] and optimistic algorithms [9, 12] are
two classes of algorithms that effectively balance the exploration-exploitation tradeoff and achieve
near-optimal performance in many stylized online decision problems. However, most analyses of such
algorithms focus on establishing performance guarantees that only exploit the parametric structure of
the model [1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11]. There has not been much focus on how prior information as well
as information gain during the learning process affect performance, with few exceptions [15, 16].
In our work, we leverage concepts from information theory to quantify the information gain of
the agent and address the exploration-exploitation tradeoff for Thompson sampling and optimistic
algorithms. By connecting information-theoretic quantities with confidence bounds, we are able to
relate the agent’s per-period performance with its information gain about the environment during the
period. The relation explicitly characterizes how an algorithm balances exploration and exploitation
on a single-period basis. The information gain is represented succinctly using mutual information,
which abstracts away from the specific parametric form of the model. The level of abstraction
offered by information theory shows promise of these information-theoretic confidence bounds
being generalizable to a broad class of problems. Moreover, the resulting cumulative regret bound
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

