Online Sampling from Log-Concave Distributions
Holden Lee
Duke University

Oren Mangoubi
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
Given a sequence of convex functions f0 , f1 , . . P
. , fT , we study the problem of
t
k=0 fk for each epoch t in an
sampling from the Gibbs distribution ⇡t / e
online manner. Interest in this problem derives from applications in machine
learning, Bayesian statistics, and optimization where, rather than obtaining all the
observations at once, one constantly acquires new data, and must continuously
update the distribution. Our main result is an algorithm that generates roughly
independent samples from ⇡t for every epoch t and, under mild assumptions,
makes polylog(T ) gradient evaluations per epoch. All previous results imply a
bound on the number of gradient or function evaluations which is at least linear
in T . Motivated by real-world applications, we assume that functions are smooth,
their associated distributions have a bounded second moment, and their minimizer
drifts in a bounded manner, but do not assume they are strongly convex. In
particular, our assumptions hold for online Bayesian logistic regression, when the
data satisfy natural regularity properties, giving a sampling algorithm with updates
that are poly-logarithmic in T . In simulations, our algorithm achieves accuracy
comparable to an algorithm specialized to logistic regression. Key to our algorithm
is a novel stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics Markov chain with a carefully
designed variance reduction step and constant batch size. Technically, lack of
strong convexity is a significant barrier to analysis and, here, our main contribution
is a martingale exit time argument that shows our Markov chain remains in a ball
of radius roughly poly-logarithmic in T for enough time to reach within " of ⇡t .

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the following online sampling problem:
Problem 1.1. Consider a sequence of convex functions f0 , f1 , . . . , fT : Rd ! R for some T 2 N,
and let " > 0. At each epoch t 2 {1, . . . , T }, the function ft is given to us, so that we have oracle
access to the gradients of the first t + 1 functions P
f0 , f1 , . . . , ft . The goal at each epoch t is to
t
k=0 fk (x) with fixed total-variation (TV) error
generate a sample from the distribution ⇡t (x) / e
". The samples at different time steps should be almost independent.
Various versions of this problem have been considered in the literature, with applications in Bayesian
statistics, optimization, and theoretical computer science; see [NR17, DDFMR00, ADH10] and
references therein. If f is convex, then a distribution p / e f is logconcave; this captures a large
class of useful distributions such as gaussian, exponential, Laplace, Dirichlet, gamma, beta, and
chi-squared distributions. We give some settings where online sampling can be used:
• Online posterior sampling. In Bayesian statistics, the goal is to infer the probability distribution
(the posterior) of a parameter, based on observations; however, rather than obtaining all the
observations at once, one constantly acquires new data, and must continuously update the posterior
distribution, rather than only after all data is collected. Suppose ✓ ⇠ p0 / e f0 for a given
prior distribution, and samples yt drawn from the conditional distribution p(·|✓, y1 , . . . , yt 1 )
arrive in a streaming manner. By Bayes’s rule, letting pt (✓) = e ft (✓) := p(✓|y1 , . . . , yt ) be
the posterior distribution, we have the following recursion: pt (✓) / pt 1 (✓)p(yt |✓, y1 , . . . , yt 1 ).
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

