Stochastic Proximal Langevin Algorithm:
Potential Splitting and Nonasymptotic Rates

Adil Salim
Dmitry Kovalev
Peter Richtárik∗
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
We propose a new algorithm—Stochastic Proximal Langevin Algorithm
(SPLA)—for sampling from a log concave distribution. Our method is a generalization of the Langevin algorithm to potentials expressed as the sum of one
stochastic smooth term and multiple stochastic nonsmooth terms. In each iteration, our splitting technique only requires access to a stochastic gradient of the
smooth term and a stochastic proximal operator for each of the nonsmooth terms.
We establish nonasymptotic sublinear and linear convergence rates under convexity and strong convexity of the smooth term, respectively, expressed in terms of
the KL divergence and Wasserstein distance. We illustrate the efficiency of our
sampling technique through numerical simulations on a Bayesian learning task.

1

Introduction

Many applications in the field of Bayesian machine learning require to sample from a probability
distribution µ⋆ with density µ⋆ (x), x ∈ Rd . Due to their scalability, Monte Carlo Markov Chain
(MCMC) methods such as Langevin Monte Carlo [48] or Hamiltonian Monte Carlo [28] are popular
algorithms to solve such problems. Monte Carlo methods typically generate a sequence of random
variables (xk )k≥0 with the property that the distribution of xk approaches µ⋆ as k grows.
While the theory of MCMC algorithms has remained mainly asymptotic, in recent years the
exploration of non-asymptotic properties of such algorithms has led to a renaissance in the
field [14, 26, 39, 15, 16, 19, 22, 12, 53, 10, 52]. In particular, if µ⋆ (x) ∝ exp(−U (x)), where
U is a smooth convex function, [14, 19] provide explicit convergence rates for the Langevin algorithm (LA)
p
xk+1 = xk − γ∇U (xk ) + 2γW k ,

where γ > 0 and (W k )k≥0 is a sequence of i.i.d. standard Gaussian random variables. The function
U , also called the potential, enters the algorithm through its gradient.

In optimization, the problem min U where U is composite, i.e. is a sum of nonsmooth terms which
must be handled separately, has many instances, see [17, Section 2]. These optimization problems
can be seen as a Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) computation of some Bayesian model. Sampling
a posterori in these models allows for a better Bayesian inference [20]. In these cases, the task
of sampling a posterori takes the form of sampling from the target distribution µ⋆ , where U has a
composite form.
In this work we study the setting where the potential U is the sum of a single smooth and a potentially
large number of nonsmooth convex functions. In particular, we consider the problem
Sample from µ⋆ (x) ∝ exp(−U (x)),
∗

where U (x) := F (x) +

n
P

Gi (x),

i=1

Also affiliated with Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russia.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

(1)

