Continuous-time Models
for Stochastic Optimization Algorithms
Antonio Orvieto
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland ⇤

Aurelien Lucchi
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
We propose new continuous-time formulations for first-order stochastic optimization algorithms such as mini-batch gradient descent and variance-reduced methods.
We exploit these continuous-time models, together with simple Lyapunov analysis
as well as tools from stochastic calculus, in order to derive convergence bounds
for various types of non-convex functions. Guided by such analysis, we show that
the same Lyapunov arguments hold in discrete-time, leading to matching rates.
In addition, we use these models and Itô calculus to infer novel insights on the
dynamics of SGD, proving that a decreasing learning rate acts as time warping or,
equivalently, as landscape stretching.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of finding the minimizer of a smooth non-convex function f : Rd ! R:
x⇤ := arg minx2Rd f (x). We are here specifically interested in a finite-sum setting which is
commonly encountered in machine learning and where f (·) can be written as a sum of individual
functions over datapoints. In such settings, the optimization method of choice is mini-batch Stochastic
Gradient Descent (MB-SGD) which simply iteratively computes stochastic gradients based on
averaging from sampled datapoints. The advantage of this approach is its cheap per-iteration
complexity which is independent of the size of the dataset. This is of course especially relevant
given the rapid growth in the size of the datasets commonly used in machine learning applications.
However, the steps of MB-SGD have a high variance, which can significantly slow down the
speed of convergence [22, 36]. In the case where f (·) is a strongly-convex function, SGD with a
decreasing learning rate achieves a sublinear rate of convergence in the number of iterations, while
its deterministic counterpart (i.e. full Gradient Descent, GD) exhibits a linear rate of convergence.
There are various ways to improve this rate. The first obvious alternative is to systematically increase
the size of the mini-batch at each iteration: [20] showed that a controlled increase of the mini-batch
size yields faster rates of convergence. An alternative, that has become popular recently, is to use
variance reduction (VR) techniques such as SAG [56], SVRG [32], SAGA [16], etc. The high-level
idea behind such algorithms is to re-use past gradients on top of MB-SGD in order to reduce the
variance of the stochastic gradients. This idea leads to faster rates: for general L-smooth objectives,
both SVRG and SAGA find an ✏-approximate stationary point2 in O Ln2/3 /✏ stochastic gradient
computations [3, 53], compared to the O (Ln/✏) needed for GD [45] and the O 1/✏2 needed for
MB-SGD [22]. As a consequence, most modern state-of-the-art optimizers designed for general
smooth objectives (Natasha [2], SCSG [37], Katyusha [1], etc) are based on such methods. The
optimization algorithms discussed above are typically analyzed in their discrete form. One alternative
that has recently become popular in machine learning is to view these methods as continuous-time
⇤

2

Correspondence to orvietoa@ethz.ch
A point x where krf (x)k  ✏.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

