Iterative Least Trimmed Squares for Mixed Linear
Regression
Yanyao Shen
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
shenyanyao@utexas.edu

Sujay Sanghavi
ECE Department
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
sanghavi@mail.utexas.edu

Abstract
Given a linear regression setting, Iterative Least Trimmed Squares (ILTS) involves
alternating between (a) selecting the subset of samples with lowest current loss,
and (b) re-fitting the linear model only on that subset. Both steps are very fast and
simple. In this paper we analyze ILTS in the setting of mixed linear regression with
corruptions (MLR-C). We first establish deterministic conditions (on the features
etc.) under which the ILTS iterate converges linearly to the closest mixture
component. We also evaluate it for the widely studied setting of isotropic Gaussian
features, and establish that we match or better existing results in terms of sample
complexity. We then provide a global algorithm that uses ILTS as a subroutine, to
fully solve mixed linear regressions with corruptions. Finally, we provide an ODE
analysis for a gradient-descent variant of ILTS that has optimal time complexity.
Our results provide initial theoretical evidence that iteratively fitting to the best
subset of samples – a potentially widely applicable idea – can provably provide
state-of-the-art performance in bad training data settings.

1

Introduction

In vanilla linear regression, one (implicitly) assumes that each sample is a linear measurement of
a single unknown vector, which needs to be recovered from these measurements. Statistically, it is
typically studied in the setting where the samples come from such a ground truth unknown vector,
and we are interested in the (computational/statistical complexity of) recovery of this ground truth
vector. Mixed linear regression (MLR for brevity) is the problem where there are multiple unknown
vectors, and each sample can come from any one of them (and we do not know which one, a-priori).
Our objective is again to recover all (or some, or one) of them from the samples. In this paper, we
consider MLR with the additional presence of corruptions – i.e. adversarial additive errors in the
responses – for some unknown subset of the samples. There is now a healthy and quickly growing
body of work on algorithms, and corresponding theoretical guarantees, for MLR with and without
additive noise and corruptions; we review these in detail in the related work section.
In our paper we start from a classical (but hard to compute) approach from robust statistics: least
trimmed squares [19]. This advocates fitting a model so as to minimize the loss on only a fraction ⌧
of the samples, instead of all of them – but crucially, the subset S of samples chosen and the model to
fit them are to be estimated jointly. To be more specific, suppose our samples are (xi , yi ), for i 2 [n].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

