Provably Global Convergence of Actor-Critic: A Case
for Linear Quadratic Regulator with Ergodic Cost
Zhuoran Yang
Princeton University

Yongxin Chen
Georgia Institute of Technology

Mingyi Hong
University of Minnesota

zy6@princeton.edu

yongchen@gatech.edu

mhong@umn.edu

Zhaoran Wang
Northwestern University
zhaoran.wang@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Despite the empirical success of the actor-critic algorithm, its theoretical understanding lags behind. In a broader context, actor-critic can be viewed as an online
alternating update algorithm for bilevel optimization, whose convergence is known
to be fragile. To understand the instability of actor-critic, we focus on its application
to linear quadratic regulators, a simple yet fundamental setting of reinforcement
learning. We establish a nonasymptotic convergence analysis of actor-critic in this
setting. In particular, we prove that actor-critic finds a globally optimal pair of
actor (policy) and critic (action-value function) at a linear rate of convergence. Our
analysis may serve as a preliminary step towards a complete theoretical understanding of bilevel optimization with nonconvex subproblems, which is NP-hard in the
worst case and is often solved using heuristics.

1

Introduction

The actor-critic algorithm [36] is one of the most used algorithms in reinforcement learning [46].
Compared with the classical policy gradient algorithm [73], actor-critic tracks the action-value
function (critic) in policy gradient in an online manner, and alternatively updates the policy (actor)
and the critic. On the one hand, the online update of critic significantly reduces the variance of policy
gradient and hence leads to faster convergence. On the other hand, it also introduces algorithmic
instability, which is often observed in practice [33] and parallels the notoriously unstable training
of generative adversarial networks [50]. Such instability of actor-critic originates from several
intertwining challenges, including (i) function approximation of actor and critic, (ii) improper choice
of stepsizes, (iii) the noise arising from stochastic approximation, (iv) the asynchrony between actor
and critic, and (v) possibly off-policy data used in the update of critic. As a result, the convergence
of actor-critic remains much less well understood than that of policy gradient, which itself is open.
Consequently, the practical use of actor-critic often lacks theoretical guidance.
In this paper, we aim to theoretically understand the algorithmic instability of actor-critic. In
particular, under a bilevel optimization framework, we establish the global rate of convergence and
sample complexity of actor-critic for linear quadratic regulators (LQR) with ergodic cost, a simple
yet fundamental setting of reinforcement learning [54], which captures all the above challenges.
Compared with the classical two-timescale analysis of actor-critic [11], which is asymptotic in
nature and requires finite action space, our analysis is fully nonasymptotic and allows for continuous
action space. Moreover, beyond the convergence to a stable equilibrium obtained by the classical
two-timescale stochastic approximation via ordinary differential equations, we for the first time
establish the linear rate of convergence to a globally optimal pair of actor and critic. In addition, we
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

