Enhancing the Locality and Breaking the Memory
Bottleneck of Transformer on Time Series Forecasting
Shiyang Li
shiyangli@ucsb.edu

Xiaoyong Jin
x_jin@ucsb.edu

Wenhu Chen
wenhuchen@ucsb.edu

Yao Xuan
yxuan@ucsb.edu

Yu-Xiang Wang
yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu

Xiyou Zhou
xiyou@ucsb.edu

Xifeng Yan
xyan@cs.ucsb.edu

University of California, Santa Barbara

Abstract
Time series forecasting is an important problem across many domains, including
predictions of solar plant energy output, electricity consumption, and traffic jam
situation. In this paper, we propose to tackle such forecasting problem with
Transformer [1]. Although impressed by its performance in our preliminary study,
we found its two major weaknesses: (1) locality-agnostics: the point-wise dotproduct self-attention in canonical Transformer architecture is insensitive to local
context, which can make the model prone to anomalies in time series; (2) memory
bottleneck: space complexity of canonical Transformer grows quadratically with
sequence length L, making directly modeling long time series infeasible. In
order to solve these two issues, we first propose convolutional self-attention by
producing queries and keys with causal convolution so that local context can
be better incorporated into attention mechanism. Then, we propose LogSparse
Transformer with only O(L(log L)2 ) memory cost, improving forecasting accuracy
for time series with fine granularity and strong long-term dependencies under
constrained memory budget. Our experiments on both synthetic data and realworld datasets show that it compares favorably to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting plays an important role in daily life to help people manage resources and make
decisions. For example, in retail industry, probabilistic forecasting of product demand and supply
based on historical data can help people do inventory planning to maximize the profit. Although
still widely used, traditional time series forecasting models, such as State Space Models (SSMs) [2]
and Autoregressive (AR) models, are designed to fit each time series independently. Besides, they
also require practitioners’ expertise in manually selecting trend, seasonality and other components.
To sum up, these two major weaknesses have greatly hindered their applications in the modern
large-scale time series forecasting tasks.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, deep neural networks [3, 4, 5, 6] have been proposed as
an alternative solution, where Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [7, 8, 9] has been employed to
model time series in an autoregressive fashion. However, RNNs are notoriously difficult to train [10]
because of gradient vanishing and exploding problem. Despite the emergence of various variants,
including LSTM [11] and GRU [12], the issues still remain unresolved. As an example, [13] shows
that language models using LSTM have an effective context size of about 200 tokens on average
but are only able to sharply distinguish 50 tokens nearby, indicating that even LSTM struggles to
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

