Screening Sinkhorn Algorithm for Regularized
Optimal Transport

Mokhtar Z. Alaya
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
mokhtarzahdi.alaya@gmail.com

Maxime Bérar
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
maxime.berar@univ-rouen.fr

Gilles Gasso
LITIS EA4108
INSA, University of Rouen Normandy
gilles.gasso@insa-rouen.fr

Alain Rakotomamonjy
LITIS EA4108
University of Rouen Normandy
and Criteo AI Lab, Criteo Paris
alain.rakoto@insa-rouen.fr

Abstract
We introduce in this paper a novel strategy for efficiently approximating the
Sinkhorn distance between two discrete measures. After identifying neglectable
components of the dual solution of the regularized Sinkhorn problem, we propose
to screen those components by directly setting them at that value before entering
the Sinkhorn problem. This allows us to solve a smaller Sinkhorn problem while
ensuring approximation with provable guarantees. More formally, the approach
is based on a new formulation of dual of Sinkhorn divergence problem and on
the KKT optimality conditions of this problem, which enable identification of
dual components to be screened. This new analysis leads to the S CREENKHORN
algorithm. We illustrate the efficiency of S CREENKHORN on complex tasks such
as dimensionality reduction and domain adaptation involving regularized optimal
transport.

1

Introduction

Computing optimal transport (OT) distances between pairs of probability measures or histograms,
such as the earth mover’s distance [38, 33] and Monge-Kantorovich or Wasserstein distance [37],
are currently generating an increasing attraction in different machine learning tasks [36, 27, 4, 21],
statistics [17, 31, 14, 6, 16], and computer vision [8, 33, 35], among other applications [26, 32]. In
many of these problems, OT exploits the geometric features of the objects at hand in the underlying
spaces to be leveraged in comparing probability measures. This effectively leads to improved
performance of methods that are oblivious to the geometry, for example the chi-squared distances or
the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Unfortunately, this advantage comes at the price of an enormous
computational cost of solving the OT problem, that can be prohibitive in large scale applications.
For instance, the OT between two histograms with supports of equal size n can be formulated as a
linear programming problem that requires generally super O(n2.5 ) [28] arithmetic operations, which
is problematic when n becomes larger.
A remedy to the heavy computation burden of OT lies in a prevalent approach referred to as regularized
OT [11] and operates by adding an entropic regularization penalty to the original problem. Such a
regularization guarantees a unique solution, since the objective function is strongly convex, and a
greater computational stability. More importantly, this regularized OT can be solved efficiently with
celebrated matrix scaling algorithms, such as Sinkhorn’s fixed point iteration method [34, 25, 22].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

