Incremental Scene Synthesis

Benjamin Planche1,2
Harald Kosch2

Xuejian Rong3,4
YingLi Tian3

Ziyan Wu4
Jan Ernst4

Srikrishna Karanam4
Andreas Hutter1

1

Siemens Corporate Technology, Munich, Germany
2
University of Passau, Passau, Germany
3
The City College, City University of New York, New York NY
4
Siemens Corporate Technology, Princeton NJ
{first.last}@siemens.com, {xrong,ytian}@ccny.cuny.edu, harald.kosch@uni-passau.de

Abstract
We present a method to incrementally generate complete 2D or 3D scenes with
the following properties: (a) it is globally consistent at each step according to a
learned scene prior, (b) real observations of a scene can be incorporated while
observing global consistency, (c) unobserved regions can be hallucinated locally in
consistence with previous observations, hallucinations and global priors, and (d)
hallucinations are statistical in nature, i.e., different scenes can be generated from
the same observations. To achieve this, we model the virtual scene, where an active
agent at each step can either perceive an observed part of the scene or generate a
local hallucination. The latter can be interpreted as the agent’s expectation at this
step through the scene and can be applied to autonomous navigation. In the limit
of observing real data at each point, our method converges to solving the SLAM
problem. It can otherwise sample entirely imagined scenes from prior distributions.
Besides autonomous agents, applications include problems where large data is
required for building robust real-world applications, but few samples are available.
We demonstrate efficacy on various 2D as well as 3D data.
global memory

hallucination

agent observations
feature encoding
incremental memory update
(with observed or previously synthesized views)
“Here is what I have seen so far.”

sequential synthesis of unobserved views
“What would other locations look like?”

Figure 1: Our solution for scene understanding and novel view synthesis, given non-localized agents.

1

Introduction

We live in a three-dimensional world, and a proper cognitive understanding of its structure is crucial
for planning and action. The ability to anticipate under uncertainty is necessary for autonomous agents
to perform various downstream tasks such as exploration and target navigation [3]. Deep learning
has shown promise in addressing these questions [31, 16]. Given a set of views and corresponding
camera poses, existing methods have demonstrated the capability of learning an object’s 3D shape
via direct 3D or 2D supervision.
Novel view synthesis methods of this type have three common limitations. First, most recent
approaches solely focus on single objects and surrounding viewpoints, and are trained with category33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

