On Sample Complexity Upper and Lower Bounds for
Exact Ranking from Noisy Comparisons

Wenbo Ren
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
ren.453@osu.edu

Jia Liu
Department of Computer Science
Iowa State University
jialiu@iastate.edu

Ness B. Shroff
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering and Computer Science & Engineering
The Ohio State University
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of finding the exact ranking from noisy comparisons.
A noisy comparison over a set of m items produces a noisy outcome about the most
preferred item, and reveals some information about the ranking. By repeatedly
and adaptively choosing items to compare, we want to fully rank the items with
a certain confidence, and use as few comparisons as possible. Different from
most previous works, in this paper, we have three main novelties: (i) compared
to prior works, our upper bounds (algorithms) and lower bounds on the sample
complexity (aka number of comparisons) require the minimal assumptions on the
instances, and are not restricted to specific models; (ii) we give lower bounds and
upper bounds on instances with unequal noise levels; and (iii) this paper aims at
the exact ranking without knowledge on the instances, while most of the previous
works either focus on approximate rankings or study exact ranking but require prior
knowledge. We first derive lower bounds for pairwise ranking (i.e., compare two
items each time), and then propose (nearly) optimal pairwise ranking algorithms.
We further make extensions to listwise ranking (i.e., comparing multiple items each
time). Numerical results also show our improvements against the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Background and motivation: Ranking from noisy comparisons has been a canonical problem in
the machine learning community, and has found applications in various areas such as social choices
[8], web search [9], crowd sourcing [4], and recommendation systems [3]. The main goal of ranking
problems is to recover the full or partial rankings of a set of items from noisy comparisons. The
items can refer to various things, such as products, movies, pages, and advertisements, and the
comparisons refer to tests or queries about the items’ strengths or the users’ preferences. In this paper,
we use words “item”, “comparison” and “preference” for simplicity. A comparison involves two
(i.e., pairwise) or multiple (i.e., listwise) items, and returns a noisy result about the most preferred
one, where “noisy” means that the comparison outcome is random and the returned item may not
be the most preferred one. A noisy comparison reveals some information about the ranking of
the items. This information can be used to describe users’ preferences, which helps applications
such as recommendations, decision making, and advertising, etc. One example is e-commerce: A
user’s click or purchase of a product (but not others) is based on a noisy (due to the lack of full
information) comparison between several similar products, and one can rank the products based
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

