Combinatorial Bayesian Optimization
using the Graph Cartesian Product

Changyong Oh1 Jakub M. Tomczak2 Efstratios Gavves1 Max Welling1,2,3
1
University of Amsterdam 2 Qualcomm AI Research 3 CIFAR
C.Oh@uva.nl, jtomczak@qti.qualcomm.com, egavves@uva.nl, m.welling@uva.nl

Abstract
This paper focuses on Bayesian Optimization (BO) for objectives on combinatorial
search spaces, including ordinal and categorical variables. Despite the abundance
of potential applications of Combinatorial BO, including chipset configuration
search and neural architecture search, only a handful of methods have been proposed. We introduce COMBO, a new Gaussian Process (GP) BO. COMBO
quantifies “smoothness” of functions on combinatorial search spaces by utilizing
a combinatorial graph. The vertex set of the combinatorial graph consists of all
possible joint assignments of the variables, while edges are constructed using the
graph Cartesian product of the sub-graphs that represent the individual variables.
On this combinatorial graph, we propose an ARD diffusion kernel with which the
GP is able to model high-order interactions between variables leading to better
performance. Moreover, using the Horseshoe prior for the scale parameter in the
ARD diffusion kernel results in an effective variable selection procedure, making
COMBO suitable for high dimensional problems. Computationally, in COMBO
the graph Cartesian product allows the Graph Fourier Transform calculation to
scale linearly instead of exponentially.We validate COMBO in a wide array of realistic benchmarks, including weighted maximum satisfiability problems and neural
architecture search. COMBO outperforms consistently the latest state-of-the-art
while maintaining computational and statistical efficiency.

1

Introduction

This paper focuses on Bayesian Optimization (BO) [42] for objectives on combinatorial search
spaces consisting of ordinal or categorical variables. Combinatorial BO [21] has many applications,
including finding optimal chipset configurations, discovering the optimal architecture of a deep
neural network or the optimization of compilers to embed software on hardware optimally. All these
applications, where Combinatorial BO is potentially useful, feature the following properties. They
(i) have black-box objectives for which gradient-based optimizers [47] are not amenable, (ii) have
expensive evaluation procedures for which methods with low sample efficiency such as, evolution
[12] or genetic [9] algorithms are unsuitable, and (iii) have noisy evaluations and highly non-linear
objectives for which simple and exact solutions are inaccurate [5, 11, 40].
Interestingly, most BO methods in the literature have focused on continuous [29] rather than combinatorial search spaces. One of the reasons is that the most successful BO methods are built on top of
Gaussian Processes (GPs) [22, 33, 42]. As GPs rely on the smoothness defined by a kernel to model
uncertainty [37], they are originally proposed for, and mostly used in, continuous input spaces. In
spite of the presence of kernels proposed on combinatorial structures [17, 25, 41], to date the relation
between the smoothness of graph signals and the smoothness of functions defined on combinatorial
structures has been overlooked and not been exploited for BO on combinatorial structures. A simple
solution is to use continuous kernels and round them up. This rounding, however, is not incorporated
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

