Deconstructing Lottery Tickets:
Zeros, Signs, and the Supermask

Hattie Zhou
Uber
hattie@uber.com

Janice Lan
Uber AI
janlan@uber.com

Rosanne Liu
Uber AI
rosanne@uber.com

Jason Yosinski
Uber AI
yosinski@uber.com

Abstract
The recent “Lottery Ticket Hypothesis” paper by Frankle & Carbin showed that a
simple approach to creating sparse networks (keeping the large weights) results
in models that are trainable from scratch, but only when starting from the same
initial weights. The performance of these networks often exceeds the performance
of the non-sparse base model, but for reasons that were not well understood. In this
paper we study the three critical components of the Lottery Ticket (LT) algorithm,
showing that each may be varied significantly without impacting the overall results.
Ablating these factors leads to new insights for why LT networks perform as well
as they do. We show why setting weights to zero is important, how signs are all
you need to make the reinitialized network train, and why masking behaves like
training. Finally, we discover the existence of Supermasks, masks that can be
applied to an untrained, randomly initialized network to produce a model with
performance far better than chance (86% on MNIST, 41% on CIFAR-10).

1

Introduction

Many neural networks are over-parameterized [3, 4], enabling compression of each layer [4, 21, 8] or
of the entire network [14]. Some compression approaches enable more efficient computation by pruning parameters, by factorizing matrices, or via other tricks [8, 10, 13, 16–18, 20–23]. Unfortunately,
although sparse networks created via pruning often work well, training sparse networks directly often
fails, with the resulting networks underperforming their dense counterparts [16, 8].
A recent work by Frankle & Carbin [5] was thus surprising to many researchers when it presented
a simple algorithm for finding sparse subnetworks within larger networks that are trainable from
scratch. Their approach to finding these sparse, performant networks is as follows: after training a
network, set all weights smaller than some threshold to zero, pruning them (similarly to other pruning
approaches [9, 8, 15]), rewind the rest of the weights to their initial configuration, and then retrain the
network from this starting configuration but with the zero weights frozen (not trained). Using this
approach, they obtained two intriguing results.
First, they showed that the pruned networks performed well. Aggressively pruned networks (with 95
percent to 99.5 percent of weights pruned) showed no drop in performance compared to the much
larger, unpruned network. Moreover, networks only moderately pruned (with 50 percent to 90 percent
of weights pruned) often outperformed their unpruned counterparts. Second, they showed that these
pruned networks train well only if they are rewound to their initial state, including the specific initial
weights that were used. Reinitializing the same network topology with new weights causes it to train
poorly. As pointed out in [5], it appears that the specific combination of pruning mask and weights
underlying the mask form a more efficient subnetwork found within the larger network, or, as named
by the original study, a lucky winning “Lottery Ticket,” or LT.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

