Global Convergence of Least Squares EM
for Demixing Two Log-Concave Densities
Wei Qian, Yuqian Zhang, Yudong Chen
School of Operations Research and Information Engineering
Cornell University
{wq34,yz2557,yudong.chen}@cornell.edu

Abstract
This work studies the location estimation problem for a mixture of two rotation
invariant log-concave densities. We demonstrate that Least Squares EM, a variant
of the EM algorithm, converges to the true location parameter from a randomly
initialized point. Moreover, we establish the explicit convergence rates and sample
complexity bounds, revealing their dependence on the signal-to-noise ratio and the
tail property of the log-concave distributions. Our analysis generalizes previous
techniques for proving the convergence results of Gaussian mixtures, and highlights
that an angle-decreasing property is sufficient for establishing global convergence
for Least Squares EM.

1

Introduction

One important problem in statistics and machine learning [18, 24] is learning a finite mixture of
distributions. In the parametric setting in which the functional form of the density is known, this
problem is to estimate parameters (e.g., mean and covariance) that specify the distribution of each
mixture component. The parameter estimation problem for mixture models is inherently non-convex,
posing challenges for both computation and analysis. While many algorithms have been proposed,
rigorous performance guarantees are often elusive. One exception is the Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) for which much theoretical progress has been made in recent years. The goal of this paper is
to study algorithmic guarantees for a much broader class of mixture models, namely the mixture of
log-concave distributions. This class includes may common distributions1 and is interesting from
both modelling and theoretical perspectives [2, 3, 6, 12, 26, 23].
We focus on the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm [11], which is one of the most popular
methods for estimating mixture models. Understanding the convergence property of EM is highly nontrivial due to the non-convexity of the negative log-likelihood function. The work in [4] developed
a general framework for establishing local convergence to the true parameter. Proving global
convergence of EM is more challenging, even in the simplest setting with a mixture of two Gaussians
(2GMM). The recent work in [10, 28] considered balanced 2GMM with known covariance matrix and
showed for the first time that EM converges to the true location parameter using random initialization.
Subsequent work established global convergence results for a mixture of two truncated Gaussians [19],
two linear regressions (2MLR) [17, 16], and two one-dimensional Laplace distributions [5].
All the above results (with the exception of [5]) rely on the explicit density form and the specific
properties of the Gaussian distribution. In particular, under the the Gaussian assumption, the
M-step in the EM algorithm has a closed-form expression, which allows a direct analysis of the
convergence behavior of the algorithm. However, for a general log-concave distribution the M-step
no longer admits a closed-form solution, and this poses significant challenges for analysis. To address
1

Familiar examples of log-concave distributions include Gaussian, Laplace, Gamma, and Logistics [3].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

