Graph Structured Prediction Energy Networks

Colin Graber

Alexander Schwing

cgraber2@illinois.edu

aschwing@illinois.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Champaign, IL

Abstract
For joint inference over multiple variables, a variety of structured prediction techniques have been developed to model correlations among variables and thereby
improve predictions. However, many classical approaches suffer from one of two
primary drawbacks: they either lack the ability to model high-order correlations
among variables while maintaining computationally tractable inference, or they
do not allow to explicitly model known correlations. To address this shortcoming, we introduce ‘Graph Structured Prediction Energy Networks,’ for which we
develop inference techniques that allow to both model explicit local and implicit
higher-order correlations while maintaining tractability of inference. We apply
the proposed method to tasks from the natural language processing and computer
vision domain and demonstrate its general utility.

1

Introduction

Many machine learning tasks involve joint prediction of a set of variables. For instance, semantic
image segmentation infers the class label for every pixel in an image. To address joint prediction, it
is common to use deep nets which model probability distributions independently over the variables
(e.g., the pixels). The downside: correlations between different variables aren’t modeled explicitly.
A number of techniques, such as Structured SVMs [1], Max-Margin Markov Nets [2] and Deep
Structured Models [3, 4], directly model relations between output variables. However, modeling the
correlations between a large number of variables is computationally expensive and therefore generally
impractical. As an attempt to address some of the fallbacks of classical high-order structured prediction techniques, Structured Prediction Energy Networks (SPENs) were introduced [5, 6]. SPENs
assign a score to an entire prediction, which allows them to harness global structure. Additionally,
because these models do not represent structure explicitly, complex relations between variables can be
learned while maintaining tractability of inference. However, SPENs have their own set of downsides:
Belanger and McCallum [5] mention, and we can confirm, that it is easy to overfit SPENs to the
training data. Additionally, the inference techniques developed for SPENs do not enforce structural
constraints among output variables, hence they cannot support structured scores and discrete losses.
An attempt to combine locally structured scores with joint prediction was introduced very recently by
Graber et al. [7]. However, Graber et al. [7] require the score function to take a specific, restricted
form, and inference is formulated as a difficult-to-solve saddle-point optimization problem.
To address these concerns, we develop a new model which we refer to as ‘Graph Structured Prediction
Energy Network’ (GSPEN). Specifically, GSPENs combine the capabilities of classical structured
prediction models and SPENs and have the ability to explicitly model local structure when known
or assumed, while providing the ability to learn an unknown or more global structure implicitly.
Additionally, the proposed GSPEN formulation generalizes the approach by Graber et al. [7]. Concretely, inference in GSPENs is a maximization of a generally non-concave function w.r.t. structural
constraints, for which we develop two inference algorithms.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

