Semi-Implicit Graph Variational Auto-Encoders

Arman Hasanzadeh†∗, Ehsan Hajiramezanali†∗ , Nick Duffield† , Krishna Narayanan† ,
Mingyuan Zhou‡ , Xiaoning Qian†
† Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M University
{armanihm, ehsanr, duffieldng, krn, xqian}@tamu.edu
‡ McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Semi-implicit graph variational auto-encoder (SIG-VAE) is proposed to expand
the flexibility of variational graph auto-encoders (VGAE) to model graph data.
SIG-VAE employs a hierarchical variational framework to enable neighboring node
sharing for better generative modeling of graph dependency structure, together
with a Bernoulli-Poisson link decoder. Not only does this hierarchical construction
provide a more flexible generative graph model to better capture real-world graph
properties, but also does SIG-VAE naturally lead to semi-implicit hierarchical
variational inference that allows faithful modeling of implicit posteriors of given
graph data, which may exhibit heavy tails, multiple modes, skewness, and rich
dependency structures. SIG-VAE integrates a carefully designed generative model,
well suited to model real-world sparse graphs, and a sophisticated variational
inference network, which propagates the graph structural information and distribution uncertainty to capture complex posteriors. SIG-VAE clearly outperforms a
simple combination of VGAE with variational inference, including semi-implicit
variational inference (SIVI) or normalizing flow (NF), which does not propagate
uncertainty in its inference network, and provides more interpretable latent representations than VGAE does. Extensive experiments with a variety of graph data
show that SIG-VAE significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods on several
different graph analytic tasks.

1

Introduction

Analyzing graph data is an important machine learning task with a wide variety of applications.
Transportation networks, social networks, gene co-expression networks, and recommendation systems
are a few example datasets that can be modeled as graphs, where each node represents an agent (e.g.,
road intersection, person, and gene) and the edges manifest the interactions between the agents. The
main challenge for analyzing graph datasets for link prediction, clustering, or node classification,
is how to deploy graph structural information in the model. Graph representation learning aims to
summarize the graph structural information by a feature vector in a low-dimensional latent space,
which can be used in downstream analytic tasks.
While the vast majority of existing methods assume that each node is embedded to a deterministic
point in the latent space [5, 2, 25, 30, 14, 15, 10, 4], modeling uncertainty is of crucial importance in
many applications, including physics and biology. For example, when link prediction in Knowledge
Graphs is used for driving expensive pharmaceutical experiments, it would be beneficial to know
what is the confidence level of a model in its prediction. To address this, variational graph autoencoder (VGAE) [18] embeds each node to a random variable in the latent space. Despite its
∗

Both authors contributed equally.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

