Multi-object Generation with Amortized Structural
Regularization

Kun Xu, Chongxuan Li, Jun Zhu∗, Bo Zhang
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., Institute for AI, THBI Lab, BNRist Center,
State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys., Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{kunxu.thu, chongxuanli1991}@gmail.com, {dcszj, dcszb}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep generative models (DGMs) have shown promise in image generation. However, most of the existing methods learn a model by simply optimizing a divergence
between the marginal distributions of the model and the data, and often fail to
capture rich structures, such as attributes of objects and their relationships, in an image. Human knowledge is a crucial element to the success of DGMs to infer these
structures, especially in unsupervised learning. In this paper, we propose amortized structural regularization (ASR), which adopts posterior regularization (PR) to
embed human knowledge into DGMs via a set of structural constraints. We derive
a lower bound of the regularized log-likelihood in PR and adopt the amortized
inference technique to jointly optimize the generative model and an auxiliary recognition model for inference efficiently. Empirical results show that ASR outperforms
the DGM baselines in terms of inference performance and sample quality.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models (DGMs) [19, 26, 10] have
made significant progress in image generation, which
largely promotes the downstream applications, especially in unsupervised learning [5, 7] and semisupervised learning [20, 6]. In most of the real-world
settings, visual data is often presented as a scene
of multiple objects with complicated relationships
among them. However, most of the existing methods [19, 10] lack of a mechanism to capture the underlying structures in images, including regularities
(e.g., size, shape) of an object and the relationships
among objects. This is because they adopt a single
feature vector to represent the whole image and consequently focus on generating images with a single main
object [17]. It largely impedes DGMs generalizing to
complex scene images. How to solve the problem in
an unsupervised manner is still largely open.

Figure 1: An illustration of the overlapping
problem. The first bounding box is in red,
and the second one is in green. The overlapping area is in purple. Defining the prior
distribution in the auto-regressive manner
is still challenging since some locations are
not valid even for the first bounding box as
shown in the right panel.

The key to address the problem is to model the structures explicitly. Existing work attempts to solve
the problem via structured DGMs [8, 24], where a structured prior distribution over latent variables
is used to encode the structural information of images and regularize the model behavior under the
framework of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, there are two potential limitations of
such methods. First, merely maximizing data’s log-likelihood of such models often fails to capture the
∗

Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

