Bayesian Optimization under Heavy-tailed Payoffs

Aditya Gopalan
Department of ECE
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India 560012
aditya@iisc.ac.in

Sayak Ray Chowdhury
Department of ECE
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India 560012
sayak@iisc.ac.in

Abstract
We consider black box optimization of an unknown function in the nonparametric
Gaussian process setting when the noise in the observed function values can be
heavy tailed. This is in contrast to existing literature that typically assumes subGaussian noise distributions for queries. Under the assumption that the unknown
function belongs to the Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) induced by
a kernel, we first show that an adaptation ofthe well-known
GP-UCB algorithm

2+α
2(1+α)
with reward truncation enjoys sublinear Õ T
regret even with only the
(1 + α)-th moments, α ∈ (0, 1], of the reward distribution being bounded (Õ
hides logarithmic factors). However, for the common squared exponential (SE)
and Matérn kernels, this is seen to be significantly larger than a fundamental
1
Ω(T 1+α ) lower bound on regret. We resolve this gap by developing novel Bayesian
optimization algorithms, based on kernel approximation techniques, with regret
bounds matching the lower bound in order for the SE kernel. We numerically
benchmark the algorithms on environments based on both synthetic models and
real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Black-box optimization of an unknown function f : Rd → R with expensive, noisy queries is a
generic problem arising in domains such as hyper-parameter tuning for complex machine learning
models [3], sensor selection [14], synthetic gene design [15], experimental design etc. The popular
Bayesian optimization (BO) approach, towards solving this problem, starts with a prior distribution,
typically a nonparametric Gaussian process (GP), over a function class, uses function evaluations
to compute the posterior distribution over functions, and chooses the next function evaluation
adaptively – using a sampling strategy – towards reaching the optimum. Popular sampling strategies
include expected improvement [25], probability of improvement [40], upper confidence bounds [35],
Thompson sampling [11], predictive-entropy search [17], etc.
The design and analysis of adaptive sampling strategies for BO typically involves the assumption of
bounded, or at worst sub-Gaussian, distributions for rewards (or losses) observed by the learner, which
is quite light-tailed. Yet, many real-world environments are known to exhibit heavy-tailed behavior,
e.g., the distribution of delays in data networks is inherently heavy-tailed especially with highly
variable or bursty traffic flow distributions that are well-modeled with heavy tails [20], heavy-tailed
price fluctuations are common in finance and insurance data [29], properties of complex networks
often exhibit heavy tails such as degree distribution [37], etc. This motivates studying methods for
Bayesian optimization when observations are significantly heavy tailed compared to Gaussian.
A simple version of black box optimization – in the form of online learning in finite multi-armed
bandits (MABs) – with heavy-tailed payoffs, was first studied rigorously by Bubeck et al. [8], where
the payoffs are assumed to have bounded (1 + α)-th moment for α ∈ (0, 1]. They showed that for
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

