Shaping Belief States with Generative Environment
Models for RL
Karol Gregor
Yan Wu

Danilo Jimenez Rezende
Hamza Merzic

Frederic Besse
Aäron van den Oord

Google DeepMind
London, UK
{karolg, danilor, fbesse, yanwu, hamzamerzic, avdnoord}@google.com

Abstract
When agents interact with a complex environment, they must form and maintain
beliefs about the relevant aspects of that environment. We propose a way to
efficiently train expressive generative models in complex environments. We show
that a predictive algorithm with an expressive generative model can form stable
belief-states in visually rich and dynamic 3D environments. More precisely, we
show that the learned representation captures the layout of the environment as well
as the position and orientation of the agent. Our experiments show that the model
substantially improves data-efficiency on a number of reinforcement learning (RL)
tasks compared with strong model-free baseline agents. We find that predicting
multiple steps into the future (overshooting), in combination with an expressive
generative model, is critical for stable representations to emerge. In practice, using
expressive generative models in RL is computationally expensive and we propose
a scheme to reduce this computational burden, allowing us to build agents that are
competitive with model-free baselines.

1

Introduction

We are interested in making agents that can solve a wide range of tasks in complex and dynamic
environments. While tasks may be vastly different from each other, there is a large amount of
structure in the world that can be captured and used by the agents in a task-independent manner.
This observation is consistent with the view that such general agents must understand the world
around them [1]. The collection of algorithms that learn representations by exploiting structure in
the data that are general enough to support a wide range of downstream tasks is what we refer to as
unsupervised learning or self-supervised learning. We hypothesize that an ideal unsupervised learning
algorithm should use past observations to create a stable representation of the environment. That
is, a representation that captures the global factors of variation of the environment in a temporally
coherent way. As an example, consider an agent navigating in a complex landscape. At any given
time, only a small part of the environment is observable from the the perspective of the agent. The
frames that this agent observes can vary significantly over time, even though the global structure of
the environment is relatively static with only a few moving objects. An useful representation of such
an environment would contain, for example, a map describing the overall layout of the terrain. Our
goal is to learn such representations in a general manner.
Predictive models have long been hypothesized as a general mechanism to produce useful representations based on which an agent can perform a wide variety of tasks in partially observed worlds
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

