Interlaced Greedy Algorithm for Maximization of
Submodular Functions in Nearly Linear Time

Alan Kuhnle
Department of Computer Science
Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306
akuhnle@fsu.edu

Abstract
A deterministic approximation algorithm is presented for the maximization of
non-monotone submodular functions over a ground set of size n subject to cardinality constraint k; the algorithm is based upon the idea of interlacing two greedy
procedures. The algorithm uses interlaced,
 thresholded greedy procedures to obtain tight ratio 1/4 − ε in O nε log kε queries of the objective function, which
improves upon both the ratio and the quadratic time complexity of the previously
fastest deterministic algorithm for this problem. The algorithm is validated in
the context of two applications of non-monotone submodular maximization, on
which it outperforms the fastest deterministic and randomized algorithms in prior
literature.

1

Introduction

A nonnegative function f defined on subsets of a ground set U of size n is submodular iff for all
A, B ⊆ U , x ∈ U \ B, such that A ⊆ B, it holds that f (B ∪ x) − f (B) ≤ f (A ∪ x) − f (A).
Intuitively, the property of submodularity captures diminishing returns. Because of a rich variety of
applications, the maximization of a nonnegative submodular function with respect to a cardinality
constraint (MCC) has a long history of study (Nemhauser et al., 1978). Applications of MCC
include viral marketing (Kempe et al., 2003), network monitoring (Leskovec et al., 2007), video
summarization (Mirzasoleiman et al., 2018), and MAP Inference for Determinantal Point Processes
(Gillenwater et al., 2012), among many others. In recent times, the amount of data generated by many
applications has been increasing exponentially; therefore, linear or sublinear-time algorithms are
needed.
If a submodular function f is monotone1 , greedy approaches for MCC have proven effective and
nearly optimal, both in terms of query complexity and approximation factor: subject to a cardinality
constraint k, a simple greedy algorithm gives a (1 − 1/e) approximation ratio in O(kn) queries
(Nemhauser et al., 1978), where n is the size of the instance. Furthermore, this ratio is optimal
under the value oracle model (Nemhauser and
Wolsey, 1978). Badanidiyuru and Vondrák (2014)

sped up the greedy algorithm to require O nε log nε queries while sacrificing only a small ε > 0 in
the approximation ratio, while Mirzasoleiman et al. (2015) developed a randomized (1 − 1/e − ε)
approximation in O(n/ε) queries.
When f is non-monotone, the situation is very different; no subquadratic deterministic algorithm has
yet been developed. Although a linear-time, randomized (1/e
 − ε)-approximation has been developed
by Buchbinder et al. (2015), which requires O εn2 log 1ε queries, the performance guarantee of this
algorithm holds only in expectation. A derandomized version of the algorithm with ratio 1/e has been
1

The function f is monotone if for all A ⊆ B, f (A) ≤ f (B).

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

