Regret Minimization for Reinforcement Learning by
Evaluating the Optimal Bias Function
Zihan Zhang
Tsinghua University
zihan-zh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We present an algorithm based on the Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU)
principle which is able to learn Reinforcement Learning (RL) modeled by Markov
decision process (MDP) with finite state-action space efficiently. By evaluating
the state-pair difference of thep
optimal bias function h⇤ , the proposed algorithm
achieves a regret bound of Õ( SAHT )1 for MDP with S states and A actions,
⇤
in the case that an upper bound H on the span of h⇤ , i.e.,
p sp(h ) is known. This
result outperforms
p the best previous regret bounds Õ(S AHT )[Fruit et al., 2019]
by p
a factor of S. Furthermore, this regret bound matches the lower bound of
⌦( SAHT )[Jaksch et al., 2010] up to a logarithmic factor.
As a consequence,
p
we show that there is a near optimal regret bound of Õ( p
SADT ) for MDPs with
a finite diameter D compared to the lower bound of ⌦( SADT )[Jaksch et al.,
2010].

1

Introduction

In this work we consider the Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem [Burnetas and Katehakis, 1997,
Sutton and Barto, 2018] of an agent interacting with an environment. The problem is generally
modelled as a discrete Markov Decision Process (MDP)[Puterman, 1994]. The RL agent needs to
learn the underlying dynamics of the environment in order to make sequential decisions. At step t,
the agent observes current state st and chooses an action at based on the policy learned from the past.
Then the agent receives a reward rt from the environment, and the environment transits to state st+1
according to the states transition model. Particularly, both rt and st+1 are independent of previous
trajectories, and are only conditioned on st and at . In the online framework of reinforcement learning,
we aim to maximize cumulative reward. Therefore, there is a trade-off between exploration and
exploitation, i.e., taking actions we have not learned accurately enough and taking actions which
seem to be optimal currently.
The solutions to exploration-exploitation dilemma can mainly be divided into two groups. In the first
group, the approaches utilize the Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) principle [Auer et al.,
2002]. Under OFU principle, the agent maintains a confident set of MDPs and the underlying MDP
is contained in this set with high probability. The agent executes the optimal policy of the best MDP
in the confidence set [Bartlett and Tewari, 2009, Jaksch et al., 2010, Maillard et al., 2011, Fruit et al.,
2018a]. In the second group, the approaches utilize posterior sampling [Thompson, 1933]. The agent
maintains a posterior distribution over reward functions and transition models. It samples an MDP
and executes corresponding optimal policy in each epoch. Because of simplicity and scalability, as
well as provably optimal regret bound, posterior sampling has been getting popular in related research
field [Osband et al., 2013, Osband and Van Roy, 2016, Agrawal and Jia, 2017, Abbasi-Yadkori, 2015].
1

The symbol Õ means O with log factors ignored.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

