High-Quality Self-Supervised Deep Image Denoising

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA∗

Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA, Aalto University

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

Abstract
We describe a novel method for training high-quality image denoising models
based on unorganized collections of corrupted images. The training does not need
access to clean reference images, or explicit pairs of corrupted images, and can
thus be applied in situations where such data is unacceptably expensive or impossible to acquire. We build on a recent technique that removes the need for
reference data by employing networks with a “blind spot” in the receptive field,
and significantly improve two key aspects: image quality and training efficiency.
Our result quality is on par with state-of-the-art neural network denoisers in the
case of i.i.d. additive Gaussian noise, and not far behind with Poisson and impulse
noise. We also successfully handle cases where parameters of the noise model are
variable and/or unknown in both training and evaluation data.

1

Introduction

Denoising, the removal of noise from images, is a major application of deep learning. Several
architectures have been proposed for general-purpose image restoration tasks, e.g., U-Nets [23],
hierarchical residual networks [20], and residual dense networks [31]. Traditionally, the models are
trained in a supervised fashion with corrupted images as inputs and clean images as targets, so that
the network learns to remove the corruption.
Lehtinen et al. [17] introduced N OISE 2N OISE training, where pairs of corrupted images are used as
training data. They observe that when certain statistical conditions are met, a network faced with
the impossible task of mapping corrupted images to corrupted images learns, loosely speaking, to
output the “average” image. For a large class of image corruptions, the clean image is a simple
per-pixel statistic — such as mean, median, or mode — over the stochastic corruption process, and
hence the restoration model can be supervised using corrupted data by choosing the appropriate loss
function to recover the statistic of interest.
While removing the need for clean training images, N OISE 2N OISE training still requires at least two
independent realizations of the corruption for each training image. While this eases data collection
significantly compared to noisy-clean pairs, large collections of (single) poor images are still much
more widespread. This motivates investigation of self-supervised training: how much can we learn
from just looking at corrupted data? While foregoing supervision would lead to the expectation of
some regression in performance, can we make up for it by making stronger assumptions about the
corruption process? In this paper, we show that for several noise models that are i.i.d. between pixels
(Gaussian, Poisson, impulse), only minor concessions in denoising performance are necessary. We
furthermore show that the parameters of the noise models do not need to be known in advance.
We draw inspiration from the recent N OISE 2VOID training technique of Krull et al. [14]. The
algorithm needs no image pairs, and uses just individual noisy images as training data, assuming
that the corruption is zero-mean and independent between pixels. The method is based on blindspot networks where the receptive field of the network does not include the center pixel. This
∗

{slaine, tkarras, jlehtinen, taila}@nvidia.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

