Are Disentangled Representations Helpful for
Abstract Visual Reasoning?

Sjoerd van Steenkiste
IDSIA, USI, SUPSI
sjoerd@idsia.ch

Francesco Locatello
ETH Zurich, MPI-IS
locatelf@ethz.ch

Jürgen Schmidhuber
IDSIA, USI, SUPSI, NNAISENSE
juergen@idsia.ch

Olivier Bachem
Google Research, Brain Team
bachem@google.com

Abstract
A disentangled representation encodes information about the salient factors of
variation in the data independently. Although it is often argued that this representational format is useful in learning to solve many real-world down-stream
tasks, there is little empirical evidence that supports this claim. In this paper, we
conduct a large-scale study that investigates whether disentangled representations
are more suitable for abstract reasoning tasks. Using two new tasks similar to
Raven’s Progressive Matrices, we evaluate the usefulness of the representations
learned by 360 state-of-the-art unsupervised disentanglement models. Based on
these representations, we train 3600 abstract reasoning models and observe that
disentangled representations do in fact lead to better down-stream performance. In
particular, they enable quicker learning using fewer samples.

1

Introduction

Learning good representations of high-dimensional sensory data is of fundamental importance to
Artificial Intelligence [4, 3, 6, 49, 7, 69, 67, 50, 59, 73]. In the supervised case, the quality of a
representation is often expressed through the ability to solve the corresponding down-stream task.
However, in order to leverage vasts amounts of unlabeled data, we require a set of desiderata that
apply to more general real-world settings.
Following the successes in learning distributed representations that efficiently encode the content
of high-dimensional sensory data [45, 56, 76], recent work has focused on learning representations
that are disentangled [6, 69, 68, 73, 71, 26, 27, 42, 10, 63, 16, 52, 53, 48, 9, 51]. A disentangled
representation captures information about the salient (or explanatory) factors of variation in the
data, isolating information about each specific factor in only a few dimensions. Although the
precise circumstances that give rise to disentanglement are still being debated, the core concept of a
local correspondence between data-generative factors and learned latent codes is generally agreed
upon [16, 26, 52, 63, 71].
Disentanglement is mostly about how information is encoded in the representation, and it is often
argued that a representation that is disentangled is desirable in learning to solve challenging real-world
down-stream tasks [6, 73, 59, 7, 26, 68]. Indeed, in a disentangled representation, information about
an individual factor value can be readily accessed and is robust to changes in the input that do not
affect this factor. Hence, learning to solve a down-stream task from a disentangled representation
is expected to require fewer samples and be easier in general [68, 6, 28, 29, 59]. Real-world
generative processes are also often based on latent spaces that factorize. In this case, a disentangled
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

