Latent Distance Estimation for Random Geometric
Graphs

Ernesto Araya
Laboratoire de Mathématiques d’Orsay (LMO)
Université Paris-Sud
91405 Orsay Cedex, France
ernesto.araya-valdivia@u-psud.fr

Yohann De Castro
Institut Camille Jordan
École Centrale de Lyon
69134 Écully, France
yohann.de-castro@ec-lyon.fr

Abstract
Random geometric graphs are a popular choice for a latent points generative model
for networks. Their definition is based on a sample of n points X1 , X2 , · · · , Xn
on the Euclidean sphere Sd−1 which represents the latent positions of nodes of
the network. The connection probabilities between the nodes are determined by
an unknown function (referred to as the “link” function) evaluated at the distance
between the latent points. We introduce a spectral estimator of the pairwise distance
between latent points and we prove that its rate of convergence is the same as the
nonparametric estimation of a function on Sd−1 , up to a logarithmic factor. In
addition, we provide an efficient spectral algorithm to compute this estimator
without any knowledge on the nonparametric link function. As a byproduct, our
method can also consistently estimate the dimension d of the latent space.

1

Introduction

Random geometric graph (RGG) models have received attention lately as alternative to some simpler
yet unrealistic models as the ubiquitous Erdös-Rényi model [12]. They are generative latent point
models for graphs, where it is assumed that each node has associated a latent point in a metric
space (usually the Euclidean unit sphere or the unit cube in Rd ) and the connection probability
between two nodes depends on the position of their associated latent points. In many cases, the
connection probability depends only on the distance between the latent points and it is determined by
a one-dimensional “link” function.
Because of its geometric structure, this model is appealing for applications in wireless networks
modeling [18], social networks [17] and biological networks [15], to name a few. In many of these
real-world networks, the probability that a tie exists between two agents (nodes) depends on the
similarity of their profiles. In other words, the connection probability depends on some notion of
distance between the position of the agents in a metric space, which in the social network literature
has been called the social space.
In the classical RGG model, as introduced by Gilbert in [13], we consider n independent and
identically distributed latent points {Xi }ni=1 in Rd and the construct the graph with vertex set
V = {1, 2, · · · , n}, where the node i and j are connected if and only if the Euclidean distance
kXi − Xj kd is smaller than a certain predefined threshold τ . The seminal reference on the classical
RGG model, from the probabilistic point of view, is the monograph [27]. Another good reference is
the survey paper [30]. In such a case, the “link” function, which we have not yet formally defined, is
the threshold function 1t≤τ (t). Otherwise stated, two points are connected only if their distance is
smaller than τ . In that case, all the randomness lies in the fact that we are sampling the latent points
with a certain distribution. We choose to maintain the name of random geometric graphs for more
general “link” functions.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

