Learning Transferable Graph Exploration
Hanjun Dai"†⇤, Yujia Li§ , Chenglong Wang‡ , Rishabh Singh† , Po-Sen Huang§ , Pushmeet Kohli§
"
Georgia Institute of Technology
†
Google Brain, {hadai, rising}@google.com
‡
University of Washington, clwang@cs.washington.edu
§
DeepMind, {yujiali, posenhuang, pushmeet}@google.com

Abstract
This paper considers the problem of efficient exploration of unseen environments,
a key challenge in AI. We propose a ‘learning to explore’ framework where we
learn a policy from a distribution of environments. At test time, presented with
an unseen environment from the same distribution, the policy aims to generalize
the exploration strategy to visit the maximum number of unique states in a limited
number of steps. We particularly focus on environments with graph-structured
state-spaces that are encountered in many important real-world applications like
software testing and map building. We formulate this task as a reinforcement
learning problem where the ‘exploration’ agent is rewarded for transitioning to
previously unseen environment states and employ a graph-structured memory
to encode the agent’s past trajectory. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach is extremely effective for exploration of spatial maps; and when applied on
the challenging problems of coverage-guided software-testing of domain-specific
programs and real-world mobile applications, it outperforms methods that have
been hand-engineered by human experts.

1

Introduction

Exploration is a fundamental problem in AI; appearing in the context of reinforcement learning as a
surrogate for the underlying target task [1, 2, 3] or to balance exploration and exploitation [4]. In this
paper, we consider a coverage variant of the exploration problem where given a (possibly unknown)
environment, the goal is to reach as many distinct states as possible, within a given interaction budget.
The above-mentioned state-space coverage exploration problem appears in many important real-world
applications like software testing and map building which we consider in this paper. The goal of
software testing is to find as many potential bugs as possible with carefully designed or generated
test inputs. To quantify the effectiveness of program exploration, program coverage (e.g. number
of branches of code triggered by the inputs) is typically used as a surrogate objective [5]. One
popular automated testing technique is fuzzing, which tries to maximize code coverage via randomly
generated inputs [6]. In active map building, a robot needs to construct the map for an unknown
environment while also keeping track of its locations [7]. The more locations one can visit, the better
the map reconstruction could be. Most of these problems have limited budget (e.g. limited time or
simulation trials), thus having a good exploration strategy is important.
A crucial challenge for these problems is of generalization to unseen environments. Take software
testing as an example, in most traditional fuzzing methods, the fuzzing procedure will start from
scratch for a new program, where the knowledge about the previously tested programs is not utilized.
Different programs may share common design patterns and semantics, which could be exploited
during exploration. Motivated by this problem, this paper proposes a ‘learning to explore’ framework
⇤

Work done during an internship at DeepMind, when Hanjun was in Georgia Institute of Technology

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

