Foundations of Comparison-Based Hierarchical
Clustering

Debarghya Ghoshdastidar∗ †
Department of Informatics, TU Munich
ghoshdas@in.tum.de

Michaël Perrot∗
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
michael.perrot@tuebingen.mpg.de

Ulrike von Luxburg
Department of Computer Science, University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
We address the classical problem of hierarchical clustering, but in a framework
where one does not have access to a representation of the objects or their pairwise
similarities. Instead, we assume that only a set of comparisons between objects
is available, that is, statements of the form “objects i and j are more similar than
objects k and l.” Such a scenario is commonly encountered in crowdsourcing
applications. The focus of this work is to develop comparison-based hierarchical
clustering algorithms that do not rely on the principles of ordinal embedding. We
show that single and complete linkage are inherently comparison-based and we
develop variants of average linkage. We provide statistical guarantees for the
different methods under a planted hierarchical partition model. We also empirically
demonstrate the performance of the proposed approaches on several datasets.

1

Introduction

The definition of clustering as the task of grouping similar objects emphasizes the importance of
assessing similarity scores for the process of clustering. Unfortunately, many applications of data
analysis, particularly in crowdsourcing and psychometric problems, do not come with a natural
representation of the underlying objects or a well-defined similarity function between pairs of objects.
Instead, one only has access to the results of comparisons of similarities, for instance, quadruplet
comparisons of the form “similarity between xi and xj is larger than similarity between xk and xl .”
The importance and robustness of collecting such ordinal information from human subjects and
crowds has been widely discussed in the psychometric and crowdsourcing literature (Shepard, 1962;
Young, 1987; Borg and Groenen, 2005; Stewart et al., 2005). Subsequently, there has been growing
interest in the machine learning and statistics communities to perform data analysis in a comparisonbased framework (Agarwal et al., 2007; Van Der Maaten and Weinberger, 2012; Heikinheimo and
Ukkonen, 2013; Zhang et al., 2015; Arias-Castro et al., 2017; Haghiri et al., 2018). The traditional
approach for learning in an ordinal setup involves a two step procedure—first obtain a Euclidean
embedding of the objects from available similarity comparisons, and subsequently learn from the
embedded data using standard machine learning techniques (Borg and Groenen, 2005; Agarwal
et al., 2007; Jamieson and Nowak, 2011; Tamuz et al., 2011; Van Der Maaten and Weinberger,
2012; Terada and von Luxburg, 2014; Amid and Ukkonen, 2015). As a consequence, the statistical
∗
†

Both authors contributed equally to the paper.
This work was done when the author was affiliated to the University of Tübingen.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

