First Exit Time Analysis of Stochastic Gradient
Descent Under Heavy-Tailed Gradient Noise

Thanh Huy Nguyen1 , Umut Şimşekli1,2 , Mert Gürbüzbalaban3 , Gaël Richard1
1: LTCI, Télécom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France
2: Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
3: Dept. of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers Business School, NJ, USA

Abstract
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has been widely used in machine learning due
to its computational efficiency and favorable generalization properties. Recently, it
has been empirically demonstrated that the gradient noise in several deep learning
settings admits a non-Gaussian, heavy-tailed behavior. This suggests that the
gradient noise can be modeled by using α-stable distributions, a family of heavytailed distributions that appear in the generalized central limit theorem. In this
context, SGD can be viewed as a discretization of a stochastic differential equation
(SDE) driven by a Lévy motion, and the metastability results for this SDE can then
be used for illuminating the behavior of SGD, especially in terms of ‘preferring
wide minima’. While this approach brings a new perspective for analyzing SGD,
it is limited in the sense that, due to the time discretization, SGD might admit
a significantly different behavior than its continuous-time limit. Intuitively, the
behaviors of these two systems are expected to be similar to each other only when
the discretization step is sufficiently small; however, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no theoretical understanding on how small the step-size should be chosen
in order to guarantee that the discretized system inherits the properties of the
continuous-time system. In this study, we provide formal theoretical analysis
where we derive explicit conditions for the step-size such that the metastability
behavior of the discrete-time system is similar to its continuous-time limit. We
show that the behaviors of the two systems are indeed similar for small step-sizes
and we identify how the error depends on the algorithm and problem parameters.
We illustrate our results with simulations on a synthetic model and neural networks.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is one of the most popular algorithms in machine learning due
to its scalability to large dimensional problems as well as favorable generalization properties. SGD
algorithms are applicable to a broad set of convex and non-convex optimization problems arising
in machine learning [1, 2], including deep learning where they have been particularly successful
[3, 4, 5]. In deep learning, many key tasks can be formulated as the following non-convex optimization
problem:
n
1 X (i)
minw∈Rd f (w) =
f (w),
(1)
n i=1
where w ∈ Rd contains the weights for the deep network to estimate, f (i) : Rd 7→ R is the typically
non-convex loss function corresponding to the i-th data point, and n is the number of data points
[6, 7, 5]. SGD iterations consist of
W k+1 = W k − η∇f˜k (W k ), k ≥ 0,
(2)
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

