Discrete Object Generation
with Reversible Inductive Construction
Ari Seff
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
aseff@princeton.edu

Wenda Zhou
Columbia University
New York, NY
wz2335@columbia.edu

Abigail Doyle
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
agdoyle@princeton.edu

Farhan Damani
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
fdamani@princeton.edu
Ryan P. Adams
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ
rpa@princeton.edu

Abstract
The success of generative modeling in continuous domains has led to a surge of
interest in generating discrete data such as molecules, source code, and graphs.
However, construction histories for these discrete objects are typically not unique
and so generative models must reason about intractably large spaces in order to
learn. Additionally, structured discrete domains are often characterized by strict
constraints on what constitutes a valid object and generative models must respect
these requirements in order to produce useful novel samples. Here, we present a
generative model for discrete objects employing a Markov chain where transitions
are restricted to a set of local operations that preserve validity. Building off of
generative interpretations of denoising autoencoders, the Markov chain alternates
between producing 1) a sequence of corrupted objects that are valid but not from
the data distribution, and 2) a learned reconstruction distribution that attempts to
fix the corruptions while also preserving validity. This approach constrains the
generative model to only produce valid objects, requires the learner to only discover
local modifications to the objects, and avoids marginalization over an unknown
and potentially large space of construction histories. We evaluate the proposed
approach on two highly structured discrete domains, molecules and Laman graphs,
and find that it compares favorably to alternative methods at capturing distributional
statistics for a host of semantically relevant metrics.

1

Introduction

Many applied domains of optimization and design would benefit from accurate generative modeling
of structured discrete objects. For example, a generative model of molecular structures may aid drug
or material discovery by enabling an inexpensive search for stable molecules with desired properties.
Similarly, in computer-aided design (CAD), generative models may allow an engineer to sample
new parts or conditionally complete partially-specified geometry. Indeed, recent work has aimed to
extend the success of learned generative models in continuous domains, such as images and audio, to
discrete data including graphs [38, 25], molecules [14, 21], and program source code [37, 30].
However, discrete domains present particular challenges to generative modeling. Discrete data
structures often exhibit non-unique representations, e.g., up to n! equivalent adjacency matrix
representations for a graph with n nodes. Models that perform additive construction—incrementally
building a graph from scratch [38, 25]—are flexible but face the prospect of reasoning over an
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

