Sequential Experimental Design for Transductive
Linear Bandits
Tanner Fiez
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Washington
fiezt@uw.edu

Lalit Jain⇤
Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
lalitj@cs.washington.edu

Kevin Jamieson
Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington
jamieson@cs.washington.edu

Lillian Ratliff
Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Washington
ratliffl@uw.edu

Abstract
In this paper we introduce the pure exploration transductive linear bandit problem:
given a set of measurement vectors X ⇢ Rd , a set of items Z ⇢ Rd , a fixed
confidence , and an unknown vector ✓⇤ 2 Rd , the goal is to infer argmaxz2Z z > ✓⇤
with probability 1
by making as few sequentially chosen noisy measurements
of the form x> ✓⇤ as possible. When X = Z, this setting generalizes linear bandits,
and when X is the standard basis vectors and Z ⇢ {0, 1}d , combinatorial bandits.
The transductive setting naturally arises when the set of measurement vectors is
limited due to factors such as availability or cost. As an example, in drug discovery
the compounds and dosages X a practitioner may be willing to evaluate in the lab
in vitro due to cost or safety reasons may differ vastly from those compounds and
dosages Z that can be safely administered to patients in vivo. Alternatively, in
recommender systems for books, the set of books X a user is queried about may be
restricted to known best-sellers even though the goal might be to recommend more
esoteric titles Z. In this paper, we provide instance-dependent lower bounds for
the transductive setting, an algorithm that matches these up to logarithmic factors,
and an evaluation. In particular, we present the first non-asymptotic algorithm for
linear bandits that nearly achieves the information-theoretic lower bound.

1

Introduction

In content recommendation or property optimization in the physical sciences, often there is a set of
items (e.g., products to purchase, drugs) described by a set of feature vectors Z ⇢ Rd , and the goal is
to find the z 2 Z that maximizes some response or property (e.g., affinity of user to the product, drug
combating disease). A natural model for these settings is to assume that there is an unknown vector
✓⇤ 2 Rd and the expected response to any item z 2 Z, if evaluated, is equal to z > ✓⇤ . However,
we often cannot measure z > ✓⇤ directly, but we may infer it transductively through some potentially
noisy probes. That is, given a finite set of probes X ⇢ Rd we observe x> ✓⇤ + ⌘ for any x 2 X
where ⌘ is independent mean-zero, sub-Gaussian noise. Given a set of measurements {(xi , ri )}N
i=1
PN
2
b
one can construct the least squares estimator ✓b = arg min✓ i=1 (ri x>
i ✓) and then use ✓ as a
plug-in estimate for ✓⇤ to estimate the optimal z⇤ := argmaxz2Z z > ✓⇤ . However, the accuracy of
such a plug-in estimator depends critically on the number and choice of probes used to construct
⇤

Contribution shared equally among T. Fiez and L. Jain.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

