A Little Is Enough:
Circumventing Defenses For Distributed Learning

Moran Baruch 1
Gilad Baruch 1
Yoav Goldberg 1 2
moran.baruch@biu.ac.il
gilad.baruch@biu.ac.il
yogo@cs.biu.ac.il
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Bar Ilan University, Israel
2
The Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Distributed learning is central for large-scale training of deep-learning models.
However, it is exposed to a security threat in which Byzantine participants can
interrupt or control the learning process. Previous attack models assume that the
rogue participants (a) are omniscient (know the data of all other participants),
and (b) introduce large changes to the parameters. Accordingly, most defense
mechanisms make a similar assumption and attempt to use statistically robust
methods to identify and discard values whose reported gradients are far from the
population mean. We observe that if the empirical variance between the gradients
of workers is high enough, an attacker could take advantage of this and launch
a non-omniscient attack that operates within the population variance. We show
that the variance is indeed high enough even for simple datasets such as MNIST,
allowing an attack that is not only undetected by existing defenses, but also uses
their power against them, causing those defense mechanisms to consistently select
the byzantine workers while discarding legitimate ones. We demonstrate our attack
method works not only for preventing convergence but also for repurposing of the
model behavior (“backdooring”). We show that less than 25% of colluding workers
are sufficient to degrade the accuracy of models trained on MNIST, CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 by 50%, as well as to introduce backdoors without hurting the accuracy
for MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, but with a degradation for CIFAR100.

1

Introduction

Distributed Learning has become a wide-spread framework for large-scale model training [1, 3, 10,
17, 18, 23, 31], in which a server is leveraging the compute power of many devices by aggregating
local models trained on each of the devices.
A popular class of distributed learning algorithms is Synchronous Stochastic Gradient Descent
(sync-SGD), using a single server (called Parameter Server - PS) and n workers, also called nodes
[17, 18]. In each round, each worker trains a local model on his or her device with a different chunk
of the dataset, and shares the final gradients with the PS. The PS then aggregates the gradients of
the different workers, and starts another round by sharing with the workers the resulting combined
parameters to start another round. The structure of the network (number of layers, types, sizes etc.) is
agreed between all workers beforehand.
While effective in a sterile environment, a major risk emerge with regards to the correctness of the
learned model upon facing even a single Byzantine worker [5]. Such participants are not rigorously
following the protocol either innocently, for example due to faulty communication, numerical error
or crashed devices, or adversarially, in which the Byzantine output is well crafted to maximize its
effect on the network.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

