Copula Multi-label Learning

Weiwei Liu
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Wuhan, China 430072
liuweiwei863@gmail.com

Abstract
A formidable challenge in multi-label learning is to model the interdependencies
between labels and features. Unfortunately, the statistical properties of existing
multi-label dependency modelings are still not well understood. Copulas are a
powerful tool for modeling dependence of multivariate data, and achieve great
success in a wide range of applications, such as finance, econometrics and systems
neuroscience. This inspires us to develop a novel copula multi-label learning
paradigm for modeling label and feature dependencies. The copula based paradigm
enables to reveal new statistical insights in multi-label learning. In particular, the
paper first leverages the kernel trick to construct continuous distribution in the
output space, and then estimates our proposed model semiparametrically where
the copula is modeled parametrically, while the marginal distributions are modeled
nonparametrically. Theoretically, we show that our estimator is an unbiased and
consistent estimator and follows asymptotically a normal distribution. Moreover,
we bound the mean squared error of estimator. The experimental results from
various domains validate the superiority of our proposed approach.

1

Introduction

Multi-label learning [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], which allows multiple labels for each instance simultaneously,
is of paramount importance in a variety of fields ranging from protein function classification and
video annotation, to automatic image categorization. For example, an image may have Cloud, Tree
and Sky tags; labels such as Government, Policy and Election may be needed to describe the subject
of the video; a gene can belong to the functions of Protein Synthesis, Metabolism and Transcription.
Binary relevance (BR) [7] is one of the most popular baselines for multi-label learning, which aims
to independently train a binary classifier for each label. Recently, much of the multi-label learning
literature [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13] have shown that the independent assumption among labels and features
leads to degenerated performance. A plethora of methods have been motivated by a perceived need
to modelling the dependence. For example, the classifier chain (CC) model [14] captures label
dependency by using binary label predictions as extra input attributes for the following classifiers in a
chain. CCA [15] uses canonical correlation analysis for learning label dependency. CPLST [10] uses
principal component analysis to capture both the label and the feature dependencies. Unfortunately,
the statistical properties of all these methods are still not well understood. This paper aims to fill this
gap. Particularly, the work in this paper is inspired by Sklar’s observation below.
Sklar’s Observation. Sklar’s Theorem [16] shows that the univariate margins and the multivariate
dependence structure can be separated, and the dependence structure can be represented by a copula
[17]. Therefore, a copula contains all the information that we need to measure dependence, and it is
invariant to any nonlinear strictly increasing transformations of the marginal variables.
Contributions. Motivated by copulas’s superiority in modeling dependence, we develop a novel
copula multi-label learning paradigm for modeling label and feature dependencies. Our main
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

