Rethinking Kernel Methods for
Node Representation Learning on Graphs

Yu Tian∗
Rutgers University
yt219@cs.rutgers.edu

Long Zhao∗
Rutgers University
lz311@cs.rutgers.edu

Xi Peng
University of Delaware
xipeng@udel.edu

Dimitris N. Metaxas
Rutgers University
dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Graph kernels are kernel methods measuring graph similarity and serve as a standard tool for graph classification. However, the use of kernel methods for node
classification, which is a related problem to graph representation learning, is still
ill-posed and the state-of-the-art methods are heavily based on heuristics. Here, we
present a novel theoretical kernel-based framework for node classification that can
bridge the gap between these two representation learning problems on graphs. Our
approach is motivated by graph kernel methodology but extended to learn the node
representations capturing the structural information in a graph. We theoretically
show that our formulation is as powerful as any positive semidefinite kernels. To
efficiently learn the kernel, we propose a novel mechanism for node feature aggregation and a data-driven similarity metric employed during the training phase. More
importantly, our framework is flexible and complementary to other graph-based
deep learning models, e.g., Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). We empirically
evaluate our approach on a number of standard node classification benchmarks,
and demonstrate that our model sets the new state of the art. The source code is
publicly available at https://github.com/bluer555/KernelGCN.

1

Introduction

Graph structured data, such as citation networks [11, 22, 30], biological models [12, 45], grid-like
data [36, 37, 51] and skeleton-based motion systems [6, 42, 49, 50], are abundant in the real world.
Therefore, learning to understand graphs is a crucial problem in machine learning. Previous studies
in the literature generally fall into two main categories: (1) graph classification [8, 19, 40, 47, 48],
where the whole structure of graphs is captured for similarity comparison; (2) node classification [1,
19, 38, 41, 46], where the structural identity of nodes is determined for representation learning.
For graph classification, kernel methods, i.e., graph kernels, have become a standard tool [20]. Given
a large collection of graphs, possibly with node and edge attributes, such algorithms aim to learn a
kernel function that best captures the similarity between any two graphs. The graph kernel function
can be utilized to classify graphs via standard kernel methods such as support vector machines or
k-nearest neighbors. Moreover, recent studies [40, 47] also demonstrate that there has been a close
connection between Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph kernel [32],
and relate GNNs to the classic graph kernel methods for graph classification.
∗

indicates equal contributions.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

