Learning Fairness in Multi-Agent Systems

Jiechuan Jiang
Peking University
jiechuan.jiang@pku.edu.cn

Zongqing Lu∗
Peking University
zongqing.lu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Fairness is essential for human society, contributing to stability and productivity.
Similarly, fairness is also the key for many multi-agent systems. Taking fairness
into multi-agent learning could help multi-agent systems become both efficient
and stable. However, learning efficiency and fairness simultaneously is a complex,
multi-objective, joint-policy optimization. To tackle these difficulties, we propose
FEN, a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning model. We first decompose
fairness for each agent and propose fair-efficient reward that each agent learns its
own policy to optimize. To avoid multi-objective conflict, we design a hierarchy
consisting of a controller and several sub-policies, where the controller maximizes
the fair-efficient reward by switching among the sub-policies that provides diverse
behaviors to interact with the environment. FEN can be trained in a fully decentralized way, making it easy to be deployed in real-world applications. Empirically,
we show that FEN easily learns both fairness and efficiency and significantly
outperforms baselines in a variety of multi-agent scenarios.

1

Introduction

Fairness is essential for human society, contributing to stability and productivity. Similarly, fairness
is also the key for many multi-agent systems, e.g., routing [1], traffic light control [2], and cloud
computing [3]. More specifically, in routing, link bandwidth needs to be fairly allocated to packets to
achieve load balance; in traffic light control, resources provided by infrastructure needs to be fairly
shared by vehicles; in cloud computing, resource allocation of virtual machines has to be fair to
optimize profit.
Many game-theoretic methods [4, 5, 6] have been proposed for fair division in multi-agent systems,
which mainly focus on proportional fairness and envy-freeness. Most of them are in static settings,
while some [7, 8, 9] consider the dynamic environment. Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning
(RL) has been successfully applied to multi-agent sequential decision-making, such as [10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16]. However, most of them try to maximize the reward of each individual agent or the
shared reward among agents, without taking fairness into account. Only a few methods consider
fairness, but are handcrafted for different applications [17, 18, 19], which all require domain-specific
knowledge and cannot be generalized. Some methods [20, 21, 22] aim to encourage cooperation in
social dilemmas but cannot guarantee fairness.
Taking fairness into multi-agent learning could help multi-agent systems become both efficient and
stable. However, learning efficiency (system performance) and fairness simultaneously is a complex,
multi-objective, joint-policy optimization. To tackle these difficulties, we propose a novel hierarchical
RL model, FEN, to enable agents to easily and effectively learn both efficiency and fairness. First,
we decompose fairness for each agent and propose fair-efficient reward that each agent learns its own
policy to optimize it. We prove that agents achieve Pareto efficiency and fairness is guaranteed in
infinite-horizon sequential decision-making if all agents maximize their own fair-efficient reward
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

