Efficient Meta Learning via Minibatch Proximal
Update

Pan Zhou∗ Xiao-Tong Yuan† Huan Xu‡ Shuicheng Yan4 Jiashi Feng∗
∗
Learning & Vision Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
†
B-DAT Lab, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, Nanjing, China
‡
Alibaba and Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
4
YITU Technology, Shanghai, China
pzhou@u.nus.edu xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn Huan.xu@alibaba-inc.com {eleyans, elefjia}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We address the problem of meta-learning which learns a prior over hypothesis
from a sample of meta-training tasks for fast adaptation on meta-testing tasks. A
particularly simple yet successful paradigm for this research is model-agnostic
meta-learning (MAML). Implementation and analysis of MAML, however, can
be tricky; first-order approximation is usually adopted to avoid directly computing
Hessian matrix but as a result the convergence and generalization guarantees remain
largely mysterious for MAML. To remedy this deficiency, in this paper we propose
a minibatch proximal update based meta-learning approach for learning to efficient
hypothesis transfer. The principle is to learn a prior hypothesis shared across
tasks such that the minibatch risk minimization biased regularized by this prior
can quickly converge to the optimal hypothesis in each training task. The prior
hypothesis training model can be efficiently optimized via SGD with provable
convergence guarantees for both convex and non-convex problems. Moreover, we
theoretically justify the benefit of the learnt prior hypothesis for fast adaptation to
new few-shot learning tasks via minibatch proximal update. Experimental results
on several few-shot regression and classification tasks demonstrate the advantages
of our method over state-of-the-arts.

1

Introduction

Meta-learning [1, 2, 3], a.k.a. learning-to-learn [4], is an effective approach for learning fast from
small amount of data, with many successful applications witnessed to regression/classification [5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10] and reinforcement learning [6, 11, 12, 13]. It assumes access to a distribution of
tasks, each of which could be a learning problem (e.g. classification), and then learns from a finite
set of sample meta-tasks. Specifically, meta-learning contains a meta-learner which is a trainable
learning hypothesis or algorithm to extract knowledge from all observed meta-tasks and facilitate
the learning a learner for a potentially unseen meta-task with only a few samples. The current
meta-learners can be grouped into metric-based approaches [14, 8, 15, 16] which learn the similarity
metrics among samples, memory-based methods [17, 7, 18] which use memory models, e.g. neural
Turing machines [19] and long short-term memory [20], to store important training samples or
learn a fast adaptation algorithm, and optimization-based approaches [6, 5, 9, 10, 21] that learn
a good parameter initialization or regularization for fast adaptation to new tasks. Compared with
metric-based approaches which are more suitable for non-parametric learners, and memory-based
methods which are designed case-by-case, optimization based approaches are simpler but also more
general, and thus have been applied to various applications without lots of tailors [6, 9].
MAML [6] is a recent leading approach of optimization-based meta-learning. In principle, MAML
aims to estimate a good parameter initialization w of a network such that for a randomly sampled task
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

