Search on the Replay Buffer:
Bridging Planning and Reinforcement Learning

Benjamin Eysenbachθφ , Ruslan Salakhutdinovθ , Sergey Levineφψ
θ
CMU, φ Google Brain, ψ UC Berkeley
beysenba@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The history of learning for control has been an exciting back and forth between
two broad classes of algorithms: planning and reinforcement learning. Planning
algorithms effectively reason over long horizons, but assume access to a local
policy and distance metric over collision-free paths. Reinforcement learning excels
at learning policies and the relative values of states, but fails to plan over long
horizons. Despite the successes of each method in various domains, tasks that
require reasoning over long horizons with limited feedback and high-dimensional
observations remain exceedingly challenging for both planning and reinforcement
learning algorithms. Frustratingly, these sorts of tasks are potentially the most
useful, as they are simple to design (a human only need to provide an example
goal state) and avoid reward shaping, which can bias the agent towards find a suboptimal solution. We introduce a general-purpose control algorithm that combines
the strengths of planning and reinforcement learning to effectively solve these
tasks. Our aim is to decompose the task of reaching a distant goal state into
a sequence of easier tasks, each of which corresponds to reaching a particular
subgoal. Planning algorithms can automatically find these waypoints, but only if
provided with suitable abstractions of the environment – namely, a graph consisting
of nodes and edges. Our main insight is that this graph can be constructed via
reinforcement learning, where a goal-conditioned value function provides edge
weights, and nodes are taken to be previously seen observations in a replay buffer.
Using graph search over our replay buffer, we can automatically generate this
sequence of subgoals, even in image-based environments. Our algorithm, search
on the replay buffer (SoRB), enables agents to solve sparse reward tasks over one
hundred steps, and generalizes substantially better than standard RL algorithms.1

1

Introduction

How can agents learn to solve complex, temporally extended tasks? Classically, planning algorithms
give us one tool for learning such tasks. While planning algorithms work well for tasks where
it is easy to determine distances between states and easy to design a local policy to reach nearby
states, both of these requirements become roadblocks when applying planning to high-dimensional
(e.g., image-based) tasks. Learning algorithms excel at handling high-dimensional observations,
but reinforcement learning (RL) – learning for control – fails to reason over long horizons to solve
temporally extended tasks. In this paper, we propose a method that combines the strengths of planning
and RL, resulting in an algorithm that can plan over long horizons in tasks with high-dimensional
observations.
Recent work has introduced goal-conditioned RL algorithms (Pong et al., 2018; Schaul et al., 2015)
that acquire a single policy for reaching many goals. In practice, goal-conditioned RL succeeds at
1

Run our algorithm in your browser: http://bit.ly/rl_search

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

