Meta-Curvature
Eunbyung Park
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
eunbyung@cs.unc.edu

Junier B. Oliva
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
joliva@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We propose meta-curvature (MC), a framework to learn curvature information
for better generalization and fast model adaptation. MC expands on the modelagnostic meta-learner (MAML) by learning to transform the gradients in the inner
optimization such that the transformed gradients achieve better generalization
performance to a new task. For training large scale neural networks, we decompose
the curvature matrix into smaller matrices in a novel scheme where we capture
the dependencies of the model’s parameters with a series of tensor products. We
demonstrate the effects of our proposed method on several few-shot learning tasks
and datasets. Without any task specific techniques and architectures, the proposed
method achieves substantial improvement upon previous MAML variants and
outperforms the recent state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we observe faster
convergence rates of the meta-training process. Finally, we present an analysis that
explains better generalization performance with the meta-trained curvature.

1

Introduction

Despite huge progress in artificial intelligence, the ability to quickly learn from few examples is
still far short of that of a human. We are capable of utilizing prior knowledge from past experiences
to efficiently learn new concepts or skills. With the goal of building machines with this capability,
learning-to-learn or meta-learning has begun to emerge with promising results.
One notable example is model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [9, 30], which has shown its effectiveness on various few-shot learning tasks. It formalizes learning-to-learn as meta objective function
and optimizes it with respect to a model’s initial parameters. Through the meta-training procedure,
the resulting model’s initial parameters become a very good prior representation and the model can
quickly adapt to new tasks or skills through one or more gradient steps with a few examples. Although
this end-to-end approach, using standard gradient descent as the inner optimization algorithm, was
theoretically shown to approximate any learning algorithm [10], recent studies indicate that the choice
of the inner-loop optimization algorithm affects performance. [22, 4, 13].
Given the sensitivity to the inner-loop optimization algorithm, second order optimization methods
(or preconditioning the gradients) are worth considering. They have been extensively studied and
have shown their practical benefits in terms of faster convergence rates [31], an important aspect of
few-shot learning. In addition, the problems of computational and spatial complexity for training deep
networks can be effectively handled thanks to recent approximation techniques [24, 38]. Nevertheless,
there are issues with using second order methods in its current form as an inner loop optimizer in
the meta-learning framework. First, they do not usually consider generalization performance. They
compute local curvatures with training losses and move along the curvatures as far as possible. It can
be very harmful, especially in the few-shot learning setup, because it can overfit easily and quickly.
The code is available at https://github.com/silverbottlep/meta_curvature

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

