Efficient Convex Relaxations for Streaming PCA
Raman Arora
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Teodor V. Marinov
Dept. of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21204
tmarino2@jhu.edu

Abstract
We revisit two algorithms, matrix stochastic gradient (MSG) and `2 -regularized
MSG (RMSG), that are instances of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on a convex
relaxation to principal component analysis (PCA). These algorithms have been
shown to outperform Oja’s algorithm, empirically, in terms of the iteration complexity, and to have runtime comparable with Oja’s. However, these findings are
not supported by existing theoretical results. While the iteration complexity bound
for `2 -RMSG was recently shown to match that of Oja’s algorithm, its theoretical
efficiency was left as an open problem. In this work, we give improved bounds
on per iteration cost of mini-batched variants of both MSG and `2 -RMSG and
arrive at an algorithm with total computational complexity matching that of Oja’s
algorithm.

1

Introduction

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a fundamental dimensionality reduction tool used by statisticians and machine learning practitioners alike. In this paper, we study PCA in a streaming setting
wherein we receive a stream of high dimensional vectors sampled from an unknown distribution. The
goal is to project each point to a lower dimensional space such that most of the information in data,
as measured by variance, is preserved.
Formally, we are given a stream of data vectors (xt )Tt=1 ⇢ Rd , such that each point is sampled
i.i.d. from a distribution xt ⇠ D, with covariance matrix C = Ex⇠D [xx> ] 2 Rd⇥d . Assuming the
distribution is zero-mean, the problem is to output an orthonormal Ut 2 Rd⇥k , after observing xt ,
which tries to minimize Ex⇠D [kUU> x xk22 ] over all possible orthonormal matrices U 2 Rd⇥k .
Equivalently, we are interested in solving the following non-convex stochastic optimization problem
in a streaming setting:
maximize Tr U> CU
U2Rd⇥k

subject to

U> U = Ik

.

(1)

There have been two classes of algorithms that have been proposed to solve Problem 1. One is based
on the stochastic power method, also known as Oja’s algorithm and is essentially stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) on Problem 1 (De Sa et al., 2014; Hardt & Price, 2014; Balcan et al., 2016; Jain et al.,
2016; Shamir, 2016a,b; Allen-Zhu & Li, 2017; Li et al., 2018); note, however, that Problem 1 is
non-convex. The second approach consists of relaxing the constraint set and reformulating PCA
as an equivalent but convex optimization problem. This latter formulation was initially studied by
Warmuth & Kuzmin (2008) in the non-stochastic (online) setting and later revisited by Arora et al.
(2013) in a stochastic setting. Formally, the equivalent convex problem to Problem 1 is given as
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

