The Randomized Midpoint Method for Log-Concave
Sampling

Ruoqi Shen
University of Washington
shenr3@cs.washington.edu

Yin Tat Lee
University of Washington and Microsoft Research
yintat@uw.edu

Abstract
Sampling from log-concave distributions is a well researched problem that has
many applications in statistics and machine learning. We study the distributions
of the form p∗ ∝ exp(−f (x)), where f : Rd → R has an L-Lipschitz gradient and is m-strongly convex. In our paper, we propose a Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithm based on the underdamped Langevin diffusion (ULD).
It can achieve  · D error (in 2-Wasserstein distance) in Õ κ7/6 /1/3 + κ/2/3
q
def
def L
d
steps, where D =
m is the effective diameter of the problem and κ = m is
the condition number. Our algorithm performs significantly faster than the previ-
ously best known algorithm for solving this problem, which requires Õ κ1.5 /
steps [7, 15]. Moreover, our algorithm can be easily parallelized to require only
O(κ log 1 ) parallel steps.
To solve the sampling problem, we propose a new framework to discretize stochastic differential equations. We apply this framework to discretize and simulate
ULD, which converges to the target distribution p∗ . The framework can be used
to solve not only the log-concave sampling problem, but any problem that involves
simulating (stochastic) differential equations.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study the problem of sampling from a high-dimensional log-concave distribution.
This problem is central in statistics, machine learning and theoretical computer science, with applications such as Bayesian estimation [1], volume computation [55] and bandit optimization [54]. In
a seminal 1989 result, Dyer, Frieze and Kannan [23] first presented a polynomial-time algorithm
(for an equivalent problem) that takes Õ(d23 log 1 ) steps on any d dimensional log-concave distribution to achieve target accuracy . After three decades of research in Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) and convex geometry [34, 2, 22, 35, 27, 37, 11, 30, 31, 43], results have been improved
to Õ(d4 log 1 ) steps for general log-concave distributions and slightly better for distributions given
in a certain form. Unfortunately, d log 1 steps are necessary even for a special case of log-concave
sampling, i.e., convex optimization [3]. To avoid this lower bound, there has been a recent surge of
interest in obtaining a faster algorithm via assuming some properties on the distribution.
We call a distribution log-concave if its density is proportional to e−f (x) with a convex function f .
For the standard assumption that f is m-strongly convex with an L-Lipschitz gradient (see Section
3.1), the current best algorithms have at least a linear d or 1/ dependence or a large dependence on
def

L
the condition number κ = m
. In this paper, we present an algorithm with no dependence on d and
a much smaller dependence on κ and  than shown in previous research. Moreover, our algorithm
is the first algorithm with better than 1/ dependence that is not Metropolis-adjusted and does not
make any extra assumption, such as high-order smoothness [41, 42, 6, 45].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

