Functional Adversarial Attacks
Cassidy Laidlaw
University of Maryland
claidlaw@umd.edu

Soheil Feizi
University of Maryland
sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We propose functional adversarial attacks, a novel class of threat models for crafting adversarial examples to fool machine learning models. Unlike a standard ℓp -ball
threat model, a functional adversarial threat model allows only a single function to
be used to perturb input features to produce an adversarial example. For example,
a functional adversarial attack applied on colors of an image can change all red
pixels simultaneously to light red. Such global uniform changes in images can be
less perceptible than perturbing pixels of the image individually. For simplicity,
we refer to functional adversarial attacks on image colors as ReColorAdv, which
is the main focus of our experiments. We show that functional threat models can
be combined with existing additive (ℓp ) threat models to generate stronger threat
models that allow both small, individual perturbations and large, uniform changes
to an input. Moreover, we prove that such combinations encompass perturbations
that would not be allowed in either constituent threat model. In practice, ReColorAdv can significantly reduce the accuracy of a ResNet-32 trained on CIFAR-10.
Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, combining ReColorAdv with other
attacks leads to the strongest existing attack even after adversarial training.

1

Introduction

There is an extensive recent literature on adversarial examples, small perturbations to inputs of
machine learning algorithms that cause the algorithms to report an erroneous output, e.g. the incorrect
label for a classifier. Adversarial examples present serious security challenges for real-world systems
like self-driving cars, since a change in the environment that is not noticeable to a human may cause
unexpected, unwanted, or dangerous behavior. Many methods of generating adversarial examples
(called adversarial attacks) have been proposed [23, 5, 15, 17, 3]. Defenses against such attacks have
also been explored [18, 14, 30].
Most existing attack and defense methods consider a threat model of adversarial attacks where
adversarial examples can differ from normal inputs by a small ℓp distance. However, using this
threat model that encompasses a simple definition of "small perturbation" misses other types of
perturbations that may also be imperceptible to humans. For instance, small spatial perturbations
have been used to generate adversarial examples [4, 27, 26].
In this paper, we propose a new class of threat models for adversarial attacks, called functional threat
models. Under a functional threat model, adversarial examples can be generated from a regular input
to a classifier by applying a single function to all features of the input:
Additive threat model:
Functional threat model:

(x1 , . . . , xn )
(x1 , . . . , xn )

→
→

(x1 + δ1 , . . . , xn + δn )
(f (x1 ), . . . , f (xn ))

For instance, the perturbation function f (·) could darken every red pixel in an image, or increase
the volume of every timestep in an audio sample. Functional threat models are in some ways
more restrictive because features cannot be perturbed individually. However, the uniformity of the
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

