Online-Within-Online Meta-Learning
Giulia Denevi1,2 , Dimitris Stamos3 , Carlo Ciliberto3,4 and Massimiliano Pontil1,3
1

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (Italy), 2 University of Genoa (Italy),
University College of London (UK),4 Imperial College of London (UK),
giulia.denevi@iit.it, c.ciliberto@imperial.ac.uk, {d.stamos.12,m.pontil}@ucl.ac.uk
3

Abstract
We study the problem of learning a series of tasks in a fully online Meta-Learning
setting. The goal is to exploit similarities among the tasks to incrementally adapt
an inner online algorithm in order to incur a low averaged cumulative error over
the tasks. We focus on a family of inner algorithms based on a parametrized
variant of online Mirror Descent. The inner algorithm is incrementally adapted
by an online Mirror Descent meta-algorithm using the corresponding within-task
minimum regularized empirical risk as the meta-loss. In order to keep the process
fully online, we approximate the meta-subgradients by the online inner algorithm.
An upper bound on the approximation error allows us to derive a cumulative
error bound for the proposed method. Our analysis can also be converted to the
statistical setting by online-to-batch arguments. We instantiate two examples of the
framework in which the meta-parameter is either a common bias vector or feature
map. Finally, preliminary numerical experiments confirm our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Humans can quickly adapt knowledge gained when learning past tasks, in order to solve new tasks
from just a handful of examples. In contrast, learning systems are still rather limited when it comes to
transfer knowledge over a sequence of learning problems. Overcoming this limitation can have a broad
impact in artificial intelligence, as it can save the expensive preparation of large training samples,
often humanly annotated, needed by current machine learning methods. As a result, Meta-Learning
is receiving increasing attention, both from applied [15, 32] and theoretical perspective [5, 40, 17].
Until very recently, Meta-Learning was mainly studied in the batch statistical setting, where data are
assumed to be independently sampled from some distribution and they are processed in one batch, see
[6, 23, 24, 25, 26, 29]. Only recently, a lot of interest raised in investigating more efficient methods,
combining ideas from Online Learning and Meta-Learning, see [1, 12, 13, 30, 3, 21, 16, 8, 11, 30]. In
this setting, which is sometimes referred to as Lifelong Learning, the tasks are observed sequentially
– via corresponding sets of training examples – and the broad goal is to exploit similarities across the
tasks to incrementally adapt an inner (within-task) algorithm to such a sequence. There are different
ways to deal with Meta-Learning in an online framework: the so-called Online-Within-Batch (OWB)
framework, where the tasks are processed online but the data within each task are processed in one
batch, see [1, 12, 13, 16, 8, 3, 21], or the so-called Online-Within-Online (OWO) framework, where
data are processed sequentially both within and across the tasks, see [1, 3, 21, 16, 11]. Previous work
mainly analyzed specific settings, see the technical discussion in App. A. The main goal of this work
is to propose an OWO Meta-Learning approach that can be adapted to a broad family of algorithms.
We consider a general class of inner algorithms based on primal-dual Online Learning [37, 33, 38, 36,
35]. In particular, we discuss in detail the case of online Mirror Descent on a regularized variant of the
empirical risk. The regularizer belongs to a general family of strongly convex functions parametrized
by a meta-parameter. The inner algorithm is adapted by a meta-algorithm, which also consists in
applying online Mirror Descent on a meta-objective given by the within-task minimum regularized
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

