Distributional Policy Optimization:
An Alternative Approach for Continuous Control
Chen Tessler∗ , Guy Tennenholtz∗ and Shie Mannor
∗
Equal Contribution
chen.tessler@campus.technion.ac.il, guytenn@gmail.com, shie@ee.technion.ac.il
Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel

Abstract
We identify a fundamental problem in policy gradient-based methods in continuous control. As policy gradient methods require the agent’s underlying probability
distribution, they limit policy representation to parametric distribution classes. We
show that optimizing over such sets results in local movement in the action space
and thus convergence to sub-optimal solutions. We suggest a novel distributional
framework, able to represent arbitrary distribution functions over the continuous
action space. Using this framework, we construct a generative scheme, trained using an off-policy actor-critic paradigm, which we call the Generative Actor Critic
(GAC). Compared to policy gradient methods, GAC does not require knowledge
of the underlying probability distribution, thereby overcoming these limitations.
Empirical evaluation shows that our approach is comparable and often surpasses
current state-of-the-art baselines in continuous domains.

1

Introduction

Model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a learning paradigm which aims to maximize a cumulative reward signal based on experience gathered through interaction with an environment [Sutton
and Barto, 1998]. It is divided into two primary categories. Value-based approaches involve learning
the value of each action and acting greedily with respect to it (i.e., selecting the action with highest
value). On the other hand, policy-based approaches (the focus of this work) learn the policy directly,
thereby explicitly learning a mapping from state to action.
Policy gradients (PGs) [Sutton et al., 2000b] have been the go-to approach for learning policies
in empirical applications. The combination of the policy gradient with recent advances in deep
learning has enabled the application of RL in complex and challenging environments. Such domains
include continuous control problems, in which an agent controls complex robotic machines both in
simulation [Schulman et al., 2015, Haarnoja et al., 2017, Peng et al., 2018] as well as real life
[Levine et al., 2016, Andrychowicz et al., 2018, Riedmiller et al., 2018]. Nevertheless, there exists a
fundamental problem when PG methods are applied to continuous control regimes. As the gradients
require knowledge of the probability of the performed action P (a | s), the PG is empirically limited
to parametric distribution functions. Common parametric distributions used in the literature include
the Gaussian [Schulman et al., 2015, 2017], Beta [Chou et al., 2017] and Delta [Silver et al., 2014,
Lillicrap et al., 2015, Fujimoto et al., 2018] distribution functions.
In this work, we show that while the PG is properly defined over parametric distribution functions,
it is prone to converge to sub-optimal exterma (Section 3). The leading reason is that these distributions are not convex in the distribution space1 and are thus limited to local improvement in the
1

As an example, consider the Gaussian distribution, which is known to be non-convex.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

