Latent ODEs for Irregularly-Sampled Time Series

Yulia Rubanova, Ricky T. Q. Chen, David Duvenaud
University of Toronto and the Vector Institute
{rubanova, rtqichen, duvenaud}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Time series with non-uniform intervals occur in many applications, and are difficult to model using standard recurrent neural networks (RNNs). We generalize
RNNs to have continuous-time hidden dynamics defined by ordinary differential
equations (ODEs), a model we call ODE-RNNs. Furthermore, we use ODE-RNNs
to replace the recognition network of the recently-proposed Latent ODE model.
Both ODE-RNNs and Latent ODEs can naturally handle arbitrary time gaps between observations, and can explicitly model the probability of observation times
using Poisson processes. We show experimentally that these ODE-based models
outperform their RNN-based counterparts on irregularly-sampled data.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are the dominant
model class for high-dimensional, regularly-sampled time
series data, such as text or speech. However, they are an
awkward fit for irregularly-sampled time series data, common in medical or business settings. A standard trick for
applying RNNs to irregular time series is to divide the
timeline into equally-sized intervals, and impute or aggregate observations using averages. Such preprocessing
destroys information, particularly about the timing of
measurements, which can be informative about latent
variables [Lipton et al., 2016, Che et al., 2018].

Standard RNN

RNN-Decay

Neural ODE

ODE-RNN
An approach which better matches reality is to construct
a continuous-time model with a latent state defined at all
times. Recently, steps have been taken in this direction,
Time
defining RNNs with continuous dynamics given by a simple exponential decay between observations [Che et al.,
Figure 1: Hidden state trajectories. Ver2018, Cao et al., 2018, Rajkomar et al., 2018, Mei and
tical lines show observation times. Lines
Eisner, 2017].
show different dimensions of the hidden
We generalize state transitions in RNNs to continuous- state. Standard RNNs have constant or
time dynamics specified by a neural network, as in Neural undefined hidden states between observaODEs [Chen et al., 2018]. We call this model the ODE- tions. The RNN-Decay model has states
RNN, and use it to contruct two distinct continuous-time which exponentially decay towards zero,
models. First, we use it as a standalone autoregressive and are updated at observations. States
model. Second, we refine the Latent ODE model of Chen of Neural ODE follow a complex trajecet al. [2018] by using the ODE-RNN as a recognition tory but are determined by the initial state.
network. Latent ODEs define a generative process over The ODE-RNN model has states which
time series based on the deterministic evolution of an obey an ODE between observations, and
initial latent state, and can be trained as a variational are also updated at observations.
autoencoder [Kingma and Welling, 2013]. Both models
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

