Assessing Social and Intersectional Biases in
Contextualized Word Representations

Yi Chern Tan, L. Elisa Celis
Yale University
{yichern.tan, elisa.celis}@yale.edu

Abstract
Social bias in machine learning has drawn significant attention, with work ranging
from demonstrations of bias in a multitude of applications, curating definitions
of fairness for different contexts, to developing algorithms to mitigate bias. In
natural language processing, gender bias has been shown to exist in context-free
word embeddings. Recently, contextual word representations have outperformed
word embeddings in several downstream NLP tasks. These word representations
are conditioned on their context within a sentence, and can also be used to encode
the entire sentence. In this paper, we analyze the extent to which state-of-the-art
models for contextual word representations, such as BERT and GPT-2, encode
biases with respect to gender, race, and intersectional identities. Towards this, we
propose assessing bias at the contextual word level. This novel approach captures
the contextual effects of bias missing in context-free word embeddings, yet avoids
confounding effects that underestimate bias at the sentence encoding level. We
demonstrate evidence of bias at the corpus level, find varying evidence of bias in
embedding association tests, show in particular that racial bias is strongly encoded in
contextual word models, and observe that bias effects for intersectional minorities
are exacerbated beyond their constituent minority identities. Further, evaluating
bias effects at the contextual word level captures biases that are not captured at the
sentence level, confirming the need for our novel approach.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings [22, 24], which provide context-free vector representations of words, have become
standard practice in NLP. Recently, contextual word representations [19, 17, 25, 26, 10, 27] have had
significant success in improving downstream NLP tasks, and most state-of-the-art systems use such
representations of words. These models rely on a pre-trained encoder network run on a sentence to
output contextual embeddings for each token. The networks can be based on Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) units or a transformer, and the corresponding embeddings can be used in the same manner as
context-free word embeddings.
However, word embeddings such as word2vec [22] and GloVe [24] have been shown to exhibit
social biases, including gender bias [2, 5] and racial bias [20]. These biases are concerning, as word
embeddings form the foundation of most language systems. Their use can perpetuate and even amplify
cultural stereotypes by encoding them into language systems. Downstream tasks such as classification
and ranking will suffer from the implicit encoding of these biases, posing a hurdle to building fair
machine learning systems [31]. In this work we extend and expand on the analysis of contextual
representations with respect to social and intersectional biases. Zhao et al. [35] demonstrate that
ELMo [25] contextual word representations exhibit gender bias. However, BERT has since surpassed
ELMo in performance on downstream NLP tasks like natural language understanding, inference,
question answering, and named entity recognition [10]. BERT is composed of a layered self-attention
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

