Private Stochastic Convex Optimization with Optimal
Rates
Raef Bassily∗
The Ohio State University
bassily.1@osu.edu

Vitaly Feldman∗
Google Research. Brain Team.

Kunal Talwar∗
Google Research. Brain Team.
kunal@google.com

Abhradeep Thakurta∗
University of California Santa Cruz
Google Research. Brain Team.

Abstract
We study differentially private (DP) algorithms for stochastic convex optimization
(SCO). In this problem the goal is to approximately minimize the population loss
given i.i.d. samples from a distribution over convex and Lipschitz loss functions. A
long line of existing work on private convex optimization focuses on the empirical
loss and derives asymptotically tight bounds on the excess empirical loss. However
a significant gap exists in the known bounds for the population loss.
We show that, up to logarithmic factors, the optimal excess population loss for DP
algorithms is equal to the larger of the optimal non-private excess population loss,
and the optimal excess empirical loss of DP algorithms. This implies that, contrary
to √
intuition based on private ERM, private SCO has asymptotically the same rate of
1/ n as non-private SCO in the parameter regime most common in practice. The
best previous result in this setting gives rate of 1/n1/4 . Our approach builds on
existing differentially private algorithms and relies on the analysis of algorithmic
stability to ensure generalization.

1

Introduction

Many fundamental problems in machine learning reduce to the problem of minimizing the expected
loss (a.k.a. population loss) L(w) = E [`(w, z)] for convex loss functions of w given access to
z∼D

samples z1 , . . . , zn from the data distribution D. This problem arises in various settings, such as
estimating the mean of a distribution, least squares regression, or minimizing a convex surrogate loss
for a classification problem. This problem is commonly referred to as Stochastic Convex Optimization
(SCO) and has been the subject of extensive study in machine learning and optimization [SSBD14].
In this work we study this problem with the additional constraint of differential privacy.
P
A closely related problem is that of minimizing the loss b
L(w) = n1 i `(w, zi ) on the sampled set
of functions, often known as Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM). The problem of private ERM has
been well-studied and tight upper and lower bounds are known for private ERM. We give nearly tight
upper and lower bounds on the excess population loss (a.k.a. excess population risk). At first glance
these two problems may appear to be essentially the same as an optimal algorithm for minimizing the
empirical risk should also achieve the best bounds for the population risk itself, i.e. the best approach
to private SCO is to use the best private ERM.
This simple intuition is unfortunately false, even in the non-private case. A natural approach of
b
bounding the population loss is by proving an upper bound on Ez1 ,...,zn [supw (L(w) − L(w))].
This
∗

Part of this work was done while visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

