Distributed Low-rank Matrix Factorization
With Exact Consensus
Zhihui Zhu⇤
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA
zzhu29@jhu.edu

Qiuwei Li⇤
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
qiuli@mines.edu

Xinshuo Yang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
xinshuoyang@mines.edu

Gongguo Tang
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
gtang@mines.edu

Michael B. Wakin
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
mwakin@mines.edu

Abstract
Low-rank matrix factorization is a problem of broad importance, owing to the
ubiquity of low-rank models in machine learning contexts. In spite of its nonconvexity, this problem has a well-behaved geometric landscape, permitting local
search algorithms such as gradient descent to converge to global minimizers. In this
paper, we study low-rank matrix factorization in the distributed setting, where local
variables at each node encode parts of the overall matrix factors, and consensus
is encouraged among certain such variables. We identify conditions under which
this new problem also has a well-behaved geometric landscape, and we propose
an extension of distributed gradient descent (DGD) to solve this problem. The
favorable landscape allows us to prove convergence to global optimality with exact
consensus, a stronger result than what is provided by off-the-shelf DGD theory.

1

Introduction

A promising line of recent literature has examined the nonconvex objective functions that arise
when certain matrix optimization problems are solved in factored form, that is, when a low-rank
optimization variable X is replaced by a product of two thin matrices UVT and the optimization
proceeds jointly over U and V [6, 2, 10, 14, 23, 24, 27, 37, 38, 41, 42, 43]. In many cases, a study of
the geometric landscape of these objective functions reveals that—despite their nonconvexity—they
possess a certain favorable geometry. In particular, many of the resulting objective functions (i) satisfy
the strict saddle property [13, 36], where every critical point is either a local minimum or a strict
saddle point, at which the Hessian matrix has at least one negative eigenvalue, and (ii) have no
spurious local minima (every local minimum corresponds to a global minimum).
⇤

Equal contribution. ZZ is also with the Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of
Denver.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

