Fully Parameterized Quantile Function for
Distributional Reinforcement Learning

Derek Yang∗
UC San Diego
dyang1206@gmail.com
Tao Qin
Microsoft Research
taoqin@microsoft.com

Li Zhao
Microsoft Research
lizo@microsoft.com

Zichuan Lin
Tsinghua University
linzc16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Jiang Bian
Microsoft Research
jiang.bian@microsoft.com

Tieyan Liu
Microsoft Research
tyliu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Distributional Reinforcement Learning (RL) differs from traditional RL in that,
rather than the expectation of total returns, it estimates distributions and has
achieved state-of-the-art performance on Atari Games. The key challenge in
practical distributional RL algorithms lies in how to parameterize estimated distributions so as to better approximate the true continuous distribution. Existing
distributional RL algorithms parameterize either the probability side or the return
value side of the distribution function, leaving the other side uniformly fixed as in
C51, QR-DQN or randomly sampled as in IQN. In this paper, we propose fully
parameterized quantile function that parameterizes both the quantile fraction axis
(i.e., the x-axis) and the value axis (i.e., y-axis) for distributional RL. Our algorithm contains a fraction proposal network that generates a discrete set of quantile
fractions and a quantile value network that gives corresponding quantile values.
The two networks are jointly trained to find the best approximation of the true
distribution. Experiments on 55 Atari Games show that our algorithm significantly
outperforms existing distributional RL algorithms and creates a new record for the
Atari Learning Environment for non-distributed agents.

1

Introduction

Distributional reinforcement learning [Jaquette et al., 1973, Sobel, 1982, White, 1988, Morimura
et al., 2010, Bellemare et al., 2017] differs from value-based reinforcement learning in that, instead
of focusing only on the expectation of the return, distributional reinforcement learning also takes
the intrinsic randomness of returns within the framework into consideration [Bellemare et al., 2017,
Dabney et al., 2018b,a, Rowland et al., 2018]. The randomness comes from both the environment
itself and agent’s policy. Distributional RL algorithms characterize the total return as random variable
and estimate the distribution of such random variable, while traditional Q-learning algorithms estimate
only the mean (i.e., traditional value function) of such random variable.
The main challenge of distributional RL algorithm is how to parameterize and approximate the
distribution. In Categorical DQN [Bellemare et al., 2017](C51), the possible returns are limited to
a discrete set of fixed values, and the probability of each value is learned through interacting with
environments. C51 out-performs all previous variants of DQN on a set of 57 Atari 2600 games in the
Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) [Bellemare et al., 2013]. Another approach for distributional
reinforcement learning is to estimate the quantile values instead. Dabney et al. [2018b] proposed QR∗

Contributed during internship at Microsoft Research.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

