A Model to Search for Synthesizable Molecules

John Bradshaw
University of Cambridge
MPI for Intelligent Systems
jab255@cam.ac.uk

Brooks Paige
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
bpaige@turing.ac.uk

Marwin H. S. Segler
BenevolentAI
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster
marwin.segler@benevolent.ai

Matt J. Kusner
University College London
The Alan Turing Institute
m.kusner@ucl.ac.uk

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
The Alan Turing Institute
Microsoft Research Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep generative models are able to suggest new organic molecules by generating
strings, trees, and graphs representing their structure. While such models allow
one to generate molecules with desirable properties, they give no guarantees that
the molecules can actually be synthesized in practice. We propose a new molecule
generation model, mirroring a more realistic real-world process, where (a) reactants
are selected, and (b) combined to form more complex molecules. More specifically,
our generative model proposes a bag of initial reactants (selected from a pool of
commercially-available molecules) and uses a reaction model to predict how they
react together to generate new molecules. We first show that the model can generate
diverse, valid and unique molecules due to the useful inductive biases of modeling
reactions. Furthermore, our model allows chemists to interrogate not only the
properties of the generated molecules but also the feasibility of the synthesis routes.
We conclude by using our model to solve retrosynthesis problems, predicting a set
of reactants that can produce a target product.

1

Introduction

The ability of machine learning to generate structured objects has progressed dramatically in the
last few years. One particularly successful example of this is the flurry of developments devoted to
generating small molecules [14, 46, 27, 10, 49, 11, 20, 30, 55, 41, 2]. These models have been shown
to be extremely effective at finding molecules with desirable properties: drug-like molecules [14],
biological target activity molecules [46], and soluble molecules [11].
However, these improvements in molecule discovery come at a cost: these methods do not describe
how to synthesize such molecules, a prerequisite for experimental testing. Traditionally, in computeraided molecular design, this has been addressed by virtual screening [48], where molecule data sets
|D| ≈ 108 , are first generated via the expensive combinatorial enumeration of molecular fragments
stitched together using hand-crafted bonding rules, and then are scored in an O(|D|) step.
In this paper we propose a generative model for molecules (shown in Figure 1) that describes how to
make such molecules from a set of commonly-available reactants. Our model first generates a set of
reactant molecules, and second maps them to a predicted product molecule via a reaction prediction
model. It allows one to simultaneously search for better molecules and describe how such molecules
can be made. By closely mimicking the real-world process of designing new molecules, we show
that our model: 1. Is able to generate a wide range of molecules not seen in the training data; 2.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

