The Thermodynamic Variational Objective

1

Vaden Masrani1 , Tuan Anh Le2 , Frank Wood1
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia
2
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT

Abstract
We introduce the thermodynamic variational objective (TVO) for learning in both
continuous and discrete deep generative models. The TVO arises from a key
connection between variational inference and thermodynamic integration that
results in a tighter lower bound to the log marginal likelihood than the standard
variational evidence lower bound (ELBO) while remaining as broadly applicable.
We provide a computationally efficient gradient estimator for the TVO that applies
to continuous, discrete, and non-reparameterizable distributions and show that the
objective functions used in variational inference, variational autoencoders, wake
sleep, and inference compilation are all special cases of the TVO. We use the
TVO to learn both discrete and continuous deep generative models and empirically
demonstrate state of the art model and inference network learning.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning in richly structured deep latent variable models [1, 2] remains challenging.
Fundamental research directions include low-variance gradient estimation for discrete and continuous
latent variable models [3–7], tightening variational bounds in order to obtain better model learning [8–
11], and alleviation of the associated detrimental effects on learning of inference networks [12].
We present the thermodynamic variational objective (TVO), which is based on a key connection we
establish between thermodynamic integration (TI) and amortized variational inference (VI), namely
that by forming a geometric path between the model and inference network, the “instantaneous
ELBO” [13] that appears in VI is equivalent to the first derivative of the potential function that appears
in TI [14, 15]. This allows us to formulate the log evidence as a 1D integration of the instantaneous
ELBO in a unit interval, which we then approximate to form the TVO .
We demonstrate that optimizing the TVO leads to improved learning of both discrete and continuous
latent-variable deep generative models. The gradient estimator we derive for optimizing the TVO has
empirically lower variance than the REINFORCE [16] estimator, and unlike the reparameterization
trick (which is only applicable to a limited family of continuous latent variables), applies to both
continuous and discrete latent variables models.
The TVO is a lower bound to the log evidence which can be made arbitrarily tight. We empirically
show that optimizing the TVO results in better inference networks than optimizing the importance
weighted autoencoder (IWAE) objective [8] for which tightening of the bound is known to make
inference network learning worse [12]. While this problem can be ameliorated by reducing the
variance of the gradient estimator in the case of reparameterizable latent variables [17], resolving it
in the case of non-reparameterizable latent variables currently involves alternating optimization of
model and inference networks [18–20].

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

