Transductive Zero-Shot Learning with Visual
Structure Constraint
Ziyu Wan∗1 , Dongdong Chen∗2 , Yan Li3 , Xingguang Yan4
Junge Zhang5 , Yizhou Yu6 , Jing Liao†1
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Cloud+AI
3
PCG, Tencent 4 Shenzhen University 5 NLPR, CASIA 6 Deepwise AI Lab

Abstract
To recognize objects of the unseen classes, most existing Zero-Shot Learning(ZSL)
methods first learn a compatible projection function between the common semantic
space and the visual space based on the data of source seen classes, then directly
apply it to the target unseen classes. However, in real scenarios, the data distribution
between the source and target domain might not match well, thus causing the wellknown domain shift problem. Based on the observation that visual features of test
instances can be separated into different clusters, we propose a new visual structure
constraint on class centers for transductive ZSL, to improve the generality of the
projection function (i.e.alleviate the above domain shift problem). Specifically,
three different strategies (symmetric Chamfer-distance, Bipartite matching distance,
and Wasserstein distance) are adopted to align the projected unseen semantic centers
and visual cluster centers of test instances. We also propose a new training strategy
to handle the real cases where many unrelated images exist in the test dataset, which
is not considered in previous methods. Experiments on many widely used datasets
demonstrate that the proposed visual structure constraint can bring substantial
performance gain consistently and achieve state-of-the-art results. The source code
is available at https://github.com/raywzy/VSC.

1

Introduction

Relying on massive labeled training datasets, significant progress has been made for image recognition
in the past years [12]. However, it is unrealistic to label all the object classes, thus making these
supervised learning methods struggle to recognize objects which are unseen during training. By
contrast, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [24, 38, 40] only requires labeled images of seen classes (source
domain), and are capable of recognizing images of unseen classes (target domain). The seen and
unseen domains often share a common semantic space, which defines how unseen classes are
semantically related to seen classes. The most popular semantic space is based on semantic attributes,
where each seen or unseen class is represented by an attribute vector. Besides the semantic space,
images of the source and target domains are also related and represented in a visual feature space.
To associate the semantic space and the visual space, existing methods often rely on the source domain
data to learn a compatible projection function to map one space to the other, or two compatible
projection functions to map both spaces into one common embedding space. During test time, to
recognize an image in the target domain, semantic vectors of all unseen classes and the visual feature
of this image would be projected into the embedding space using the learned function, then nearest
neighbor (NN) search will be performed to find the best match class. However, due to the existence of
∗
†

Equal contribution. Email: ziyuwan2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cddlyf@gmail.com
The corresponding author. Email: jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

