General E(2) - Equivariant Steerable CNNs
Maurice Weiler∗
University of Amsterdam, QUVA Lab
m.weiler@uva.nl

Gabriele Cesa∗†
University of Amsterdam
cesa.gabriele@gmail.com

Abstract
The big empirical success of group equivariant networks has led in recent years to
the sprouting of a great variety of equivariant network architectures. A particular
focus has thereby been on rotation and reflection equivariant CNNs for planar
images. Here we give a general description of E(2)-equivariant convolutions in
the framework of Steerable CNNs. The theory of Steerable CNNs thereby yields
constraints on the convolution kernels which depend on group representations
describing the transformation laws of feature spaces. We show that these constraints
for arbitrary group representations can be reduced to constraints under irreducible
representations. A general solution of the kernel space constraint is given for
arbitrary representations of the Euclidean group E(2) and its subgroups. We
implement a wide range of previously proposed and entirely new equivariant
network architectures and extensively compare their performances. E(2)-steerable
convolutions are further shown to yield remarkable gains on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100
and STL-10 when used as drop in replacement for non-equivariant convolutions.

1

Introduction

The equivariance of neural networks under symmetry group actions has in the recent years proven
to be a fruitful prior in network design. By guaranteeing a desired transformation behavior of
convolutional features under transformations of the network input, equivariant networks achieve
improved generalization capabilities and sample complexities compared to their non-equivariant
counterparts. Due to their great practical relevance, a big pool of rotation- and reflection- equivariant
models for planar images has been proposed by now. Unfortunately, an empirical survey, reproducing
and comparing all these different approaches, is still missing.
An important step in this direction is given by the theory of Steerable CNNs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] which
defines a very general notion of equivariant convolutions on homogeneous spaces. In particular,
steerable CNNs describe E(2)-equivariant (i.e. rotation- and reflection-equivariant) convolutions on
the image plane R2 . The feature spaces of steerable CNNs are thereby defined as spaces of feature
fields, characterized by a group representation which determines their transformation behavior under
transformations of the input. In order to preserve the specified transformation law of feature spaces,
the convolutional kernels are subject to a linear constraint, depending on the corresponding group
representations. While this constraint has been solved for specific groups and representations [1, 2],
no general solution strategy has been proposed so far. In this work we give a general strategy which
reduces the solution of the kernel space constraint under arbitrary representations to much simpler
constraints under single, irreducible representations.
Specifically for the Euclidean group E(2) and its subgroups, we give a general solution of this kernel
space constraint. As a result, we are able to implement a wide range of equivariant models, covering
regular GCNNs [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], classical Steerable CNNs [1], Harmonic Networks [12], gated
Harmonic Networks [2], Vector Field Networks [13], Scattering Transforms [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] and
entirely new architectures, in one unified framework. In addition, we are able to build hybrid models,
mixing different field types (representations) of these networks both over layers and within layers.
* Equal contribution, author ordering determined by random number generator.
† This research has been conducted during an internship at QUVA lab, University of Amsterdam.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

