Positive-Unlabeled Compression on the Cloud

Yixing Xu† , Yunhe Wang† , Hanting Chen§ , Kai Han† ,
Chunjing Xu† , Dacheng Tao‡ , Chang Xu‡
†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
§
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), CMIC,
School of EECS, Peking University, China
‡
The University of Sydney, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{yixing.xu, yunhe.wang, kai.han, xuchunjing}@huawei.com
htchen@pku.edu.cn, {dacheng.tao, c.xu}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Many attempts have been done to extend the great success of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) achieved on high-end GPU servers to portable devices such as
smart phones. Providing compression and acceleration service of deep learning
models on the cloud is therefore of significance and is attractive for end users. However, existing network compression and acceleration approaches usually fine-tuning
the svelte model by requesting the entire original training data (e.g. ImageNet),
which could be more cumbersome than the network itself and cannot be easily
uploaded to the cloud. In this paper, we present a novel positive-unlabeled (PU)
setting for addressing this problem. In practice, only a small portion of the original
training set is required as positive examples and more useful training examples can
be obtained from the massive unlabeled data on the cloud through a PU classifier
with an attention based multi-scale feature extractor. We further introduce a robust
knowledge distillation (RKD) scheme to deal with the class imbalance problem of
these newly augmented training examples. The superiority of the proposed method
is verified through experiments conducted on the benchmark models and datasets.
We can use only 8% of uniformly selected data from the ImageNet to obtain an
efficient model with comparable performance to the baseline ResNet-34.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely used in a variety of computer vision
applications such as image classification [14, 18, 21], object detection [5], semantic segmentation [17],
clustering [31], multi-label learning [23], etcCNNs are often over-parameterized to achieve a good
recognition performance. However, many empirical studies suggest that those redundant parameters
or filters can be eliminated without affecting the performance of the network. To be compatible with
various running environments (e.g. cell phone and autonomous driving) in real-world applications,
well trained neural networks need to be further compressed and accelerated accordingly. Considering
the scalable computation resource (e.g. GPU and RAM) offered by the cloud, it is therefore promising
to provide network compression service for end users.
Compared with the model compression service offered by the cloud, it would be much harder for
end users to compress the cumbersome network by themselves. One one hand, GPUs are essential to
doing effective deep learning. Compared with setting up their own servers, many users tend to spin
up cloud instances with GPUs by balancing the flexibility and the investment, especially when the
GPUs are only needed for several hours. One the other hand, not every user is a deep learning expert,
and a cloud service would be expected to produce efficient deep neural networks according to users’
needs.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

