Learnable Tree Filter for Structure-preserving
Feature Transform
Lin Song1∗ Yanwei Li2,3∗ Zeming Li4 Gang Yu4 Hongbin Sun1†
Jian Sun4 Nanning Zheng1
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong Univeristy.
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. 4 Megvii Inc. (Face++).
stevengrove@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, liyanwei2017@ia.ac.cn,
{hsun, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {lizeming, yugang, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
Learning discriminative global features plays a vital role in semantic segmentation.
And most of the existing methods adopt stacks of local convolutions or non-local
blocks to capture long-range context. However, due to the absence of spatial structure preservation, these operators ignore the object details when enlarging receptive
fields. In this paper, we propose the learnable tree filter to form a generic tree filtering module that leverages the structural property of minimal spanning tree to model
long-range dependencies while preserving the details. Furthermore, we propose a
highly efficient linear-time algorithm to reduce resource consumption. Thus, the
designed modules can be plugged into existing deep neural networks conveniently.
To this end, tree filtering modules are embedded to formulate a unified framework
for semantic segmentation. We conduct extensive ablation studies to elaborate on
the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed method. Specifically, it attains better performance with much less overhead compared with the classic PSP block and
Non-local operation under the same backbone. Our approach is proved to achieve
consistent improvements on several benchmarks without bells-and-whistles. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/StevenGrove/TreeFilter-Torch.

1

Introduction

Scene perception, based on semantic segmentation, is a fundamental yet challenging topic in the
vision field. The goal is to assign each pixel in the image with one of several predefined categories.
With the developments of convolutional neural networks (CNN), it has achieved promising results
using improved feature representations. Recently, numerous approaches have been proposed to
capture larger receptive fields for global context aggregation [1–5], which can be divided into local
and non-local solutions according to their pipelines.
Traditional local approaches enlarge receptive fields by stacking conventional convolutions [6–8]
or their variants (e.g., atrous convolutions [9, 2]). Moreover, the distribution of impact within a
receptive field in deep stacks of convolutions converges to Gaussian [10], without detailed structure
preservation (the pertinent details, which are proved to be effective in feature representation [11, 12]).
Considering the limitation of local operations, several non-local solutions have been proposed to
model long-range feature dependencies directly, such as convolutional methods (e.g., non-local
operations [13], PSP [3] and ASPP modules [2, 14, 15]) and graph-based neural networks [16–
18]. However, due to the absence of structure-preserving property, which considers both spatial
∗
†

Equal contribution. This work was done in Megvii Research.
Corresponding author.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

