Multi-mapping Image-to-Image Translation via
Learning Disentanglement

Xiaoming Yu1,2 , Yuanqi Chen1,2 , Thomas Li1,3 , Shan Liu4 , and Ge Li 1,2
School of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
4
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University
Tencent America
xiaomingyu@pku.edu.cn, cyq373@pku.edu.cn
tli@aiit.org.cn, shanl@tencent.com, geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Recent advances of image-to-image translation focus on learning the one-to-many
mapping from two aspects: multi-modal translation and multi-domain translation.
However, the existing methods only consider one of the two perspectives, which
makes them unable to solve each other’s problem. To address this issue, we propose
a novel unified model, which bridges these two objectives. First, we disentangle
the input images into the latent representations by an encoder-decoder architecture
with a conditional adversarial training in the feature space. Then, we encourage
the generator to learn multi-mappings by a random cross-domain translation. As a
result, we can manipulate different parts of the latent representations to perform
multi-modal and multi-domain translations simultaneously. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Code will be available
at https://github.com/Xiaoming-Yu/DMIT.

1

Introduction

Image-to-image (I2I) translation is a broad concept that aims to translate images from one domain to
another. Many computer vision and image processing problems can be handled in this framework,
e.g. image colorization [16], image inpainting [39], style transfer [45], etc. Previous works [16, 45,
40, 18, 24] present the impressive results on the task with deterministic one-to-one mapping, but
suffer from mode collapse when the outputs correspond to multiple possibilities. For example, in the
season transfer task, as shown in Fig. 1, a summer image may correspond to multiple winter scenes
with different styles of lighting, sky, and snow. To tackle this problem and generalize the applicable
scenarios of I2I, recent studies focus on one-to-many translation and explore the problem from two
perspectives: multi-domain translation [20, 3, 25], and multi-modal translation [46, 22, 15, 42, 39].
The multi-domain translation aims to learn mappings between each domain and other domains.
Under a single unified framework, recent works realize the translation among multiple domains.
However, between the two domains, what these methods have learned are still deterministic one-toone mappings, thus they fail to capture the multi-modal nature of the image distribution within the
image domain. Another line of works is the multi-modal translation. BicycleGAN [46] achieves the
one-to-many mapping between the source domain and the target domain by combining the objective
of cVAE-GAN [21] and cLR-GAN [2, 5, 7]. MUNIT [15] and DRIT [22] extend the method to
learn two one-to-many mappings between the two image domains in an unsupervised setting, i.e.,
domain A to domain B and vice versa. While capable of generating diverse and realistic translation
outputs, these methods are limited when there are multiple image domains to be translated. In order
to adapt to the new task, the domain-specific encoder-decoder architecture in these methods needs to
be duplicated to the number of image domains. Moreover, they assume that there is no correlation of
the styles between domains, while we argue that they could be aligned as shown in Fig. 1. Besides,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

