Fine-grained Optimization of Deep Neural Networks
Mete Ozay∗

Abstract
In recent studies, several asymptotic upper bounds on generalization errors on deep
neural networks (DNNs) are theoretically derived. These bounds are functions of
several norms of weights of the DNNs, such as the Frobenius and spectral norms,
and they are computed for weights grouped according to either input and output
channels of the DNNs. In this work, we conjecture that if we can impose multiple
constraints on weights of DNNs to upper bound the norms of the weights, and train
the DNNs with these weights, then we can attain empirical generalization errors
closer to the derived theoretical bounds, and improve accuracy of the DNNs.
To this end, we pose two problems. First, we aim to obtain weights whose different
norms are all upper bounded by a constant number. To achieve these bounds,
we propose a two-stage renormalization procedure; (i) normalization of weights
according to different norms used in the bounds, and (ii) reparameterization of
the normalized weights to set a constant and finite upper bound of their norms. In
the second problem, we consider training DNNs with these renormalized weights.
To this end, we first propose a strategy to construct joint spaces (manifolds) of
weights according to different constraints in DNNs. Next, we propose a finegrained SGD algorithm (FG-SGD) for optimization on the weight manifolds to
train DNNs with assurance of convergence to minima. Experimental analyses show
that image classification accuracy of baseline DNNs can be boosted using FG-SGD
on collections of manifolds identified by multiple constraints.

1

Introduction

Understanding generalization behavior of DNNs is an open problem [1]. Recent works [2–8]
addressed this problem by extending the early results proposed for shallow linear neural networks
(NNs) [9] for a more general class of DNNs (e.g. neural networks with ReLU), recurrent neural
networks [10, 11], and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (see Table 1 for a comparison). The
proposed asymptotic bounds were obtained by defining weight matrices of DNNs using random
matrices, and applying concentration inequalities on them. Thereby, the bounds were computed by
functions of several `p norms of these matrices, for 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞.
In this work, we conjecture that if we can impose multiple constraints on weights of DNNs to set
upper bounds of the norms of the weight matrices, and train the DNNs with these weights, then the
DNNs can achieve empirical generalization errors closer to the proposed theoretical bounds, and we
can improve their accuracy in various tasks. We pose two problems in order to achieve this goal;
1. Renormalization of weights to upper bound norms of their matrices.
2. Training DNNs with renormalized weights with assurance to convergence to minima.
1.1

Background

Spaces of normalized weights can be identified by different Riemann manifolds [12]; (i) unit norm
weights reside on the sphere Sp(Al Bl − 1), (ii) orthonormal weights belong to the Stiefel manifold
∗

meteozay@gmail.com

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

