Optimal Stochastic and Online Learning with
Individual Iterates

1

Yunwen Lei1,2 Peng Yang1 Ke Tang1∗ Ding-Xuan Zhou3
University Key Laboratory of Evolving Intelligent Systems of Guangdong Province,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
2
Department of Computer Science,
Technical University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern 67653, Germany
3
School of Data Science and Department of Mathematics,
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
{leiyw, yangp, tangk3}@sustech.edu.cn mazhou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Stochastic composite mirror descent (SCMD) is a simple and efficient method able
to capture both geometric and composite structures of optimization problems in
machine learning. Existing strategies require to take either an average or a random
selection of iterates to achieve optimal convergence rates, which, however, can
either destroy the sparsity of solutions or slow down the practical training speed. In
this paper, we propose a theoretically sound strategy to select an individual iterate
of the vanilla SCMD, which is able to achieve optimal rates for both convex and
strongly convex problems in a non-smooth learning setting. This strategy of outputting an individual iterate can preserve the sparsity of solutions which is crucial
for a proper interpretation in sparse learning problems. We report experimental
comparisons with several baseline methods to show the effectiveness of our method
in achieving a fast training speed as well as in outputting sparse solutions.

1

Introduction

Gradient-based methods have found wide applications to solve various optimization problems. A
basic and representative method of this type is the gradient descent, which iteratively moves iterates
along the minus gradient direction of the current iterate. However, gradient descent applied to
machine learning problems requires to go through all training examples at each iteration, which is not
efficient when the sample size is large. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) relieves this computational
burden by approximating the true gradient of the objective function with an unbiased estimation
based on a randomly selected training example. With this strategy, SGD can achieve sample-size
independent computational cost per iteration and therefore can be successfully applied to very large
datasets which are becoming ubiquitous in the big data era [2, 4, 44].
From different viewpoints, SGD has been extended in various ways. For example, the trick of variancereduction has been introduced to exploit the finite summation structure of objective functions for
reducing the inherent variance [16, 33, 40, 43]. Adaptive step sizes were proposed to dynamically
incorporate the knowledge of the geometry of the data observed [9]. Decreasing step sizes in a
stagewise manner is used as a common trick in practice [14, 19, 41]. The trick of momentum is
widely used to accelerate SGD by choosing an appropriate direction to pursue per iteration [18, 26, 29].
Proximal operators have been introduced to capture a structure of optimization problems [28], which
∗

Corresponding author

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

