Random Projections and Sampling Algorithms for
Clustering of High-Dimensional Polygonal Curves

Stefan Meintrup
Faculty of Computer Science
TU Dortmund University
Dortmund, Germany
stefan.meintrup@tu-dortmund.de

Alexander Munteanu
Dortmund Data Science Center
TU Dortmund University
Dortmund, Germany
alexander.munteanu@tu-dortmund.de

Dennis Rohde
Chair of Efficient Algorithms and Complexity Theory
TU Dortmund University
Dortmund, Germany
dennis.rohde@tu-dortmund.de

Abstract
We study the k-median clustering problem for high-dimensional polygonal curves
with finite but unbounded number of vertices. We tackle the computational issue
that arises from the high number of dimensions by defining a Johnson-Lindenstrauss
projection for polygonal curves. We analyze the resulting error in terms of the
Fréchet distance, which is a tractable and natural dissimilarity measure for curves.
Our clustering algorithms achieve sublinear dependency on the number of input
curves via subsampling. Also, we show that
√ the Fréchet distance can not be
approximated within any factor of less than 2 by probabilistically reducing the
dependency on the number of vertices of the curves. As a consequence we provide
a fast, CUDA-parallelized version of the Alt and Godau algorithm for computing
the Fréchet distance and use it to evaluate our results empirically.

1

Introduction

Time-series are sequences of measurements taken at certain instants of time. They arise in numerous
applications, e.g., in the physical, geo-spatial, technical or financial domains (Zhang et al., 2007;
Chapados and Bengio, 2008; Zimmer et al., 2018). Often there are multiple measurements per time
instant, e.g., when there are numerous synchronized sensors. While the analysis of time-series is
a well-studied topic, cf. Hamilton (1994); Liao (2005); Aghabozorgi et al. (2015), there are only
few approaches that take high-dimensional multivariate time-series into account. In this work we
build upon Driemel et al. (2016), who developed the first (1 + ε)-approximation algorithms for
clustering univariate time-series under the Fréchet distance. Their idea is that –due to environmental
circumstances– time-series often have heterogeneous lengths and their measurements are taken with
different time-intervals in between. Thus, common approaches, where univariate time-series are
represented by a point in a high-dimensional space, each dimension corresponding to one instant
of time, become hard or even impossible to apply. Additionally, when these time-intervals differ
substantially, depending on the sampling rates, continuous distance measures perform much better
than discrete ones. This is due to the fact that they are inherently independent of the sampling rates:
by interpreting a sequence of measurements as the vertices of a polygonal curve, those induce a
linear interpolation between every two consecutive measurements. We extend this further to the
multivariate case. When synchronized sensors are available, multiple univariate time-series are
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

