A coupled autoencoder approach for multi-modal
analysis of cell types

Rohan Gala, Nathan Gouwens, Zizhen Yao, Agata Budzillo, Osnat Penn,
Bosiljka Tasic, Gabe Murphy, Hongkui Zeng, Uygar Sümbül
Allen Institute, Seattle, WA 98109
rohang@alleninstitute.org, uygars@alleninstitute.org

Abstract
Recent developments in high throughput profiling of individual neurons have
spurred data driven exploration of the idea that there exist natural groupings of
neurons referred to as cell types. The promise of this idea is that the immense
complexity of brain circuits can be reduced, and effectively studied by means of
interactions between cell types. While clustering of neuron populations based on
a particular data modality can be used to define cell types, such definitions are
often inconsistent across different characterization modalities. We pose this issue
of cross-modal alignment as an optimization problem and develop an approach
based on coupled training of autoencoders as a framework for such analyses.
We apply this framework to a Patch-seq dataset consisting of transcriptomic and
electrophysiological profiles for the same set of neurons to study consistency of
representations across modalities, and evaluate cross-modal data prediction ability.
We explore the problem where only a subset of neurons is characterized with
more than one modality, and demonstrate that representations learned by coupled
autoencoders can be used to identify types sampled only by a single modality.

1

Introduction

Computation in the brain can involve complicated interactions between millions of different cells.
Identifying cell types and their stereotypical interactions based on functional and developmental
characteristics of individual cells has the potential to reduce this complexity in service of our efforts
to understand the brain. However, capturing the notion of a cell type identity that is consistent
across different single cell characterization modalities such as transcriptomics, electrophysiology,
morphology, and connectivity has been a challenging computational problem [1, 2, 3, 4, 5].
A general approach to understand correspondence between cell type definitions based on different
modalities [3] is to evaluate the degree to which the observable cellular features themselves can
be aligned across the modalities. The existence of such alignment would allow one to determine
an abstract, potentially low-dimensional representation for each cell. In such a scenario, different
transformations could be used to generate realizations of the features measured in the different
modalities from the abstract representation itself. Moreover, tasks such as clustering to define cell
types could be performed on such representations obtained for cell populations. Here, we propose
a method to reveal such abstract identities of cells by casting it as an optimization problem. We
demonstrate that (i) cell classes defined by a single data modality can be predicted with high accuracy
from observations measuring seemingly very different aspects of neuronal identity, and (ii) the same
framework enables cross-modal prediction of raw recordings.
Well known approaches to obtain coordinated representations [6] from multi-modal datasets include
the canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and its nonlinear variants [7, 8]. These techniques involve
calculation of explicit transformation matrices and possibly parameters of multi-layer perceptrons.

