Bias Correction of Learned Generative Models using
Likelihood-Free Importance Weighting
Aditya Grover1 , Jiaming Song1 , Alekh Agarwal2 , Kenneth Tran2 ,
Ashish Kapoor2 , Eric Horvitz2 , Stefano Ermon1
1
Stanford University, 2 Microsoft Research, Redmond

Abstract
A learned generative model often produces biased statistics relative to the underlying data distribution. A standard technique to correct this bias is importance
sampling, where samples from the model are weighted by the likelihood ratio
under model and true distributions. When the likelihood ratio is unknown, it can
be estimated by training a probabilistic classifier to distinguish samples from the
two distributions. We show that this likelihood-free importance weighting method
induces a new energy-based model and employ it to correct for the bias in existing
models. We find that this technique consistently improves standard goodness-of-fit
metrics for evaluating the sample quality of state-of-the-art deep generative models, suggesting reduced bias. Finally, we demonstrate its utility on representative
applications in a) data augmentation for classification using generative adversarial
networks, and b) model-based policy evaluation using off-policy data.

1

Introduction

Learning generative models of complex environments from high-dimensional observations is a longstanding challenge in machine learning. Once learned, these models are used to draw inferences and
to plan future actions. For example, in data augmentation, samples from a learned model are used to
enrich a dataset for supervised learning [1]. In model-based off-policy policy evaluation (henceforth
MBOPE), a learned dynamics model is used to simulate and evaluate a target policy without real-world
deployment [2], which is especially valuable for risk-sensitive applications [3]. In spite of the recent
successes of deep generative models, existing theoretical results show that learning distributions in an
unbiased manner is either impossible or has prohibitive sample complexity [4, 5]. Consequently, the
models used in practice are inherently biased,1 and can lead to misleading downstream inferences.
In order to address this issue, we start from the observation that many typical uses of generative
models involve computing expectations under the model. For instance, in MBOPE, we seek to find
the expected return of a policy under a trajectory distribution defined by this policy and a learned
dynamics model. A classical recipe for correcting the bias in expectations, when samples from
a different distribution than the ground truth are available, is to importance weight the samples
according to the likelihood ratio [6]. If the importance weights were exact, the resulting estimates are
unbiased. But in practice, the likelihood ratio is unknown and needs to be estimated since the true
data distribution is unknown and even the model likelihood is intractable or ill-defined for many deep
generative models, e.g., variational autoencoders [7] and generative adversarial networks [8].
Our proposed solution to estimate the importance weights is to train a calibrated, probabilistic
classifier to distinguish samples from the data distribution and the generative model. As shown in
prior work, the output of such classifiers can be used to extract density ratios [9]. Appealingly, this
estimation procedure is likelihood-free since it only requires samples from the two distributions.
1

We call a generative model biased if it produces biased statistics relative to the true data distribution.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

