Gate Decorator: Global Filter Pruning Method for
Accelerating Deep Convolutional Neural Networks

Zhonghui You 1
Peking University
zhonghui@pku.edu.cn

Kun Yan 1
Peking University
kyan2018@pku.edu.cn

Meng Ma 2, *
Peking University
mameng@pku.edu.cn

Jinmian Ye
Momenta
jinmian.y@gmail.com

Ping Wang 1, 2, 3, *
Peking University
pwang@pku.edu.cn

1

School of Software and Microelectronics, Peking University
National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University
3
Key Laboratory of High Confidence Software Technologies (PKU), Ministry of Education
2

Abstract
Filter pruning is one of the most effective ways to accelerate and compress convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In this work, we propose a global filter pruning
algorithm called Gate Decorator, which transforms a vanilla CNN module by
multiplying its output by the channel-wise scaling factors (i.e. gate). When the
scaling factor is set to zero, it is equivalent to removing the corresponding filter. We
use Taylor expansion to estimate the change in the loss function caused by setting
the scaling factor to zero and use the estimation for the global filter importance
ranking. Then we prune the network by removing those unimportant filters. After
pruning, we merge all the scaling factors into its original module, so no special
operations or structures are introduced. Moreover, we propose an iterative pruning
framework called Tick-Tock to improve pruning accuracy. The extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches. For example, we achieve
the state-of-the-art pruning ratio on ResNet-56 by reducing 70% FLOPs without
noticeable loss in accuracy. For ResNet-50 on ImageNet, our pruned model with
40% FLOPs reduction outperforms the baseline model by 0.31% in top-1 accuracy.
Various datasets are used, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, CUB-200, ImageNet
ILSVRC-12 and PASCAL VOC 2011.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have witnessed the remarkable achievements of CNNs in many computer vision
tasks [40, 48, 37, 51, 24]. With the support of powerful modern GPUs, CNN models can be designed
to be larger and more complex for better performance. However, the large amount of computation and
storage consumption prevents the deployment of state-of-the-art models to the resource-constrained
devices such as mobile phones or the Internet of Things (IoT) devices. The constraints mainly come
from three aspects [28]: 1) Model size. 2) Run-time memory. 3) Number of computing operations.
Take the widely used VGG-16 [39] model as an example. The model has up to 138 million parameters
and consumes more than 500MB storage space. To infer an image with resolution of 224×224, the
model requires more than 16 billion floating point operations (FLOPs) and 93MB extra run-time
* corresponding author.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

