Domain Generalization via
Model-Agnostic Learning of Semantic Features

Qi Dou Daniel C. Castro Konstantinos Kamnitsas Ben Glocker
Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Imperial College London, UK
{qi.dou,dc315,kk2412,b.glocker}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Generalization capability to unseen domains is crucial for machine learning models
when deploying to real-world conditions. We investigate the challenging problem
of domain generalization, i.e., training a model on multi-domain source data such
that it can directly generalize to target domains with unknown statistics. We adopt
a model-agnostic learning paradigm with gradient-based meta-train and meta-test
procedures to expose the optimization to domain shift. Further, we introduce
two complementary losses which explicitly regularize the semantic structure of
the feature space. Globally, we align a derived soft confusion matrix to preserve
general knowledge about inter-class relationships. Locally, we promote domainindependent class-specific cohesion and separation of sample features with a
metric-learning component. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated with
new state-of-the-art results on two common object recognition benchmarks. Our
method also shows consistent improvement on a medical image segmentation task.

1

Introduction

Machine learning methods have achieved remarkable success, under the assumption that training and
test data are sampled from the same distribution. In real-world applications, this assumption is often
violated as conditions for data acquisition may change, and a trained system may fail to produce
accurate predictions for unseen data with domain shift. To tackle this issue, domain adaptation
algorithms normally learn to align source and target data in a domain-invariant discriminative feature
space [6, 11, 19, 32, 33, 42, 43, 50, 51]. These methods rely on access to a few labelled [6, 42, 50] or
unlabelled [11, 19, 32, 33, 43, 51] data samples from the target distribution during training.
An arguably harder problem is domain generalization, which aims to train a model using multi-domain
source data, such that it can directly generalize to new domains without need of retraining. This
setting is very different to domain adaptation as no information about the new domains is available,
a scenario that is encountered in real-world applications. In the field of healthcare, for example,
medical images acquired at different sites can differ significantly in their data distribution, due to
varying scanners, imaging protocols or patient cohorts. At deployment, each new hospital can be
regarded as a new domain but it is impractical to collect data each time to adapt a trained system.
Learning a model which directly generalizes to new clinical sites would be of great practical value.
Domain generalization is an active research area with a number of approaches being proposed. As no
a priori knowledge of the target distribution is available, the key question is how to guide the model
learning to capture information which is discriminative for the specific task but insensitive to changes
of domain-specific statistics. For computer vision applications, the aim is to capture general semantic
features for object recognition. Previous work has demonstrated that this can be investigated through
regularization of the feature space, e.g., by minimizing divergence between marginal distributions of
data sources [35], or joint consideration of the class conditional distributions [30]. Li et al. [28] use
adversarial feature alignment via maximum mean discrepancy. Leveraging distance metrics of feature
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

