arXiv:1906.02715v2 [cs.LG] 28 Oct 2019

Visualizing and Measuring the Geometry of BERT
Andy Coenen⇤, Emily Reif⇤, Ann Yuan⇤
Been Kim, Adam Pearce, Fernanda Viégas, Martin Wattenberg
Google Brain
Cambridge, MA
{andycoenen,ereif,annyuan,beenkim,adampearce,viegas,wattenberg}@google.com

Abstract
Transformer architectures show significant promise for natural language processing.
Given that a single pretrained model can be fine-tuned to perform well on many
different tasks, these networks appear to extract generally useful linguistic features.
How do such networks represent this information internally? This paper describes
qualitative and quantitative investigations of one particularly effective model, BERT.
At a high level, linguistic features seem to be represented in separate semantic and
syntactic subspaces. We find evidence of a fine-grained geometric representation of
word senses. We also present empirical descriptions of syntactic representations in
both attention matrices and individual word embeddings, as well as a mathematical
argument to explain the geometry of these representations.

1

Introduction

Neural networks for language processing have advanced rapidly in recent years. A key breakthrough
was the introduction of transformer architectures [25]. One recent system based on this idea, BERT
[5], has proven to be extremely flexible: a single pretrained model can be fine-tuned to achieve
state-of-the-art performance on a wide variety of NLP applications. This suggests the model is
extracting a set of generally useful features from raw text. It is natural to ask, which features are
extracted? And how is this information represented internally?
Similar questions have arisen with other types of neural nets. Investigations of convolutional neural
networks [9, 8] have shown how representations change from layer to layer [27] ; how individual
units in a network may have meaning [2]; and that “meaningful” directions exist in the space of
internal activations [7]. These explorations have led to a broader understanding of network behavior.
Analyses on language-processing models (e.g., [1, 6, 10, 20, 24]) point to the existence of similarly
rich internal representations of linguistic structure. Syntactic features seem to be extracted by RNNs
(e.g., [1, 10]) as well as in BERT [24, 23, 11, 20]. Inspirational work from Hewitt and Manning [6]
found evidence of a geometric representation of entire parse trees in BERT’s activation space.
Our work extends these explorations of the geometry of internal representations. Investigating
how BERT represents syntax, we describe evidence that attention matrices contain grammatical
representations. We also provide mathematical arguments that may explain the particular form of the
parse tree embeddings described in [6]. Turning to semantics, using visualizations of the activations
created by different pieces of text, we show suggestive evidence that BERT distinguishes word senses
at a very fine level. Moreover, much of this semantic information appears to be encoded in a relatively
low-dimensional subspace.
⇤

Equal contribution

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

