Multilabel reductions: what is my loss optimising?
Aditya Krishna Menon, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J. Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
New York, NY 10011
{adityakmenon, sashank, ankitsrawat, sanjivk}@google.com

Abstract
Multilabel classification is a challenging problem arising in applications ranging
from information retrieval to image tagging. A popular approach to this problem is
to employ a reduction to a suitable series of binary or multiclass problems (e.g.,
computing a softmax based cross-entropy over the relevant labels). While such
methods have seen empirical success, less is understood about how well they approximate two fundamental performance measures: precision@k and recall@k. In
this paper, we study five commonly used reductions, including the one-versus-all
reduction, a reduction to multiclass classification, and normalised versions of the
same, wherein the contribution of each instance is normalised by the number of
relevant labels. Our main result is a formal justification of each reduction: we explicate their underlying risks, and show they are each consistent with respect to either
precision or recall. Further, we show that in general no reduction can be optimal
for both measures. We empirically validate our results, demonstrating scenarios
where normalised reductions yield recall gains over unnormalised counterparts.

1

Introduction

Multilabel classification is the problem of predicting multiple labels for a given instance [Tsoumakas
and Katakis, 2007, Zhang and Zhou, 2014]. For example, in information retrieval, one may predict
whether a number of documents are relevant to a given query [Manning et al., 2008]; in image tagging,
one may predict whether several individuals’ faces are contained in an image [Xiao et al., 2010]. In
the extreme classification scenario where the number of potential labels is large, naïve modelling of
all possible label combinations is prohibitive. This has motivated a number of algorithms targetting
this setting [Agrawal et al., 2013, Yu et al., 2014, Bhatia et al., 2015, Jain et al., 2016, Babbar and
Schölkopf, 2017, Yen et al., 2017, Prabhu et al., 2018, Jain et al., 2019, Reddi et al., 2019]. One
popular strategy is to employ a reduction to a series of binary or multiclass problems, and thereafter
treat labels independently. Such reductions significantly reduce the complexity of learning, and have
seen empirical success. For example, in the one-versus-all reduction, one reduces the problem to
a series of independent binary classification tasks [Brinker et al., 2006, Dembczyński et al., 2010,
2012]. Similarly, in the pick-one-label reduction, one reduces the problem to multiclass classification
with a randomly drawn positive label [Boutell et al., 2004, Jernite et al., 2017, Joulin et al., 2017].
The theoretical aspects of these reductions are less clear, however. In particular, precisely what
properties of the original multilabel problem do these reductions preserve? While similar questions
are well-studied for reductions of multiclass to binary classification [Zhang, 2004, Tewari and Bartlett,
2007, Ramaswamy et al., 2014], reductions for multilabel problems have received less attention,
despite their wide use in practice. Recently, Wydmuch et al. [2018] established that the pick-one-label
is inconsistent with respect to the precision@k, a key measure of retrieval performance. On the other
hand, they showed that a probabilistic label tree-based implementation of one-versus-all is consistent.
This intriguing observation raises two natural questions: what can be said about consistency of other
reductions? And does the picture change if we consider a different metric, such as the recall@k?
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

