Towards Interpretable Reinforcement Learning Using
Attention Augmented Agents
Alex Mott*

Daniel Zoran*

Mike Chrzanowski

Daan Wierstra Danilo J. Rezende
DeepMind
London, UK
{alexmott,danielzoran,chrzanowski,wierstra,danilor}@google.com

Abstract
Inspired by recent work in attention models for image captioning and question
answering, we present a soft attention model for the reinforcement learning domain.
This model uses a soft, top-down attention mechanism to create a bottleneck in
the agent, forcing it to focus on task-relevant information by sequentially querying
its view of the environment. The output of the attention mechanism allows direct
observation of the information used by the agent to select its actions, enabling
easier interpretation of this model than of traditional models. We analyze different
strategies that the agents learn and show that a handful of strategies arise repeatedly
across different games. We also show that the model learns to query separately
about space and content (“where” vs. “what”). We demonstrate that an agent using
this mechanism can achieve performance competitive with state-of-the-art models
on ATARI tasks while still being interpretable.

1

Introduction

Traditional RL agents and image classifiers rely on some combination of convolutional and fully
connected components to gradually process input information and arrive at a set of policy or class
logits. This sort of architecture is very effective, but does not lend itself to easy understanding of
how decisions are taken, what information is used and why mistakes are made. Previous efforts to
visualize deep RL agents [1, 2, 3] focus on generating saliency maps to understand the magnitude of
policy changes as a function of a perturbation of the input. This can uncover some of the “attended"
regions, but may be difficult to interpret. It also can’t reveal certain types of behavior, such as when
the agent makes decisions based on components absent from a frame. The model we propose here
provides a more direct interpretation by making the attention an explicit bottleneck in the system.
In this work we apply a soft, top-down, spatial attention mechanism to visual information in a
reinforcement learning setting. The model enables us to build agents that actively select important,
task-relevant information from visual inputs by sequentially querying and receiving compressed,
query-dependent summaries to generate appropriate outputs. While doing this, the model generates
attention maps which can uncover some of the underlying decision process used to solve the task. By
observing and analyzing the resulting attention maps we can understand how the system solves a task.
We observe that the attention focuses on the key components of each level: tracking the region ahead
of the player, focusing on enemies and important moving objects. We find that the agent reacts in a
consistent manner even when encountering new, unseen configurations of the environment. We also
observe that the agent is able to localize its attention based on both the content in the frame as well
as absolute spatial positions. Finally we find that building the attention into the agent yields more
* Equal contribution.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

