Information Competing Process for Learning
Diversified Representations

Jie Hu12 , Rongrong Ji123∗, ShengChuan Zhang1 , Xiaoshuai Sun1 ,
Qixiang Ye4 , Chia-Wen Lin5 , Qi Tian6 .
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University.
2
National Institute for Data Science in Health and Medicine, Xiamen University.
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory. 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
5
National Tsing Hua University. 6 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei.

Abstract
Learning representations with diversified information remains as an open problem.
Towards learning diversified representations, a new approach, termed Information
Competing Process (ICP), is proposed in this paper. Aiming to enrich the information carried by feature representations, ICP separates a representation into two parts
with different mutual information constraints. The separated parts are forced to
accomplish the downstream task independently in a competitive environment which
prevents the two parts from learning what each other learned for the downstream
task. Such competing parts are then combined synergistically to complete the task.
By fusing representation parts learned competitively under different conditions,
ICP facilitates obtaining diversified representations which contain rich information.
Experiments on image classification and image reconstruction tasks demonstrate
the great potential of ICP to learn discriminative and disentangled representations
in both supervised and self-supervised learning settings. 1

1

Introduction

Representation learning aims to make the learned feature representations more effective on extracting
useful information from input for downstream tasks [4], which has been an active research topic
in recent years and has become the foundation for many tasks [28, 8, 11, 15, 40, 20, 6]. Notably,
a majority of works about representation learning have been studied from the viewpoint of mutual
information constraint. For instance, the Information Bottleneck (IB) theory [38, 1] minimizes the
information carried by representations to fit the target outputs, and the generative models such as
β-VAE [13, 5] also rely on such information constraint to learn disentangled representations. Some
other works [22, 3, 26, 14] reveal the advantages of maximizing the mutual information for learning
discriminative representations. Despite the exciting progresses, learning diversified representations
remains as an open problem. Diversified representations are learned with different constraints
encouraging representation parts to extract various information from inputs, which results in powerful
features to represent the inputs. In principle, a good representation learning approach is supposed to
discriminate and disentangle the underlying explanatory factors hidden in the input [4]. However,
this goal is hard to realize as the existing methods typically resort to only one type of information
constraint. As a consequence, the information diversity of the learned representations is deteriorated.
∗

Corresponding Author.
Codes, models and experimental results are all available at https://github.com/hujiecpp/
InformationCompetingProcess/
1

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

