Disentangling Influence: Using disentangled
representations to audit model predictions∗

Charles T. Marx
Haverford College
cmarx@haverford.edu

Richard Lanas Phillips
Cornell University
rlp246@cornell.edu

Carlos Scheidegger
University of Arizona
cscheid@cs.arizona.edu

Sorelle A. Friedler
Haverford College
sorelle@cs.haverford.edu

Suresh Venkatasubramanian
University of Utah
suresh@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the need to audit complex and black box models, there has been
extensive research on quantifying how data features influence model predictions.
Feature influence can be direct (a direct influence on model outcomes) and indirect
(model outcomes are influenced via proxy features). Feature influence can also
be expressed in aggregate over the training or test data or locally with respect to
a single point. Current research has typically focused on one of each of these
dimensions. In this paper, we develop disentangled influence audits, a procedure
to audit the indirect influence of features. Specifically, we show that disentangled
representations provide a mechanism to identify proxy features in the dataset, while
allowing an explicit computation of feature influence on either individual outcomes
or aggregate-level outcomes. We show through both theory and experiments that
disentangled influence audits can both detect proxy features and show, for each
individual or in aggregate, which of these proxy features affects the classifier
being audited the most. In this respect, our method is more powerful than existing
methods for ascertaining feature influence.

1

Introduction

As machine learning models have become increasingly complex, there has been a growing subfield of
work on interpreting and explaining the predictions of these models [24, 11]. In order to assess the
importance of particular features to aggregated or individual model predictions, a variety of feature
influence techniques have been developed.
The goal of explaining model predictions is of particular importance in the context of fairness in
machine learning. In human-centered prediction tasks such as recidivism prediction and consumer
finance, understanding how protected attributes such as gender or race affect a prediction can improve
transparency and aligns with the principles of contestable design [14]. While direct influence methods
[7, 12, 20, 25] focus on determining how a feature is used directly by the model to determine an
outcome, it is also possible for the model to access protected information through proxy variables
– variables which are closely related the protected attribute. Indirect feature influence techniques
[1, 2, 15] report that a feature is important if that feature or a proxy has an influence on the model
outcomes.
∗

This research was funded in part by the NSF under grants DMR-1709351, IIS-1633387, IIS-1633724, and
IIS-1815238, by the DARPA SD2 program, and the Arnold and Mabel Beckman Foundation. The Titan Xp used
for this research was donated by the NVIDIA Corporation.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

