Hyperspherical Prototype Networks

Pascal Mettes
ISIS Lab
University of Amsterdam

Elise van der Pol
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam

Cees G. M. Snoek
ISIS Lab
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
This paper introduces hyperspherical prototype networks, which unify classification
and regression with prototypes on hyperspherical output spaces. For classification, a common approach is to define prototypes as the mean output vector over
training examples per class. Here, we propose to use hyperspheres as output
spaces, with class prototypes defined a priori with large margin separation. We
position prototypes through data-independent optimization, with an extension to
incorporate priors from class semantics. By doing so, we do not require any prototype updating, we can handle any training size, and the output dimensionality
is no longer constrained to the number of classes. Furthermore, we generalize
to regression, by optimizing outputs as an interpolation between two prototypes
on the hypersphere. Since both tasks are now defined by the same loss function,
they can be jointly trained for multi-task problems. Experimentally, we show the
benefit of hyperspherical prototype networks for classification, regression, and
their combination over other prototype methods, softmax cross-entropy, and mean
squared error approaches.

1

Introduction

This paper introduces a class of deep networks that employ hyperspheres as output spaces with an a
priori defined organization. Standard classification (with softmax cross-entropy) and regression (with
squared loss) are effective, but are trained in a fully parametric manner, ignoring known inductive
biases, such as large margin separation, simplicity, and knowledge about source data [28]. Moreover,
they require output spaces with a fixed output size, either equal to the number of classes (classification)
or a single dimension (regression). We propose networks with output spaces that incorporate inductive
biases prior to learning and have the flexibility to handle any output dimensionality, using a loss
function that is identical for classification and regression.
Our approach is similar in spirit to recent prototype-based networks for classification, which employ
a metric output space and divide the space into Voronoi cells around a prototype per class, defined as
the mean location of the training examples [11, 12, 17, 37, 45]. While intuitive, this definition alters
the true prototype location with each mini-batch update, meaning it requires constant re-estimation.
As such, current solutions either employ coarse prototype approximations [11, 12] or are limited to
few-shot settings [4, 37]. In this paper, we propose an alternative prototype definition.
For classification, our notion is simple: when relying on hyperspherical output spaces, prototypes
do not need to be inferred from data. We incorporate large margin separation and simplicity from
the start by placing prototypes as uniformly as possible on the hypershere, see Fig. 1a. However,
obtaining a uniform distribution for an arbitrary number of prototypes and output dimensions is
an open mathematical problem [31, 39]. As an approximation, we rely on a differentiable loss
function and optimization to distribute prototypes as uniformly as possible. We furthermore extend
the optimization to incorporate privileged information about classes to obtain output spaces with
semantic class structures. Training and inference is achieved through cosine similarities between
examples and their fixed class prototypes.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

