Superposition of many models into one

Brian Cheung
Redwood Center, BAIR
UC Berkeley
bcheung@berkeley.edu

Alex Terekhov
Redwood Center
UC Berkeley
aterekhov@berkeley.edu

Pulkit Agrawal
BAIR
UC Berkeley
pulkitag@berkeley.edu

Yubei Chen
Redwood Center, BAIR
UC Berkeley
yubeic@berkeley.edu

Bruno Olshausen
Redwood Center, BAIR
UC Berkeley
baolshausen@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a method for storing multiple models within a single set of parameters. Models can coexist in superposition and still be retrieved individually. In
experiments with neural networks, we show that a surprisingly large number of
models can be effectively stored within a single parameter instance. Furthermore,
each of these models can undergo thousands of training steps without significantly
interfering with other models within the superposition. This approach may be
viewed as the online complement of compression: rather than reducing the size
of a network after training, we make use of the unrealized capacity of a network
during training.

1

Introduction

While connectionist models have enjoyed a resurgence of interest in the artificial intelligence community, it is well known that deep neural networks are over-parameterized and a majority of the weights
can be pruned after training [7, 20, 3, 8, 9, 1]. Such pruned neural networks achieve accuracies similar
to the original network but with much fewer parameters. However, it has not been possible to exploit
this redundancy to train a neural network with fewer parameters from scratch to achieve accuracies
similar to its over-parameterized counterpart. In this work we show that it is possible to partially
exploit the excess capacity present in neural network models during training by learning multiple
tasks. Suppose that a neural network with L parameters achieves desirable accuracy at a single
task. We outline a method for training a single neural network with L parameters to simultaneously
L
perform K different tasks and thereby effectively requiring ≈ O K
parameters per task.

While we learn a separate set of parameters Wk ; k ∈ [1, K] for each of the K tasks, these
parameters are stored in superposition with each other, thus requiring approximately the same
number of parameters as a model for a single task. The task-specific models can be accessed using
task-specific “context” information Ck that dynamically “routes” an input towards a specific model
retrieved from this superposition. The model parameters W can be therefore thought of as a “memory"
and the context Ck as “keys" that are used to access the specific parameters Wk required for a task.
Such an interpretation is inspired by Kanerva’s work on hetero-associative memory [4].
Because the parameters for different tasks exist in super-position with each other and are constantly
changing during training, it is possible that these individual parameters interfere with each other and
thereby result in loss in performance on individual tasks. We show that under mild assumptions of
the input data being intrinsically low-dimensional relative to its ambient space (e.g. natural images
lie on a much lower dimensional subspace as compared to their representation of individual pixels
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

