Depth-First Proof-Number Search with Heuristic
Edge Cost and Application to Chemical Synthesis
Planning

Akihiro Kishimoto
IBM Research, Ireland

Beat Buesser
IBM Research, Ireland

Bei Chen
IBM Research, Ireland

Adi Botea
Eaton, Ireland∗

Abstract
Search techniques, such as Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) and Proof-Number
Search (PNS), are effective in playing and solving games. However, the understanding of their performance in industrial applications is still limited. We investigate
MCTS and Depth-First Proof-Number (DFPN) Search, a PNS variant, in the domain of Retrosynthetic Analysis (RA). We find that DFPN’s strengths, that justify
its success in games, have limited value in RA, and that an enhanced MCTS variant
by Segler et al. significantly outperforms DFPN. We address this disadvantage
of DFPN in RA with a novel approach to combine DFPN with Heuristic Edge
Initialization. Our new search algorithm DFPN-E outperforms the enhanced MCTS
in search time by a factor of 3 on average, with comparable success rates.

1

Introduction

Search is a core AI technique, especially in games [5, 27, 31] and domain-independent planning
[3, 12]. Historically, new search algorithms and novel combinations of existing algorithms have led
to significant performance improvements. Another way to achieve progress is to transfer successful
approaches from one domain to another. This paper combines both strategies.
Proof-Number Search (PNS) [1] and Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [18] are two notable algorithms that have been extensively studied in solving games/game positions and playing games,
respectively. Their success has been demonstrated by solving the game of checkers [27] and by
achieving super-human strength in playing the game of Go [31].
Due to recent advances in AI, chemistry is being reconsidered as an AI research domain [14]. We
focus on chemical synthesis planning, the task of planning chemical reaction routes to synthesize
a given organic molecule. Retrosynthetic Analysis (RA) is a technique going backwards from the
target molecule towards a library of usually smaller, starting molecules. This task can be modeled
similarly to solving games [11] and can be tackled with search algorithms such as PNS and MCTS
[11, 29]. However, since no direct performance comparison between PNS and MCTS has been made,
their search performance in RA is not well understood.
We investigate the search performance of MCTS and Depth-First Proof-Number (DFPN) Search
[21], a variant of PNS, in RA. PNS variants [1, 21] are designed to efficiently identify the smallest
amount of work needed to solve a game position. The game research community largely agrees that
this advantage is one reason why PNS variants have been a popular choice in solving difficult games
or game positions [16, 21, 27], with solution lengths exceeding 1500 steps. However, we discover
that DFPN performs poorly in the domain of RA. We find that DFPN’s significant performance
degradation is due to RA’s lopsided search space, which alternates large branching factors with
very small ones. To address this, we introduce DFPN-E, a novel algorithm to combine DFPN with
∗

Work performed while the author was affiliated with IBM Research, Ireland.

33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

