Fully Neural Network based Model for General
Temporal Point Processes

Takahiro Omi
The University of Tokyo, RIKEN AIP
takahiro.omi.em@gmail.com
Naonori Ueda
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, RIKEN AIP
naonori.ueda.fr@hco.ntt.co.jp

Kazuyuki Aihara
The University of Tokyo
aihara@sat.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
A temporal point process is a mathematical model for a time series of discrete
events, which covers various applications. Recently, recurrent neural network
(RNN) based models have been developed for point processes and have been
found effective. RNN based models usually assume a specific functional form
for the time course of the intensity function of a point process (e.g., exponentially
decreasing or increasing with the time since the most recent event). However, such
an assumption can restrict the expressive power of the model. We herein propose a
novel RNN based model in which the time course of the intensity function is represented in a general manner. In our approach, we first model the integral of the
intensity function using a feedforward neural network and then obtain the intensity
function as its derivative. This approach enables us to both obtain a flexible model
of the intensity function and exactly evaluate the log-likelihood function, which
contains the integral of the intensity function, without any numerical approximations. Our model achieves competitive or superior performances compared to the
previous state-of-the-art methods for both synthetic and real datasets.

1

Introduction

The activity of many diverse systems is characterized as a sequence of temporally discrete events.
The examples include financial transactions, communication in a social network, and user activity
at a web site. In many cases, the occurrences of the event are correlated to each other in a certain
manner, and information on future events may be extracted from the information of past events.
Therefore, the appropriate modeling of the dependence of the event occurrence on the history of
past events is important for understanding the system and predicting future events.
A temporal point process is a useful mathematical tool for modeling the time series of discrete
events. In this framework, the dependence on the event history is characterized using a conditional
intensity function that maps the history of the past events to the intensity function of the point
process. The most common models, such as the Poisson process or the Hawkes process [1, 2, 3],
assume a specific parametric form for the conditional intensity function. Recently, Du et al. (2016)
proposed a model based on a recurrent neural network (RNN) for point processes [4], and the variant
models were further developed [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. In this approach, an RNN is used to obtain a
compact representation of the event history. The conditional intensity function is then modeled as
a function of the hidden state of the RNN. Consequently, the RNN based models outperform the
parametric models in prediction performance.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

