Fast Efficient Hyperparameter Tuning
for Policy Gradient Methods

Supratik Paul, Vitaly Kurin, Shimon Whiteson
Deptartment of Computer Science
University of Oxford
{supratik.paul,vitaly.kurin,shimon.whiteson}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The performance of policy gradient methods is sensitive to hyperparameter settings
that must be tuned for any new application. Widely used grid search methods
for tuning hyperparameters are sample inefficient and computationally expensive.
More advanced methods like Population Based Training (Jaderberg et al., 2017)
that learn optimal schedules for hyperparameters instead of fixed settings can yield
better results, but are also sample inefficient and computationally expensive. In this
paper, we propose Hyperparameter Optimisation on the Fly (HOOF), a gradientfree algorithm that requires no more than one training run to automatically adapt the
hyperparameter that affect the policy update directly through the gradient. The main
idea is to use existing trajectories sampled by the policy gradient method to optimise
a one-step improvement objective, yielding a sample and computationally efficient
algorithm that is easy to implement. Our experimental results across multiple
domains and algorithms show that using HOOF to learn these hyperparameter
schedules leads to faster learning with improved performance.

1

Introduction

Policy gradient methods (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999) optimise reinforcement learning policies
by performing gradient ascent on the policy parameters and have shown considerable success in
environments characterised by large or continuous action spaces (Mordatch et al., 2015; Schulman
et al., 2016; Rajeswaran et al., 2017). However, like other gradient-based optimisation methods, their
performance can be sensitive to a number of key hyperparameters.
For example, the performance of first order policy gradient methods can depend critically on the
learning rate, the choice of which in turn often depends on the task, the particular policy gradient
method in use, and even the optimiser, e.g., RMSProp (Tieleman and Hinton, 2012) and ADAM
(Kingma and Ba, 2014) have narrow ranges for good learning rates (Henderson et al., 2018b) which
may not be known a priori. Even for second order methods like Natural Policy Gradients (NPG)
(Kakade, 2001) or Trust Region Policy Optimisation (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015), which are
more robust to the KL divergence constraint (which can be interpreted as a learning rate), significant
performance gains can often be obtained by tuning this parameter (Duan et al., 2016).
Similarly, variance reduction techniques such as Generalised Advantage Estimators (GAE) (Schulman
et al., 2016), which trade variance for bias in policy gradient estimates, introduce key hyperparameters
(γ, λ) that can also greatly affect performance (Schulman et al., 2016; Mahmood et al., 2018).
Given such sensitivities, there is a great need for effective methods for tuning policy gradient
hyperparameters. Perhaps the most popular hyperparameter optimiser is simply grid search (Schulman
et al., 2015; Mnih et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2016; Igl et al., 2018; Farquhar et al., 2018). More
sophisticated techniques such as Bayesian optimisation (BO) (Srinivas et al., 2010; Hutter et al.,
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

