Regression Planning Networks

Danfei Xu
Stanford University

Roberto Martín-Martín
Stanford University

De-An Huang
Stanford University

Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

Yuke Zhu
Stanford University
NVIDIA Research

Li Fei-Fei
Stanford University

Abstract
Recent learning-to-plan methods have shown promising results on planning directly
from observation space. Yet, their ability to plan for long-horizon tasks is limited
by the accuracy of the prediction model. On the other hand, classical symbolic
planners show remarkable capabilities in solving long-horizon tasks, but they
require predefined symbolic rules and symbolic states, restricting their real-world
applicability. In this work, we combine the benefits of these two paradigms
and propose a learning-to-plan method that can directly generate a long-term
symbolic plan conditioned on high-dimensional observations. We borrow the idea
of regression (backward) planning from classical planning literature and introduce
Regression Planning Networks (RPN), a neural network architecture that plans
backward starting at a task goal and generates a sequence of intermediate goals that
reaches the current observation. We show that our model not only inherits many
favorable traits from symbolic planning, e.g., the ability to solve previously unseen
tasks, but also can learn from visual inputs in an end-to-end manner. We evaluate
the capabilities of RPN in a grid world environment and a simulated 3D kitchen
environment featuring complex visual scene and long task horizon, and show that
it achieves near-optimal performance in completely new task instances.

1

Introduction

Performing real-world tasks such as cooking meals or assembling furniture requires an agent to
determine long-term strategies. This is often formulated as a planning problem. In traditional
AI literature, symbolic planners have shown remarkable capability in solving high-level reasoning
problems by planning in human-interpretable symbolic spaces [1, 2]. However, classical symbolic
planning methods typically abstract away perception with ground-truth symbols and rely on predefined planning domains to specify the causal effects of actions. These assumptions significantly
restrict the applicability of these methods in real environments, where states are high-dimensional
(e.g., color images) and it’s tedious, if not impossible, to specify a detailed planning domain.
A solution to plan without relying on predefined action models and symbols is to learn to plan from
observations. Recent works have shown that deep networks can capture the environment dynamics
directly in the observation space [3–5] or a learned latent space [6–8]. With a learned dynamics model,
these methods can plan a sequence of actions towards a desired goal through forward prediction.
However, these learned models are far from accurate in long-term predictions due to the compounding
errors over multiple steps. Moreover, due to the action-conditioned nature of these models, they
are bound to use myopic sampling-based action selection for planning [4, 5]. Such strategy may be
sufficient for simple short-horizon tasks, e.g., pushing an object to a location, but they fall short in
tasks that involve high-level decision making over longer timescale, e.g., making a meal.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

