Principal Component Projection and Regression in
Nearly Linear Time through Asymmetric SVRG

Yujia Jin
Stanford Universty
yujiajin@stanford.edu

Aaron Sidford
Stanford Universty
sidford@stanford.edu

Abstract
Given a data matrix A ∈ Rn×d , principal component projection (PCP) and principal component regression (PCR), i.e. projection and regression restricted to the
top-eigenspace of A, are fundamental problems in machine learning, optimization,
and numerical analysis. In this paper we provide the first algorithms that solve
these problems in nearly linear time for fixed eigenvalue distribution and large n.
This improves upon previous methods which have superlinear running times when
both the number of top eigenvalues and inverse gap between eigenspaces is large.
We achieve our results by applying rational polynomial approximations to reduce
PCP and PCR to solving asymmetric linear systems which we solve by a variant of
SVRG. We corroborate these findings with preliminary empirical experiments.
1

Introduction

PCA is one of the most fundamental algorithmic tools for analyzing large data sets. Given a data
matrix A ∈ Rn×d and a parameter k the classic principal component analysis (PCA) problem asks to
compute the top k eigenvectors of A> A. This is a core computational task in machine learning and
often used for feature selection [1–3], data visualization [4, 5], and model compression [6].
However, as k becomes large, the running time of PCA can degrade. Even just writing down the output
takes Ω(kd) time and the performance of many methods degrade with k. This high-computational
cost for exploring large-cardinality top-eigenspaces has motivated researchers to consider prominent
tasks solved by PCA, for example principal component projection (PCP) which asks to project a
vector onto the top-k eigenspace, and principal component regression (PCR) which asks to solve
regression restricted to this top-k eigenspace (see Section 1.2).
Recent work [7, 8] showed that the dependence on k in solving PCP and PCR can be overcome
by instead depending on eigengap γ, defined as the ratio between the smallest eigenvalue in the
space projected onto and the largest eigenvalue of the space projected orthogonal to. These works
replace the typical poly(k)nnz(A) dependence in runtime with a poly(1/γ)nnz(A) (at the cost of
lower order terms), by reducing these problems to solving poly(1/γ) ridge-regression problems.
Unfortunately, for large-scale problems, as data-set sizes grow so too can k and 1/γ, yielding large
super-linear running times for all previously known methods (see Section 1.4). Consequently, this
leaves the following fundamental open problem:
Can we obtain nearly linear running times for solving PCP and PCR to high precision, i.e.
with running time Õ(nnz(A)) plus an additive term depending only on the eigenvalue distribution?
The main contribution of the paper is an affirmative answer to this question. We design randomized
algorithms that solve PCP and PCR with high probability in nearly linear time. Leveraging rational
polynomial approximations we reduce these problems to solving asymmetric linear systems, which
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

