Region-specific Diffeomorphic Metric Mapping

Zhengyang Shen
UNC Chapel Hill

François-Xavier Vialard
LIGM, UPEM

Marc Niethammer
UNC Chapel Hill

zyshen@cs.unc.edu

francois-xavier.vialard@u-pem.fr

mn@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We introduce a region-specific diffeomorphic metric mapping (RDMM) registration approach. RDMM is non-parametric, estimating spatio-temporal velocity
fields which parameterize the sought-for spatial transformation. Regularization of
these velocity fields is necessary. In contrast to existing non-parametric registration approaches using a fixed spatially-invariant regularization, for example, the
large displacement diffeomorphic metric mapping (LDDMM) model, our approach
allows for spatially-varying regularization which is advected via the estimated
spatio-temporal velocity field. Hence, not only can our model capture large displacements, it does so with a spatio-temporal regularizer that keeps track of how
regions deform, which is a more natural mathematical formulation. We explore a
family of RDMM registration approaches: 1) a registration model where regions
with separate regularizations are pre-defined (e.g., in an atlas space or for distinct foreground and background regions), 2) a registration model where a general
spatially-varying regularizer is estimated, and 3) a registration model where the
spatially-varying regularizer is obtained via an end-to-end trained deep learning
(DL) model. We provide a variational derivation of RDMM, showing that the model
can assure diffeomorphic transformations in the continuum, and that LDDMM is a
particular instance of RDMM. To evaluate RDMM performance we experiment
1) on synthetic 2D data and 2) on two 3D datasets: knee magnetic resonance
images (MRIs) of the Osteoarthritis Initiative (OAI) and computed tomography
images (CT) of the lung. Results show that our framework achieves comparable
performance to state-of-the-art image registration approaches, while providing
additional information via a learned spatio-temporal regularizer. Further, our deep
learning approach allows for very fast RDMM and LDDMM estimations. Code is
available at https://github.com/uncbiag/registration.

1

Introduction

Quantitative analysis of medical images frequently requires the estimation of spatial correspondences,
i.e.image registration. For example, one may be interested in capturing knee cartilage changes
over time, localized changes of brain structures, or how organs at risk move between planning
and treatment for radiation treatment. Specifically, image registration seeks to estimate the spatial
transformation between a source image and a target image, subject to a chosen transformation model.
Transformations can be parameterized via low-dimensional parametric models (e.g., an affine transformation), but more flexible models are required to capture subtle local deformations. Such registration
models [3, 32] may have large numbers of parameters, e.g., a large number of B-spline control
points [30] or may even be non-parametric where vector fields are estimated [5, 22]. Spatial regularity can be achieved by appropriate constraints on displacement fields [14] or by parameterizing
the transformation via integration of a sufficiently regular stationary or time-dependent velocity
field [5, 15, 38, 8, 41]. Given sufficient regularization, diffeomorphic transformations can be assured
in the continuum. A popular approach based on time-dependent velocity fields is LDDMM [5, 15].
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

