Uncovering Prototypical Knowledge for Weakly
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation

Fei Zhang1

3

Tianfei Zhou3 Boyang Li4 Hao He5 Chaofan Ma1 Tianjiao Zhang1
Jiangchao Yao1,2† Ya Zhang1,2 Yanfeng Wang1,2

1
CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
Beijing Institute of Technology 4 National University of Defense Technology

5

CUHK

ferenas@sjtu.edu.cn, ztfei.debug@gmail.com
{chaofanma, xiaoeyuztj, Sunarker, ya_zhang, wangyanfeng622@}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of weakly open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (WOVSS), which learns to segment objects of arbitrary classes using mere
image-text pairs. Existing works turn to enhance the vanilla vision transformer
by introducing explicit grouping recognition, i.e., employing several group tokens/centroids to cluster the image tokens and perform the group-text alignment.
Nevertheless, these methods suffer from a granularity inconsistency regarding
the usage of group tokens, which are aligned in the all-to-one v.s. one-to-one
manners during the training and inference phases, respectively. We argue that this
discrepancy arises from the lack of elaborate supervision for each group token.
To bridge this granularity gap, this paper explores explicit supervision for the
group tokens from the prototypical knowledge. To this end, this paper proposes the
non-learnable prototypical regularization (NPR) where non-learnable prototypes
are estimated from source features to serve as supervision and enable contrastive
matching of the group tokens. This regularization encourages the group tokens to
segment objects with less redundancy and capture more comprehensive semantic
regions, leading to increased compactness and richness. Based on NPR, we propose the prototypical guidance segmentation network (PGSeg) that incorporates
multi-modal regularization by leveraging prototypical sources from both images
and texts at different levels, progressively enhancing the segmentation capability
with diverse prototypical patterns. Experimental results show that our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance on several benchmark datasets. The
source code is available at https://github.com/Ferenas/PGSeg.

1

Introduction

Recently, the remarkable success of vision-language pre-training (VLP) methods [39, 29, 2] has
invigorated the field of semantic segmentation, one of the prominent computer vision tasks. This
advancement has led to the emergence of an intriguing task known as open-vocabulary semantic
segmentation (OVSS), which aims to segment object pixels belonging to arbitrary classes beyond
pre-defined categories. To address this challenge, most works [22, 19, 34, 37] have turned to a
large quantity of image-text pairs equipped with precisely-annotated masks. To liberate OVSS from
exhaustive pixel-level ground truth, we in this paper excavate weakly open-vocabulary semantic
segmentation (WOVSS), a more arduous setting that achieves OVSS with mere image-text pairs.
† denotes the corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

