Winner-Take-All Column Row Sampling for Memory
Efficient Adaptation of Language Model

Zirui Liu1∗, Guanchu Wang1∗ , Shaochen Zhong1 , Zhaozhuo Xu2 , Daochen Zha1 ,
Ruixiang Tang1 , Zhimeng Jiang3 , Kaixiong Zhou1 , Vipin Chaudhary4 , Shuai Xu4 , Xia Hu1
1
Rice University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology, 3 Texas A&M University,
4
Case Western Reserve University
{zl105,gw22,hz88,daochen.zha,ruixiang.tang,kaixiong.zhou,xia.hu}@rice.edu;
zxu79@stevens.edu; zhimengj@tamu.edu;
{vipin, sxx214}@case.edu

Abstract
As the model size grows rapidly, fine-tuning the large pre-trained language model
has become increasingly difficult due to its extensive memory usage. Previous
works usually focus on reducing the number of trainable parameters in the network.
While the model parameters do contribute to memory usage, the primary memory
bottleneck during training arises from storing feature maps, also known as activations, as they are crucial for gradient calculation. Notably, machine learning models
are typically trained using stochastic gradient descent. We argue that in stochastic
optimization, models can handle noisy gradients as long as the gradient estimator
is unbiased with reasonable variance. Following this motivation, we propose a new
family of unbiased estimators called WTA-CRS , for matrix production with reduced
variance, which only requires storing the sub-sampled activations for calculating
the gradient. Our work provides both theoretical and experimental evidence that, in
the context of tuning transformers, our proposed estimators exhibit lower variance
compared to existing ones. By replacing the linear operation with our approximated one in transformers, we can achieve up to 2.7× peak memory reduction
with almost no accuracy drop and enables up to 6.4× larger batch size. Under
the same hardware, WTA-CRS enables better down-streaming task performance by
applying larger models and/or faster training speed with larger batch sizes. The
code is available at https://github.com/zirui-ray-liu/WTACRS/.

1

Introduction

Pre-trained language models (LMs) with transformer architecture have achieved remarkable success
in numerous natural language processing (NLP) tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Specifically, these models
are trained on vast text corpora to acquire general-purpose representations, which are then adapted
to a specific task by fine-tuning on task-specific data. In recent studies, it has been convincingly
demonstrated that significantly increasing the number of parameters in pre-trained LMs leads to
remarkable improvements in performance [6, 7]. As a result, there is now an urgent necessity to
effectively adapt these models, equipped with billion-scale parameters, to a wide range of tasks.
However, a significant disparity exists between the memory requirements of pre-trained LMs and
the capacity of current hardware, particularly GPUs. For example, even a GPU with 24GB memory
cannot accommodate the fine-tuning process of the T5-3B model [3] with batch size one, which
boasts three billion parameters. Without additional techniques, attempting to fine-tune billion-scale
LMs on a single GPU is impossible. Although model-parallel fine-tuning is feasible, the majority of
the time, we cannot bear the expense of acquiring multiple GPUs or the communication overhead
∗

Equal contribution. The order of authors is determined by flipping a coin.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

