Cola: A Benchmark for Compositional
Text-to-image Retrieval

Arijit Ray1,2

Filip Radenovic2
Abhimanyu Dubey2
2,3
Ranjay Krishna
Kate Saenko1,2

Bryan A. Plummer1

{array, bplum, saenko}@bu.edu, {filipradenovic, dubeya}@fb.com,
ranjay@cs.washington.edu
1

Boston University, 2 Meta AI (FAIR), 3 University of Washington

Abstract
Compositional reasoning is a hallmark of human visual intelligence. Yet despite
the size of large vision-language models, they struggle to represent simple compositions by combining objects with their attributes. To measure this lack of
compositional capability, we design Cola, a text-to-image retrieval benchmark
to Compose Objects Localized with Attributes. To solve Cola, a model must
retrieve images with the correct configuration of attributes and objects, and avoid
choosing a distractor image with the same objects and attributes but in the wrong
configuration. Cola contains about 1.2k composed queries of 168 objects and
197 attributes on around 30K images. Our human evaluation finds that Cola is
83.33% accurate, similar to contemporary compositionality benchmarks. Using
Cola as a testbed, we explore empirical modeling designs to adapt pre-trained
vision-language models to reason compositionally. We explore 6 adaptation strategies on 2 seminal vision-language models, using compositionality-centric test
benchmarks - Cola and CREPE. We find the optimal adaptation strategy is to
train a multi-modal attention layer that jointly attends over the frozen pre-trained
image and language features. Surprisingly, training multimodal layers on CLIP
performs better than tuning a larger FLAVA model with already pre-trained multimodal layers. Furthermore, our adaptation strategy improves CLIP and FLAVA
to comparable levels, suggesting that training multimodal layers using contrastive
attribute-object data is key, as opposed to using them pre-trained. Lastly, we show
that Cola is harder than a closely-related contemporary benchmark, CREPE, since
simpler fine-tuning strategies without multimodal layers suffice on CREPE, but not
on Cola. However, we still see a significant gap between our best adaptation and
human accuracy, suggesting considerable room for further research. Project page:
https://cs-people.bu.edu/array/research/cola/

1

Introduction

Compositionality is a fundamental characteristic of human intelligence, allowing us to elicit “the
meaning of the whole [as] a function of the meanings of its parts” [9]. In language, the whole is
a sentence made up of words like nouns and adjectives. In vision, the whole is an image made
up of visual elements like objects and attributes [27, 19]. For example, the expression “round
white table” is a composition of the noun “table” and adjectives “round” and “white”, visually
represented in the leftmost photo of Fig. 1. Recent work has consistently identified that this type of
compositionality—that between objects and their attributes—is something existing vision-language
models struggle to represent [54, 34, 24]. Instead, they disperse attributes and ground them to
distractor objects; for instance, they incorrectly match “round white table” to the second left photo in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

