Optimistic Rates for Multi-Task Representation
Learning

Austin Watkins
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
awatki29@jhu.edu

Enayat Ullah
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
enayat@jhu.edu

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of transfer learning via Multi-Task Representation Learning
(MTRL), wherein multiple source tasks are used to learn a good common representation, and a predictor is trained on top of it for the target task. Under standard
regularity assumptions on the loss function and task diversity, we provide new statistical rates on the excess risk of the target task, which demonstrate the benefit of
representation learning. Importantly, our rates are optimistic, i.e., they interpolate
between the standard O(m−1/2 ) rate and the fast O(m−1 ) rate, depending on the
difficulty of the learning task, where m is the number of samples for the target
task. Besides the main result, we make several new contributions, including giving
optimistic rates for excess risk of source tasks (Multi-Task Learning (MTL)), a
local Rademacher complexity theorem for MTRL and MTL, as well as a chain rule
for local Rademacher complexity for composite predictor classes.

1

Introduction

Transfer learning has emerged as a powerful tool in modern machine learning. The goal is to find a
good predictor on a given target task with little data, by extracting knowledge from source task(s).
The source tasks can either be explicitly given (supervised learning), or constructed from domain
knowledge (unsupervised/self-supervised learning). An example of the supervised learning approach
is a widely successful practice in deep learning, wherein a complex model is first trained on a source
task with plentiful data, then applied to a target task by extracting representations of data by freezing
the last layer of the complex model, and training a simple (linear) classifier on top of it [Bengio
et al., 2013, Donahue et al., 2014]. Similarly, the unsupervised approaches of training a (large)
neural network on a general objective has seen tremendous success, especially in natural language
processing [Brown et al., 2020, Devlin et al., 2019] and computer vision. As before, a simple linear
classifier trained on the output of the penultimate layer works well on a target task.
Representation learning, where the goal is to learn representations of data that are useful across
multiple domains and tasks, is a common theme in the examples above. We study a popular
formalization of this type of machine learning called Multi-Task Representation Learning (MTRL).
As the name suggests, we are given t source tasks each with a small number of data points, say n.
We seek to effectively pool the nt data points to extract a common good representation useful for the
target task. Therefore, if our tasks are sufficiently “diverse”, we hope to effectively circumvent our
data scarcity by sharing knowledge between tasks. As a by-product, since the shared representation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

