Fractal Landscapes in Policy Optimization

Tao Wang
UC San Diego
taw003@ucsd.edu

Sylvia Herbert
UC San Diego
sherbert@ucsd.edu

Sicun Gao
UC San Diego
sicung@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Policy gradient lies at the core of deep reinforcement learning (RL) in continuous
domains. Despite much success, it is often observed in practice that RL training
with policy gradient can fail for many reasons, even on standard control problems
with known solutions. We propose a framework for understanding one inherent
limitation of the policy gradient approach: the optimization landscape in the policy
space can be extremely non-smooth or fractal for certain classes of MDPs, such
that there does not exist gradient to be estimated in the first place. We draw on
techniques from chaos theory and non-smooth analysis, and analyze the maximal
Lyapunov exponents and Hölder exponents of the policy optimization objectives.
Moreover, we develop a practical method that can estimate the local smoothness
of objective function from samples to identify when the training process has
encountered fractal landscapes. We show experiments to illustrate how some
failure cases of policy optimization can be explained by such fractal landscapes.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has achieved much success in various applications [23, 30, 38], but they
also often fail, especially in continuous spaces, on control problems that other methods can readily
solve. The understanding of such failure cases is still limited. For instance, the training process
of reinforcement learning is unstable and the learning curve can fluctuate during training in ways
that are hard to predict. The probability of obtaining satisfactory policies can also be inherently
low in reward-sparse or highly nonlinear control tasks. Existing analysis of the failures focuses
on limitations of the sampling and optimization algorithms, such as function approximation errors
[35, 39], difficulty in data collection [34], and aggressive updates in the policy space [28]. There has
not been much study of potentially deeper causes of failures that may be inherent in the formulation
of policy optimization problems.
Motivated by the common observation that small updates in the policy parameters can significantly
change the performance, we analyze the smoothness of the optimization landscapes in policy optimization. Drawing on chaos theory, we introduce the concept of maximal Lyapunov exponent (MLE)
[17] to the RL setting to measure the exponential rate of trajectory divergence in MDP. It seems
contradictory that a trajectory in chaotic systems can be both exponentially divergent and uniformly
bounded at the same time, and we will show that these two conflicting facts combine to yield the
fractal structure in the optimization landscape. Intuitively, the objective function is non-differentiable
when the rate of trajectory divergence exceeds the decay rate of discount factor. Furthermore, this
finding indicates that the fluctuations observed in the loss curve are not just due to the numerical or
sampling error but rather reflect the intrinsic properties of the corresponding MDP.
We should emphasize that the fractal landscapes that we will demonstrate are stronger than various
existing results on the non-smoothness [2, 7]. Most non-smooth objectives that have been studied
still assume is local Lipschitz continuity or piecewise smoothness that implies differentiability almost
everywhere (such as f (x) = |x|). Instead, by showing that the loss landscape of policy optimization
can be fractal, we demonstrate the absence of descent directions, which causes the failure of first-order
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

