Students Parrot Their Teachers: Membership
Inference on Model Distillation
Matthew Jagielski1
Christopher Choquette-Choo1
1

Milad Nasr1
Katherine Lee1
Nicholas Carlini1
Florian Tramèr2

Google DeepMind
2
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Model distillation is frequently proposed as a technique to reduce the privacy leakage of machine learning. These empirical privacy defenses rely on the intuition
that distilled “student” models protect the privacy of training data, as they only
interact with this data indirectly through a “teacher” model. In this work, we design membership inference attacks to systematically study the privacy provided
by knowledge distillation to both the teacher and student training sets. Our new
attacks show that distillation alone provides only limited privacy across a number
of domains. We explain the success of our attacks on distillation by showing that
membership inference attacks on a private dataset can succeed even if the target
model is never queried on any actual training points, but only on inputs whose
predictions are highly influenced by training data. Finally, we show that our attacks are strongest when student and teacher sets are similar, or when the attacker
can poison the teacher set.

1

Introduction

Model distillation [HVD+15] is a common framework for knowledge transfer, where knowledge
learned by a “teacher model” is transferred to a “student model” via the teacher’s predictions. Distillation is helpful because the teacher’s predictions are a more useful guide for the student model
than hard labels; this phenomenon has been explained by the teacher’s predictions containing some
useful “dark knowledge”. Variants of model distillation have been proposed for, e.g., model compression [HVD+15; BC14; PPA18; KPK18; SCGL19] or training more accurate models [ZK16;
XLHL20]. Within the privacy-preserving machine learning community, distillation has been adapted
to protect the privacy of a training dataset [PAEGT16; TMSSNHM22; SH21; MHHVEHP22].
Many of these approaches rely on the intuition that distilling the teacher model serves as a privacy
barrier that protects the teacher’s training data. Informally, restricting the student to learn only
from the teacher’s predictions is a form of data minimization, which should result in less private
information being fed into, and memorized by, the student. This privacy barrier around the teacher
also allows the teacher model to be trained with strong, non-private, training approaches, improving
both the teacher model’s and student model’s accuracy.
Because model distillation does not provide a rigorous privacy guarantee (such as those offered by
differential privacy [DMNS06]), in our work we evaluate the empirical privacy provided by these
schemes. We show that distillation is vulnerable to membership inference attacks—a well-studied
class of privacy attacks on machine learning [SSSS17; YGFJ18].
We adapt the state-of-the-art Likelihood Ratio Attack (LiRA) [CCNSTT22] to the distillation setting, and find that this attack works surprisingly well at inferring membership of the teacher’s training data. For some training examples, model distillation fails to appropriately protect against mem37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

