Model-Based Reparameterization Policy Gradient
Methods: Theory and Practical Algorithms

Shenao Zhang1
1

Boyi Liu1
Zhaoran Wang1†
Northwestern University 2 Georgia Tech
shenao@u.northwestern.edu

Tuo Zhao2†

Abstract
ReParameterization (RP) Policy Gradient Methods (PGMs) have been widely
adopted for continuous control tasks in robotics and computer graphics. However,
recent studies have revealed that, when applied to long-term reinforcement learning problems, model-based RP PGMs may experience chaotic and non-smooth
optimization landscapes with exploding gradient variance, which leads to slow
convergence. This is in contrast to the conventional belief that reparameterization
methods have low gradient estimation variance in problems such as training deep
generative models. To comprehend this phenomenon, we conduct a theoretical
examination of model-based RP PGMs and search for solutions to the optimization
difficulties. Specifically, we analyze the convergence of the model-based RP PGMs
and pinpoint the smoothness of function approximators as a major factor that affects
the quality of gradient estimation. Based on our analysis, we propose a spectral
normalization method to mitigate the exploding variance issue caused by long
model unrolls. Our experimental results demonstrate that proper normalization
significantly reduces the gradient variance of model-based RP PGMs. As a result,
the performance of the proposed method is comparable or superior to other gradient estimators, such as the Likelihood Ratio (LR) gradient estimator. Our code is
available at https://github.com/agentification/RP_PGM.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has seen tremendous success in a variety of sequential decisionmaking applications, such as strategy games [51, 59] and robotics [15, 61], by identifying actions
that maximize long-term accumulated rewards. As one of the most popular methodologies, the policy
gradient methods (PGM) [56, 31, 52] seek to search for the optimal policy by iteratively computing
and following a stochastic gradient direction with respect to the policy parameters. Therefore, the
quality of the stochastic gradient estimation is essential for the effectiveness of PGMs.
Two main categories have emerged in the realm of stochastic gradient estimation: (1) Likelihood Ratio
(LR) estimators, which perform zeroth-order estimation through the sampling of function evaluations
[64, 32, 31], and (2) ReParameterization (RP) gradient estimators, which harness the differentiability
of the function approximation [17, 48, 12, 53]. Despite the wide adoption of both LR and RP PGMs
in practice, the majority of the literature on the theoretical properties of PGMs focuses on LR PGMs.
The optimality and approximation error of LR PGMs have been heavily investigated under various
settings [3, 60, 7]. Conversely, the theoretical underpinnings of RP PGMs remain to be fully explored,
with a dearth of research on the quality of RP gradient estimators and the convergence of RP PGMs.
RP gradient estimators have established themselves as a reliable technique for training deep generative
models such as variational autoencoders [17]. From a stochastic optimization perspective, previous
†

Equal advising.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

