Evaluating Open-QA Evaluation

Cunxiang Wang1, 2∗, Sirui Cheng3∗, Qipeng Guo4 , Yuanhao Yue5 , Bowen Ding2 ,
Zhikun Xu5 , Yidong Wang2 , Xiangkun Hu4 , Zheng Zhang4 , and Yue Zhang2†
1
Zhejiang University, China; 2 School of Engineering, Westlake University, China
3
Northeastern University, China; 4 Amazon AWS AI; 5 Fudan University, China
{wangcunxiang, zhangyue}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
This study focuses on the evaluation of the Open Question Answering (OpenQA) task, which can directly estimate the factuality of large language models
(LLMs). Current automatic evaluation methods have shown limitations, indicating
that human evaluation still remains the most reliable approach. We introduce a
new task, Evaluating QA Evaluation (QA-Eval) and the corresponding dataset
EVOUNA, designed to assess the accuracy of AI-generated answers in relation to
standard answers within Open-QA. Our evaluation of these methods utilizes humanannotated results to measure their performance. Specifically, the work investigates
methods that show high correlation with human evaluations, deeming them more
reliable. We also discuss the pitfalls of current methods and methods to improve
LLM-based evaluators. We believe this new QA-Eval task and corresponding
dataset EVOUNA will facilitate the development of more effective automatic
evaluation tools and prove valuable for future research in this area. All resources
are available at https://github.com/wangcunxiang/QA-Eval and it is under
the Apache-2.0 License.

1

Introduction

Open Question Answering (Open-QA) [Chen et al., 2017, Yang et al., 2019], refers to the generation
of precise responses to broad, open-ended queries. While Open-QA is useful for downstream
applications, such as digital assistant and customer support, it also serves as an essential measure of a
model’s competency in dealing with factuality [Zhu et al., 2021]. With the advent of Large Language
Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022a] and BARD [Google, 2023], significant strides
have been made in tackling NLP tasks [Qin et al., 2023, Kung et al., 2022]. However, evidence has
indicated that LLMs can generate hallucinations or other contents that contradict reality [Bang et al.,
2023, Ji et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2023a,b]. Consequently, ensuring factuality has become a prime
concern, and Open-QA can be a valuable benchmark task for detecting hallucinations.
The Open-QA task is traditionally evaluated via the Exact Match (EM) score [Izacard and Grave,
2021, Lewis et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2017], which uses whether the model output and one of golden
answers are an exact character match to determine whether it is correct. Hence, EM has certain
limitations as it does not adequately account for the variation in expression of the answers. For
instance, ‘Lionel Messi’ can also be expressed as ‘Lionel Andrés Messi’, ‘Messi’, or ‘Leo Messi’,
none of which would produce an exact match. Moreover, the EM score is inapplicable for detailed
responses from LLMs such as ChatGPT [OpenAI, 2022a] and GPT-3.5 [OpenAI, 2022b], where
formulating a gold standard answer could excessively restrict model performance.
∗
†

Equal contribution
The corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

