Active Negative Loss Functions for Learning with
Noisy Labels

Xichen Ye
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
yexichen0930@shu.edu.cn
Tong Liu
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
tong_liu@shu.edu.cn

Xiaoqiang Li ∗
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
xqli@shu.edu.cn

Songmin Dai
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
laodar@shu.edu.cn

Yan Sun
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
yansun@shu.edu.cn

Weiqin Tong
Shanghai University
Shanghai, China
wqtong@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
Robust loss functions are essential for training deep neural networks in the presence of noisy labels. Some robust loss functions use Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
as its necessary component. For example, the recently proposed Active Passive
Loss (APL) uses MAE as its passive loss function. However, MAE treats every
sample equally, slows down the convergence and can make training difficult. In
this work, we propose a new class of theoretically robust passive loss functions
different from MAE, namely Normalized Negative Loss Functions (NNLFs), which
focus more on memorized clean samples. By replacing the MAE in APL with
our proposed NNLFs, we improve APL and propose a new framework called Active Negative Loss (ANL). Experimental results on benchmark and real-world
datasets demonstrate that the new set of loss functions created by our ANL
framework can outperform state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/Virusdoll/Active-Negative-Loss.

1

Introduction

Relying on large-scale datasets with high quality annotations, such as ImageNet [1], deep neural
networks (DNNs) achieve good performance in various supervised classification tasks. However,
in practice, the process of labeling large-scale datasets is costly and inevitably introduces noisy
(mislabeled) samples. Moreover, empirical studies show that over-parameterized DNNs can easily fit
a randomly labeled dataset [2], which implies that DNNs may have a poor evaluation performance
when trained on a noisy dataset. As a result, noisy label learning has received a lot of attention.
Different approaches have been proposed to solve the noisy label learning problem, and one popular
research line is to design noise-robust loss functions, which is also the main focus of this paper.
Ghosh et al. [3] have theoretically proved that, symmetric loss functions such as Mean Absolute
Error (MAE), are robust to noise, while others like commonly used Cross Entropy (CE) are not.
However, MAE treats every sample equally, leading to significantly longer training time before
convergence and even making learning difficult, which suggests that MAE is not suitable for training
DNNs with challenging datasets [4]. Motivated by this, several works proposed partially robust loss
functions, including Generalized Cross Entropy (GCE) [4], a generalized mixture of CE and MAE,
and Symmetric Cross Entropy (SCE) [5], a combination of CE and a scaled MAE, Reverse Cross
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

