What Knowledge Gets Distilled in Knowledge
Distillation?
Utkarsh Ojha∗

Yuheng Li∗

Yingyu Liang

Anirudh Sundara Rajan∗
Yong Jae Lee

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Knowledge distillation aims to transfer useful information from a teacher network
to a student network, with the primary goal of improving the student’s performance
for the task at hand. Over the years, there has a been a deluge of novel techniques
and use cases of knowledge distillation. Yet, despite the various improvements,
there seems to be a glaring gap in the community’s fundamental understanding of
the process. Specifically, what is the knowledge that gets distilled in knowledge
distillation? In other words, in what ways does the student become similar to the
teacher? Does it start to localize objects in the same way? Does it get fooled by
the same adversarial samples? Does its data invariance properties become similar?
Our work presents a comprehensive study to try to answer these questions. We
show that existing methods can indeed indirectly distill these properties beyond
improving task performance. We further study why knowledge distillation might
work this way, and show that our findings have practical implications as well.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation, first introduced in [2, 12], is a procedure of training neural networks in
which the ‘knowledge’ of a teacher is transferred to a student. The thesis is that such a transfer (i)
is possible and (ii) can help the student learn additional useful representations. The seminal work
by [12] demonstrated its effectiveness by making the student imitate the teacher’s class probability
outputs for an image. This ushered in an era of knowledge distillation algorithms, including those that
try to mimic intermediate features of the teacher [26, 33, 13], or preserve the relationship between
samples as modeled by the teacher [22, 32], among others.
While thousands of papers have been published on different techniques and ways of using knowledge
distillation, there appears to be a gap in our fundamental understanding of it. Yes, it is well-known
that the student’s performance on the task at hand can be improved with the help of a teacher. But
what exactly is the so-called knowledge that gets distilled during the knowledge distillation process?
For example, does distillation make the student look at similar regions as the teacher when classifying
images? If one crafts an adversarial image to fool the teacher, is the student also more prone to getting
fooled by it? If the teacher is invariant to a certain change in data, is that invariance also transferred
to the student? Such questions have not been thoroughly answered in the existing literature.
This has become particularly relevant because there have been studies which present some surprising
findings about the distillation process. [3] showed that performing knowledge distillation with a
bigger teacher does not necessarily improve the student’s performance over that with a smaller teacher,
and thus raised questions about the effectiveness of the distillation procedure in such cases. [29]
showed that the agreement between the teacher and distilled student’s predictions on test images is
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

