Depth-discriminative Metric Learning
for Monocular 3D Object Detection

Wonhyeok Choi∗
Mingyu Shin∗
Sunghoon Im†
DGIST, Daegu, Korea
{smu06117, alsrb4446, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection poses a significant challenge due to the lack of depth
information in RGB images. Many existing methods strive to enhance the object
depth estimation performance by allocating additional parameters for object depth
estimation, utilizing extra modules or data. In contrast, we introduce a novel metric
learning scheme that encourages the model to extract depth-discriminative features
regardless of the visual attributes without increasing inference time and model size.
Our method employs the distance-preserving function to organize the feature space
manifold in relation to ground-truth object depth. The proposed (K, B, ϵ)-quasiisometric loss leverages predetermined pairwise distance restriction as guidance for
adjusting the distance among object descriptors without disrupting the non-linearity
of the natural feature manifold. Moreover, we introduce an auxiliary head for
object-wise depth estimation, which enhances depth quality while maintaining the
inference time. The broad applicability of our method is demonstrated through
experiments that show improvements in overall performance when integrated into
various baselines. The results show that our method consistently improves the
performance of various baselines by 25.27% and 4.54% on average across KITTI
and Waymo, respectively.

1

Introduction

Monocular 3D object detections [20, 22, 23, 27] has gained prominence as a cost-effective and easily
deployable solution, playing a critical role in autonomous driving and robotic navigation systems.
Typically, the frameworks consist of a feature extractor and lightweight multi-head architectures that
predict the projected centers, depths, bounding box sizes, and heading directions of multiple objects
from a single RGB image [18, 20, 22, 23, 26, 27, 41]. Among these tasks, object depth estimation,
inferring the distance from a monocular camera to the center of an object, is the most challenging subtask due to depth ambiguity. Previous work [23] has highlighted this issue in ablation studies, revealing
that substituting object depth predictions with ground-truth (GT) values significantly improves overall
performance, while replacing other sub-tasks, such as heading direction and 3D size, does not
notably enhance performance. Furthermore, several prior works [3, 10, 18, 22, 27, 28, 37, 41] have
attempted to improve object depth estimation quality by adding additional modules or introducing
new formulations. However, despite the subsequent increase in inference time and model size, the
improvement in performance remains limited.
These observations suggest that monocular 3D object detection heavily relies on object depth quality; nevertheless, conventional methods yield unsatisfactory results due to the extraction of lessdiscriminative features for object depth inference. One reason is that the extracted feature involves
visual attributes, such as the color, size, and heading direction of objects, resulting in the object
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

