A Smooth Binary Mechanism for Efficient Private
Continual Observation
Joel Daniel Andersson
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
jda@di.ku.dk

Rasmus Pagh
Basic Algorithms Research Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen
pagh@di.ku.dk

Abstract
In privacy under continual observation we study how to release differentially
private estimates based on a dataset that evolves over time. The problem of
releasing private prefix sums of x1 , x2 , x3 , · · · ∈ {0, 1} (where the value of each
xi is to be private) is particularly well-studied, and a generalized form is used in
state-of-the-art methods for private stochastic gradient descent (SGD). The seminal
binary mechanism privately releases the first t prefix sums with noise of variance
polylogarithmic in t. Recently, Henzinger et al. and Denisov et al. showed that it
is possible to improve on the binary mechanism in two ways: The variance of the
noise can be reduced by a (large) constant factor, and also made more even across
time steps. However, their algorithms for generating the noise distribution are
not as efficient as one would like in terms of computation time and (in particular)
space. We address the efficiency problem by presenting a simple alternative to the
binary mechanism in which 1) generating the noise takes constant average time
per value, 2) the variance is reduced by a factor about 4 compared to the binary
mechanism, and 3) the noise distribution at each step is identical. Empirically, a
simple Python implementation of our approach outperforms the running time of
the approach of Henzinger et al., as well as an attempt to improve their algorithm
using high-performance algorithms for multiplication with Toeplitz matrices.

1

Introduction

There are many actors in society that wish to publish aggregate statistics about individuals, be it for
financial or social utility. Netflix might recommend movies based on other users’ preferences, and
policy might be driven by information on average incomes across groups. Whatever utility one has in
mind however, it should be balanced against the potential release of sensitive information. While
it may seem anodyne to publish aggregate statistics about users, doing it without consideration to
privacy may expose sensitive information of individuals (Dinur & Nissim, 2003). Differential privacy
offers a framework for dealing with these problems in a mathematically rigorous way.
A particular setting is when statistics are updated and released continually, for example a website
releasing its number of visitors over time. Studying differential privacy in this setup is referred
to as differential privacy under continual observation (Dwork et al., 2010; Dwork & Roth, 2013).
A central problem in this domain is referred to as differentially private counting under continual
observation (Chan et al., 2011; Dwork et al., 2010), continual counting for short. It covers the
following problem: a binary stream x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . is received one element at a time such that xt is
received in round t. The objective is to continually output the number of 1s encountered up to each
time step while maintaining differential privacy. We consider two streams x and x′ as neighboring if
they are identical except for a single index i where xi ̸= x′i . It suffices to study the setting in which
there is a known upper bound T on the number of prefix sums to release — algorithms for the case of
unbounded streams then follow by a general reduction (Chan et al., 2011).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

