Public Opinion Field Effect Fusion in Representation
Learning for Trending Topics Diffusion

Junliang Li1,2 , Yajun Yang1,2∗, Qinghua Hu1 , Xin Wang1 , Hong Gao3
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Communication Content Cognition, Beijing, China
3
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Zhejiang Normal University, China
1
{lijunliang,yjyang,huqinghua,wangx}@tju.edu.cn,3 honggao@zjnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Trending topic diffusion and prediction analysis is an important problem and has
been well studied in social networks. Representation learning is an effective way
to extract node embeddings, which can help for topic propagation analysis by
completing downstream tasks such as link prediction and node classification. In
real world, there are often several trending topics or opinion leaders in public
opinion space at the same time and they can be regarded as different centers of
public opinion. A public opinion field will be formed surrounding every center.
These public opinion fields compete for public’s attention and it will potentially
affect the development of public opinion. However, the existing methods do not
consider public opinion field effect for trending topics diffusion. In this paper,
we introduce three well-known observations about public opinion field effect in
media and communication studies, and propose a novel and effective heterogeneous
representation learning framework to incorporate public opinion field effect and
social circle influence effect. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
to consider these effects in representation learning for trending topic diffusion.
Extensive experiments on real-world datasets validate the superiority of our model.

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of the Internet, hundreds of millions of people access and share information on social medias. Social networks have become the most important platform for producing
and spreading public opinions. Various trending topics widely spread on social networks will bring
a series of consequences. For example, fake news quickly spreads on social networks, will cause
governments or organizations to fall into a huge crisis of public opinion [11]. Studying the diffusion
and prediction of trending topics can effectively help governments and enterprises to timely discover
potential public opinion crisis and deal with it to avoid their reputation and economic losses [52].
The existing studies on trending topic diffusion are mainly divided into two categories: content-based
and network-based. The content-based methods [54, 21, 55, 26] aim to predict the dissemination
trends, e.g., number of comments and retweets, mainly for a blog based on content features such as
tags of text, images, and videos, but not cosider the network features. For network-based methods,
various prediction model based on graph embedding techiniques [6, 53, 34, 62] or random walk [33,
51, 2, 22] are proposed to calculate the information propagation probability for every node in social
networks. Recently, representation learning on heterogeneous graph becomes an effective way to
extract a low-dimensional node embedding by considering the network structure and node attribute
features, which can be applied to downstream tasks of propagation analysis such as link prediction
and node classification [18, 28, 27, 61, 30].
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

