Bootstrapping Vision-Language Learning with
Decoupled Language Pre-training

Yiren Jian1 Chongyang Gao2 Soroush Vosoughi1
1
Dartmouth College 2 Northwestern University

Abstract
We present a novel methodology aimed at optimizing the application of frozen large
language models (LLMs) for resource-intensive vision-language (VL) pre-training.
The current paradigm uses visual features as prompts to guide language models,
with a focus on determining the most relevant visual features for corresponding
text. Our approach diverges by concentrating on the language component, specifically identifying the optimal prompts to align with visual features. We introduce
the Prompt-Transformer (P-Former), a model that predicts these ideal prompts,
which is trained exclusively on linguistic data, bypassing the need for image-text
pairings. This strategy subtly bifurcates the end-to-end VL training process into
an additional, separate stage. Our experiments reveal that our framework significantly enhances the performance of a robust image-to-text baseline (BLIP-2), and
effectively narrows the performance gap between models trained with either 4M
or 129M image-text pairs. Importantly, our framework is modality-agnostic and
flexible in terms of architectural design, as validated by its successful application in
a video learning task using varied base modules. The code will be made available
at https://github.com/yiren-jian/BLIText.

1

Introduction

The field of vision-language (VL) learning seeks to create AI systems that mimic human cognition,
processing the world through multi-modal inputs. Core research areas in VL include visual-questionanswering (VQA), image captioning, image-text retrieval, and visual reasoning. VL learning began
with task-specific learning [3, 64] and has since progressed to large-scale image-text pre-training
paired with task-specific fine-tuning [50]. Furthermore, contemporary studies have begun exploring
the use of off-the-shelf frozen pre-trained large language models (LLMs) in VL models [2, 23, 34, 58],
which have delivered impressive results in language generation tasks such as VQA and image
captioning.
Present VL models utilizing frozen LLMs are characterized by shared design elements: visual
encoders, visual-to-language modules, and frozen LLMs. Except for Flamingo [2], which employs
a visual signal at each layer of the frozen LLM via gated cross-attention, the majority of works
[6, 34, 41, 46, 58] feed aligned visual features as soft language prompts [29] into the frozen LLMs
(see Figure 1 left). The models are then trained end-to-end with an image-conditioned language
generation loss using large-scale image-text pairs. This conceptually simple and implementation-wise
straightforward design has proven effective. BLIP-2 [34] demonstrates that decoupling the end-to-end
training into two stages is crucial for state-of-the-art results. The second stage of training involves
standard end-to-end learning, while the first stage of training of BLIP-2 utilizes a learnable module
(called Query-Transformer/Q-Former) to selectively choose/query visual features relevant to the
corresponding text. This reduces 256 features of an entire image to the 32 most relevant visual
features that will be sent into the following parts of the model. Stage 1 of BLIP-2 can be viewed as a
refined learnable version of early VL works [3, 38, 71] that use object detectors like Faster-RCNN
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

