M3Exam: A Multilingual, Multimodal, Multilevel
Benchmark for Examining Large Language Models

Wenxuan Zhang1 , Sharifah Mahani Aljunied1 , Chang Gao1,2∗, Yew Ken Chia1,3* , Lidong Bing1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Singapore University of Technology and Design
{saike.zwx, mahani.aljunied, gaochang.gao, yewken.chia, l.bing}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Despite the existence of various benchmarks for evaluating natural language processing models, we argue that human exams are a more suitable means of evaluating
general intelligence for large language models (LLMs), as they inherently demand
a much wider range of abilities such as language understanding, domain knowledge,
and problem-solving skills. To this end, we introduce M3Exam, a novel benchmark sourced from real and official human exam questions for evaluating LLMs
in a multilingual, multimodal, and multilevel context. M3Exam exhibits three
unique characteristics: (1) multilingualism, encompassing questions from multiple
countries that require strong multilingual proficiency and cultural knowledge; (2)
multimodality, accounting for the multimodal nature of many exam questions to
test the model’s multimodal understanding capability; and (3) multilevel structure, featuring exams from three critical educational periods to comprehensively
assess a model’s proficiency at different levels. In total, M3Exam contains 12,317
questions in 9 diverse languages with three educational levels, where about 23%
of the questions require processing images for successful solving. We assess the
performance of top-performing LLMs on M3Exam and find that current models,
including GPT-4, still struggle with multilingual text, particularly in low-resource
and non-Latin script languages. Multimodal LLMs also perform poorly with complex multimodal questions. We believe that M3Exam can be a valuable resource for
comprehensively evaluating LLMs by examining their multilingual and multimodal
abilities and tracking their development. Data and evaluation code is available at
https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/M3Exam.

1

Introduction

In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in various
natural language processing (NLP) tasks [9, 31, 3, 4]. For instance, ChatGPT [30] shows an impressive
ability to effectively respond to a wide range of questions and provide high-quality answers [7]. Their
applications even extend beyond traditional NLP domains, as they have been integrated to address
real-world challenges in diverse areas [22, 27, 40]. Given the increasing reliance on LLMs, the need
for appropriate and comprehensive evaluations has become ever more critical. Such assessments
should not only examine whether the models exhibit strong language understanding, but also evaluate
their capabilities to handle complex problems requiring different kinds of skills [31].
Typically, NLP models are evaluated using well-designed benchmarks for specific tasks, such as
SQuAD [34] for question-answering or WMT [8] for machine translation. Although useful, these taskspecific benchmarks often emphasize on certain aspects, and thus do not adequately assess the breadth
∗

Chang Gao is a research intern at Alibaba. Yew Ken Chia is under the Joint Ph.D. Program between Alibaba
and SUTD.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

