Estimating and Controlling for Equalized Odds via
Sensitive Attribute Predictors
Beepul Bharti
Johns Hopkins University
bbharti1@jhu.edu

Paul Yi
University of Maryland
pyi@som.umaryland.edu

Jeremias Sulam
Johns Hopkins University
jsulam1@jhu.edu

Abstract
As the use of machine learning models in real world high-stakes decision settings
continues to grow, it is highly important that we are able to audit and control
for any potential fairness violations these models may exhibit towards certain
groups. To do so, one naturally requires access to sensitive attributes, such as
demographics, biological sex, or other potentially sensitive features that determine
group membership. Unfortunately, in many settings, this information is often
unavailable. In this work we study the well known equalized odds (EOD) definition
of fairness. In a setting without sensitive attributes, we first provide tight and
computable upper bounds for the EOD violation of a predictor. These bounds
precisely reflect the worst possible EOD violation. Second, we demonstrate how
one can provably control the worst-case EOD by a new post-processing correction
method. Our results characterize when directly controlling for EOD with respect
to the predicted sensitive attributes is – and when is not – optimal when it comes to
controlling worst-case EOD. Our results hold under assumptions that are milder
than previous works, and we illustrate these results with experiments on synthetic
and real datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) algorithms are increasingly used in high stakes prediction applications
that can significantly impact society. For example, ML models have been used to detect breast
cancer in mammograms [37], inform parole and sentencing decisions [14], and aid in loan approval
decisions [41]. While these algorithms often demonstrate excellent overall performance, they
can be dangerously unfair and negatively impact under-represented groups [38]. Some of these
unforeseen negative consequences can even be fatal, e.g. deep learning models for chest x-ray disease
classification exhibit under diagnosis bias towards certain sensitive groups [36]. Recommendations
to ensure that ML systems do not exacerbate societal biases have been raised by several groups,
including the White House, which in 2016, released a report on big data, algorithms, and civil rights
[31]. It is thus critical to understand how to rigorously evaluate the fairness of ML algorithms and
control for unfairness during model development.
These needs have prompted considerable research in the area of Fair ML. While there exist many
definitions of algorithmic fairness [7], common notions of group fairness consider different error rates
of a predictor across different groups: males and females, white and non-white, etc. For example, the
equal opportunity criterion requires the true positive rate (TPR) be equal across both groups, while
equalized odds requires both TPR and false positive rate (FPR) to be the same across groups [21].
Obtaining predictors that are fair therefore requires enforcing these constraints on error rates across
groups during model development, which can be posed as a constrained (or regularized) optimization
problem [35, 42, 2, 13, 16]. Alternatively, one can devise post-processing strategies to modify a
certain predictor to correct for differences in TPR and FPR [21, 18, 12, 1], or even include data
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

