Covariance adaptive best arm identification

El Mehdi Saad
Université Paris-Sacalay, CentraleSupéléc
Laboratoire des Signaux et Systèmes
Paris, France
el-mehdi.saad@centralesupelec.fr
Gilles Blanchard
Institut de Mathématique d’Orsay
Université Paris-Saclay
Paris, France
gilles.blanchard@universite-paris-saclay.fr
Nicolas Verzelen
Mistea, INRAE
Institut Agro, Université de Montpellier
Montpellier, France
nicolas.verzelen@inrae.fr

Abstract
We consider the problem of best arm identification in the multi-armed bandit model,
under fixed confidence. Given a confidence input δ, the goal is to identify the arm
with the highest mean reward with a probability of at least 1 − δ, while minimizing
the number of arm pulls. While the literature provides solutions to this problem
under the assumption of independent arms distributions, we propose a more flexible
scenario where arms can be dependent and rewards can be sampled simultaneously.
This framework allows the learner to estimate the covariance among the arms
distributions, enabling a more efficient identification of the best arm. The relaxed
setting we propose is relevant in various applications, such as clinical trials, where
similarities between patients or drugs suggest underlying correlations in the outcomes. We introduce new algorithms that adapt to the unknown covariance of the
arms and demonstrate through theoretical guarantees that substantial improvement
can be achieved over the standard setting. Additionally, we provide new lower
bounds for the relaxed setting and present numerical simulations that support their
theoretical findings.

1

Introduction and setting

Best arm identification (BAI) is a sequential learning and decision problem that refers to finding
the arm with the largest mean (average reward) among a finite number of arms in a stochastic
multi-armed bandit (MAB) setting. An MAB model ν is a set of K distributions in R: ν1 , . . . , νK ,
with means µ1 , . . . , µK . An "arm" is identified with the corresponding distribution index. The
observation consists in sequential draws ("queries" or "arm pulls") from these distributions, and each
such outcome is a "reward". The learner’s goal is to identify the optimal arm i∗ := Arg Maxi∈JKK µi ,
efficiently. There are two main variants of BAI problems: The fixed budget setting [1, 8], where
given a fixed number of queries T , the learner allocates queries to candidates arms and provides a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

