Encoding Time-Series Explanations through
Self-Supervised Model Behavior Consistency

Owen Queen
Harvard University
owen_queen@hms.harvard.edu
Teddy Koker
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
thomas.koker@ll.mit.edu

Thomas Hartvigsen
University of Virginia, MIT
hartvigsen@virginia.edu

Huan He
Harvard University
huan_he@hms.harvard.edu

Theodoros Tsiligkaridis
MIT Lincoln Laboratory
tsili@ll.mit.edu

Marinka Zitnik
Harvard University
marinka@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Interpreting time series models is uniquely challenging because it requires identifying both the location of time series signals that drive model predictions and
their matching to an interpretable temporal pattern. While explainers from other
modalities can be applied to time series, their inductive biases do not transfer well
to the inherently challenging interpretation of time series. We present T IME X,
a time series consistency model for training explainers. T IME X trains an interpretable surrogate to mimic the behavior of a pretrained time series model. It
addresses the issue of model faithfulness by introducing model behavior consistency, a novel formulation that preserves relations in the latent space induced by
the pretrained model with relations in the latent space induced by T IME X. T IME X
provides discrete attribution maps and, unlike existing interpretability methods, it
learns a latent space of explanations that can be used in various ways, such as to
provide landmarks to visually aggregate similar explanations and easily recognize
temporal patterns. We evaluate T IME X on eight synthetic and real-world datasets
and compare its performance against state-of-the-art interpretability methods. We
also conduct case studies using physiological time series. Quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that T IME X achieves the highest or second-highest performance in
every metric compared to baselines across all datasets. Through case studies, we
show that the novel components of T IME X show potential for training faithful,
interpretable models that capture the behavior of pretrained time series models.

1

Introduction

Prevailing time series models are high-capacity pre-trained neural networks [1, 2], which are often
seen as black boxes due to their internal complexity and lack of interpretability [3]. However, practical
use requires techniques for auditing and interrogating these models to rationalize their predictions.
Interpreting time series models poses a distinct set of challenges due to the need to achieve two
goals: pinpointing the specific location of time series signals that influence the model’s predictions
and aligning those signals with interpretable temporal patterns [4]. While explainers designed for
other modalities can be adapted to time series, their inherent biases can miss important structures
in time series, and their reliance on isolated visual interpretability does not translate effectively to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

