Unlocking Feature Visualization for Deeper Networks
with Magnitude Constrained Optimization

Thomas Fel⋆1,2,4 , Thibaut Boissin⋆2,3 , Victor Boutin⋆1,2 , Agustin Picard⋆2,3 , Paul Novello⋆2,3
Julien Colin1,5 , Drew Linsley1 , Tom Rousseau4 , Rémi Cadène1 , Lore Goetschalckx1 ,
Laurent Gardes4 , Thomas Serre1,2
1
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University
2
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute
3
Institut de Recherche Technologique Saint-Exupery
4
Innovation & Research Division, SNCF 5 ELLIS Alicante, Spain.
{thomas_fel@brown.edu, thibaut.boissin@irt-saintexupery.com}

Abstract
Feature visualization has gained substantial popularity, particularly after the influential work by Olah et al. in 2017, which established it as a crucial tool for
explainability. However, its widespread adoption has been limited due to a reliance
on tricks to generate interpretable images, and corresponding challenges in scaling
it to deeper neural networks. Here, we describe MACO, a simple approach to
address these shortcomings. The main idea is to generate images by optimizing
the phase spectrum while keeping the magnitude constant to ensure that generated
explanations lie in the space of natural images. Our approach yields significantly
better results – both qualitatively and quantitatively – and unlocks efficient and
interpretable feature visualizations for large state-of-the-art neural networks. We
also show that our approach exhibits an attribution mechanism allowing us to
augment feature visualizations with spatial importance. We validate our method on
a novel benchmark for comparing feature visualization methods, and release its
visualizations for all classes of the ImageNet dataset on
Lens.
Overall, our approach unlocks, for the first time, feature visualizations for large,
state-of-the-art deep neural networks without resorting to any parametric prior
image model.

1

Introduction

The field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) [2, 3] has largely focused on characterizing
computer vision models through the use of attribution methods [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. These
methods aim to explain the decision strategy of a network by assigning an importance score to each
input pixel (or group of input pixels [14, 15, 16]), according to their contribution to the overall
decision. Such approaches only offer a partial understanding of the learned decision processes as they
aim to identify the location of the most discriminative features in an image, the “where”, leaving open
the “what” question, i.e. the semantic meaning of those features. Recent work [17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22]
has highlighted the intrinsic limitations of attribution methods [23, 24, 25, 26], calling for the
development of methods that provide a complementary explanation regarding the “what”.
Feature visualizations provide a bridge to fill this gap via the generation of images that elicit a strong
response from specifically targeted neurons (or groups of neurons). One of the simplest approaches
uses gradient ascent to search for such an image. In the absence of regularization, this optimization is
⋆ The authors contributed equally.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

