Non-Convex Bilevel Optimization with Time-Varying
Objective Functions

Sen Lin∗
Department of CS
University of Houston
slin50@central.uh.edu
Kaiyi Ji
Department of CSE
University at Buffalo
kaiyiji@buffalo.edu

Daouda Sow
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
sow.53@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang889@osu.edu

Ness Shroff
Department of ECE & CSE
The Ohio State University
shroff.11@osu.edu

Abstract
Bilevel optimization has become a powerful tool in a wide variety of machine
learning problems. However, the current nonconvex bilevel optimization considers
an offline dataset and static functions, which may not work well in emerging online
applications with streaming data and time-varying functions. In this work, we
study online bilevel optimization (OBO) where the functions can be time-varying
and the agent continuously updates the decisions with online streaming data. To
deal with the function variations and the unavailability of the true hypergradients
in OBO, we propose a single-loop online bilevel optimizer with window averaging
(SOBOW), which updates the outer-level decision based on a window average
of the most recent hypergradient estimations stored in the memory. Compared
to existing algorithms, SOBOW is computationally efficient and does not need
to know previous functions. To handle the unique technical difficulties rooted in
single-loop update and function variations for OBO, we develop a novel analytical
technique that disentangles the complex couplings between decision variables,
and carefully controls the hypergradient estimation error. We show that SOBOW
can achieve a sublinear bilevel local regret under mild conditions. Extensive
experiments across multiple domains corroborate the effectiveness of SOBOW.

1

Introduction

Bilevel optimization has attracted significant recent attention, which in general studies the following
problem:
min f (x, y ∗ (x)) s.t. y ∗ (x) = arg min g(x, y).

x∈Rd1

y∈Rd2

(1)

Here both the outer-level function f and the inner-level function g are continuously differentiable,
and the outer optimization problem is solved subject to the optimality of the inner problem. Due to
its capability of capturing hierarchical structures in many machine learning problems, this nested
optimization framework has been exploited in a wide variety of applications, e.g., meta-learning
[4, 31], hyperparameter optimization [13, 3], reinforcement learning [62, 57] and neural architecture
search [38, 8].
However, numerous machine learning problems with hierarchical structures are online in nature, e.g.,
online meta-learning [11] and online hyperparameter optimization [63], where the current bilevel
∗

The work was done when Sen Lin was in The Ohio State University

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

