Elastic Decision Transformer
Yueh-Hua Wu12 Xiaolong Wang1∗ Masashi Hamaya2∗
1
UC San Diego 2 OMRON SINIC X
yuw088@ucsd.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces Elastic Decision Transformer (EDT), a significant advancement over the existing Decision Transformer (DT) and its variants. Although DT
purports to generate an optimal trajectory, empirical evidence suggests it struggles with trajectory stitching, a process involving the generation of an optimal
or near-optimal trajectory from the best parts of a set of sub-optimal trajectories.
The proposed EDT differentiates itself by facilitating trajectory stitching during
action inference at test time, achieved by adjusting the history length maintained
in DT. Further, the EDT optimizes the trajectory by retaining a longer history
when the previous trajectory is optimal and a shorter one when it is sub-optimal,
enabling it to "stitch" with a more optimal trajectory. Extensive experimentation
demonstrates EDT’s ability to bridge the performance gap between DT-based and Q
Learning-based approaches. In particular, the EDT outperforms Q Learning-based
methods in a multi-task regime on the D4RL locomotion benchmark and Atari
games. Videos are available at: https://kristery.github.io/edt/.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) trains agents to
interact with an environment and learn from reHopper
Walker2d
89
wards. It has demonstrated impressive results
74
across diverse applications such as game play61
61
ing [23, 44], robotics [41, 40, 54], and recom45 50
43
mendation systems [12, 1]. A notable area of RL
30
is Offline RL [31], which employs pre-collected
data for agent training and proves more efficient
when real-time interactions are costly or limDT
QDT
TS+BC
Ours
ited. Recently, the conditional policy approach
has shown large potentials in Offline RL, where
the agent learns a policy based on the observed Figure 1: Normalized return with mediumstate and a goal. This approach enhances perfor- replay datasets. The dotted gray lines indicate normance and circumvents stability issues related malized return with medium datasets. By achievto long-term credit assignment. Moreover, the ing trajectory stitching, our method benefits from
successful Transformer architecture [49], widely worse trajectories and learns a better policy.
used in applications like natural language processing [52, 13, 8] and computer vision [14, 34], has
been adapted for RL as the Decision Transformer (DT) [11].
DT utilizes a Transformer architecture to model and reproduce sequences from demonstrations,
integrating a goal-conditioned policy to convert Offline RL into a supervised learning task. Despite
its competitive performance in Offline RL tasks, the DT falls short in achieving trajectory stitching,
a desirable property in Offline RL that refers to creating an optimal trajectory by combining parts
of sub-optimal trajectories [19, 9, 59]. This limitation stems from the DT’s inability to generate
∗

equal advising

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

