Dynamic Tensor Decomposition via Neural
Diffusion-Reaction Processes
Zheng Wang∗
Kahlert School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
u1208847@utah.edu

Shikai Fang∗
Kahlert School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
shikai.fang@utah.edu

Shibo Li
Kahlert School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
shibo@cs.utah.edu

Shandian Zhe†
Kahlert School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
zhe@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Tensor decomposition is an important tool for multiway data analysis. In practice,
the data is often sparse yet associated with rich temporal information. Existing
methods, however, often under-use the time information and ignore the structural knowledge within the sparsely observed tensor entries. To overcome these
limitations and to better capture the underlying temporal structure, we propose
Dynamic EMbedIngs fOr dynamic Tensor dEcomposition (DEMOTE). We develop a neural diffusion-reaction process to estimate dynamic embeddings for the
entities in each tensor mode. Specifically, based on the observed tensor entries,
we build a multi-partite graph to encode the correlation between the entities. We
construct a graph diffusion process to co-evolve the embedding trajectories of
the correlated entities and use a neural network to construct a reaction process
for each individual entity. In this way, our model can capture both the commonalities and personalities during the evolution of the embeddings for different
entities. We then use a neural network to model the entry value as a nonlinear function of the embedding trajectories. For model estimation, we combine
ODE solvers to develop a stochastic mini-batch learning algorithm. We propose
a stratified sampling method to balance the cost of processing each mini-batch
so as to improve the overall efficiency. We show the advantage of our approach
in both simulation study and real-world applications. The code is available at
https://github.com/wzhut/Dynamic-Tensor-Decompositionvia-Neural-Diffusion-Reaction-Processes.

1

Introduction

Multiway data is common in real-world applications and naturally represented by tensors. For
example, online shopping and promotion activities can be expressed as a three-mode tensor (customer,
commodity, online merchant). Tensor decomposition is an important tool for multiway data analysis.
It estimates embeddings for the entities in each tensor mode, with which to recover the observed
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

