S AT LM: Satisfiability-Aided Language Models
Using Declarative Prompting

Xi Ye

Qiaochu Chen
Isil Dillig
Greg Durrett
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
{xiye,qchen,isil,gdurrett}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Prior work has combined chain-of-thought prompting in large language models
(LLMs) with programmatic representations to perform effective and transparent
reasoning. While such an approach works well for tasks that only require forward
reasoning (e.g., straightforward arithmetic), it is less effective for constraint solving problems that require more sophisticated planning and search. In this paper,
we propose a new satisfiability-aided language modeling (S AT LM) approach for
improving the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. We use an LLM to generate a
declarative task specification rather than an imperative program and leverage an
off-the-shelf automated theorem prover to derive the final answer. This approach
has two key advantages. The declarative specification is closer to the problem
description than the reasoning steps are, so the LLM can parse it out of the description more accurately. Furthermore, by offloading the actual reasoning task
to an automated theorem prover, our approach can guarantee the correctness of
the answer with respect to the parsed specification and avoid planning errors in
the solving process. We evaluate S AT LM on 8 different datasets and show that
it consistently outperforms program-aided LMs in the imperative paradigm. In
particular, S AT LM outperforms program-aided LMs by 23% on a challenging
subset of the GSM arithmetic reasoning dataset; S AT LM also achieves a new SoTA
on LSAT and B OARDGAME QA, surpassing previous models that are trained on
the respective training sets.1

1

Introduction

Using large language models (LLMs) to perform complex reasoning has been a central thrust of
recent research (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Rae et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022b).
Techniques like scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021) or chain-of-thought prompting (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022c)
enable LLMs to follow a sequence of reasoning steps before making a prediction. This paradigm
is effective on various multi-step reasoning tasks, especially those with fixed forward reasoning
procedures (Wei et al., 2022c), e.g., concatenating the last letters of several words. However, CoT
prompting can fall short when scaling to problems that involve intensive computation (Gao et al.,
2023) or long sequences of reasoning steps (Creswell et al., 2023; Saparov and He, 2023; Ribeiro
et al., 2023).
Solving a complex reasoning problem involves three conceptual components: parsing a natural
language description into a representation of the problem, deriving a plan to solve the problem, and
executing that plan to obtain an answer. Recent work on improving CoT prompting focuses on fixing
execution errors by augmenting LLMs with symbolic executors such as a Python interpreter, which
1

Code available at https://github.com/xiye17/SAT-LM.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

