MultiModN—Multimodal, Multi-Task, Interpretable
Modular Networks
Vinitra Swamy*
EPFL

Malika Satayeva*
EPFL

Jibril Frej
EPFL

Thierry Bossy
EPFL

vinitra.swamy@epfl.ch

malika.satayeva@epfl.ch

jibril.frej@epfl.ch

thierry.bossy@epfl.ch

Thijs Vogels
EPFL

Martin Jaggi
EPFL

Tanja Käser*
EPFL

Mary-Anne Hartley*
Yale, EPFL

thijs.vogels@epfl.ch

martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

tanja.kaser@epfl.ch

mary-anne.hartley@yale.edu

Abstract
Predicting multiple real-world tasks in a single model often requires a particularly
diverse feature space. Multimodal (MM) models aim to extract the synergistic
predictive potential of multiple data types to create a shared feature space with
aligned semantic meaning across inputs of drastically varying sizes (i.e. images,
text, sound). Most current MM architectures fuse these representations in parallel, which not only limits their interpretability but also creates a dependency on
modality availability. We present MultiModN, a multimodal, modular network
that fuses latent representations in a sequence of any number, combination, or
type of modality while providing granular real-time predictive feedback on any
number or combination of predictive tasks. MultiModN’s composable pipeline
is interpretable-by-design, as well as innately multi-task and robust to the fundamental issue of biased missingness. We perform four experiments on several
benchmark MM datasets across 10 real-world tasks (predicting medical diagnoses,
academic performance, and weather), and show that MultiModN’s sequential MM
fusion does not compromise performance compared with a baseline of parallel
fusion. By simulating the challenging bias of missing not-at-random (MNAR),
this work shows that, contrary to MultiModN, parallel fusion baselines erroneously
learn MNAR and suffer catastrophic failure when faced with different patterns
of MNAR at inference. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first inherently
MNAR-resistant approach to MM modeling. In conclusion, MultiModN provides
granular insights, robustness, and flexibility without compromising performance.

1

Introduction

The world is richly multimodal and intelligent decision-making requires an integrated understanding
of diverse environmental signals, known as embodied intelligence [1]. Until recently, advances in deep
learning have been mostly compartmentalized by data modality, creating disembodied domains such
as computer vision for images, natural language processing for text, and so on. Multimodal (MM)
learning has emerged from the need to address real-world tasks that cannot be robustly represented
by a single signal type as well as the growing availability and diversity of digitized signals [2, 3, 4].
Some examples are diagnosis from a combination of medical tests and imagery [5, 6, 7], estimating
sentiment from facial expression, text, and sound [8, 9, 10, 11], and identifying human activities from
a combination of sensors [12].
* denotes equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

