Accelerating Motion Planning via Optimal Transport

An T. Le1 , Georgia Chalvatzaki1,3,5 , Armin Biess, Jan Peters1−4
Department of Computer Science, Technische Universitat Darmstadt, Germany
2
German Research Center for AI (DFKI) 3 Hessian.AI 4 Centre for Cognitive Science
5
Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior, Uni. Marburg and JLU Giessen, Germany
1

Abstract
Motion planning is still an open problem for many disciplines, e.g., robotics, autonomous driving, due to their need for high computational resources that hinder
real-time, efficient decision-making. A class of methods striving to provide smooth
solutions is gradient-based trajectory optimization. However, those methods usually
suffer from bad local minima, while for many settings, they may be inapplicable
due to the absence of easy-to-access gradients of the optimization objectives. In
response to these issues, we introduce Motion Planning via Optimal Transport
(MPOT)—a gradient-free method that optimizes a batch of smooth trajectories over
highly nonlinear costs, even for high-dimensional tasks, while imposing smoothness through a Gaussian Process dynamics prior via the planning-as-inference
perspective. To facilitate batch trajectory optimization, we introduce an original
zero-order and highly-parallelizable update rule—-the Sinkhorn Step, which uses
the regular polytope family for its search directions. Each regular polytope, centered on trajectory waypoints, serves as a local cost-probing neighborhood, acting
as a trust region where the Sinkhorn Step “transports” local waypoints toward
low-cost regions. We theoretically show that Sinkhorn Step guides the optimizing
parameters toward local minima regions of non-convex objective functions. We
then show the efficiency of MPOT in a range of problems from low-dimensional
point-mass navigation to high-dimensional whole-body robot motion planning,
evincing its superiority compared to popular motion planners, paving the way for
new applications of optimal transport in motion planning.

1

Introduction

Motion planning is a fundamental problem for various domains, spanning robotics [1], autonomous
driving [2], space-satellite swarm [3], protein docking [4]. etc., aiming to find feasible, smooth, and
collision-free paths from start-to-goal configurations. Motion planning has been studied both as
sampling-based search [5, 6] and as an optimization problem [7–9]. Both approaches have to deal
with the complexity of high-dimensional configuration spaces, e.g., when considering high-degrees
of freedom (DoF) robots, the multi-modality of objectives due to multiple constraints at both configuration and task space, and the requirement for smooth trajectories that low-level controllers can
effectively execute. Sampling-based methods sample the high-dimensional manifold of configurations
and use different search techniques to find a feasible and optimal path [6, 10, 5], but suffer from
the complex sampling process and the need for large computational budgets to provide a solution,
which increases w.r.t. the complexity of the problem (e.g., highly redundant robots and narrow passages) [11]. Optimization-based approaches work on a trajectory level, optimizing initial trajectory
samples either via covariant gradient descent [7, 12] or through probabilistic inference [9, 8, 13].
Nevertheless, as with every optimization pipeline, trajectory optimization depends on initialization
and can get trapped in bad local minima due to the non-convexity of complex objectives. Moreover,
in some problem settings, objective gradients are unavailable or expensive to compute. Indeed,
trajectory optimization is difficult to tune and is often avoided in favor of sampling-based methods
with probabilistic completeness. We refer to Appendix H for an extensive discussion of related works.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

