Policy Optimization in a Noisy Neighborhood:
On Return Landscapes in Continuous Control

Nate Rahn∗
Mila, McGill University

Pierluca D’Oro∗
Mila, Université de Montréal

Pierre-Luc Bacon
Mila, Université de Montréal

Harley Wiltzer
Mila, McGill University

Marc G. Bellemare
Mila, McGill University

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning agents for continuous control are known to exhibit
significant instability in their performance over time. In this work, we provide a
fresh perspective on these behaviors by studying the return landscape: the mapping
between a policy and a return. We find that popular algorithms traverse noisy
neighborhoods of this landscape, in which a single update to the policy parameters
leads to a wide range of returns. By taking a distributional view of these returns,
we map the landscape, characterizing failure-prone regions of policy space and
revealing a hidden dimension of policy quality. We show that the landscape exhibits
surprising structure by finding simple paths in parameter space which improve the
stability of a policy. To conclude, we develop a distribution-aware procedure which
finds such paths, navigating away from noisy neighborhoods in order to improve
the robustness of a policy. Taken together, our results provide new insight into the
optimization, evaluation, and design of agents.

1

Introduction

It is well-documented that agents trained with deep reinforcement learning can exhibit substantial
variations in performance – as measured by their episodic return. The problem is particularly acute in
continuous control, where these variations make it difficult to compare the end product of different
algorithms or implementations of the same algorithm [11, 20] or even reliably measure an agent’s
progress from episode to episode [9]. A recurring finding is that simply averaging the return produced
by a set of policies may be insufficient for rigorous evaluation.
In this paper, we demonstrate that high-frequency discontinuities in the mapping from policy parameters θ to the return R(θ) are an important cause of return variation. As a consequence of these
discontinuities, a single gradient step or perturbation to the policy parameters often causes important
changes in the return, even in settings where both the policy and the dynamics are deterministic.
Because an agent’s parameters constantly change during training and should be robust to minute
parametric perturbations, we argue that the distribution of returns in the neighborhood of θ is in fact
a better representative of its performance, both from an evaluation and an optimization perspective.
Noisy neighborhoods in the return landscape. We call the return landscape the mapping from
θ to R(θ), our main object of study. We show that the return often varies substantially within the
vicinity of any given θ, forming what we call a noisy neighborhood of θ. Based on this observation,
we demonstrate the usefulness of studying the landscape through the distribution of returns obtained
from small perturbations of θ. In the important case where these perturbations result from a single
gradient step, we call the resulting object the post-update return distribution.
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {nathan.rahn,pierluca.doro}@mila.quebec.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

