Breaking the Communication-Privacy-Accuracy
Tradeoff with f -Differential Privacy

Richeng Jin1
Zhonggen Su1
Caijun Zhong1
1
Zhaoyang Zhang
Tony Q.S. Quek2
Huaiyu Dai3
1

Zhejiang University
3

2

Singapore University of Technology and Design
North Carolina State University

Abstract
We consider a federated data analytics problem in which a server coordinates the
collaborative data analysis of multiple users with privacy concerns and limited
communication capability. The commonly adopted compression schemes introduce
information loss into local data while improving communication efficiency, and it
remains an open problem whether such discrete-valued mechanisms provide any
privacy protection. In this paper, we study the local differential privacy guarantees of discrete-valued mechanisms with finite output space through the lens of
f -differential privacy (DP). More specifically, we advance the existing literature by
deriving tight f -DP guarantees for a variety of discrete-valued mechanisms, including the binomial noise and the binomial mechanisms that are proposed for privacy
preservation, and the sign-based methods that are proposed for data compression,
in closed-form expressions. We further investigate the amplification in privacy by
sparsification and propose a ternary stochastic compressor. By leveraging compression for privacy amplification, we improve the existing methods by removing
the dependency of accuracy (in terms of mean square error) on communication
cost in the popular use case of distributed mean estimation, therefore breaking the
three-way tradeoff between privacy, communication, and accuracy.

1

Introduction

Nowadays, the massive data generated and collected for analysis, and consequently the prohibitive
communication overhead for data transmission, are overwhelming the centralized data analytics
paradigm. Federated data analytics is, therefore, proposed as a new distributed computing paradigm
that enables data analysis while keeping the raw data locally on the user devices [1]. Similarly to its
most notable use case, i.e., federated learning (FL) [2, 3], federated data analytics faces two critical
challenges: data privacy and communication efficiency. On one hand, the local data of users may
contain sensitive information, and privacy-preserving mechanisms are needed. On the other hand,
the user devices are usually equipped with limited communication capabilities, and compression
mechanisms are often adopted to improve communication efficiency.
Differential privacy (DP) has become the gold standard for privacy measures due to its rigorous
foundation and simple implementation. One classic technique to ensure DP is adding Gaussian or
Laplacian noises to the data [4]. However, they are prone to numerical errors on finite-precision
computers [5] and may not be suitable for federated data analytics with communication constraints due
to their continuous nature. With such consideration, various discrete noises with privacy guarantees
have been proposed, e.g., the binomial noise [6], the discrete Gaussian mechanism [7], and the
Skellam mechanism [8]. Nonetheless, the additive noises in [7] and [8] assume infinite range, which
renders them less communication-efficient without appropriate clipping. Unfortunately, clipping
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

