InsActor: Instruction-driven Physics-based Characters

Jiawei Ren∗1

Mingyuan Zhang∗1
1

Cunjun Yu∗2

Xiao Ma3

Liang Pan1

Ziwei Liu1

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
National University of Singapore
3
Dyson Robot Learning Lab

Abstract
Generating animation of physics-based characters with intuitive control has long
been a desirable task with numerous applications. However, generating physically
simulated animations that reflect high-level human instructions remains a difficult
problem due to the complexity of physical environments and the richness of human
language. In this paper, we present InsActor, a principled generative framework
that leverages recent advancements in diffusion-based human motion models to
produce instruction-driven animations of physics-based characters. Our framework empowers InsActor to capture complex relationships between high-level
human instructions and character motions by employing diffusion policies for
flexibly conditioned motion planning. To overcome invalid states and infeasible
state transitions in planned motions, InsActor discovers low-level skills and maps
plans to latent skill sequences in a compact latent space. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that InsActor achieves state-of-the-art results on various tasks, including instruction-driven motion generation and instruction-driven waypoint heading.
Notably, the ability of InsActor to generate physically simulated animations using
high-level human instructions makes it a valuable tool, particularly in executing
long-horizon tasks with a rich set of instructions. Our project page is available at
jiawei-ren.github.io/projects/insactor/index.html

1

Introduction

Generating life-like natural motions in a simulated environment has been the focus of physics-based
character animation [24, 16]. To enable user interaction with the generated motion, various conditions
such as waypoints have been introduced to control the generation process [40, 15]. In particular,
human instructions, which have been widely adopted in text generation and image generation,
have recently drawn attention in physics-simulated character animation [15]. The accessibility and
versatility of human instructions open up new possibilities for downstream physics-based character
applications.
Therefore, we investigate a novel task in this work: generating physically-simulated character
animation from human instruction. The task is challenging for existing approaches. While motion
tracking [4] is a common approach for character animation, it presents challenges when tracking novel
motions generated from free-form human language. Recent advancements in language-conditioned
controllers [15] have demonstrated the feasibility of managing characters using instructions, but
they struggle with complex human commands. On the other hand, approaches utilizing conditional
generative models to directly generate character actions [14] fall short of ensuring the accuracy
necessary for continuous control.
To tackle this challenging task, we present InsActor, a framework that employs a hierarchical design
for creating instruction-driven, physics-based characters. At the high level, InsActor generates motion
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

