Reverse Engineering Self-Supervised Learning

Ido Ben-Shaul
Department of Applied Mathematics
Tel-Aviv University & eBay Research
ido.benshaul@gmail.com

Ravid Shwartz-Ziv∗
New York University
ravid.shwartz.ziv@nyu.edu

Tomer Galanti∗
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
galanti@mit.edu

Shai Dekel
Department of Applied Mathematics
Tel-Aviv University
shaidekel6@gmail.com

Yann LeCun
New York University & Meta AI, FAIR
yann@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a powerful tool in machine learning, but understanding the learned representations and their underlying mechanisms remains
a challenge. This paper presents an in-depth empirical analysis of SSL-trained
representations, encompassing diverse models, architectures, and hyperparameters.
Our study reveals an intriguing aspect of the SSL training process: it inherently
facilitates the clustering of samples with respect to semantic labels, which is surprisingly driven by the SSL objective’s regularization term. This clustering process not
only enhances downstream classification but also compresses the data information.
Furthermore, we establish that SSL-trained representations align more closely with
semantic classes rather than random classes. Remarkably, we show that learned representations align with semantic classes across various hierarchical levels, and this
alignment increases during training and when moving deeper into the network. Our
findings provide valuable insights into SSL’s representation learning mechanisms
and their impact on performance across different sets of classes.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning (SSL) [12, 5] has made significant progress over the last few years, almost
reaching the performance of supervised baselines on many downstream tasks [42, 4, 31, 30, 47, 34,
15, 37, 66, 16]. However, understanding the learned representations and their underlying mechanisms
remains a persistent challenge due to the complexity of the models and the lack of labeled training
data. Moreover, the pretext tasks used in self-supervision frequently lack direct relevance to the
specific downstream tasks, further complicating the interpretation of the learned representations.
In supervised classification, however, the structure of the learned representations is often very simple.
For instance, a recent line of work [50, 36] has identified a universal phenomenon called neural
collapse, which occurs at the terminal stages of training. Neural collapse reveals several properties
of the top-layer embeddings, such as mapping samples from the same class to the same point,
maximizing the margin between the classes, and certain dualities between activations and the toplayer weight matrix. Later studies [10, 28, 26, 56, 62] characterized related properties at intermediate
layers of the network.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

