Follow-ups Also Matter: Improving Contextual
Bandits via Post-serving Contexts

Chaoqi Wang1 Ziyu Ye1 Zhe Feng2 Ashwinkumar Badanidiyuru3
University of Chicago1
Google Research2
Google3
{chaoqi, ziyuye, haifengxu}@uchicago.edu
{zhef, ashwinkumarbv}@google.com

Haifeng Xu1

Abstract
Standard contextual bandit problem assumes that all the relevant contexts are
observed before the algorithm chooses an arm. This modeling paradigm, while
useful, often falls short when dealing with problems in which valuable additional
context can be observed after arm selection. For example, content recommendation platforms like Youtube, Instagram, Tiktok also observe valuable follow-up
information pertinent to the user’s reward after recommendation (e.g., how long
the user stayed, what is the user’s watch speed, etc.). To improve online learning
efficiency in these applications, we study a novel contextual bandit problem with
post-serving contexts and design a new algorithm, poLinUCB, that achieves tight
regret under standard assumptions. Core to our technical proof is a robustified and
generalized version of the well-known Elliptical Potential Lemma (EPL), which
can accommodate noise in data. Such robustification is necessary for tackling our
problem, and we believe it could also be of general interest. Extensive empirical
tests on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate the significant benefit of
utilizing post-serving contexts as well as the superior performance of our algorithm
over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1

Introduction

Contextual bandits represent a fundamental mathematical model that is employed across a variety
of applications, such as personalized recommendations (Li et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2016) and online
advertising (Schwartz et al., 2017; Nuara et al., 2018). In their conventional setup, at each round t,
a learner observes the context xt , selects an arm at ∈ A, and subsequently, observes its associated
reward rt,at . Despite being a basic and influential framework, it may not always capture the
complexity of real-world scenarios (Wang et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2020). Specifically, the learner
often observes valuable follow-up information pertinent to the payoff post arm selection (henceforth,
the post-serving context). Standard contextual bandits framework that neglects such post-serving
contexts may result in significantly suboptimal performance due to model misspecification.
Consider an algorithm designed to recommend educational resources to a user by utilizing the user’s
partially completed coursework, interests, and proficiency as pre-serving context (exemplified in
platforms such as Coursera). After completing the recommendation, the system can refine the user’s
profile by incorporating many post-serving context features such as course completion status, how
much time spent on different educational resources, performances, etc. This transition naturally
delineates a mapping from user attributes (i.e., the pre-serving context) to user’s learning experiences
and outcomes (i.e., the post-serving context). It is not difficult to see that similar scenarios happen in
many other recommender system applications. For instance, in e-commerce platforms (e.g., Amazon,
Etsy or any retailing website), the system will first recommend products based on the user’s profile
information, purchasing pattern and browsing history, etc.; post recommendations, the system can
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

