Efficient RL with Impaired Observability: Learning to
Act with Delayed and Missing State Observations

Minshuo Chen1
Yu Bai2
H. Vincent Poor1
Mengdi Wang1
1
2
Princeton University
Salesforce Research

Abstract
In real-world reinforcement learning (RL) systems, various forms of impaired
observability can complicate matters. These situations arise when an agent is
unable to observe the most recent state of the system due to latency or lossy
channels, yet the agent must still make real-time decisions. This paper introduces
a theoretical investigation into efficient RL in control systems where agents must
act with delayed and missing
state observations. We establish near-optimal regret
p
e
bounds, of the form O( poly(H)SAK), for RL in both the delayed and missing
observation settings. Despite impaired observability posing significant challenges
to the policy class and planning, our results demonstrate that learning remains
efficient, with the regret bound optimally depending on the state-action size of the
original system. Additionally, we provide a characterization of the performance of
the optimal policy under impaired observability, comparing it to the optimal value
obtained with full observability.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), an agent engages with an environment in a sequential manner. In
an ideal setting, at each time step, the agent would observe the current state of the environment, select
an action to perform, and receive a reward Smallwood and Sondik [1973], Bertsekas [2012], Sutton
and Barto [2018], Lattimore and Szepesvári [2020]. However, real-world engineering systems often
introduce impaired observability and latency, where the agent may not have immediate access to the
instant state and reward information. In systems with lossy communication channels, certain state
observations may even be permanently missing, never reaching the agent. Nevertheless, the agent is
still required to make real-time decisions based on the available information.
The presence of impaired observability transforms the system into a complex interactive decision
process (Figure 1), presenting challenges for both learning and planning in RL. With limited knowledge about recent states and rewards, the agent’s policy must extract information from the observed
history and utilize it to make immediate decisions. This introduces significant complexity to the
policy class and poses difficulties for RL. Moreover, the loss of information due to permanently
missing observations further hampers the efficiency of RL methods. Although a naïve approach
would involve augmenting the state and action space to create a fully observable Markov Decision
Process (MDP), such a method would lead to exponential regret growth in the state-action size.
Why existing methods do not work. One may be tempted to cast the problem of impaired
observability into a Partially Observed MDPs (POMDPs). However, this would not solve the problem.
In POMDP, the system does not reveal its instant state to the agent but provides an emission state
observation conditioned on the latent state. POMDPs are known to suffer from the curse of history
Papadimitriou and Tsitsiklis [1987], Bertsekas [2012], Krishnamurthy [2016], unless additional
assumptions are imposed. Existing efficient algorithms focus on subclasses of POMDPs with
decodable or distinguishable partial observations Jin et al. [2020], Uehara et al. [2022], Zhan et al.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

