PointGPT: Auto-regressively Generative
Pre-training from Point Clouds

Guangyan Chen1
1

Meiling Wang1

Yi Yang1

Beijing Institute of Technology

Kai Yu1
2

Li Yuan2 ∗

Yufeng Yue1 ∗

Peking University

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) based on the generative pre-training transformer
(GPT) [46] have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness across a diverse range of
downstream tasks. Inspired by the advancements of the GPT, we present PointGPT,
a novel approach that extends the concept of GPT to point clouds, addressing the
challenges associated with disorder properties, low information density, and task
gaps. Specifically, a point cloud auto-regressive generation task is proposed to pretrain transformer models. Our method partitions the input point cloud into multiple
point patches and arranges them in an ordered sequence based on their spatial
proximity. Then, an extractor-generator based transformer decoder [27], with a dual
masking strategy, learns latent representations conditioned on the preceding point
patches, aiming to predict the next one in an auto-regressive manner. To explore
scalability and enhance performance, a larger pre-training dataset is collected.
Additionally, a subsequent post-pre-training stage is introduced, incorporating a
labeled hybrid dataset. Our scalable approach allows for learning high-capacity
models that generalize well, achieving state-of-the-art performance on various
downstream tasks. In particular, our approach achieves classification accuracies
of 94.9% on the ModelNet40 dataset and 93.4% on the ScanObjectNN dataset,
outperforming all other transformer models. Furthermore, our method also attains
new state-of-the-art accuracies on all four few-shot learning benchmarks. Codes
are available at https://github.com/CGuangyan-BIT/PointGPT.

1

Introduction

Point clouds are becoming widely adopted data structures in various application areas, such as
autonomous driving and robotics, emphasizing the importance of acquiring informative and comprehensive 3D representations. However, current 3D-centric approaches [9; 40; 41; 58; 32] typically
necessitate fully-supervised training from scratch, which entails labor-intensive human annotations.
In natural language processing (NLP) and image analysis domains, self-supervised learning (SSL)
[11; 19; 47; 5; 46] has emerged as a promising approach for acquiring latent representations without
relying on annotations. Among these methods, the generative pre-training transformer (GPT) [46]
has been particularly effective at learning representative features [7], where the task is to predict data
in an auto-regressive manner. Due to its remarkable performance, we naturally ask the question: can
the GPT be adapted to point clouds and serve as an effective 3D representation learner?
To answer this question, we exploit the GPT scheme for point cloud understanding. However, it is
challenging to employ GPT on point clouds due to the following reasons: (I) Disorder properties.
∗

Yufeng Yue and Li Yuan contributed equally to this study as co-corresponding authors. This work was
supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. NSFC 62003039, 62233002,
92370203, 61973034, the National Key RD Program of China (2022ZD0118), the CAST program under Grant
No. YESS20200126.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

