3D Copy-Paste: Physically Plausible Object Insertion
for Monocular 3D Detection
Yunhao Ge⋄† , Hong-Xing Yu⋄ , Cheng Zhao§ , Yuliang Guo§ , Xinyu Huang§ , Liu Ren§ ,
Laurent Itti† , Jiajun Wu⋄
⋄
Stanford University † University of Southern California
§
Bosch Research North America, Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{yunhaoge, koven, jiajunwu}@cs.stanford.edu {yunhaoge, itti}@usc.edu
{Cheng.Zhao, Yuliang.Guo2, Xinyu.Huang, Liu.Ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
A major challenge in monocular 3D object detection is the limited diversity and
quantity of objects in real datasets. While augmenting real scenes with virtual
objects holds promise to improve both the diversity and quantity of the objects,
it remains elusive due to the lack of an effective 3D object insertion method in
complex real captured scenes. In this work, we study augmenting complex real
indoor scenes with virtual objects for monocular 3D object detection. The main
challenge is to automatically identify plausible physical properties for virtual assets
(e.g., locations, appearances, sizes, etc.) in cluttered real scenes. To address this
challenge, we propose a physically plausible indoor 3D object insertion approach
to automatically copy virtual objects and paste them into real scenes. The resulting
objects in scenes have 3D bounding boxes with plausible physical locations and
appearances. In particular, our method first identifies physically feasible locations
and poses for the inserted objects to prevent collisions with the existing room
layout. Subsequently, it estimates spatially-varying illumination for the insertion
location, enabling the immersive blending of the virtual objects into the original
scene with plausible appearances and cast shadows. We show that our augmentation
method significantly improves existing monocular 3D object models and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. For the first time, we demonstrate that a physically
plausible 3D object insertion, serving as a generative data augmentation technique,
can lead to significant improvements for discriminative downstream tasks such
as monocular 3D object detection. Project website: https://gyhandy.github.
io/3D-Copy-Paste/.

1

Introduction

Monocular indoor 3D object detection methods have shown promising results in various applications
such as robotics and augmented reality [Yang and Scherer, 2019, Chen et al., 2017]. However, the
deployment of these methods is potentially constrained by the limited diversity and quantity of
objects in existing real datasets. For example, in SUN RGB-D dataset [Song et al., 2015], the bathtub
category has only less than 500 annotations compared to chair which has over 19,000 annotations.
This may be due to the difficulty in acquiring and labeling substantial indoor scene datasets with
diverse 3D object annotations [Silberman et al., 2012, Song et al., 2015, Dai et al., 2017].
Data augmentation techniques have been widely utilized in 2D detection and segmentation tasks
to improve the diversity and quantity of the available training data [Dwibedi et al., 2017, Ge et al.,
2022a, Ghiasi et al., 2021, Ge et al., 2022b, 2023]. However, it is non-trivial to scale 2D augmentation
methods to 3D scenes due to physical constraints in real 3D scenes. In particular, technical challenges
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

