On the Choice of Perception Loss Function for
Learned Video Compression

Sadaf Salehkalaibar∗
ECE Department
University of Toronto
sadafs@ece.utoronto.ca
Jun Chen
ECE Department
McMaster University
chenjun@mcmaster.ca

Buu Phan*
ECE Department
University of Toronto
truong.phan@mail.utoronto.ca

Wei Yu
ECE Department
University of Toronto
weiyu@ece.utoronto.ca

Ashish Khisti
ECE Department
University of Toronto
akhisti@ece.utoronto.ca

Abstract
We study causal, low-latency, sequential video compression when the output is
subjected to both a mean squared-error (MSE) distortion loss as well as a perception
loss to target realism. Motivated by prior approaches, we consider two different
perception loss functions (PLFs). The first, PLF-JD, considers the joint distribution
(JD) of all the video frames up to the current one, while the second metric, PLFFMD, considers the framewise marginal distributions (FMD) between the source
and reconstruction. Using information theoretic analysis and deep-learning based
experiments, we demonstrate that the choice of PLF can have a significant effect on
the reconstruction, especially at low-bit rates. In particular, while the reconstruction
based on PLF-JD can better preserve the temporal correlation across frames, it
also imposes a significant penalty in distortion compared to PLF-FMD and further
makes it more difficult to recover from errors made in the earlier output frames.
Although the choice of PLF decisively affects reconstruction quality, we also
demonstrate that it may not be essential to commit to a particular PLF during
encoding and the choice of PLF can be delegated to the decoder. In particular,
encoded representations generated by training a system to minimize the MSE
(without requiring either PLF) can be near universal and can generate close to
optimal reconstructions for either choice of PLF at the decoder. We validate
our results using (one-shot) information-theoretic analysis, detailed study of the
rate-distortion-perception tradeoff of the Gauss-Markov source model as well as
deep-learning based experiments on moving MNIST and KTH datasets. Code will
be available at https://github.com/truongbuu/URDP_flow.

1

Introduction

There is an increasing demand for video compression algorithms that are able to generate visually
pleasing videos at low bitrates. Most of the current video codecs use distortion measures such
as PSNR [1–4], MSE and MS-SSIM [3–5] to generate reconstructions which tend to be blurry at
extremely low bitrates. In recent years, there has been a growing interest (see e.g., [6–10]) in using
deep generative models to make the reconstructions look more realistic. Such techniques introduce an
additional perception loss function that measures a distance between distributions of the source and
reconstruction, with perfect perception corresponding requiring that the two distributions be identical.
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

