Neural Functional Transformers
Allan Zhou1 Kaien Yang1 Yiding Jiang2 Kaylee Burns1
Winnie Xu1 Samuel Sokota2 J. Zico Kolter2 Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University 2 Carnegie Mellon University
ayz@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
The recent success of neural networks as implicit representation of data has driven
growing interest in neural functionals: models that can process other neural networks as input by operating directly over their weight spaces. Nevertheless, constructing expressive and efficient neural functional architectures that can handle
high-dimensional weight-space objects remains challenging. This paper uses the
attention mechanism to define a novel set of permutation equivariant weight-space
layers and composes them into deep equivariant models called neural functional
Transformers (NFTs). NFTs respect weight-space permutation symmetries while
incorporating the advantages of attention, which have exhibited remarkable success
across multiple domains. In experiments processing the weights of feedforward
MLPs and CNNs, we find that NFTs match or exceed the performance of prior
weight-space methods. We also leverage NFTs to develop I NR 2A RRAY, a novel
method for computing permutation invariant latent representations from the weights
of implicit neural representations (INRs). Our proposed method improves INR
classification accuracy by up to +17% over existing methods. We provide an
implementation of our layers at https://github.com/AllanYangZhou/nfn.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have emerged as flexible modeling tools applicable to a wide variety of different
fields, ranging from natural language processing to vision to the natural sciences. The sub-field of
implicit neural representations (INRs) has achieved significant success in using neural networks to
represent data such as 3D surfaces or scenes [32, 30, 37]. This has fueled interest in techniques that
directly operate in weight space to modify or extract information from a neural network through
its weights or gradients. However, developing models that can process weight-space objects is
challenging due to their high dimensional nature. As a consequence, some existing methods for
processing datasets of weights assume a restricted training process that reduces the effective weight
space [9, 3, 6].
In contrast, we follow recent work in building permutation equivariant weight-space models called
neural functionals, that can process neural network weights1 without such restrictions [31, 46].
In particular, this work concerns neural functionals that are equivariant to permutations of the
weights that correspond to re-arranging neurons. These weight-space permutations, known as neuron
permutation symmetries, exactly preserve the network’s behavior (see examples in Figure 1). Since
equivariance to neuron permutations is typically a useful inductive bias for weight-space tasks, neural
functionals achieve superior generalization compared to non-equivariant architectures. Despite this,
their performance on weight-space tasks remains significantly worse than convolutional networks’
performance on analogous image-space tasks [31, 46], suggesting that neural functional architectures
can be significantly improved.
1

For clarity, we use “weights” (and “weight space”) to describe the weights (and space they belong to) for the
network being processed by a neural functional. We use “parameters” for the weights of the neural functional.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

