AV-NeRF: Learning Neural Fields for Real-World
Audio-Visual Scene Synthesis

Susan Liang1 Chao Huang1 Yapeng Tian1
Anurag Kumar2 Chenliang Xu1
1
University of Rochester 2 Meta Reality Labs Research

Abstract
Can machines recording an audio-visual scene produce realistic, matching audiovisual experiences at novel positions and novel view directions? We answer it by
studying a new task—real-world audio-visual scene synthesis—and a first-of-itskind NeRF-based approach for multimodal learning. Concretely, given a video
recording of an audio-visual scene, the task is to synthesize new videos with spatial
audios along arbitrary novel camera trajectories in that scene. We propose an
acoustic-aware audio generation module that integrates prior knowledge of audio
propagation into NeRF, in which we implicitly associate audio generation with the
3D geometry and material properties of a visual environment. Furthermore, we
present a coordinate transformation module that expresses a view direction relative
to the sound source, enabling the model to learn sound source-centric acoustic
fields. To facilitate the study of this new task, we collect a high-quality Real-World
Audio-Visual Scene (RWAVS) dataset. We demonstrate the advantages of our
method on this real-world dataset and the simulation-based SoundSpaces dataset.
We recommend that readers visit our project page for convincing comparisons:
https://liangsusan-git.github.io/project/avnerf/.

1

Introduction

We study a new task, real-world audio-visual scene synthesis, to generate target videos and audios
along novel camera trajectories from source audio-visual recordings of known trajectories. By
learning from real-world source videos with binaural audio, we aim to generate target video frames
and spatial audios that exhibit consistency with the given camera trajectory visually and acoustically.
This consistency ensures perceptual realism and immersion, enriching the overall user experience.
As far as we know, attempts in the audio-visual learning literature [1–11] have yet to succeed in
solving this challenging task thus far. Although there are similar works [12–15], these methods have
constraints that limit their ability to solve this new task. Luo et al. [12] propose neural acoustic
fields to model sound propagation in a room. Su et al. [13] introduce representing audio scenes
by disentangling the scene’s geometry features. These methods are tailored for estimating room
impulse response signals in a simulation environment that are difficult to obtain in a real-world scene.
Concurrent to our work, ViGAS proposed by Chen et al. [15] learns to synthesize new sounds by
inferring the audio-visual cues. However, ViGAS is limited to a few viewpoints for audio generation.
We introduce AV-NeRF, a novel NeRF-based method of synthesizing real-world audio-visual scenes.
AV-NeRF enables the generation of videos and spatial audios, following arbitrary camera trajectories.
It utilizes source videos and camera poses as references. AV-NeRF consists of two branches: A-NeRF,
which learns the acoustic fields of an environment, and V-NeRF, which models color and density
fields. We represent a static audio field as a continuous function using A-NeRF, which takes the
listener’s position and head direction as input. A-NeRF effectively models the energy decay of sound
as the sound travels from the source to the listener by correlating the listener’s position with the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

