NetHack is Hard to Hack
Ulyana Piterbarg∗
NYU

Lerrel Pinto
NYU

Rob Fergus
NYU

Abstract
Neural policy learning methods have achieved remarkable results in various control
problems, ranging from Atari games to simulated locomotion. However, these
methods struggle in long-horizon tasks, especially in open-ended environments with
multi-modal observations, such as the popular dungeon-crawler game, NetHack.
Intriguingly, the NeurIPS 2021 NetHack Challenge revealed that symbolic agents
outperformed neural approaches by over four times in median game score. In
this paper, we delve into the reasons behind this performance gap and present
an extensive study on neural policy learning for NetHack. To conduct this study,
we analyze the winning symbolic agent, extending its codebase to track internal
strategy selection in order to generate one of the largest available demonstration
datasets. Utilizing this dataset, we examine (i) the advantages of an action hierarchy;
(ii) enhancements in neural architecture; and (iii) the integration of reinforcement
learning with imitation learning. Our investigations produce a state-of-the-art neural
agent that surpasses previous fully neural policies by 127% in offline settings and
25% in online settings on median game score. However, we also demonstrate that
mere scaling is insufficient to bridge the performance gap with the best symbolic
models or even the top human players.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) combined with deep neural policies has achieved impressive results in
control problems, such as short-horizon simulated locomotion tasks [55, 7]. However, these methods
struggle in long-horizon problem domains, such as NetHack [34], a highly challenging grid-world
game. NetHack poses difficulties due to its vast state and action space, multi-modal observation space
(including vision and language), procedurally-generated randomness, diverse strategies, and deferred
rewards. These challenges are evident in the recent NetHack Challenge [23], where agents based on
hand-crafted symbolic rules outperform purely neural approaches (see Figure 1), despite the latter
having access to high-quality human demonstration data [24] and utilizing large-scale models.
We propose three reasons for the poor performance of large-scale neural policies compared to symbolic
strategies. First, symbolic strategies implement hierarchical control schemes, which are generally
absent in neural policies used for NetHack. Second, symbolic models use hand-crafted parsers for
multi-modal observations, suggesting that larger networks could enhance representations extracted
from complex observations. Third, symbolic strategies incorporate error correction mechanisms,
which could be crucial for improving neural policies if integrated with RL based error correction.
In this work, we conduct a comprehensive study of NetHack and examine various learning mechanisms to enhance the performance of neural models. We bypass traditional RL obstacles, such as
sparse rewards or exploration challenges, by focusing on imitation learning. However, we find that
existing datasets lack crucial information, such as hierarchical labels and symbolic planning traces.
To address this, we augment the codebase of AutoAscend, the top-performing symbolic agent in
the 2021 NetHack Challenge, and extract hierarchical labels tracking the agent’s internal strategy
selection in order to construct a large-scale dataset containing 109 actions.
∗

Correspondence to up2021@cims.nyu.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

