Diffusion Probabilistic Models for
Structured Node Classification
Hyosoon Jang1 , Seonghyun Park1 , Sangwoo Mo2 , Sungsoo Ahn1
1
2
POSTECH
University of Michigan
{hsjang1205,shpark26,sungsoo.ahn}@postech.ac.kr, swmo@umich.edu

Abstract
This paper studies structured node classification on graphs, where the predictions
should consider dependencies between the node labels. In particular, we focus on
solving the problem for partially labeled graphs where it is essential to incorporate
the information in the known label for predicting the unknown labels. To address
this issue, we propose a novel framework leveraging the diffusion probabilistic
model for structured node classification (DPM-SNC). At the heart of our framework
is the extraordinary capability of DPM-SNC to (a) learn a joint distribution over
the labels with an expressive reverse diffusion process and (b) make predictions
conditioned on the known labels utilizing manifold-constrained sampling. Since
the DPMs lack training algorithms for partially labeled data, we design a novel
training algorithm to apply DPMs, maximizing a new variational lower bound. We
also theoretically analyze how DPMs benefit node classification by enhancing the
expressive power of GNNs based on proposing AGG-WL, which is strictly more
powerful than the classic 1-WL test. We extensively verify the superiority of our
DPM-SNC in diverse scenarios, which include not only the transductive setting on
partially labeled graphs but also the inductive setting and unlabeled graphs.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we address the node classification problem, which is a fundamental problem in machine
learning on graphs with various applications, such as social networks [1] and citation networks [2].
One representative example is a transductive problem to classify documents from a partially labeled
citation graph. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [3, 4] have shown great success in this
problem over their predecessors [5, 6]. Their success stems from the high capacity of non-linear
neural architectures combined with message passing.
However, the conventional GNNs are incapable of structured node classification: predicting node
labels while considering the node-wise label dependencies [7–9]. That is, given a graph G with
vertices V and node labels {yi : i ∈ V}, a GNN with parameter θ outputs an unstructured prediction,
i.e., pθ (yi , yj |G) = pθ (yi |G)pθ (yj |G) for i, j ∈ V. Especially, this limitation becomes problematic
in a transductive setting where the prediction can be improved by incorporating the known labels,
e.g., output pθ (yi |G, yj ) for known yj . In Figures 1(a) and 1(b), we elaborate on this issue with an
example where the conventional GNN fails to make the correct prediction.
To resolve this issue, recent studies have investigated combining GNNs with classical structured
prediction algorithms, i.e., schemes that consider dependencies between the node labels [8–13]. They
combine GNNs with conditional random fields [14], label propagation [15], or iterative classification
algorithm [2]. Despite the promising outcomes demonstrated by these studies, their approach relies
on the classical algorithms to express joint dependencies between node labels and may lack sufficient
expressive power or consistency in incorporating known labels.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

