Domain Adaptive Imitation Learning
with Visual Observation
Sungho Choi1
Jongseong Chae1
1

Seungyul Han2∗
Whiyoung Jung4

Woojun Kim3
Youngchul Sung1

3
4
UNIST
Carnegie Mellon University
LG AI Research
{sungho.choi,jongseong.chae,ycsung}@kaist.ac.kr,
syhan@unist.ac.kr, woojunk@andrew.cmu.edu, whiyoung.jung@lgresearch.ai

KAIST

2

Abstract
In this paper, we consider domain-adaptive imitation learning with visual observation, where an agent in a target domain learns to perform a task by observing expert
demonstrations in a source domain. Domain adaptive imitation learning arises in
practical scenarios where a robot, receiving visual sensory data, needs to mimic
movements by visually observing other robots from different angles or observing
robots of different shapes. To overcome the domain shift in cross-domain imitation
learning with visual observation, we propose a novel framework for extracting
domain-independent behavioral features from input observations that can be used
to train the learner, based on dual feature extraction and image reconstruction.
Empirical results demonstrate that our approach outperforms previous algorithms
for imitation learning from visual observation with domain shift.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) is a framework where an agent learns behavior by mimicking an expert’s
demonstration without access to true rewards. The mainstream IL methods include Behavior Cloning
(BC), which trains the learner with supervised learning [3, 31, 33, 39], Inverse Reinforcement
Learning (IRL), which tries to find the reward function [1, 29, 49], and Adversarial Imitation
Learning (AIL), which trains the learner to match its state-action visitation distribution to that of the
expert via adversarial learning [10, 12, 18, 40, 46]. IL provides an effective alternative to solving
reinforcement learning (RL) problems because it circumvents the difficulty in the careful design of a
reward function for intended behavior [30, 47]. Despite the effectiveness, conventional IL assumes
that the expert and the learner lie in the same domain, but this is a limited assumption in the real
world. For example, a self-driving car should learn real-world driving skills from demonstrations in a
driving simulator. In such a case, the expert and the learner do not lie in the same domain.
In this paper, we consider the challenge of domain shift in IL, i.e., an agent in a target domain learns
to perform a task based on an expert’s demonstration in a source domain. In particular, we focus
on the case where the expert demonstrations are provided in a visual form. In many practical cases,
obtaining expert demonstrations as an explicit sequence of states (such as positions and velocities)
and actions (such as movement angles) can be challenging. Instead, the expert’s demonstrations are
often provided as image sequences. One example can be a robot mimicking a movement by visually
observing human behavior. However, learning from visual observations poses a major challenge in
IL since images are high-dimensional and often include only partial information about the expert’s
behavior or information unrelated to the expert’s behavior. Even minor changes between the source
and target domains can vastly affect the agent’s policy and lead to unstable learning. In recent years,
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

