Gradient Flossing: Improving Gradient Descent
through Dynamic Control of Jacobians

Rainer Engelken
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute
Columbia University
New York, USA
re2365@columbia.edu

Abstract
Training recurrent neural networks (RNNs) remains a challenge due to the instability of gradients across long time horizons, which can lead to exploding and
vanishing gradients. Recent research has linked these problems to the values
of Lyapunov exponents for the forward-dynamics, which describe the growth or
shrinkage of infinitesimal perturbations. Here, we propose gradient flossing, a
novel approach to tackling gradient instability by pushing Lyapunov exponents
of the forward dynamics toward zero during learning. We achieve this by regularizing Lyapunov exponents through backpropagation using differentiable linear
algebra. This enables us to "floss" the gradients, stabilizing them and thus improving network training. We demonstrate that gradient flossing controls not only the
gradient norm but also the condition number of the long-term Jacobian, facilitating
multidimensional error feedback propagation. We find that applying gradient
flossing prior to training enhances both the success rate and convergence speed for
tasks involving long time horizons. For challenging tasks, we show that gradient
flossing during training can further increase the time horizon that can be bridged
by backpropagation through time. Moreover, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on various RNN architectures and tasks of variable temporal complexity. Additionally, we provide a simple implementation of our gradient flossing
algorithm that can be used in practice. Our results indicate that gradient flossing
via regularizing Lyapunov exponents can significantly enhance the effectiveness of
RNN training and mitigate the exploding and vanishing gradients problem.

1

Introduction

Recurrent neural networks are commonly used both in machine learning and computational neuroscience for tasks that involve input-to-output mappings over sequences and dynamic trajectories.
Training is often achieved through gradient descent by the backpropagation of error information
across time steps [1, 2, 3, 4]. This amounts to unrolling the network dynamics in time and recursively
applying the chain rule to calculate the gradient of the loss with respect to the network parameters.
Mathematically, evaluating the product of Jacobians of the recurrent state update describes how error
signals travel across time steps. When trained on tasks that have long-range temporal dependencies,
recurrent neural networks are prone to exploding and vanishing gradients [5, 6, 7, 8]. These arise from
the exponential amplification or attenuation of recursive derivatives of recurrent network states over
many time steps. Intuitively, to evaluate how an output error depends on a small parameter change at
a much earlier point in time, the error information has to be propagated through the recurrent network
states iteratively. Mathematically, this corresponds to a product of Jacobians that describe how
changes in one recurrent network state depend on changes in the previous network state. Together,
this product forms the long-term Jacobian. The singular value spectrum of the long-term Jacobian reg37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

