Your representations are in the network: composable
and parallel adaptation for large scale models

Yonatan Dukler

Alessandro Achille

Hao Yang

Luca Zancato

Avinash Ravichandran

Benjamin Bowman∗

Charless Fowlkes

Varsha Vivek

Ashwin Swaminathan

Stefano Soatto
AWS AI Labs
{dukler, aachille, haoyng, bowmaben, varshviv, zancato,
ravinash, fowlkec, swashwin, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a framework for transfer learning that efficiently adapts a large basemodel by learning lightweight cross-attention modules attached to its intermediate
activations. We name our approach InCA (Introspective-Cross-Attention) and
show that it can efficiently survey a network’s representations and identify strong
performing adapter models for a downstream task. During training, InCA enables
training numerous adapters efficiently and in parallel, isolated from the frozen
base model. On the ViT-L/16 architecture, our experiments show that a single
adapter, 1.3% of the full model, is able to reach full fine-tuning accuracy on
average across 11 challenging downstream classification tasks. Compared with
other forms of parameter-efficient adaptation, the isolated nature of the InCA
adaptation is computationally desirable for large-scale models. For instance, we
adapt ViT-G/14 (1.8B+ parameters) quickly with 20+ adapters in parallel on a
single V100 GPU (76% GPU memory reduction) and exhaustively identify its
most useful representations. We further demonstrate how the adapters learned by
InCA can be incrementally modified or combined for flexible learning scenarios
and our approach achieves state of the art performance on the ImageNet-to-Sketch
multi-task benchmark.

1

Introduction

Foundation models promise to achieve top performance with minimal adaptation on any downstream
task. In the realm of language, the data and the hypothesis spaces are shared, and many tasks can
be unified into a homogeneous representation. Visual inference domains, on the other hand, can
be highly heterogeneous and possibly antagonistic. For instance, the hypothesis space for pose
estimation is geometric, whereas for scene classification it is semantic and even domains that appear
homogeneous, such as image classification into the 10 CIFAR classes, can trigger interference in the
trained model in the presence of modest perturbations of the image statistics.
Antagonistic domains may interfere within the activations of the latter layers, which cannot be
simultaneously minimal and sufficient for all domains. However, information about a dissimilar
domain may be present in earlier layers, and certainly in the input data which is trivially sufficient
∗

Work conducted while interning at AWS AI Labs.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

