Learning Topology-Agnostic EEG Representations
with Geometry-Aware Modeling

Ke Yi∗
South China University of Technology
cs_kerry@mail.scut.edu.cn
Kan Ren†
Microsoft Research Asia
kanren@microsoft.com

Yansen Wang†
Microsoft Research Asia
yansenwang@microsoft.com
Dongsheng Li
Microsoft Research Asia
dongsli@microsoft.com

Abstract
Large-scale pre-training has shown great potential to enhance models on downstream tasks in vision and language. Developing similar techniques for scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) is suitable since unlabelled data is plentiful. Meanwhile,
various sampling channel selections and inherent structural and spatial information
bring challenges and avenues to improve existing pre-training strategies further. In
order to break boundaries between different EEG resources and facilitate crossdataset EEG pre-training, we propose to map all kinds of channel selections to
a unified topology. We further introduce MMM, a pre-training framework with
Multi-dimensional position encoding, Multi-level channel hierarchy, Multi-stage
pre-training strategy built on the unified topology to obtain topology-agnostic
representations. Experiments demonstrate that our approach yields impressive
improvements over previous state-of-the-art techniques on emotional recognition
benchmark datasets. 1

1

Introduction

Scalp electroencephalography (EEG), a physiological signal that shows the human brain’s status and
can be collected in a non-invasive and low-cost manner, is widely used in disease diagnosis, medical
monitoring, rehabilitation, and some recent brain-computer interface systems [1, 2, 3]. Although
collecting EEG signals is relatively easy, interpreting the signals and providing meaningful labels
often require huge expert efforts. Therefore, a few recent works have emerged to learn representations
of EEG segments with self-supervised learning methods and apply the pre-trained model to several
downstream tasks, including emotion recognition, sleep staging, epileptic seizure detection, and so
on [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. While there are many publicly available EEG datasets for pre-training, transferring
across them is very challenging because these EEG recordings can vary significantly in terms of
montage (the number and the places of electrodes placed on the scalp) and sample rate. These factors
will completely change the format and the EEG contents’ meaning. For example, a typical setting of
the emotion recognition task involves 62 channels based on the 10-10 electrode system to track the
fine-grained changes with very high spatial resolution, and a more practical setting to monitor seizure
events may only have 19 channels based on the 10-20 system. Nevertheless, previous self-supervised
learning methods avoid handling this problem and thus can only work within a single dataset, which
hinders the model from being trained on more available resources.
∗

The work was conducted during Ke Yi’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
Correspondence to Yansen Wang and Kan Ren.
1
Project link: https://seqml.github.io/MMM/.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

