The Exact Sample Complexity Gain from Invariances
for Kernel Regression

Behrooz Tahmasebi
MIT CSAIL
bzt@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT CSAIL and TU Munich
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
In practice, encoding invariances into models improves sample complexity. In this
work, we study this phenomenon from a theoretical perspective. In particular, we
provide minimax optimal rates for kernel ridge regression on compact manifolds,
with a target function that is invariant to a group action on the manifold. Our results
hold for any smooth compact Lie group action, even groups of positive dimension.
For a finite group, the gain effectively multiplies the number of samples by the
group size. For groups of positive dimension, the gain is observed by a reduction in
the manifold’s dimension, in addition to a factor proportional to the volume of the
quotient space. Our proof takes the viewpoint of differential geometry, in contrast
to the more common strategy of using invariant polynomials. This new geometric
viewpoint on learning with invariances may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

In a broad range of applications, including machine learning for physics, molecular biology, point
clouds, and social networks, the underlying learning problems are invariant with respect to a group
action. The invariances are observed widely in practice, for instance, in the study of high energy
particle physics [21, 32], galaxies [23, 15, 2], and also molecular datasets [1, 59, 36] (see [67] for
a survey). In learning with invariances, one aims to develop powerful architectures that exploit the
problem’s invariance structure as much as possible. An essential question is thus: what are the
fundamental benefits of model invariance, e.g., in terms of sample complexity?
Several architectures for learning with invariances have been proposed for various types of data and
invariances, including DeepSet [70] for sets, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [28], PointNet
[53, 54] for point clouds with permutation invariance, tensor field neural networks [62] for point
clouds with rotations, translations, and permutations symmetries, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
[58], and SignNet and BasisNet [37] for spectral data. Other works study invariance with respect
to the orthogonal group [63], and invariant and equivariant GNNs [42]. These architectures are to
exploit the invariance of data as much as possible, and are invariant/equivariant by design.
In fixed dimensions, one common feature of many invariant models, including those discussed above,
is that the data lie on a compact manifold (not necessarily a sphere, e.g., the Stiefel manifold for
spectral data), and are invariant with respect to a group action on that manifold. Thus, characterizing
the theoretical gain of invariances corresponds to studying the gain of learning under group actions
on manifolds. Adopting this view, in this paper, we answer the question: how much gain in sample
complexity is achievable by encoding invariances? As this problem is algorithm and model dependent,
it is hard to address in general. A focused version of the problem, but still interesting, is to study
this sample complexity gain in kernel-based algorithms, which is what we address here. As neural
networks in certain regimes behave like kernels (for example, the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
[26, 34]), the results on kernels should be understood as relevant to a range of models.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

