Hypervolume Maximization: A Geometric View of
Pareto Set Learning

Xiaoyuan Zhanga , Xi Lina , Bo Xuea , Yifan Chenb , Qingfu Zhanga
a
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong;
City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute.
b
Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel approach to multiobjective algorithms aimed at modeling the Pareto set using neural networks. Whereas previous methods mainly
focused on identifying a finite number of solutions, our approach allows for the
direct modeling of the entire Pareto set. Furthermore, we establish an equivalence between learning the complete Pareto set and maximizing the associated
hypervolume, which enables the convergence analysis of hypervolume (as a new
metric) for Pareto set learning. Specifically, our new analysis framework reveals
the connection between the learned Pareto solution and its representation in a polar coordinate system. We evaluate our proposed approach on various benchmark
problems and real-world problems, and the encouraging results make it a potentially viable alternative to existing multiobjective algorithms. Code is available at
https://github.com/xzhang2523/hvpsl/tree/master.

1

Introduction

Pareto solutions [1] effectively balance multiple objectives, making optimal tradeoffs among all
objectives. For a Pareto solution, improving one objective without adversely affecting others is not
possible. The Pareto set (PS) refers to the set of all Pareto solutions, while the Pareto front (PF)
denotes the image of the PS in the objective space. Over the years, numerous methods have been
developed to generate a single Pareto optimal solution [2, 3, 4], or a finite set of Pareto solutions
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9].
Under mild conditions on continuous optimization problems with m objectives, the Pareto set becomes a (m-1)-D continuous manifold [10, 11]; given that, the finite set learned from classical
methods might not accurately approximate the continuous manifold. To overcome this issue, Pareto
set learning (PSL) has been recently proposed in [12, 13], with the hope of training a neural network model capable of approximating the entire Pareto set. The significant advantage of learning
the complete Pareto set is that a trained model can generate the optimal solution for any preference
(conceptually the weight of different objectives, see the definition in Lemma 1) in real time, allowing
for comprehensive decisions.
The training approach utilized in prior PSL techniques can be viewed as an extension of
decomposition-based multiobjective optimization strategies [5] to an infinite preference scenario.
However, several unresolved issues existed in prior PSL methods. Firstly, the interpretation of the
sum of aggregation functions under different preferences lacks clarity, simply taking all preferences
as equally important and thus leading to a partial Pareto front. Secondly, aside from the EPO-based
Correspondence to: Yifan Chen <yifanc@hkbu.edu.hk>, Qingfu Zhang <qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk>.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

