Neural Graph Generation from Graph Statistics

Kiarash Zahirnia1 , Yaochen Hu2 , Mark Coates3 , Oliver Schulte1∗
Simon Fraser University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 McGill University
kzahirni@sfu.ca, yaochen.hu@huawei.com, mark.coates@mcgill.ca, oschulte@sfu.ca
1

Abstract
We describe a new setting for learning a deep graph generative model (GGM)
from aggregate graph statistics, rather than from the graph adjacency matrix.
Matching the statistics of observed training graphs is the main approach for learning
traditional GGMs (e.g, BTER, Chung-Lu, and Erdos-Renyi models). Privacy
researchers have proposed learning from graph statistics as a way to protect privacy.
We develop an architecture for training a deep GGM to match statistics while
preserving local differential privacy guarantees. Empirical evaluation on 8 datasets
indicates that our deep GGM generates more realistic graphs than the traditional
non-neural GGMs when both are learned from graph statistics only. We also
compare our deep GGM trained on statistics only, to state-of-the-art deep GGMs
that are trained on the entire adjacency matrix. The results show that graph statistics
are often sufficient to build a competitive deep GGM that generates realistic graphs
while protecting local privacy.

1

Introduction

Graph generative models (GGMs) have produced many insights into fundamental processes in
domains including biology, engineering, and social sciences. Current deep GGMs are based on
training data with complete adjacency matrices [6, 43, 88, 89]. This paper presents GenStat, a
new deep GGM architecture for a setting where the available graph data are summarized by graph
statistics, not a complete adjacency matrix. We refer to this setting as statistics-based graph generation.
Previous work in network analysis has introduced several parametric non-neural models that support
statistics-based graph generation, such as the Chung-Lu model [5], and the BTER model [67]. The
parametric models tend to generate less realistic graphs due to lack of expressive power.
Our main motivation for generating graphs from statistics is privacy preservation. There is a direct tension between releasing real graphs to the research community and privacy concerns of the individual
entities (graph nodes) [63, 85]. A promising proposal to address it is to release synthetic graphs that
preserve the original graph properties while guaranteeing a user-specified level of privacy [20, 41].
Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) is a use-case of GGMs with a privacy guarantee.
Synthetic graphs generated by GGMs enable GNN research without information leakage [87].
Statistics-based graph generation supports the challenging use case of decentralized graphs [86],
where privacy concerns rule out collecting adjacency matrices in a central repository. Common
examples are social graphs [58], e.g., users’ connections through their phone contact lists, face-toface interactions, sexual and friendship networks, or distributed social networks, e.g., Mastodon
[58]. A solution is to have each entity perturb its data and send the perturbed data to a curator [86].
However, collecting raw data locally, such as an entity’s neighbour list, requires heavy noise injection
to satisfy privacy, and may result in a dense, distorted graph with low utility. An alternative, used
widely in industry including Google, Apple, and Microsoft [11, 19, 71, 78], is to collect, from each
entity’s ego-graph, local node-level graph statistics [24][Ch.2], with a guarantee of Local Differential
∗

Supported by NSERC Canada Discovery Grant R611341

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

