Separable Physics-Informed Neural Networks

Junwoo Cho1∗
Seungtae Nam1∗
Hyunmo Yang1
2
3
Seok-Bae Yun
Youngjoon Hong
Eunbyung Park1,4†
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Sungkyunkwan University
2
Department of Mathematics, Sungkyunkwan University
3
Department of Mathematical Sciences, KAIST
4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have recently emerged as promising
data-driven PDE solvers showing encouraging results on various PDEs. However,
there is a fundamental limitation of training PINNs to solve multi-dimensional
PDEs and approximate highly complex solution functions. The number of training
points (collocation points) required on these challenging PDEs grows substantially,
but it is severely limited due to the expensive computational costs and heavy memory overhead. To overcome this issue, we propose a network architecture and
training algorithm for PINNs. The proposed method, separable PINN (SPINN),
operates on a per-axis basis to significantly reduce the number of network propagations in multi-dimensional PDEs unlike point-wise processing in conventional
PINNs. We also propose using forward-mode automatic differentiation to reduce
the computational cost of computing PDE residuals, enabling a large number of collocation points (> 107 ) on a single commodity GPU. The experimental results show
drastically reduced computational costs (62× in wall-clock time, 1, 394× in FLOPs
given the same number of collocation points) in multi-dimensional PDEs while
achieving better accuracy. Furthermore, we present that SPINN can solve a chaotic
(2+1)-d Navier-Stokes equation significantly faster than the best-performing prior
method (9 minutes vs 10 hours in a single GPU), maintaining accuracy. Finally, we
showcase that SPINN can accurately obtain the solution of a highly nonlinear and
multi-dimensional PDE, a (3+1)-d Navier-Stokes equation. For visualized results
and code, please see https://jwcho5576.github.io/spinn.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Solving partial differential equations (PDEs) has been a long-standing problem in various science and
engineering domains. Finding analytic solutions requires in-depth expertise and is often infeasible in
many useful and important PDEs [10]. Hence, numerical approximation methods to solutions have
been extensively studied [17], e.g., spectral methods [3], finite volume methods (FVM) [9], finite
difference method (FDM) [39], and finite element methods (FEM) [47]. While successful, classical
methods have several limitations, such as expensive computational costs, requiring sophisticated
techniques to support multi-physics and multi-scale systems, and the curse of dimensionality in high
dimensional PDEs.
With the vast increases in computational power and methodological advances in machine learning,
researchers have explored data-driven and learning-based methods [4, 24, 30, 38]. Among the
promising methods, physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) have recently emerged as new datadriven PDE solvers for both forward and inverse problems [34]. PINNs employ neural networks and
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

