OpenShape: Scaling Up 3D Shape Representation
Towards Open-World Understanding

Minghua Liu1∗

Ruoxi Shi2∗
Shizhong Han3

1

2

UC San Diego

Kaiming Kuang1∗
Hong Cai3
Hao Su1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Yinhao Zhu3
Fatih Porikli3
3

Xuanlin Li1

Qualcomm AI Research†

Project Website: https://colin97.github.io/OpenShape/

Abstract
We introduce OpenShape, a method for learning multi-modal joint representations
of text, image, and point clouds. We adopt the commonly used multi-modal contrastive learning framework for representation alignment, but with a specific focus
on scaling up 3D representations to enable open-world 3D shape understanding.
To achieve this, we scale up training data by ensembling multiple 3D datasets and
propose several strategies to automatically filter and enrich noisy text descriptions.
We also explore and compare strategies for scaling 3D backbone networks and
introduce a novel hard negative mining module for more efficient training. We
evaluate OpenShape on zero-shot 3D classification benchmarks and demonstrate its
superior capabilities for open-world recognition. Specifically, OpenShape achieves
a zero-shot accuracy of 46.8% on the 1,156-category Objaverse-LVIS benchmark,
compared to less than 10% for existing methods. OpenShape also achieves an accuracy of 85.3% on ModelNet40, outperforming previous zero-shot baseline methods
by 20% and performing on par with some fully-supervised methods. Furthermore,
we show that our learned embeddings encode a wide range of visual and semantic
concepts (e.g., subcategories, color, shape, style) and facilitate fine-grained text3D and image-3D interactions. Due to their alignment with CLIP embeddings,
our learned shape representations can also be integrated with off-the-shelf CLIPbased models for various applications, such as point cloud captioning and point
cloud-conditioned image generation.

1

Introduction

3D shape understanding has recently garnered a surge of interest driven by the growing demands in
real-world applications, such as augmented/virtual reality, autonomous driving, and robotics. Despite
significant advancements in 3D recognition and analysis, existing data-driven approaches are still
greatly limited by the scale of 3D training datasets and tend to exhibit poor generalization when facing
unseen shape categories, hindering the deployment of existing models in real-world applications.
Note that 3D shapes and 2D images can be easily linked through rendering, and the dataset scale issue
of 2D images has been remarkably addressed, as shown in recent works such as CLIP [55]. Therefore,
many recent studies aim to utilize pre-trained 2D image-language models [55, 59] to assist 3D tasks,
such as 3D generation [22, 26, 45, 63, 33, 7, 38, 67] and 3D scene-level segmentation [18, 27, 14, 79,
∗
†

Equal Contribution
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

