Natural Actor-Critic for Robust Reinforcement
Learning with Function Approximation

Ruida Zhou∗
Texas A&M University
ruida@tamu.edu

Tao Liu∗
Texas A&M University
tliu@tamu.edu

Dileep Kalathil
Texas A&M University
dileep.kalathil@tamu.edu

Min Cheng
Texas A&M University
minrara0404@tamu.edu

P. R. Kumar
Texas A&M University
prk@tamu.edu

Chao Tian
Texas A&M University
chao.tian@tamu.edu

Abstract
We study robust reinforcement learning (RL) with the goal of determining a wellperforming policy that is robust against model mismatch between the training simulator and the testing environment. Previous policy-based robust RL algorithms
mainly focus on the tabular setting under uncertainty sets that facilitate robust policy evaluation, but are no longer tractable when the number of states scales up. To
this end, we propose two novel uncertainty set formulations, one based on double
sampling and the other on an integral probability metric. Both make large-scale
robust RL tractable even when one only has access to a simulator. We propose a
robust natural actor-critic (RNAC) approach that incorporates the new uncertainty
sets and employs function approximation. We provide finite-time convergence
guarantees for the proposed RNAC algorithm to the optimal robust policy within
the function approximation error. Finally, we demonstrate the robust performance
of the policy learned by our proposed RNAC approach in multiple MuJoCo environments and a real-world TurtleBot navigation task.

1

Introduction

Training a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm directly on a real-world system is expensive and
potentially risky due to the large number of data samples required to learn a satisfactory policy. To
overcome this issue, RL algorithms are typically trained on a simulator. However, in most realworld applications, the nominal model used in the simulator model may not faithfully represent
the real-world system due to various factors, such as approximation errors in modeling or variations in real-world parameters over time. For example, the mass, friction, sensor/actuator noise,
and floor terrain in a mobile robot simulator may differ from those in the real world. This mismatch, called simulation-to-reality-gap, can significantly degrade the performance of standard RL
algorithms when deployed on real-world systems [36, 44, 55, 51]. The framework of robust Markov
decision process (RMDP) [19, 40] is used to model this setting where the testing environment is
uncertain and comes from an uncertainty set around the nominal model. The optimal robust policy
is defined as the one which achieves the optimal worst-case performance over all possible models
in the uncertainty set. The goal of robust reinforcement learning is to learn such an optimal robust
policy using only the data sampled from the simulator (nominal) model.
The RMDP planning problem has been well studied in the tabular setting [63, 62, 35, 46, 16]. Also,
many works have developed model-based robust RL algorithms in the tabular setting [66, 69, 42,
∗

The first two authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

