Estimating Koopman operators with sketching to
provably learn large scale dynamical systems

Giacomo Meanti*
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Antoine Chatalic*
Università di Genova

giacomo.meanti@iit.it

antoine.chatalic@dibris.unige.it

Vladimir R. Kostic
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Novi Sad

Pietro Novelli
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
pietro.novelli@iit.it

vladimir.kostic@iit.it

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London
massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Lorenzo Rosasco
Università di Genova
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
lrosasco@mit.edu

Abstract
The theory of Koopman operators allows to deploy non-parametric machine learning algorithms to predict and analyze complex dynamical systems. Estimators such
as principal component regression (PCR) or reduced rank regression (RRR) in kernel spaces can be shown to provably learn Koopman operators from finite empirical
observations of the system’s time evolution. Scaling these approaches to very long
trajectories is a challenge and requires introducing suitable approximations to make
computations feasible. In this paper, we boost the efficiency of different kernelbased Koopman operator estimators using random projections (sketching). We derive, implement and test the new “sketched” estimators with extensive experiments
on synthetic and large-scale molecular dynamics datasets. Further, we establish non
asymptotic error bounds giving a sharp characterization of the trade-offs between
statistical learning rates and computational efficiency. Our empirical and theoretical
analysis shows that the proposed estimators provide a sound and efficient way to
learn large scale dynamical systems. In particular our experiments indicate that the
proposed estimators retain the same accuracy of PCR or RRR, while being much
faster. Code is available at https://github.com/Giodiro/NystromKoopman.

1

Introduction

In the physical world, temporally varying phenomena are everywhere, from biological processes in
the cell to fluid dynamics to electrical fields. Correspondingly, they generate large amounts of data
both through experiments and simulations. This data is often analyzed in the framework of dynamical
systems, where the state of a system x is observed at a certain time t, and the dynamics is described
by a function f which captures its evolution in time
xt+1 = f (xt ).
* Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

