Representational Strengths and Limitations of
Transformers
Clayton Sanford, Daniel Hsu
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
{clayton,djhsu}@cs.columbia.edu

Matus Telgarsky
Courant Institute
New York University
New York, NY 10012
matus.telgarsky@nyu.edu

Abstract
Attention layers, as commonly used in transformers, form the backbone of modern deep learning, yet there is no mathematical description of their benefits and
deficiencies as compared with other architectures. In this work we establish both
positive and negative results on the representation power of attention layers, with
a focus on intrinsic complexity parameters such as width, depth, and embedding
dimension. On the positive side, we present a sparse averaging task, where recurrent networks and feedforward networks all have complexity scaling polynomially
in the input size, whereas transformers scale merely logarithmically in the input
size; furthermore, we use the same construction to show the necessity and role of a
large embedding dimension in a transformer. On the negative side, we present a
triple detection task, where attention layers in turn have complexity scaling linearly
in the input size; as this scenario seems rare in practice, we also present natural
variants that can be efficiently solved by attention layers. The proof techniques
emphasize the value of communication complexity in the analysis of transformers
and related models, and the role of sparse averaging as a prototypical attention task,
which even finds use in the analysis of triple detection.

1

Introduction

In recent years, transformer networks [Vaswani et al., 2017] have been established as a fundamental neural architecture powering state-of-the-art results in many applications, including language
modeling [OpenAI, 2023], computer vision [Dosovitskiy et al., 2021], and protein folding [Jumper
et al., 2021]. The key building block of transformer models is the self-attention unit, a primitive that
represents interactions among input elements as inner-products between low-dimensional embeddings
of these elements.
The success of transformer models is linked to their ability to scale their training and generalization performance to larger datasets and sequence lengths. Their representational capacity, however,
underlies this scaling power, and is tied to the inductive biases of their learning algorithms. Empirically, transformer models trained with gradient-based learning algorithms exhibit biases towards
certain algorithmic primitives [Edelman et al., 2022, Liu et al., 2022] and learn representations that
may encode domain-specific information in the self-attention units [Clark et al., 2019, Hewitt and
Manning, 2019, Rogers et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2022]. These examples indicate that transformer
architectures not only provide computational benefits, but also have representational capabilities that
are particularly well-matched to practical tasks.
In this paper, we investigate these inductive biases by identifying “natural” computational tasks for
which transformers are well-suited, especially compared to other neural network architectures, as well
as tasks that highlight the limitations of transformers. The tasks—sparse averaging, pair-matching,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

