Hokoff: Real Game Dataset from Honor of Kings and
its Offline Reinforcement Learning Benchmarks
Yun Qu∗† , Boyuan Wang∗† , Jianzhun Shao∗† , Yuhang Jiang† , Chen Chen† , Zhenbin Ye♮ , Lin
Liu♮ , Junfeng Yang♮ , Lin Lai♮ , Hongyang Qin§ , Minwen Deng§ , Juchao Zhuo§ , Deheng Ye§ ,
Qiang Fu§ , Wei Yang§ , Guang Yang♮ , Lanxiao Huang♮ , Xiangyang Ji†
†

Tsinghua University, ♮ Tencent Timi Studio, § Tencent AI Lab
{qy22,wangby22,sjz18,jiangyh19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,chenchen.peach@gmail.com,
{zhenbinye,lincliu,fengjunyang,linlai,hongyangqin,danierdeng,jojozhuo,dericye,leonfu,
willyang,mikoyang,jackiehuang}@tencent.com,xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The advancement of Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) and Offline Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) critically depends on the availability of highquality, pre-collected offline datasets that represent real-world complexities and
practical applications. However, existing datasets often fall short in their simplicity
and lack of realism. To address this gap, we propose Hokoff, a comprehensive set
of pre-collected datasets that covers both offline RL and offline MARL, accompanied by a robust framework, to facilitate further research. This data is derived from
Honor of Kings, a recognized Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA) game
known for its intricate nature, closely resembling real-life situations. Utilizing this
framework, we benchmark a variety of offline RL and offline MARL algorithms.
We also introduce a novel baseline algorithm tailored for the inherent hierarchical action space of the game. We reveal the incompetency of current offline RL
approaches in handling task complexity, generalization and multi-task learning.

1

Introduction

Online Reinforcement Learning (Online RL) relies on the interaction between the training policy
and the environment for data collection and policy optimization [33, 18, 7]. However, this paradigm
makes online RL unsuitable for certain real-world scenarios, such as robotics and autonomous
driving [23, 18], as deploying untested policies to the environment can be costly and dangerous [19].
In contrast, Offline Reinforcement Learning (Offline RL) can learn satisfactory policies using a
fixed dataset without the need for further interaction with the environment [23, 18, 7, 19]. This
characteristic alleviates the aforementioned issue, making offline RL potentially more suitable for
certain real-world scenarios compared to online RL [23].
The research on offline RL has attracted significant attention in recent years and has made substantial
progress in both theoretical analysis and practical performance. The core challenge of offline RL is
the value overestimation issue induced by distributional shift [9, 21]. Existing studies mitigate this
problem by constraining the learning policy to closely resemble the behavior policy induced by the
dataset [39, 18, 7], or adopting conservative value iteration [19, 16]. The success of offline RL can be
largely attributed to the availability of widely-adopted open-access datasets, such as D4RL [6] and RL
Unplugged [12]. These datasets offer standardized and diverse pre-collected data for the development
of new algorithms, while also offering proper evaluation protocols that facilitate fair comparisons
between different algorithms. However, despite their benefits, tasks contained in these datasets (such
*

Authors contributed equally

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

