Neural Sampling in Hierarchical Exponential-family
Energy-based Models

Xingsi Dong1,2,3
dxs19980605@pku.edu.cn

Si Wu1,2.3
siwu@pku.edu.cn

1. PKU-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies.
2. School of Psychological and Cognitive Sciences,
Beijing Key Laboratory of Behavior and Mental Health, Peking University.
3. IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research. Center of Quantitative Biology, Peking University.

Abstract
Bayesian brain theory suggests that the brain employs generative models to understand the external world. The sampling-based perspective posits that the brain
infers the posterior distribution through samples of stochastic neuronal responses.
Additionally, the brain continually updates its generative model to approach the
true distribution of the external world. In this study, we introduce the Hierarchical
Exponential-family Energy-based (HEE) model, which captures the dynamics of
inference and learning. In the HEE model, we decompose the partition function
into individual layers and leverage a group of neurons with shorter time constants
to sample the gradient of the decomposed normalization term. This allows our
model to estimate the partition function and perform inference simultaneously,
circumventing the negative phase encountered in conventional energy-based models (EBMs). As a result, the learning process is localized both in time and space,
and the model is easy to converge. To match the brain’s rapid computation, we
demonstrate that neural adaptation can serve as a momentum term, significantly
accelerating the inference process. On natural image datasets, our model exhibits
representations akin to those observed in the biological visual system. Furthermore,
for the machine learning community, our model can generate observations through
joint or marginal generation. We show that marginal generation outperforms joint
generation and achieves performance on par with other EBMs.

1

Introduction

Human behavioral studies [1, 2, 3] and animal neurophysiological studies [4, 5] have suggested that
the brain performs statistically optimal Bayesian inference to interpret the external world [6, 7, 8, 9].
One promising theory for implementing Bayesian inference in the brain is to interpret the variability
of neural responses as Monte Carlo sampling of the posterior distribution [10]. This perspective
naturally accounts for the irregular firing patterns and other response properties observed in sensory
cortex neurons [11, 12, 13]. Numerous sampling-based models [10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 12, 13, 18] have
been proposed to elucidate neural dynamics and the underlying mechanisms of Bayesian inference.
To facilitate the brain’s ability to derive meaningful representations from sensory input, it must
continually update its generative model to approximate the true distribution of the external world [19].
Previous approaches often neglect this critical learning process. They either maintain fixed parameters
for their generative model [15, 17, 16], or they employ biologically implausible methods like the
variational approach with backpropagation (BP) for training [9]. Is there a generative model that
integrates sampling-based inference with the capability to learn locally in both time and space?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

