Energy-Based Cross Attention for Bayesian Context
Update in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Geon Yeong Park1∗ Jeongsol Kim1∗ Beomsu Kim2 Sang Wan Lee1,2,3† Jong Chul Ye2†
1
Bio and Brain Engineering, 2 Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, 3 Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
∗, †: Co-first and Co-corresponding authors
{pky3436, jeongsol, beomsu.kim, sangwan, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Despite the remarkable performance of text-to-image diffusion models in image
generation tasks, recent studies have raised the issue that generated images sometimes cannot capture the intended semantic contents of the text prompts, which
phenomenon is often called semantic misalignment. To address this, here we
present a novel energy-based model (EBM) framework for adaptive context control by modeling the posterior of context vectors. Specifically, we first formulate
EBMs of latent image representations and text embeddings in each cross-attention
layer of the denoising autoencoder. Then, we obtain the gradient of the log posterior of context vectors, which can be updated and transferred to the subsequent
cross-attention layer, thereby implicitly minimizing a nested hierarchy of energy
functions. Our latent EBMs further allow zero-shot compositional generation as
a linear combination of cross-attention outputs from different contexts. Using
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that the proposed method is highly effective
in handling various image generation tasks, including multi-concept generation,
text-guided image inpainting, and real and synthetic image editing. Code: https:
//github.com/EnergyAttention/Energy-Based-CrossAttention.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models (DMs) have made significant advances in controllable multi-modal generation tasks
[37], including text-to-image synthesis. The recent success of text-to-image diffusion models, e.g.,
Stable Diffusion [31], Imagen [33], etc., is mainly attributed to the combination of high-fidelity DMs
with high-performance large language models (LMs).
Although text-to-image DMs have shown revolutionary progress, recent studies have shown that
the current state-of-the-art models often suffer from semantic misalignment problems, where the
generated images do not accurately represent the intended semantic contents of the text prompts. For
example, [4] discovered the catastrophic neglect problem, where one or more of the concepts of the
prompt are neglected in generated images. Moreover, for a multi-modal inpainting task with text and
mask guidance, [41] found that the text-to-image DMs may often fail to fill in the masked region
precisely following the text prompt.
Therefore, this work focuses on obtaining a harmonized pair of latent image representations and text
embeddings, i.e., context vectors, to generate semantically aligned images. In order to mitigate the
misalignment, instead of leveraging fixed context vectors, we aim to establish an adaptive context by
modeling the posterior of the context, i.e. p(context | representations). Note that this is a significant
departure from the previous methods which only model p(representations | context) with frozen
context vectors encoded by the pretrained textual encoder.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

