One-Line-of-Code Data Mollification Improves
Optimization of Likelihood-based Generative Models

Ba-Hien Tran
Department of Data Science
EURECOM, France
ba-hien.tran@eurecom.fr

Giulio Franzese
Department of Data Science
EURECOM, France
giulio.franzese@eurecom.fr

Pietro Michiardi
Department of Data Science
EURECOM, France
pietro.michiardi@eurecom.fr

Maurizio Filippone
Department of Data Science
EURECOM, France
maurizio.filippone@eurecom.fr

Abstract
Generative Models (GMs) have attracted considerable attention due to their tremendous success in various domains, such as computer vision where they are capable
to generate impressive realistic-looking images. Likelihood-based GMs are attractive due to the possibility to generate new data by a single model evaluation.
However, they typically achieve lower sample quality compared to state-of-the-art
score-based Diffusion Models (DMs). This paper provides a significant step in the
direction of addressing this limitation. The idea is to borrow one of the strengths
of score-based DMs, which is the ability to perform accurate density estimation in
low-density regions and to address manifold overfitting by means of data mollification. We propose a view of data mollification within likelihood-based GMs as
a continuation method, whereby the optimization objective smoothly transitions
from simple-to-optimize to the original target. Crucially, data mollification can be
implemented by adding one line of code in the optimization loop, and we demonstrate that this provides a boost in generation quality of likelihood-based GMs,
without computational overheads. We report results on real-world image data sets
and UCI benchmarks with popular likelihood-based GMs, including variants of
variational autoencoders and normalizing flows, showing large improvements in
FID score and density estimation.

1

Introduction

Generative Models (GMs) have attracted considerable attention recently due to their tremendous
success in various domains, such as computer vision, graph generation, physics and reinforcement
learning [see e.g., 37, 39, 75, 76, and references therein]. Given a set of data points, GMs attempt to
characterize the distribution of such data so that it is then possible to draw new samples from this.
Popular approaches include Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), Normalizing Flows (NFs), Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs), and score-based Diffusion Models (DMs).
In general, the goal of any GMs is similar to that of density estimation with the additional aim to do
so by constructing a parametric mapping between an easy-to-sample-from distribution ps and the
desired data distribution pdata . While different GMs approaches greatly differ in their optimization
strategy and formulation, the underlying objectivesRshare some similarity due to their relation to
2
the optimal transport problem, defined as arg minπ kx − yk dπ(x, y). Here π is constrained to
belong to the set of joint distributions with marginals ps , pdata , respectively [19, 42]. This unified
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

