Causal Effect Identification
in Uncertain Causal Networks
Sina Akbari
EPFL, Switzerland
sina.akbari@epfl.ch

Fateme Jamshidi
EPFL, Switzerland
fateme.jamshidi@epfl.ch

Matthew J. Vowels
University of Lausanne, Switzerland
matthew.vowels@unil.ch

Jalal Etesami
TUM, Germany
j.etesami@tum.de

Ehsan Mokhtarian
EPFL, Switzerland
ehsan.mokhtarian@epfl.ch
Negar Kiyavash
EPFL, Switzerland
negar.kiyavash@epfl.ch

Abstract
Causal identification is at the core of the causal inference literature, where complete
algorithms have been proposed to identify causal queries of interest. The validity
of these algorithms hinges on the restrictive assumption of having access to a
correctly specified causal structure. In this work, we study the setting where a
probabilistic model of the causal structure is available. Specifically, the edges in
a causal graph exist with uncertainties which may, for example, represent degree
of belief from domain experts. Alternatively, the uncertainty about an edge may
reflect the confidence of a particular statistical test. The question that naturally
arises in this setting is: Given such a probabilistic graph and a specific causal effect
of interest, what is the subgraph which has the highest plausibility and for which
the causal effect is identifiable? We show that answering this question reduces to
solving an NP-complete combinatorial optimization problem which we call the
edge ID problem. We propose efficient algorithms to approximate this problem and
evaluate them against both real-world networks and randomly generated graphs.

1

Introduction

A large proportion of questions of interest in various fields, including but not limited to psychology,
social sciences, behavioral sciences, medical research, epidemiology, economy, etc., are causal in
nature [33, 24, 8]. In order to estimate causal effects, the gold standard is performing controlled
interventions and experiments. Unfortunately, such experiments can be prohibitively expensive,
unethical, or impractical [10, 12]. In contrast, non-experimental data are comparatively abundant, and
no expensive interventions are required to generate such data. This has motivated the development of
numerous techniques for understanding whether a causal query can be answered using observational
data. Specifically, if a particular causal query is identifiable, it means it can be expressed as a function
of the observational distribution and thus estimated from observational data (at least in principle).
A significant body of the causal inference literature is dedicated to the identification problem [23, 6, 29,
26, 24]. In particular, [13] presented a complete algorithmic approach to decide the identifiability of a
specific query and proved that Pearl’s do calculus is complete. Furthermore, [26] provided graphical
criteria to decide the identifiability based on the hedge criterion. The problem of identifiability
was later generalized to deal with interventional data [21, 20], selection bias [1], context-specific
independence relations [31, 15] and causal bandits [16]. However, all of these results hinge on the
full specification of the causal structure, i.e., access to a correctly specified Acyclic Directed Mixed
Graph (ADMG) that models the causal dynamics of the system. This requirement is restrictive
in a number of ways. (i) The causal identification problem is concerned with inference from the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

