Enhancing Motion Deblurring in High-Speed Scenes
with Spike Streams

Shiyan Chen1,2∗ Jiyuan Zhang1,2∗ Yajing Zheng1,2† Tiejun Huang1,2,3 Zhaofei Yu1,2,3†
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{strerichia002p,jyzhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn,
{yj.zheng,yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional cameras produce desirable vision results but struggle with motion blur in
high-speed scenes due to long exposure windows. Existing frame-based deblurring
algorithms face challenges in extracting useful motion cues from severely blurred
images. Recently, an emerging bio-inspired vision sensor known as the spike
camera has achieved an extremely high frame rate while preserving rich spatial
details, owing to its novel sampling mechanism. However, typical binary spike
streams are relatively low-resolution, degraded image signals devoid of color
information, making them unfriendly to human vision. In this paper, we propose a
novel approach that integrates the two modalities from two branches, leveraging
spike streams as auxiliary visual cues for guiding deblurring in high-speed motion
scenes. We propose the first spike-based motion deblurring model with bidirectional
information complementarity. We introduce a content-aware motion magnitude
attention module that utilizes learnable mask to extract relevant information from
blurry images effectively, and we incorporate a transposed cross-attention fusion
module to efficiently combine features from both spike data and blurry RGB
images. Furthermore, we build two extensive synthesized datasets for training
and validation purposes, encompassing high-temporal-resolution spikes, blurry
images, and corresponding sharp images. The experimental results demonstrate
that our method effectively recovers clear RGB images from highly blurry scenes
and outperforms state-of-the-art deblurring algorithms in multiple settings.

1

Introduction

Traditional computer vision is well developed and models on visual tasks are satisfying [10, 37, 36,
11]. As a mature industrial product, frame-based cameras have also been fully developed whose
imaging quality is high. Due to the existence of the exposure window, high-speed scenes or moving
objects will cause serious blur effects as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), which degrades or invalidates the
model performance. Thus, deblurring task remains an important demand for applications. With
the development of convolutional neural networks and Transformers, models like Restormer [59]
and SwinIR [32] used for deblurring tasks perform well. Nevertheless, our main concern is that the
performance of these models is not reliable as the blurry image lacks sufficient contextual information
to recover the corresponding clear image. When the blurry artifact is severe, models only input with
blurry images may fail.
∗
†

Equal contributors.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

