Uncertainty-Aware Alignment Network for
Cross-Domain Video-Text Retrieval
Xiaoshuai Hao1 , Wanqian Zhang2∗
Samsung Research China–Beijing (SRC-B)
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
xshuai.hao@samsung.com, zhangwanqian@iie.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Video-text retrieval is an important but challenging research task in the multimedia
community. In this paper, we address the challenge task of Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation Video-text Retrieval (UDAVR), assuming that training (source) data
and testing (target) data are from different domains. Previous approaches are
mostly derived from classification based domain adaptation methods, which are
neither multi-modal nor suitable for retrieval task. In addition, as to the pairwise
misalignment issue in target domain, i.e., no pairwise annotations between target
videos and texts, the existing method assumes that a video corresponds to a text. Yet
we empirically find that in the real scene, one text usually corresponds to multiple
videos and vice versa. To tackle this one-to-many issue, we propose a novel
method named Uncertainty-aware Alignment Network (UAN). Specifically, we first
introduce the multimodal mutual information module to balance the minimization
of domain shift in a smooth manner. To tackle the multimodal uncertainties pairwise
misalignment in target domain, we propose the Uncertainty-aware Alignment
Mechanism (UAM) to fully exploit the semantic information of both modalities in
target domain. Extensive experiments in the context of domain-adaptive video-text
retrieval demonstrate that our proposed method consistently outperforms multiple
baselines, showing a superior generalization ability for target data.

1

Introduction

With the exponential growth of user-generated videos on the Internet, cross-modal retrieval between
video data and natural language descriptions, known as video-text retrieval, has attracted much
attention. The goal of this task is to retrieve videos which are semantically related to a given
text query and vice versa. Generally, the de facto paradigm of video-text retrieval task is to learn
high-level video and text embeddings respectively by off-the-shelf feature extractors. To further
measure cross-modal semantic similarities between videos and texts, corresponding embeddings
should be aligned and projected into a joint embedding space [3, 10, 27, 41, 44, 55, 56, 61], where
the semantically-similar texts and videos are much closer to each other and vice versa.
With the advent of deep learning, video-text retrieval has shown promising performance in recent
years. Despite the great success, most existing works of this task are supervised, which typically train
models on a large number of aligned video-text pairs, making an assumption that training and testing
data are drawn from the same distribution. If this assumption does not hold, traditional cross-modal
retrieval methods may suffer a performance drop at the evaluation. To alleviate this, recently proposed
methods of Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Video-text Retrieval (UDAVR) have attracted much
attention, wherein no identical label set for source and target domains exists. By identical we denote
that the label set of source data is exactly the same as that of target data. For instance, given a
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

