Faith and Fate:
Limits of Transformers on Compositionality

Nouha Dziri1∗ , Ximing Lu1,2∗ , Melanie Sclar2∗ ,
Xiang Lorraine Li1† , Liwei Jiang1,2† , Bill Yuchen Lin1† ,
Peter West1,2 , Chandra Bhagavatula1 , Ronan Le Bras1 , Jena D. Hwang1 , Soumya Sanyal3 ,
Sean Welleck1,2 , Xiang Ren1,3 , Allyson Ettinger1,4 , Zaid Harchaoui1,2 , Yejin Choi1,2
1

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 2 University of Washington
3
University of Southern California 4 University of Chicago

nouhad@allenai.org, ximinglu@allenai.org, msclar@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Transformer large language models (LLMs) have sparked admiration for their
exceptional performance on tasks that demand intricate multi-step reasoning. Yet,
these models simultaneously show failures on surprisingly trivial problems. This
begs the question: Are these errors incidental, or do they signal more substantial
limitations? In an attempt to demystify transformer LLMs, we investigate the limits
of these models across three representative compositional tasks—multi-digit multiplication, logic grid puzzles, and a classic dynamic programming problem. These
tasks require breaking problems down into sub-steps and synthesizing these steps
into a precise answer. We formulate compositional tasks as computation graphs to
systematically quantify the level of complexity, and break down reasoning steps
into intermediate sub-procedures. Our empirical findings suggest that transformer
LLMs solve compositional tasks by reducing multi-step compositional reasoning into linearized subgraph matching, without necessarily developing systematic
problem-solving skills. To round off our empirical study, we provide theoretical
arguments on abstract multi-step reasoning problems that highlight how autoregressive generations’ performance can rapidly decay with increased task complexity.

1

Introduction

“It was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity.” – Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities
Large-scale transformers such as ChatGPT [57] and GPT4 [58] demonstrate unprecedented capabilities [57, 74, 11, 15, 85], even noted as “sparks of AGI” [12]. In stark contrast, the same models
sometimes struggle with simple, intuitive tasks [9, 62, 40]. For instance, humans can solve 3-digit
by 3-digit multiplication arithmetic after learning basic calculation rules [22, 34]. Yet, off-the-shelf
ChatGPT and GPT4 achieve only 55% and 59% accuracies on this task, respectively (§3).
The striking discrepancy between the impressive successes of transformer LLMs on seemingly
complex tasks and the astonishing failures on seemingly trivial tasks spark critical open questions
about how to faithfully interpret their mixed capabilities. Under what conditions do transformers
succeed, fail, and why? What types of errors do they make? Can transformers uncover implicit
problem-solving rules or be taught to follow reasoning paths?
Seeking thorough answers to these questions remains an open research challenge. However, we
offer novel insights into the fundamental limits of transformers2 , centered around compositional
∗
2

First co-authors.
† Second co-authors.
For brevity, we use ‘transformers’ to refer to ‘autoregressive transformer LLMs’ throughout the paper.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

