Polynomially Over-Parameterized Convolutional
Neural Networks Contain Structured Strong Winning
Lottery Tickets

Arthur da Cunha
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
dac@cs.au.dk

Francesco d’Amore
Aalto University
Bocconi University
Espoo, Finland
francesco.damore@aalto.fi

Emanuele Natale
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Sophia Antipolis, France
emanuele.natale@inria.fr

Abstract
The Strong Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (SLTH) states that randomly-initialised
neural networks likely contain subnetworks that perform well without any training.
Although unstructured pruning has been extensively studied in this context, its
structured counterpart, which can deliver significant computational and memory
efficiency gains, has been largely unexplored. One of the main reasons for this gap
is the limitations of the underlying mathematical tools used in formal analyses of the
SLTH. In this paper, we overcome these limitations: we leverage recent advances
in the multidimensional generalisation of the Random Subset-Sum Problem and
obtain a variant that admits the stochastic dependencies that arise when addressing
structured pruning in the SLTH. We apply this result to prove, for a wide class of
random Convolutional Neural Networks, the existence of structured subnetworks
that can approximate any sufficiently smaller network.
This result provides the first sub-exponential bound around the SLTH for structured
pruning, opening up new avenues for further research on the hypothesis and
contributing to the understanding of the role of over-parameterization in deep
learning.

1

Introduction

Much of the success of deep learning techniques relies on extreme over-parameterization [Zhang et al.,
2017, 2021, Novak et al., 2018, Brutzkus et al., 2018, Du et al., 2019, Kaplan et al., 2020]. While
such excess of parameters has allowed neural networks to become the state of the art in many tasks,
the associated computational cost limits both the progress of those techniques and their deployment
in real-world applications. This limitation motivated the development of methods for reducing the
number of parameters of neural networks; both in the past [Reed, 1993] and in the present [Blalock
et al., 2020, Hoefler et al., 2021].
Although pruning methods have traditionally targeted reducing the size of networks for inference
purposes, recent works have indicated that they can also be used to reduce parameter counts during
training or even at initialisation without sacrificing model accuracy. In particular, Frankle and Carbin
[2019] proposed the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH), which conjectures that randomly-initialised
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

