Towards Robust and Expressive Whole-body Human
Pose and Shape Estimation
Hui En Pang1 ,

Zhongang Cai1,2 , Lei Yang2 , Qingyi Tao2 , Zhonghua Wu2 ,
Tianwei Zhang1 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 SenseTime Research
{huien001, tianwei.zhang, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
{caizhongang, yanglei, taoqingyi, wuzhonghua}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Whole-body pose and shape estimation aims to jointly predict different behaviors (e.g., pose, hand gesture, facial expression) of the entire human body from a
monocular image. Existing methods often exhibit degraded performance under the
complexity of in-the-wild scenarios. We argue that the accuracy and reliability of
these models are significantly affected by the quality of the predicted bounding
box, e.g., the scale and alignment of body parts. The natural discrepancy between
the ideal bounding box annotations and model detection results is particularly
detrimental to the performance of whole-body pose and shape estimation. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework RoboSMPLX to enhance the robustness of
whole-body pose and shape estimation. RoboSMPLX incorporates three new modules to address the above challenges from three perspectives: 1) Localization
Module enhances the model’s awareness of the subject’s location and semantics
within the image space. 2) Contrastive Feature Extraction Module encourages
the model to be invariant to robust augmentations by incorporating contrastive loss
with dedicated positive samples. 3) Pixel Alignment Module ensures the reprojected mesh from the predicted camera and body model parameters are accurate
and pixel-aligned. We perform comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the
effectiveness of RoboSMPLX on body, hands, face and whole-body benchmarks.
Codebase is available at https://github.com/robosmplx/robosmplx.

1

Introduction

Human pose and shape estimation tries to build human body models from monocular RGB images
or videos. It has gained widespread attention owing to its extensive applications in various fields,
including robotics, computer graphics, and augmented/virtual reality. Early works use various
statistical models (e.g., SMPL [31], MANO [43], FLAME [26]) to individually reconstruct different
parts, including human body [17, 22, 4, 16, 24, 10, 21, 20], face [9, 8, 12], and hand [28, 3, 63].
Recently, there is a growing interest in whole-body estimation [11, 6, 61, 44, 58], which jointly
estimates the pose, hand gestures and facial expressions of the entire human body from the input.
Commonly these methods first employ separate sub-networks to extract the features of body, hands
and face. These features are then used to predict whole-body 3D joint rotations and other parameters
(e.g., body shape, facial expression), which are further combined to generate the whole-body 3D
mesh. This is a crucial step towards modeling human behaviors in an efficient and practical manner.
However, achieving accurate and robust whole-body estimation is particularly challenging as it
requires precise estimation of each body part and the correct connectivity between them. In particular,
due to the smaller sizes of hand and face images, they are typically localized, cropped and resized
to higher resolutions before being processed by the relevant sub-network. To tackle the absence
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

