FaceDNeRF: Semantics-Driven Face Reconstruction,
Prompt Editing and Relighting with Diffusion Models

Hao Zhang∗
HKUST
hzhangcc@connect.ust.hk

Yanbo Xu∗
CMU, HKUST
yxubu@connect.ust.hk

Yu-Wing Tai
Dartmouth College
yuwing@gmail.com

Tianyuan Dai∗
Stanford University, HKUST
tdaiaa@connect.ust.hk

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST
cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
The ability to create high-quality 3D faces from a single image has become increasingly important with wide applications in video conferencing, AR/VR, and
advanced video editing in movie industries. In this paper, we propose Face Diffusion NeRF (FaceDNeRF), a new generative method to reconstruct high-quality Face
NeRFs from single images, complete with semantic editing and relighting capabilities. FaceDNeRF utilizes high-resolution 3D GAN inversion and expertly trained
2D latent-diffusion model, allowing users to manipulate and construct Face NeRFs
in zero-shot learning without the need for explicit 3D data. With carefully designed
illumination and identity preserving loss, as well as multi-modal pre-training,
FaceDNeRF offers users unparalleled control over the editing process enabling
them to create and edit face NeRFs using just single-view images, text prompts,
and explicit target lighting. The advanced features of FaceDNeRF have been designed to produce more impressive results than existing 2D editing approaches that
rely on 2D segmentation maps for editable attributes. Experiments show that our
FaceDNeRF achieves exceptionally realistic results and unprecedented flexibility in
editing compared with state-of-the-art 3D face reconstruction and editing methods.
Our code will be available at https://github.com/BillyXYB/FaceDNeRF.

1

Introduction

Rich and versatile 3D contents are in high demand in entertainment industries such as movie making,
computer gaming and emerging applications such as Metaverse, which also have high potential
in robotics learning as well, where high-quality synthetic data in large amounts are required to
enhance generalizability. 3D generative methods such as EG3D [8] can generate high-fidelity NeRF
from a single image, but the reconstructed NeRF cannot be easily controlled or edited. Some
methods [33, 57] use pixel-wise segmentation maps or user-supplied sketches to guide 3D editing.
But these methods are hard to scale up due to the demanding editing requirement and limited editable
attributes. Language is regarded as one of the most suitable candidates to provide control signals
for 3D editing, especially given the current success of 2D semantics-driven editing [28, 42], where
image and language domains are bridged by CLIP, i.e., Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training [45].
However, there is still substantial room for improvement in 3D generative and editable models, in
terms of usability, edit-ability, and results quality.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

