Spiking PointNet: Spiking Neural Networks
for Point Clouds
Dayong Ren, Zhe Ma, Yuanpei Chen, Weihang Peng, Xiaode Liu, Yuhan Zhang, Yufei Guo∗
Intelligent Science & Technology Academy of CASIC, China
Scientific Research Laboratory of Aerospace Intelligent Systems and Technology, China
rdyedu@gmail.com, yfguo_bit@126.com, yfguo@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs), enjoying extreme energy efficiency,
have drawn much research attention on 2D visual recognition and shown gradually
increasing application potential. However, it still remains underexplored whether
SNNs can be generalized to 3D recognition. To this end, we present Spiking
PointNet in the paper, the first spiking neural model for efficient deep learning
on point clouds. We discover that the two huge obstacles limiting the application
of SNNs in point clouds are: the intrinsic optimization obstacle of SNNs that
impedes the training of a big spiking model with large time steps, and the expensive
memory and computation cost of PointNet that makes training a big spiking point
model unrealistic. To solve the problems simultaneously, we present a trained-less
but learning-more paradigm for Spiking PointNet with theoretical justifications
and in-depth experimental analysis. In specific, our Spiking PointNet is trained
with only a single time step but can obtain better performance with multiple time
steps inference, compared to the one trained directly with multiple time steps.
We conduct various experiments on ModelNet10, ModelNet40 to demonstrate
the effectiveness of Spiking PointNet. Notably, our Spiking PointNet even can
outperform its ANN counterpart, which is rare in the SNN field thus providing a
potential research direction for the following work. Moreover, Spiking PointNet
shows impressive speedup and storage saving in the training phase. Our code is
open-sourced at Spiking-PointNet.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep learning technologies, notably PointNet [38], has considerably amplified our capabilities to comprehend and manipulate intricate 3D data from real-world settings. With autonomous
driving and augmented reality, which often require real-time interaction and fast response, becoming
increasingly prevalent, the reliance on efficient point cloud processing techniques has been escalated.
However, computation for the point cloud is energy-hungry and usually needs powerful devices.
Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) [40; 4; 11; 12; 39; 35; 2; 55; 22; 57; 56; 47; 52; 44; 53; 54],
seen as more energy efficient than Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) due to their event-driven
computation mechanism and the energy-saving multiplication-addition transformation advantage,
have received extensive attention recently in many fields. For example, in [36], SNNs were used to
handle sequential learning and show better performance and less energy cost on sequential learning
compared to ANNs with similar scales. In [31], SNNs were leveraged to study the Human Activity
Recognition (HAR) task. The results show that the SNN can reduce up to 94% energy consumption
while being comparable to homogeneous ANN counterparts in accuracy. There are also some works
that apply SNNs in autonomous driving. LaneSNNs [45] presented an SNN-based approach to detect
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

