Human spatiotemporal pattern learning
as probabilistic program synthesis

Tracey E. Mills
MIT
temills@mit.edu

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT
jbt@mit.edu

Samuel J. Cheyette
MIT
cheyette@mit.edu

Abstract
People are adept at learning a wide variety of structured patterns from small
amounts of data, presenting a conundrum from the standpoint of the bias-variance
tradeoff: what kinds of representations and algorithms support the joint flexibility
and data-paucity of human learning? One possibility is that people “learn by
programming”: inducing probabilistic models to fit observed data. Here, we
experimentally test human learning in the domain of structured 2-dimensional
patterns, using a task in which participants repeatedly predicted where a dot
would move based on its previous trajectory. We evaluate human performance
against standard parametric and non-parametric time-series models, as well as
two Bayesian program synthesis models whose hypotheses vary in their degree of
structure: a compositional Gaussian Process model and a structured “Language
of Thought” (LoT) model. We find that signatures of human pattern learning are
best explained by the LoT model, supporting the idea that the flexibility and dataefficiency of human structure learning can be understood as probabilistic inference
over an expressive space of programs.

1

Introduction

Humans, uniquely among animals, are exceptional learners of structure: we learn languages, develop
and use systems of mathematics, make music, follow recipes, and play board games. It is very
unlikely that we have evolved specialized modules for these specific abilities, save language, given
their breadth and the fact that many were invented quite recently. Instead, people seem to have
powerful inference mechanisms that enable learning and representing structured theories in many
different domains. Yet the flexibility of human learning presents a challenge to models of intelligence
based, for instance, on training large, data-intensive networks. While there are now machine learning
systems that successfully mimic or even surpass certain human abilities, humans have general
inductive abilities that exceed modern AI systems and, importantly, often require much less data.
Models of human structure learning historically fall under two broad approaches: symbolic approaches, based on grammars and logic, and statistical approaches, such as neural networks and
Bayesian inference. Symbolic approaches have focused on capturing the productivity, systematicity,
and compositionality of human thought [1]; however, they have often been implemented in ways
that are insufficiently flexible to handle ambiguity and uncertainty which are also central features
of cognition. In contrast, statistical approaches have rarely enforced this same degree of structure
in learned representations, in order to achieve greater flexibility and robustness to ambiguity and
uncertainty. Recently, the idea of modeling human learning as probabilistic program induction —
in which probabilistic inference operates over structured, symbolic programs — has emerged as a
compelling synthesis of these two approaches [2].
Program induction models have shown success in explaining patterns in human learning in a number
of domains, including logical concepts, handwritten characters, counting, kinship relations, sequences,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

