"-fractional core stability in Hedonic Games
Simone Fioravanti1

Michele Flammini1, 2 Bojana Kodric 3 Giovanna Varricchio2,4
Gran Sasso Science Institute (GSSI), L’Aquila, Italy
2
University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
3
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Venice, Italy
4
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
{simone.fioravanti, michele.flammini}@gssi.it
bojana.kodric@unive.it giovanna.varricchio@unical.it
1

Abstract
Hedonic Games (HGs) are a classical framework modeling coalition formation
of strategic agents guided by their individual preferences. According to these
preferences, it is desirable that a coalition structure (i.e. a partition of agents into
coalitions) satisfies some form of stability. The most well-known and natural of
such notions is arguably core-stability. Informally, a partition is core-stable if no
subset of agents would like to deviate by regrouping in a so-called core-blocking
coalition. Unfortunately, core-stable partitions seldom exist and even when they do,
it is often computationally intractable to find one. To circumvent these problems,
we propose the notion of "-fractional core-stability, where at most an "-fraction of
all possible coalitions is allowed to core-block. It turns out that such a relaxation
may guarantee both existence and polynomial-time computation. Specifically, we
design efficient algorithms returning an "-fractional core-stable partition, with "
exponentially decreasing in the number of agents, for two fundamental classes of
HGs: Simple Fractional and Anonymous. From a probabilistic point of view, being
the definition of "-fractional core equivalent to requiring that uniformly sampled
coalitions core-block with probability lower than ", we further extend the definition
to handle more complex sampling distributions. Along this line, when valuations
have to be learned from samples in a PAC-learning fashion, we give positive and
negative results on which distributions allow the efficient computation of outcomes
that are "-fractional core-stable with arbitrarily high confidence.

1

Introduction

Game-theoretic models of coalition formation have drawn significant interest in the last years,
because of their ability to capture meaningful properties of multi-agent interactions. In Hedonic
Games (HGs) [2, 16] agents gather together without any form of externality, that is only minding
the internal composition of their groups. A solution is then a partition of the agents (or coalition
structure) having some desirable properties, which typically stand for stability against some kinds
of deviations. Among the many notions existing in the literature, one of the most fundamental is
core stability [10, 31]. A partition is said to be core-stable or in the core if no subset of agents
would benefit by regrouping and forming a so-called core-blocking coalition. Unfortunately, while
being a quite natural requirement, it is notably very difficult to achieve [5, 25], even under the usual
unrealistic assumption of full knowledge of agents’ preferences. Furthermore, for the few classes of
HGs in which the non-emptiness of the core has been established, a stable partition is usually hard to
compute. Nonetheless, due to its significance, it is still desirable to find an approximation of the core.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

