Learning Exponential Families from Truncated
Samples

Jane H. Lee
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
jane.h.lee@yale.edu

Andre Wibisono
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
andre.wibisono@yale.edu

Manolis Zampetakis
Department of Computer Science
Yale University
emmanouil.zampetakis@yale.edu

Abstract
Missing data problems have many manifestations across many scientific fields. A
fundamental type of missing data problem arises when samples are truncated, i.e.,
samples that lie in a subset of the support are not observed. Statistical estimation
from truncated samples is a classical problem in statistics which dates back to
Galton, Pearson, and Fisher. A recent line of work provides the first efficient
estimation algorithms for the parameters of a Gaussian distribution [10] and for
linear regression with Gaussian noise [11, 14, 37].
In this paper we generalize these results to log-concave exponential families. We
provide an estimation algorithm that shows that extrapolation is possible for a
much larger class of distributions while it maintains a polynomial sample and time
complexity on average. Our algorithm is based on Projected Stochastic Gradient
Descent and is not only applicable in a more general setting but is also simpler
than the recent algorithms of [10, 26, 11, 14, 37]. Our work also has interesting
implications for learning general log-concave distributions and sampling given
only access to truncated data.

1

Introduction

In many statistical estimation and inference problems, we have access to only a limited part of the data
that would be necessary for the classical statistical methods to work, which motivates the development
of statistical methods that are resilient to missing data [29]. Truncation [32, 8] is a fundamental and
frequent type of missing data and arises when samples that lie outside a subset of the support are not
observed and their count is also not observed. Statistical estimation from truncated samples is the
focus of the field of truncated statistics, which was developed since the beginning of the twentieth
century starting with the work of Galton [19], Pearson and Lee [34, 35], and Fisher [16]. Truncated
statistics is widely applicable in Econometrics and many other theoretical and applied fields [32].
A recent line of work establishes the first sample optimal and computationally efficient methods for
fundamental statistical estimation problems from truncated samples [10, 26, 11, 13, 14, 24, 37]. All
the aforementioned works though heavily rely on the Gaussianity of the distribution of data or the
Gaussianity of the noise in regression problems. Gaussianity is an idealized assumption and the
question of generalizing truncated statistics beyond Gaussianity has been explored in many existing
works, e.g., [1, 22, 38]. The only results in this regime though are for single dimensional problems
and truncations that can be described as intervals.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

