Multi-modal Queried Object Detection in the Wild

Yifan Xu1,3†∗, Mengdan Zhang2† , Chaoyou Fu2 ,
Peixian Chen2 , Xiaoshan Yang1,3,4 , Ke Li2 , Changsheng Xu1,3,4‡
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{yifan.xu, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, davinazhang@tencent.com

Abstract
We introduce MQ-Det, an efficient architecture and pre-training strategy design to
utilize both textual description with open-set generalization and visual exemplars
with rich description granularity as category queries, namely, Multi-modal Queried
object Detection, for real-world detection with both open-vocabulary categories
and various granularity. MQ-Det incorporates vision queries into existing wellestablished language-queried-only detectors. A plug-and-play gated class-scalable
perceiver module upon the frozen detector is proposed to augment category text
with class-wise visual information. To address the learning inertia problem brought
by the frozen detector, a vision conditioned masked language prediction strategy is
proposed. MQ-Det’s simple yet effective architecture and training strategy design
is compatible with most language-queried object detectors, thus yielding versatile
applications. Experimental results demonstrate that multi-modal queries largely
boost open-world detection. For instance, MQ-Det significantly improves the stateof-the-art open-set detector GLIP by +7.8% AP on the LVIS benchmark via multimodal queries without any downstream finetuning, and averagely +6.3% AP on 13
few-shot downstream tasks, with merely additional 3% modulating time required
by GLIP. Code is available at https://github.com/YifanXu74/MQ-Det.

1

Introduction

As the thriving of large-scale vision-language pre-training models [25, 48, 24, 29, 27, 44, 20], object
detection recently has ushered in a new fashionable paradigm, which locates the desired objects
via a queried text. Benefited from the generalization of the pre-training models on large scale
data [26, 13, 36, 43, 22, 18, 37, 31, 35], such a text queried paradigm makes steady progress on the
long road to open-set object detection.
Compared with previous fixed category sets (usually represented by finite numbers), the foregoing text
query has the merit of representing broad concepts, but also has an intrinsic limitation of insufficient
description granularity [4, 9, 32]. For example, class homonyms (e.g., “bat” can be a piece of wood
or a kind of animal) lead to ambiguous queries. Meanwhile, as exemplified in Fig. 1, for fine-grained
fish species detection, it is usually struggled to use limited text to describe the fish with specific
patterns. Empirically, one straightforward solution for the insufficient description granularity problem
is to design additional textual description, but there are three distinct obstacles: 1) it is difficult
to comprehensively describe visual details [52], and constructing textual description for a large
amount of categories is a laborious work. 2) The longer queried text increases the understanding
difficulty of the pre-training model and 3) brings more computational overhead. Experimentally, the
state-of-the-art (SoTA) text queried detector GLIP [25] merely improves average precision (AP) from
∗

Work done when interning at Tencent Youtu Lab. † Equal contribution. ‡ Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

