HiBug: On Human-Interpretable Model Debug

Muxi Chen†∗ , Yu Li‡∗, Qiang Xu†
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{mxchen21,qxu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk; li.yu@hit.edu.cn
‡

Abstract
Machine learning models can frequently produce systematic errors on critical
subsets (or slices) of data that share common attributes. Discovering and explaining
such model bugs is crucial for reliable model deployment. However, existing bug
discovery and interpretation methods usually involve heavy human intervention
and annotation, which can be cumbersome and have low bug coverage.
In this paper, we propose HiBug, an automated framework for interpretable model
debugging. Our approach utilizes large pre-trained models, such as chatGPT, to
suggest human-understandable attributes that are related to the targeted computer
vision tasks. By leveraging pre-trained vision-language models, we can efficiently
identify common visual attributes of underperforming data slices using humanunderstandable terms. This enables us to uncover rare cases in the training data,
identify spurious correlations in the model, and use the interpretable debug results
to select or generate new training data for model improvement. Experimental
results demonstrate the efficacy of the HiBug framework. Code is available at:
https://github.com/cure-lab/HiBug.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models for computer vision tasks have made significant advances in recent years.
However, they are still prone to systematic failures on critical subsets, or "slices," of data with similar
visual attributes. These bugs are largely due to the dataset used for training, such as rare data in certain
categories or biased training data leading to spurious correlations, causing potentially catastrophic
consequences for models used in safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving [Fujiyoshi
et al., 2019] and medical image processing [Giger, 2018].
Various model debugging techniques are proposed in the literature. Some focus on discovering failure
instances. For example, test input prioritization techniques aim to identify as many failure instances
as possible under a given labeling budget [Li et al., 2021, Wang et al., 2021]. Other solutions seek to
identify the visual attributes that cause model failures. For example, [Singla et al., 2021] proposes a
visualization technique (e.g., saliency maps), through which humans can identify bug-related visual
attributes. The recent Domino [Eyuboglu et al., 2022] and Spotlight [d’Eon et al., 2022] techniques try
to cluster failures in the embedding space for common bug attribute identification. While interesting,
the visual attributes in the embedding space are often entangled, making it hard to identify the true
bug-related attributes. Adavision [Gao et al., 2022] proposes to describe model bugs with natural
languages and refine the description interactively. Such a method requires heavy human intervention
and cannot guarantee bug coverage.
In this paper, we propose HiBug, an automated framework for interpretable model debugging. HiBug
leverages the recent large pre-trained models to identify common visual attributes of underperforming
∗

These authors contributed equally.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

