SE(3) Equivariant Augmented Coupling Flows

Laurence I. Midgley∗
University of Cambridge
lim24@cam.ac.uk

Javier Antorán∗
University of Cambridge
ja666@cam.ac.uk

Vincent Stimper∗
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
University of Cambridge
vs488@cam.ac.uk
Emile Mathieu∗
University of Cambridge
ebm32@cam.ac.uk

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute
for Intelligent Systems
bs@tue.mpg.de

José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Coupling normalizing flows allow for fast sampling and density evaluation, making
them the tool of choice for probabilistic modeling of physical systems. However,
the standard coupling architecture precludes endowing flows that operate on the
Cartesian coordinates of atoms with the SE(3) and permutation invariances of
physical systems. This work proposes a coupling flow that preserves SE(3) and permutation equivariance by performing coordinate splits along additional augmented
dimensions. At each layer, the flow maps atoms’ positions into learned SE(3)
invariant bases, where we apply standard flow transformations, such as monotonic
rational-quadratic splines, before returning to the original basis. Crucially, our flow
preserves fast sampling and density evaluation, and may be used to produce unbiased estimates of expectations with respect to the target distribution via importance
sampling. When trained on the DW4, LJ13, and QM9-positional datasets, our flow
is competitive with equivariant continuous normalizing flows and diffusion models,
while allowing sampling more than an order of magnitude faster. Moreover, to the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to learn the full Boltzmann distribution of
alanine dipeptide by only modeling the Cartesian positions of its atoms. Lastly,
we demonstrate that our flow can be trained to approximately sample from the
Boltzmann distribution of the DW4 and LJ13 particle systems using only their
energy functions.

1

Introduction

Modeling the distribution of a molecule’s configurations at equilibrium, known as the Boltzmann
distribution, is a promising application of deep generative models [Noé et al., 2019]. While the
unnormalized density of the Boltzmann distribution can be obtained via physical modeling, sampling
from it typically requires molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, which are expensive and produce
correlated samples. A promising alternative is to rely on surrogate deep generative models, known as
Boltzmann generators. We can draw independent samples from these and debias any expectations
∗

Equal contribution
Code: https://github.com/lollcat/se3-augmented-coupling-flows

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

