Emergent Communication for Rules Reasoning

Yuxuan Guo1, 2, 3 Yifan Hao2 Rui Zhang2 Enshuai Zhou1, 2, 3 Zidong Du2, 5
Xishan Zhang2, 3 Xinkai Song2 Yuanbo Wen2 Yongwei Zhao2 Xuehai Zhou1
Jiaming Guo2 Qi Yi1, 2, 3 Shaohui Peng6 Di Huang2 Ruizhi Chen6
∗
Qi Guo2 Yunji Chen2, 4
1

University of Science and Technology of China
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
Cambricon Technologies 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies
6
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS
2

gyx_20170818@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {haoyifan, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Research on emergent communication between deep-learning-based agents has
received extensive attention due to its inspiration for linguistics and artificial intelligence. However, previous attempts have hovered around emerging communication
under perception-oriented environmental settings, that forces agents to describe
low-level perceptual features intra image or symbol contexts. In this work, inspired
by the classic human reasoning test (namely Raven’s Progressive Matrix), we
propose the Reasoning Game, a cognition-oriented environment that encourages
agents to reason and communicate high-level rules, rather than perceived low-level
contexts. Moreover, we propose 1) an unbiased dataset (namely rule-RAVEN) as
a benchmark to avoid overfitting, 2) and a two-stage curriculum agent training
method as a baseline for more stable convergence in the Reasoning Game, where
contexts and semantics are bilaterally drifting. Experimental results show that, in
the Reasoning Game, a semantically stable and compositional language emerges to
solve reasoning problems. The emerged language helps agents apply the extracted
rules to the generalization of unseen context attributes, and to the transfer between
different context attributes or even tasks.

1

Introduction

Research on emergent communication has received extensive attention in recent years due to its
inspiration to the fields of linguistics and artificial intelligence (AI). From the linguistic perspective,
the study of emergent communication may help understand the origin and evolution of natural
language [9, 13, 14, 28, 40]. From the AI perspective, introducing communication mechanism
into the deep-learning-based multi-agents system is a promising way to make it interpretable [11],
human-interactable [25], and more importantly, generalizable [1, 7, 31, 37].
Lewis-style Game [27] is widely used in previous studies to simulate emergent communication
between two agents, a speaker, and a listener. In this game, the speaker sends a message based
on perceived contexts (usually images or symbols), and the listener completes the perception task
(usually discriminating or reconstructing the target object) based on the message. As two agents
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

