Towards Free Data Selection with
General-Purpose Models

Yichen Xie, Mingyu Ding∗, Masayoshi Tomizuka, Wei Zhan
UC Berkeley
{yichen_xie, myding, tomizuka, wzhan}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
A desirable data selection algorithm can efficiently choose the most informative
samples to maximize the utility of limited annotation budgets. However, current
approaches, represented by active learning methods, typically follow a cumbersome
pipeline that iterates the time-consuming model training and batch data selection
repeatedly. In this paper, we challenge this status quo by designing a distinct data
selection pipeline that utilizes existing general-purpose models to select data from
various datasets with a single-pass inference without the need for additional training
or supervision. A novel free data selection (FreeSel) method is proposed following
this new pipeline. Specifically, we define semantic patterns extracted from intermediate features of the general-purpose model to capture subtle local information
in each image. We then enable the selection of all data samples in a single pass
through distance-based sampling at the fine-grained semantic pattern level. FreeSel
bypasses the heavy batch selection process, achieving a significant improvement in
efficiency and being 530× faster than existing active learning methods. Extensive
experiments verify the effectiveness of FreeSel on various computer vision tasks.
Our code is available at https://github.com/yichen928/FreeSel.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Network (DNN) models have achieved remarkable progress in various tasks, benefiting
from abundant training samples and labels. Unfortunately, data labeling tends to be time-consuming
and costly, especially for dense prediction tasks such as object detection and semantic segmentation,
where experts may spend up to 90 minutes per image [33]. As such, effectively exploiting the limited
annotation budget has become a long-standing problem in the advancement of computer vision.
Many methods have been proposed to identify the most suitable samples for annotation, where
the mainstream follows the active learning [43, 45] or subset selection [42] pipelines. However,
both kinds of methods rely on task-specific models. As the most popular data selection strategy,
active learning algorithms employ a time-consuming and computationally expensive batch selection
strategy [44], as shown in Fig. 1a. Specifically, a task-specific model is first trained using a small
initial set of labeled samples. Then, the model is utilized to select images within a specified batch
budget size. These selected images are annotated and added to the labeled pool, after which the
model is retrained or fine-tuned using all the labeled samples. This iterative process is repeated
multiple times for a large unlabeled data pool. Since the selection of data is tightly coupled with the
task-specific model, the entire pipeline needs to be restarted from scratch and repeated when working
on different tasks or datasets. In many cases, it even requires up to several days to select sufficient
samples from a medium-sized data pool (e.g., Core-Set [44] in Tab. 1).
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

