Diffusion Representation for Asymmetric Kernels via
Magnetic Transform

Mingzhen He
Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
mingzhen_he@sjtu.edu.cn
Fan He
Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT-STADIUS)
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
fan.he@esat.kuleuven.be
Ruikai Yang, Xiaolin Huang
Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{ruikai.yang, xiaolinhuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
As a nonlinear dimension reduction technique, the diffusion map (DM) has been
widely used. In DM, kernels play an important role for capturing the nonlinear relationship of data. However, only symmetric kernels can be used now, which prevents
the use of DM in directed graphs, trophic networks, and other real-world scenarios
where the intrinsic and extrinsic geometries in data are asymmetric. A promising
technique is the magnetic transform which converts an asymmetric matrix to a
Hermitian one. However, we are facing essential problems, including how diffusion
distance could be preserved and how divergence could be avoided during diffusion
process. Via theoretical proof, we successfully establish a diffusion representation
framework with the magnetic transform, named MagDM. The effectiveness and
robustness for dealing data endowed with asymmetric proximity are demonstrated
on three synthetic datasets and two trophic networks.

1

Introduction

The diffusion map (DM) [1, 2, 3] and its variations [4, 5, 6, 7] are typical dimension reduction
(DR) techniques that has been widely used in the signal processing [8], computer vision [9], and
textual network embedding [10]. DM is a powerful method that embeds high-dimensional data into
a low-dimensional manifold while preserving diffusion distance, which helps describe meaningful
geometric structures in data.
Kernels play a significant role in DM and strongly impact the quality of DR, as they allow for the
identification of nonlinear relationships and underlying structures in data. In real-world scenarios
such as directed graphs, trophic and social networks, the intrinsic and extrinsic geometries in data
may be asymmetric, and asymmetric kernels [11, 12, 13, 14] are more suitable to depict asymmetric
geometric structures. The advantages of integrating diffusion geometry and asymmetric kernels have
been acknowledged by several researchers. [15] developed a framework to study function extension
and approximation problems in the context of changing data and functions on directed graphs.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

