Robust Lipschitz Bandits to Adversarial Corruptions

Yue Kang
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
yuekang@ucdavis.edu

Cho-Jui Hsieh
Google and Department of Computer Science, UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

Thomas C. M. Lee
Department of Statistics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
tcmlee@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Lipschitz bandit is a variant of stochastic bandits that deals with a continuous arm
set defined on a metric space, where the reward function is subject to a Lipschitz
constraint. In this paper, we introduce a new problem of Lipschitz bandits in
the presence of adversarial corruptions where an adaptive adversary corrupts the
stochastic rewards up to a total budget C. The budget is measured by the sum of
corruption levels across the time horizon T . We consider both weak and strong
adversaries, where the weak adversary is unaware of the current action before the
attack, while the strong one can observe it. Our work presents the first line of
robust Lipschitz bandit algorithms that can achieve sub-linear regret under both
types of adversary, even when the total budget of corruption C is unrevealed to
the agent. We provide a lower bound under each type of adversary, and show that
our algorithm is optimal under the strong case. Finally, we conduct experiments to
illustrate the effectiveness of our algorithms against two classic kinds of attacks.

1

Introduction

Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) [3] is a fundamental and powerful framework in sequential decisionmaking problems. Given the potential existence of malicious users in real-world scenarios [10], a
recent line of works considers the stochastic bandit problem under adversarial corruptions: an agent
adaptively updates its policy to choose an arm from the arm set, and an adversary may contaminate
the reward generated from the stochastic bandit before the agent could observe it. To robustify bandit
learning algorithms under adversarial corruptions, several algorithms have been developed in the
setting of traditional MAB [16, 18, 29] and contextual linear bandits [6, 12, 17, 27, 39]. These works
consider either the weak adversary [29], which has access to all past data but not the current action
before choosing its attack, or the strong adversary [6], which is also aware of the current action
for contamination. Details of these two adversaries will be elaborated in Section 3. In practice,
bandits under adversarial corruptions can be used in many real-world problems such as pay-per-click
advertising with click fraud and recommendation systems with fake reviews [29], and it has been
empirically validated that stochastic MABs are vulnerable to slight corruption [12, 15, 18].
Although there has been extensive research on the adversarial robustness of stochastic bandits, most
existing works consider problems with a discrete arm set, such as the traditional MAB and contextual
linear bandit. In this paper, we investigate robust bandit algorithms against adversarial corruptions
in the Lipschitz bandit setting, where a continuously infinite arm set lie in a known metric space
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

