MLFMF: Data Sets for Machine Learning for
Mathematical Formalization
Andrej Bauer
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
University of Ljubljana
Institute for Mathematics, Physics and Mechanics
Ljubljana, Slovenia
andrej.bauer@fmf.uni-lj.si

Matej Petković
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
University of Ljubljana
Department of Knowledge Technologies
Jožef Stefan Institute
Ljubljana, Slovenia
matej.petkovic@fmf.uni-lj.si

Ljupčo Todorovski
Faculty of Mathematics and Physics
University of Ljubljana
Department of Knowledge Technologies
Jožef Stefan Institute
Ljubljana, Slovenia
ljupco.todorovski@fmf.uni-lj.si

Abstract
We introduce MLFMF, a collection of data sets for benchmarking recommendation
systems used to support formalization of mathematics with proof assistants. These
systems help humans identify which previous entries (theorems, constructions,
datatypes, and postulates) are relevant in proving a new theorem or carrying out a
new construction. Each data set is derived from a library of formalized mathematics
written in proof assistants Agda or Lean. The collection includes the largest Lean 4
library Mathlib, and some of the largest Agda libraries: the standard library, the
library of univalent mathematics Agda-unimath, and the TypeTopology library.
Each data set represents the corresponding library in two ways: as a heterogeneous
network, and as a list of s-expressions representing the syntax trees of all the entries
in the library. The network contains the (modular) structure of the library and the
references between entries, while the s-expressions give complete and easily parsed
information about every entry. We report baseline results using standard graph and
word embeddings, tree ensembles, and instance-based learning algorithms. The
MLFMF data sets provide solid benchmarking support for further investigation
of the numerous machine learning approaches to formalized mathematics. The
methodology used to extract the networks and the s-expressions readily applies to
other libraries, and is applicable to other proof assistants. With more than 250 000
entries in total, this is currently the largest collection of formalized mathematical
knowledge in machine learnable format.

1

Introduction

Applications of artificial intelligence to automation of mathematics have a long history, starting from
early approaches based on a collection of hand-crafted heuristics for formalizing new mathematical
concepts and conjectures related to them [Lenat, 1977]. In the last decade, there has been a growing
interest in formalization of mathematics with proof assistants, which verify the formal correctness of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

