Imagine the Unseen World: A Benchmark for
Systematic Generalization in Visual World Models

Yeongbin Kim∗
KAIST

Gautam Singh∗
Rutgers University

Junyeong Park
KAIST

Caglar Gulcehre†
EPFL & Google DeepMind

Sungjin Ahn‡
KAIST

Abstract
Systematic compositionality, or the ability to adapt to novel situations by creating a
mental model of the world using reusable pieces of knowledge, remains a significant
challenge in machine learning. While there has been considerable progress in the
language domain, efforts towards systematic visual imagination, or envisioning the
dynamical implications of a visual observation, are in their infancy. We introduce
the Systematic Visual Imagination Benchmark (SVIB), the first benchmark designed
to address this problem head-on. SVIB offers a novel framework for a minimal
world modeling problem, where models are evaluated based on their ability to
generate one-step image-to-image transformations under a latent world dynamics.
The framework provides benefits such as the possibility to jointly optimize for
systematic perception and imagination, a range of difficulty levels, and the ability
to control the fraction of possible factor combinations used during training. We
provide a comprehensive evaluation of various baseline models on SVIB, offering
insight into the current state-of-the-art in systematic visual imagination. We hope
that this benchmark will help advance visual systematic compositionality. https:
//systematic-visual-imagination.github.io4

1

Introduction

Constructing a mental model of the world, known as a world model, in a composable way is a
crucial aspect of human intelligence [40, 12, 72]. This ability enables humans to adapt to novel
situations and problems in a zero-shot manner by envisioning the possible future [79, 7]. Studies
in neuroscience and cognitive science suggest that the key to this ability is the process of acquiring
abstract, conceptual, and reusable pieces of knowledge from past experiences and applying them
in new configurations to comprehend a novel situation [30, 15, 76, 7]. For instance, a person who
understands the implications of a scene involving a “big dog” and a “small cat”, e.g., how they may
interact and what the subsequent scene may look like, can also reasonably understand the implications
of an unfamiliar scenario involving a “big cat” and a “small dog”. While this capability, termed
systematic compositionality, is fundamental to human intelligence, how neural networks can acquire
such an ability remains one of the grand challenges in machine learning [63, 6, 36].
The notion of systematic compositionality originates from the fields of philosophy of language
and linguistics [95, 30]. Language inherently provides a compositional representation using token
∗

Equal Contribution.
This work was partly done while C.G. was at Google DeepMind. C.G. is currently affiliated with EPFL.
‡
Correspondence to sungjin.ahn@kaist.ac.kr.
4
This is the official project page. It provides links to the benchmark and the code.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

