Distributionally Robust Bayesian Optimization
with ϕ-divergences

Hisham Husain
Amazon
hushisha@amazon.com

Vu Nguyen
Amazon
vutngn@amazon.com

Anton van den Hengel
Amazon
hengelah@amazon.com

Abstract
The study of robustness has received much attention due to its inevitability in
data-driven settings where many systems face uncertainty. One such example of
concern is Bayesian Optimization (BO), where uncertainty is multi-faceted, yet
there only exists a limited number of works dedicated to this direction. In particular,
there is the work of Kirschner et al. [26], which bridges the existing literature of
Distributionally Robust Optimization (DRO) by casting the BO problem from the
lens of DRO. While this work is pioneering, it admittedly suffers from various
practical shortcomings such as finite contexts assumptions, leaving behind the
main question Can one devise a computationally tractable algorithm for solving
this DRO-BO problem? In this work, we tackle this question to a large degree of
generality by considering robustness against data-shift in ϕ-divergences, which
subsumes many popular choices, such as the χ2 -divergence, Total Variation, and
the extant Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. We show that the DRO-BO problem
in this setting is equivalent to a finite-dimensional optimization problem which,
even in the continuous context setting, can be easily implemented with provable
sublinear regret bounds. We then show experimentally that our method surpasses
existing methods, attesting to the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Bayesian Optimization (BO) [29, 25, 52, 49, 34] allows us to model a black-box function that
is expensive to evaluate, in the case where noisy observations are available. Many important
applications of BO correspond to situations where the objective function depends on an additional
context parameter [27, 57], for example in health-care, recommender systems can be used to model
information about a certain type of medical domain. BO has naturally found success in a number of
scientific domains [56, 20, 30, 18, 55] and also a staple in machine learning for the crucial problem
of hyperparameter tuning [44, 36, 40, 41, 59].
As with all data-driven approaches, BO is prone to cases where the given data shifts from the data
of interest. While BO models this in the form of Gaussian noise for the inputs to the objective
function, the context distribution is assumed to be consistent. This can be problematic, for example
in healthcare where patient information shifts over time. This problem exists in the larger domain
of operations research under the banner of distributionally robust optimization (DRO) [46], where
one is interested in being robust against shifts in the distribution observed. In particular, for a given
distance between distributions D, DRO studies robustness against adversaries who are allowed to
modify the observed distribution p to another distribution in the set:
{q : D(p, q) ≤ ε} ,
for some ε > 0. One can interpret this as a ball of radius ε for the given choice of D and the adversary
perturbs the observed distribution p to q where ε is a form of “budget”.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

