Label-Only Model Inversion Attacks via
Knowledge Transfer

Ngoc-Bao Nguyen∗1
Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran∗2‡
Milad Abdollahzadeh1
Ngai-Man Cheung1†
1
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
Stanford University
thibaongoc_nguyen@mymail.sutd.edu.sg ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
In a model inversion (MI) attack, an adversary abuses access to a machine learning
(ML) model to infer and reconstruct private training data. Remarkable progress has
been made in the white-box and black-box setups, where the adversary has access
to the complete model or the model’s soft output respectively. However, there is
very limited study in the most challenging but practically important setup: Labelonly MI attacks, where the adversary only has access to the model’s predicted label
(hard label) without confidence scores nor any other model information.
In this work, we propose LOKT, a novel approach for label-only MI attacks. Our
idea is based on transfer of knowledge from the opaque target model to surrogate
models. Subsequently, using these surrogate models, our approach can harness advanced white-box attacks. We propose knowledge transfer based on generative modelling, and introduce a new model, Target model-assisted ACGAN (T-ACGAN), for
effective knowledge transfer. Our method casts the challenging label-only MI into
the more tractable white-box setup. We provide analysis to support that surrogate
models based on our approach serve as effective proxies for the target model for MI.
Our experiments show that our method significantly outperforms existing SOTA
Label-only MI attack by more than 15% across all MI benchmarks. Furthermore, our method compares favorably in terms of query budget. Our study highlights rising privacy threats for ML models even when minimal information (i.e.,
hard labels) is exposed. Our code, demo, models and reconstructed data are available at our project page: https://ngoc-nguyen-0.github.io/lokt/

1

Introduction

Model inversion (MI) attacks aim to infer and reconstruct sensitive private samples used in the
training of models. MI and their privacy implications have attracted considerable attention recently
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. The model subject to MI is referred to as target model. There are three
categories of MI attacks: (1) White-box MI, where complete target model information is accessible
by the adversary [1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 10]; (2) Black-box MI, where target model’s soft labels are accessible
[4, 12, 10, 13]; (3) Label-only MI, where only target model’s hard labels are accessible [6]. This
paper focuses on label-only MI, which is the most challenging setup as only limited information
(hard labels) is available (Fig. 1).
In most existing work, MI attack is formulated as an optimization problem to seek reconstructions
that maximize the likelihood under the target model [1, 2, 3, 6]. For DNNs, the optimization problems
are highly non-linear. When the sensitive private samples are high-dimensional samples (e.g. face
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.

‡

Work done while at SUTD.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

