Adversarial Training from Mean Field Perspective

Soichiro Kumano
The University of Tokyo
kumano@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Hiroshi Kera
Chiba University
kera@chiba-u.jp

Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo
yamasaki@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Although adversarial training is known to be effective against adversarial examples,
training dynamics are not well understood. In this study, we present the first
theoretical analysis of adversarial training in random deep neural networks without
any assumptions on data distributions. We introduce a new theoretical framework
based on mean field theory, which addresses the limitations of existing mean
field-based approaches. Based on the framework, we derive the (empirically tight)
upper bounds of ℓq norm-based adversarial loss with ℓp norm-based adversarial
examples for various values of p and q. Moreover, we prove that networks without
shortcuts are generally not adversarially trainable and that adversarial training
reduces network capacity. We also show that the network width alleviates these
issues. Furthermore, the various impacts of input and output dimensions on the
upper bounds and time evolution of weight variance are presented.

1

Introduction

Adversarial training [38, 58] is one of the most effective approaches against adversarial examples [89].
Various studies aimed to improve the performance of adversarial training [28, 94, 113], leading
to numerous observations. Adversarial training improves accuracy for adversarial examples but
decreases it for clean images [58, 88]. Moreover, it requires additional training data [14, 40, 77]
and achieves high robust accuracy in a training dataset but not in a test dataset [58]. To improve the
reliability of adversarial training and address the aforementioned challenges, a theoretical analysis is
essential. Specifically, it is crucial to gain insight into network evolution during adversarial training,
conditions for adversarial trainability, and differences between adversarial and standard training.
However, the theoretical understanding of network training is challenging, even for standard training,
due to the non-convexity of loss surface and optimization stochasticity. Recent studies employed
the mean field theory and analyzed the early stage of standard training for randomly initialized deep
neural networks (random networks) [71, 81]. Some studies explored network trainability regarding
gradient vanishing/explosion [81, 104, 105] and dynamical isometry [69, 79, 100]. Others examined
network representation power [49, 71, 101]. The theoretical results of the early stage of training
have been empirically observed to fit well with fully trained networks [25, 84], partially supported
by recent theoretical results [46]. However, existing mean field-based approaches cannot manage
the probabilistic properties of an entire network (e.g., the distribution of a network Jacobian) and
dependence between network inputs and parameters, which are crucial for analyzing adversarial
training.
In this study, we propose a mean field-based framework that addresses the aforementioned limitations (Thm 4.1), and apply it to the adversarial training analysis. While previous studies on adversarial
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

