Collaborative Alignment of NLP models

Fereshte Khani
Microsoft
fkhani@microsoft.com

Marco Tulio Ribeiro
Google DeepMind∗
marcotcr@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite substantial advancements, Natural Language Processing (NLP) models
often require post-training adjustments to enforce business rules, rectify undesired
behavior, and align with user values. These adjustments involve operationalizing
"concepts"—dictating desired model responses to certain inputs. However, it’s
difficult for a single entity to enumerate and define all possible concepts, indicating
a need for a multi-user, collaborative model alignment framework. Moreover, the
exhaustive delineation of a concept is challenging, and an improper approach can
create shortcuts or interfere with original data or other concepts.
To address these challenges, we introduce CoAlign, a framework that enables multiuser interaction with the model, thereby mitigating individual limitations. CoAlign
aids users in operationalizing their concepts using Large Language Models, and
relying on the principle that NLP models exhibit simpler behaviors in local regions.
Our main insight is learning a local model for each concept, and a global model to
integrate the original data with all concepts. We then steer a large language model
to generate instances within concept boundaries where local and global disagree.
Our experiments show CoAlign is effective at helping multiple users operationalize
concepts and avoid interference for a variety of scenarios, tasks, and models.

1

Introduction

NLP models have showcased remarkable capabilities, yet they are not exempt from imperfections.
Unacceptable values embedded in their training data, persistent errors, or violations of business rules
highlight the need to teach certain concepts to these models. A concept relates a set of inputs to
desired behaviors, e.g. in sentiment analysis, a concept may dictate that “religion does not connote
sentiment” (e.g., “I’m Muslim” is Neutral). Similarly, in natural language inference (NLI), the
broader concept of “downward monotonicity” specifies entailment relations when certain parts of
expressions are made more specific (e.g., “All cats like tuna” entails “All small cats like tuna”).
The standard way of teaching concepts to models is adding new training data that exemplifies the
concept, e.g. adding neutral sentences containing religious words [1], or adding entailment pairs
that illustrate downward monotonicity [2]. However, it is hard to ensure that the data provided does
not lead to shortcuts, i.e. spurious correlations or heuristics that allow models to make predictions
without capturing the true underlying concept, such as “all sentences with religious terms are neutral”,
or “going from general to specific leads to entailment”. Further, the model may overfit – fail to
generalize from the instances provided to the actual concept, e.g. only recognizing pairs in the form
(“all X...”, “all ADJECTIVE X...”), and not pairs like (“all animals...”, “all cats...”). Finally, both
shortcuts and overfitting can lead to interference with the original data or other concepts, e.g. leading
to failures on “I love Islam” or pairs like (“Some cats like tuna”, “Some small cats like tuna”). In sum,
operationalizing concepts is challenging, since users typically cannot think of all concept boundaries
and interactions in advance.
∗

Work done while at Microsoft

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

