CBD: A Certiﬁed Backdoor Detector Based on Local
Dominant Probability

Zhen Xiang
Zidi Xiong
Bo Li
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{zxiangaa, zidix2, lbo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attack is a common threat to deep neural networks. During testing,
samples embedded with a backdoor trigger will be misclassiﬁed as an adversarial
target by a backdoored model, while samples without the backdoor trigger will be
correctly classiﬁed. In this paper, we present the ﬁrst certiﬁed backdoor detector
(CBD), which is based on a novel, adjustable conformal prediction scheme based
on our proposed statistic local dominant probability. For any classiﬁer under
inspection, CBD provides 1) a detection inference, 2) the condition under which
the attacks are guaranteed to be detectable for the same classiﬁcation domain, and 3)
a probabilistic upper bound for the false positive rate. Our theoretical results show
that attacks with triggers that are more resilient to test-time noise and have smaller
perturbation magnitudes are more likely to be detected with guarantees. Moreover,
we conduct extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets considering various
backdoor types, such as BadNet, CB, and Blend. CBD achieves comparable or even
higher detection accuracy than state-of-the-art detectors, and it in addition provides
detection certiﬁcation. Notably, for backdoor attacks with random perturbation
triggers bounded by 2 ≤ 0.75 which achieves more than 90% attack success rate,
CBD achieves 100% (98%), 100% (84%), 98% (98%), and 72% (40%) empirical
(certiﬁed) detection true positive rates on the four benchmark datasets GTSRB,
SVHN, CIFAR-10, and TinyImageNet, respectively, with low false positive rates.

1

Introduction

Despite the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in many applications, they are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks such as backdoor attacks [46, 36]. A DNN being backdoored will learn to predict
an adversarial target class for test samples embedded with a backdoor trigger, while maintaining a
high accuracy on clean test samples without the trigger [18, 8, 42, 65, 50, 43, 51, 37].
Backdoor detection is a popular task for backdoor defense. It aims to detect if a given model is
backdoored without access to the training set or any real test samples that are possibly embedded with
the trigger [48, 64]. The task corresponds to practical scenarios where the user of an app or a legacy
system containing a DNN seeks to know if the model is backdoor attacked, where the training set is
not available [1]. Various empirical approaches have been proposed for backdoor detection, most
of which are based on trigger reverse engineering [67, 6, 75, 69, 56, 62, 24], or meta classiﬁcation
[82, 29]. However, none of these works quantitatively investigate the conditions under which the
backdoor attacks are guaranteed to be detectable. Without a detection guarantee, DNNs are still
vulnerable to future attacks (e.g.) with new trigger types [51, 87, 70].
In this paper, we make the ﬁrst attempt toward the certiﬁcation of backdoor detection. Certiﬁcation
is an important concept for studies on the robustness of DNNs against adversarial examples [61,
17, 52, 7, 45]. In particular, a robustness certiﬁcation refers to a probabilistic or deterministic
guarantee for a model to produce desired outputs (e.g. correct label prediction) when the adversarial
perturbation applied to the inputs satisﬁes certain conditions (e.g. with some constrained perturbation
magnitude) [33, 58, 32, 10, 59]. As an analogy, we propose a certiﬁed backdoor detector (CBD)
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

