ImageReward: Learning and Evaluating Human
Preferences for Text-to-Image Generation

Jiazheng Xu⋄†∗ , Xiao Liu⋄‡∗ , Yuchen Wu⋄ , Yuxuan Tong⋄ , Qinkai Li§† , Ming Ding‡ ,
Jie Tang⋄ , Yuxiao Dong⋄
⋄

Tsinghua University

‡

Zhipu AI

§

Beijing U. of Posts and Telecommunications

Abstract
We present a comprehensive solution to learn and improve text-to-image models
from human preference feedback. To begin with, we build ImageReward—the
first general-purpose text-to-image human preference reward model—to effectively
encode human preferences. Its training is based on our systematic annotation
pipeline including rating and ranking, which collects 137k expert comparisons to
date. In human evaluation, ImageReward outperforms existing scoring models
and metrics, making it a promising automatic metric for evaluating text-to-image
synthesis. On top of it, we propose Reward Feedback Learning (ReFL), a direct
tuning algorithm to optimize diffusion models against a scorer. Both automatic and
human evaluation support ReFL’s advantages over compared methods. All code
and datasets are provided at https://github.com/THUDM/ImageReward.

1

Introduction

Text-to-image generative models, including auto-regressive [43; 11; 14; 16; 12; 63] and diffusionbased [37; 45; 42; 46] approaches, have experienced rapid advancements in recent years. Given
appropriate text descriptions (i.e., prompts), these models can generate high-fidelity and semanticallyrelated images on a wide range of topics, attracting significant public interest in their potential
applications and impacts.
Despite the progress, existing self-supervised pre-trained [33] generators are far from perfect. A
primary challenge lies in aligning models with human preference, as the pre-training distribution is
noisy and differs from the actual user-prompt distributions. The inherent discrepancy leads to several
well-documented issues in the generated images [15; 31], including but not limited to:
• Text-image Alignment: failing to accurately depict all the numbers, attributes, properties, and
relationships of objects described in text prompts, as shown in Figure 1 (a)(b).
• Body Problem: presenting distorted, incomplete, duplicated, or abnormal body parts (e.g., limbs)
of humans or animals, as illustrated in Figure 1 (e)(f).
• Human Aesthetic: deviating from the average or mainstream human preference for aesthetic
styles, as demonstrated in Figure 1 (c)(d).
• Toxicity and Biases: featuring content that is harmful, violent, sexual, discriminative, illegal, or
causing psychological discomfort, as depicted in Figure 1 (f).
These prevalent challenges, however, are difficult to address solely through improvements in model
architectures and pre-training data.
In natural language processing (NLP), researchers have employed reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) [55; 36; 39] to guide large language models [6; 7; 66; 48; 64] towards human
preferences and values. The approach relies on learning a reward model (RM) to capture human
* JX & XL contributed equally. Corresponding authors: YD & JT (yuxiaod|jietang@tsinghua.edu.cn).
†

Work done when JX interned at Zhipu AI and QL visited Tsinghua University.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

