Unbalanced Low-rank Optimal Transport Solvers
Meyer Scetbon⇤
Microsoft Research
t-mscetbon@microsoft.com
Giovanni Palla
Helmholtz Center Munich
giovanni.palla@helmholtz-muenchen.de

Michael Klein⇤
Apple
michalk@apple.com
Marco Cuturi
Apple
cuturi@apple.com

Abstract
Two salient limitations have long hindered the relevance of optimal transport
methods to machine learning. First, the O(n3 ) computational cost of standard
sample-based solvers (when used on batches of n samples) is prohibitive. Second,
the mass conservation constraint makes OT solvers too rigid in practice: because
they must match all points from both measures, their output can be heavily influenced by outliers. A flurry of recent works has addressed these computational and
modeling limitations, but has resulted in two separate strains of methods: While
the computational outlook was much improved by entropic regularization, more
recent O(n) linear-time low-rank solvers hold the promise to scale up OT further.
In terms of modeling flexibility, the rigidity of mass conservation has been eased
for entropic regularized OT, thanks to unbalanced variants of OT that can penalize
couplings whose marginals deviate from those specified by the source and target
distributions. The goal of this paper is to merge these two strains, low-rank and
unbalanced, to achieve the promise of solvers that are both scalable and versatile. We propose custom algorithms to implement these extensions for the linear
OT problem and its fused-Gromov-Wasserstein generalization, and demonstrate
their practical relevance to challenging spatial transcriptomics matching problems.
These algorithms are implemented in the ott-jax toolbox [Cuturi et al., 2022].

1

Introduction

Recent machine learning (ML) works have witnessed a flurry of activity around optimal transport
(OT) methods. The OT toolbox provides convenient, intuitive and versatile ways to quantify the
difference between two probability measures, either to quantify a distance (the Wasserstein and
Gromov-Wasserstein distances), or, in more elaborate scenarios, by computing a push-forward map
that can transform one measure into the other [Peyré and Cuturi, 2019]. Recent examples include,
e.g., single-cell omics [Bunne et al., 2021, 2022, Demetci et al., 2020, Nitzan et al., 2019, Cang et al.,
2023, Klein et al., 2023], attention mechanisms [Tay et al., 2020, Sander et al., 2022], self-supervised
learning[Caron et al., 2020, Oquab et al., 2023], and learning on graphs [Vincent-Cuaz et al., 2023].
On the challenges of using OT. Despite their long history in ML [Rubner et al., 2000], OT methods
have long suffered from various limitations, that arise from their statistical, computational, and
modelling aspects. The statistical argument is commonly referred to as the curse-of-dimensionality
of OT estimators: the Wasserstein distance between two probability densities, and its associated
optimal Monge map, is poorly approximated using samples as the dimension d of observation
grows [Dudley et al., 1966, Boissard and Le Gouic, 2014]. On the computational side, computing
OT between a pair of n samples involves solving a (generalized) matching problem, with a price
of O(n3 ) and above [Kuhn, 1955, Ahuja et al., 1993]. Finally, the original model for OT rests on a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

