Glance and Focus: Memory Prompting for
Multi-Event Video Question Answering

1

Ziyi Bai1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
ziyi.bai@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) has emerged as a vital tool to evaluate
agents’ ability to understand human daily behaviors. Despite the recent success
of large vision language models in many multi-modal tasks, complex situation
reasoning over videos involving multiple human-object interaction events still
remains challenging. In contrast, humans can easily tackle it by using a series
of episode memories as anchors to quickly locate question-related key moments
for reasoning. To mimic this effective reasoning strategy, we propose the GlanceFocus model. One simple way is to apply an action detection model to predict
a set of actions as key memories. However, these actions within a closed set
vocabulary are hard to generalize to various video domains. Instead of that, we
train an Encoder-Decoder to generate a set of dynamic event memories at the
glancing stage. Apart from using supervised bipartite matching to obtain the
event memories, we further design an unsupervised memory generation method
to get rid of dependence on event annotations. Next, at the focusing stage, these
event memories act as a bridge to establish the correlation between the questions
with high-level event concepts and low-level lengthy video content. Given the
question, the model first focuses on the generated key event memory, then focuses
on the most relevant moment for reasoning through our designed multi-level crossattention mechanism. We conduct extensive experiments on four Multi-Event
VideoQA benchmarks including STAR, EgoTaskQA, AGQA, and NExT-QA. Our
proposed model achieves state-of-the-art results, surpassing current large models
in various challenging reasoning tasks. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/ByZ0e/Glance-Focus.

1

Introduction

For intelligent agent that can assist humans in completing daily-life tasks, complex event reasoning
ability is particularly important. Multiple Event Video Question Answering (Multi-Event VideoQA)
task [14, 42, 16, 43] has recently been proposed. These benchmarks require agents to reason about
complex videos depicting multiple human-object interactions (i.e., events or situations). Furthermore,
a wide scope of event-centric questions are involved[14], ranging from event semantic descriptions
to event sequencing and dependencies to comprehensively evaluate an agent’s ability to understand
human behavior.
Recently, the emerged large vision-language models [1, 3, 8, 25, 47, 50] have demonstrated impressive
generalization capabilities in VideoQA tasks. By leveraging pre-training on large-scale cross-modal
pairs, these models can establish correlations between questions and videos to find answers effectively.
Such approaches proves effective for short videos containing single or few events with one-step
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

