SEVA: Leveraging sketches to evaluate alignment
between human and machine visual abstraction
Kushin Mukherjee1∗, Holly Huey2∗, Xuanchen Lu2∗, Yael Vinker3 , Rio Aguina-Kang2 ,
Ariel Shamir4 , and Judith E. Fan2,5
University of Wisconsin-Madison1
University of California, San Diego2
Tel-Aviv University3
Reichman University4
Stanford University5

Abstract
Sketching is a powerful tool for creating abstract images that are sparse but
meaningful. Sketch understanding poses fundamental challenges for generalpurpose vision algorithms because it requires robustness to the sparsity of sketches
relative to natural visual inputs and because it demands tolerance for semantic
ambiguity, as sketches can reliably evoke multiple meanings. While current vision
algorithms have achieved high performance on a variety of visual tasks, it remains
unclear to what extent they understand sketches in a human-like way. Here we
introduce SEVA, a new benchmark dataset containing approximately 90K humangenerated sketches of 128 object concepts produced under different time constraints,
and thus systematically varying in sparsity. We evaluated a suite of state-of-the-art
vision algorithms on their ability to correctly identify the target concept depicted
in these sketches and to generate responses that are strongly aligned with human
response patterns on the same sketch recognition task. We found that vision
algorithms that better predicted human sketch recognition performance also better
approximated human uncertainty about sketch meaning, but there remains a sizable
gap between model and human response patterns. To explore the potential of
models that emulate human visual abstraction in generative tasks, we conducted
further evaluations of a recently developed sketch generation algorithm [91] capable
of generating sketches that vary in sparsity. We hope that public release of this
dataset and evaluation protocol will catalyze progress towards algorithms with
enhanced capacities for human-like visual abstraction.

1

Introduction

Abstraction is key to how humans understand the external world. Abstraction enables distillation
of individual sensory experiences into compact latent representations that support learning of new
concepts [80, 45, 66, 30] and efficient communication about these concepts with others [23, 85, 34,
28]. For example, while no two roses are identical, people can rapidly infer what properties make a
flower a rose and not some other kind of flower from just a few examples [99, 50], especially when
these examples are selected to support such strong inferences [32, 77].
1/∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

