SA-Solver: Stochastic Adams Solver for Fast Sampling
of Diffusion Models
Shuchen Xue1,4∗, Mingyang Yi2†, Weijian Luo3∗, Shifeng Zhang2 ,Jiacheng Sun2 ,

1

Zhenguo Li2 , Zhi-Ming Ma1,4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Peking University
4
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) have achieved considerable success in
generation tasks. As sampling from DPMs is equivalent to solving diffusion
SDE or ODE which is time-consuming, numerous fast sampling methods built
upon improved differential equation solvers are proposed. The majority of such
techniques consider solving the diffusion ODE due to its superior efficiency. However, stochastic sampling could offer additional advantages in generating diverse
and high-quality data. In this work, we engage in a comprehensive analysis of
stochastic sampling from two aspects: variance-controlled diffusion SDE and linear
multi-step SDE solver. Based on our analysis, we propose SA-Solver, which is an
improved efficient stochastic Adams method for solving diffusion SDE to generate
data with high quality. Our experiments show that SA-Solver achieves: 1) improved
or comparable performance compared with the existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
sampling methods for few-step sampling; 2) SOTA FID on substantial benchmark
datasets under a suitable number of function evaluations (NFEs).

1

Introduction

Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs) [1–3] have demonstrated substantial success across a broad
spectrum of generative tasks such as image synthesis [4–6], video generation [7, 8], text-to-image
generation [9–11], speech synthesis [12, 13], etc. The primary mechanism of DPMs involves a
forward diffusion process that incrementally introduces noise into data. Simultaneously, a reverse
diffusion process is learned to generate data from this noise. Despite DPMs demonstrating enhanced
generation performance in comparison to alternative methods such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [14] or Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [15], the sampling process of DPMs demand
hundreds of evaluations of network function evaluations (NFE) [2]. The substantial computation
requirement poses a significant limitation to their wider application in practice.
The existing literature on improving the sampling efficacy of DPMs can be categorized into two
ways, depending on whether conducting extra training on the DPMs. The first category necessitates
supplementary training [16–21], which often emerges as a bottleneck, thereby limiting their practical
application. Due to this, we focus on exploring the second category, which consists training-free
methods to improve the sampling efficiency of DPMs in this paper. Current training-free samplers
employ efficient numerical schemes to solve the diffusion SDE/ODE[22–26]. Compared with solving
diffusion SDE (stochastic sampler) [25–27], solving diffusion ODE (deterministic sampler) [22–24]
∗

Work done during an internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. Email: xueshuchen17@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
luoweijian@stu.pku.edu.cn
†
Corresponding authors: Mingyang Yi (yimingyang2@huawei.com)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

