Improved Bayesian Regret Bounds for Thompson
Sampling in Reinforcement Learning

Ahmadreza Moradipari∗ †

Mohammad Pedramfar∗ ‡

Modjtaba Shokrian Zini∗ §

Vaneet Aggarwal ¶

Abstract
In this paper, we prove the first Bayesian regret bounds for Thompson Sampling in
reinforcement learning in a multitude of settings. We simplify the learning problem
using a discrete set of surrogate environments, and present a refined analysis of the
information
ratio using posterior consistency. This leads to an upper bound of order
p
e
O(H
dl1 T ) in the time inhomogeneous reinforcement learning problem where
H is the episode length and dl1 is the Kolmogorov l1 −dimension of the space of
environments. We then find concrete bounds of dl1 in a variety of settings, such as
tabular, linear and finite mixtures, and discuss how how our results are either the
first of their kind or improve the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) is a sequential decision-making problem in which an agent interacts
with an unknown environment typically modeled as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) [38, 8]. The
goal of the agent is to maximize its expected cumulative reward. This problem has a variety of
applications, including robotics, game playing, resource management, and medical treatments. The
key challenge in RL is to balance the so-called exploration-exploitation trade-off efficiently: exploring
unseen state-action pairs to gain more knowledge about the unknown environment or exploiting the
current knowledge to maximize the expected cumulative reward. Two efficient approaches have
been developed to control this trade-off: optimism in the face of uncertainty (OFU) and Thompson
Sampling (TS) (or Posterior Sampling (PS)). OFU constructs a confidence set of statistically plausible
MDPs that includes the true MDP with high probability and plays an optimistic policy according to
the MDP with maximum gain from this set [5, 40]. TS samples a statistically plausible MDP from a
posterior distribution and plays the optimistic policy of the sampled MDP [29, 31]. In this work, we
focus on the latter, and by combining an information theoretical approach first introduced by [36]
with analysis based on posterior consistency tools, we prove state-of-the-art Bayesian regret bounds
in a variety of settings.
In this paper, we start by defining the Bayesian RL problem, where transition and reward functions are
Bayesian and time inhomogeneous. The Bayesian RL problem we consider is more comprehensive
than in previous works, as we allow for both Bayesian transition and Bayesian rewards, and do
not make any assumption on their individual prior. To simplify the learning problem, we utilize
the notion of surrogate environments, which is a discretization of the environments space, and its
learning task and TS regret is a proxy to that of the main problem. The construction of the surrogate
environments was first introduced by [18] with an incorrect proof, which is fixed in our work by
∗
†
‡
§
¶

Authors have equal contribution.
Toyota Motor North America, InfoTech Labs, Mountain View, CA, USA, ahmadreza.moradipari@toyota.com
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, mpedramf@purdue.edu
modjtaba.shokrianzini@gmail.com
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, vaneet@purdue.edu
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant CCF-2149588 and Cisco, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

