On the Convergence of Encoder-only
Shallow Transformers
Fanghui Liu∗
University of Warwick
fanghui.liu@warwick.ac.uk

Yongtao Wu
LIONS, EPFL
yongtao.wu@epfl.ch
Grigorios G Chrysos∗
LIONS, EPFL
University of Wisconsin-Madison
chrysos@wisc.edu

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to build the global convergence theory of encoder-only shallow Transformers under a realistic setting from the perspective of architectures,
initialization, and scaling under a finite width regime. The difficulty lies in how to
tackle the softmax in self-attention mechanism, the core ingredient of Transformer.
In particular, we diagnose the scaling scheme, carefully tackle the input/output
of softmax, and prove that quadratic overparameterization is sufficient for global
convergence of our shallow Transformers under commonly-used He/LeCun initialization in practice. Besides, neural tangent kernel (NTK) based analysis is also
given, which facilitates a comprehensive comparison. Our theory demonstrates
the separation on the importance of different scaling schemes and initialization.
We believe our results can pave the way for a better understanding of modern
Transformers, particularly on training dynamics.

1

Introduction

Transformers [Vaswani et al., 2017] have demonstrated unparalleled success in influential applications [Devlin et al., 2019, Brown et al., 2020, Wang et al., 2018, Dosovitskiy et al., 2021, Liu et al.,
2022b]. A fundamental theoretical topic concerns the global convergence, i.e., the training dynamics
of Transformers, which would be helpful for further analysis, e.g., in-context learning [von Oswald
et al., 2022, Akyürek et al., 2023], generalization [Li et al., 2023]. In fact, even within a simplified
Transformer framework under certain specific regimes, the global convergence guarantees still remain
an elusive challenge.
To theoretically understand this, let us first recall the exact format of the self-attention mechanism,
the core ingredient of the Transformer. Given the input X ∈ Rds ×d (ds is the number of tokens and
d is the feature dimension of each token), a self-attention mechanism is defined as:

 



⊤ ⊤
Self-attention(X) ≜ σs τ0 (XWQ⊤ ) XWK
XWV⊤ = σs τ0 XWQ⊤ WK X⊤ XWV⊤ ,
where σs is the row-wise softmax function, τ0 ∈ R+ is the scaling factor, and the learnable weights
are WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rdm ×d with the width dm . Given X, the input of softmax depends on
⊤
τ0 WQ
WK , including the scaling factor τ0 and initialization schemes for learnable parameters, and
thus determines the output of softmax and then affects the performance of Transformers in both
∗

Work done at LIONS, EPFL.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

