Horospherical Decision Boundaries for Large Margin
Classification in Hyperbolic Space

Xiran Fan
Department of Statistics
University of Florida
fanxiran@ufl.edu

Chun-Hao Yang
Institute of Statistics and Data Science
National Taiwan University
chunhaoy@ntu.edu.tw

Baba C. Vemuri
Department of CISE
University of Florida vemuri@ufl.edu

Abstract
Hyperbolic spaces have been quite popular in the recent past for representing
hierarchically organized data. Further, several classification algorithms for data
in these spaces have been proposed in the literature. These algorithms mainly
use either hyperplanes or geodesics for decision boundaries in a large margin
classifiers setting leading to a non-convex optimization problem. In this paper, we
propose a novel large margin classifier based on horospherical decision boundaries
that leads to a geodesically convex optimization problem that can be optimized
using any Riemannian gradient descent technique guaranteeing a globally optimal
solution. We present several experiments depicting the competitive performance of
our classifier in comparison to SOTA.

1

Introduction

Hyperbolic space, a non-Euclidean space with constant negative curvature, has been shown [25, 23,
29, 24] to be effective for representing hierarchically organized data. For example, authors in [25]
showed that a tree can be embedded in a hyperbolic space with arbitrarily small distortion. The
main reason for this is that a hyperbolic space can be regarded as a continuous version of trees – the
volume of the space grows exponentially as one moves away from the center in hyperbolic space.
This matches the growth pattern of the number of nodes in a tree which grows exponentially as the
depth of the tree increases. Hyperbolic space embedding has been shown to be a promising approach
for representing data with a (latent) hierarchical structure [23, 24, 29, 15].
Recently, representation of data in hyperbolic space for the fundamental tasks of unsupervised and
supervised learning has been popularized in various contexts, e.g., dimensionality reduction [10, 13],
clustering [22], large-margin classifier [12, 32, 11], regression [20], etc. Existing ’linear’ classifiers in
hyperbolic spaces are predominantly based on geodesics i.e., using geodesics as decision boundaries.
In [12], the decision boundary is chosen to be the intersection of the hyperboloid model and a
hyperplane in the ambient space, which in this case is the Minkowski space. Then, the support vector
machine (SVM) in hyperbolic space is formulated as a nonconvex optimization problem. In [32],
authors followed the same parameterization of the hyperbolic geodesic decision plane and provided
a series of algorithms to provably learn large margin classifiers in hyperbolic space. However, as
pointed out by [11], the algorithm in [32] fails to converge in practice. Authors in [11] used the
Poincaré ball model and parameterized the geodesic decision plane as a hyperplane mapped using the
exponential map from the tangent space at some reference point. They first constructed convex hulls
for each data cluster in the hyperbolic space and the reference point is then chosen to be the midpoint
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

