Hard Prompts Made Easy: Gradient-Based Discrete
Optimization for Prompt Tuning and Discovery

Yuxin Wen∗ , Neel Jain∗ , John Kirchenbauer
University of Maryland
{ywen, njain17, jkirchen}@umd.edu

Micah Goldblum
New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

Jonas Geiping, Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
{jgeiping, tomg}@umd.edu

Abstract
The strength of modern generative models lies in their ability to be controlled
through prompts. Hard prompts comprise interpretable words and tokens, and are
typically hand-crafted by humans. Soft prompts, on the other hand, consist of
continuous feature vectors. These can be discovered using powerful optimization
methods, but they cannot be easily edited, re-used across models, or plugged into a
text-based interface.
We describe an easy-to-use approach to automatically optimize hard text prompts
through efficient gradient-based optimization. Our approach can be readily applied
to text-to-image and text-only applications alike. This method allows API users
to easily generate, discover, and mix and match image concepts without prior
knowledge of how to prompt the model. Furthermore, using our method, we
can bypass token-level content filters imposed by Midjourney by optimizing
through the open-sourced text encoder. Code is available at https://github.
com/YuxinWenRick/hard-prompts-made-easy.

1

Introduction

Prompt engineering is the art of creating instructions to guide generative models. It is the key to
unlocking the power of large models for both image generation and language tasks. As it stands today,
prompt engineering methods can be coarsely divided into two camps. First, there are hard prompting
methods, which use hand-crafted sequences of interpretable tokens to elicit model behaviors. Hard
prompt discovery is a specialized alchemy, with many good prompts being discovered by trial and
error, or sheer intuition. Then there are soft prompts, which consist of continuous-valued language
embeddings that do not correspond to any human-readable tokens. Soft prompt discovery is a
mathematical science; gradient-based optimizers and large curated datasets are used to generate
highly performant prompts for specialized tasks.
Despite the difficulty of engineering hard prompts, they have their advantages. Hard prompts and the
tricks they exploit can be mixed, matched, and mutated to perform a range of different tasks, while
soft prompts are highly specialized. Hard prompts can be edited by hand to change their behavior.
Hard prompts are portable; they can be discovered using one model and then deployed on another.
This portability is impossible with soft prompts due to differences in embedding dimension and
representation space between models. Finally, hard prompts can be used when only API access to a
model is available and it is not possible to control the embeddings of inputs.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

