Energy-Based Sliced Wasserstein Distance

Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
khainb@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
The sliced Wasserstein (SW) distance has been widely recognized as a statistically
effective and computationally efficient metric between two probability measures.
A key component of the SW distance is the slicing distribution. There are two
existing approaches for choosing this distribution. The first approach is using a
fixed prior distribution. The second approach is optimizing for the best distribution which belongs to a parametric family of distributions and can maximize
the expected distance. However, both approaches have their limitations. A fixed
prior distribution is non-informative in terms of highlighting projecting directions
that can discriminate two general probability measures. Doing optimization for
the best distribution is often expensive and unstable. Moreover, designing the
parametric family of the candidate distribution could be easily misspecified. To
address the issues, we propose to design the slicing distribution as an energy-based
distribution that is parameter-free and has the density proportional to an energy
function of the projected one-dimensional Wasserstein distance. We then derive a
novel sliced Wasserstein variant, energy-based sliced Waserstein (EBSW) distance,
and investigate its topological, statistical, and computational properties via importance sampling, sampling importance resampling, and Markov Chain methods.
Finally, we conduct experiments on point-cloud gradient flow, color transfer, and
point-cloud reconstruction to show the favorable performance of the EBSW1 .

1

Introduction

The sliced Wasserstein [2] (SW) distance is a sliced probability metric that is derived from the
Wasserstein distance [5, 36] as the base metric. Utilizing the closed-form solution of optimal transport
on one-dimension [36], the SW distance can be computed very efficiently at the time complexity of
O(n log n) and the space complexity of O(n) when dealing with two probability measures that have
at most n supports. Moreover, the sample complexity of the SW is only O(n−1/2 ) [27, 34] which
indicates that it does not suffer from the curse of dimensionality in statistical inference. Therefore, the
SW distance has been applied to various domains of applications including point-cloud applications
e.g., reconstruction, registration, generation, and upsampling [31, 41], generative models [8], domain
adaptation [22], clustering [20], gradient flows [24, 1], approximate Bayesian computation [26],
variational inference [47], and many other tasks.
The SW distance can be defined as the expectation of the one-dimensional Wasserstein distance
between two projected probability measures. The randomness comes from a random projecting
direction which is used to project two original probability measures to one dimension. The probability
distribution of the random projecting direction is referred to as the slicing distribution. Therefore,
a central task that decides the effectiveness of the SW in downstream applications is designing
1

Code for this paper is published at https://github.com/khainb/EBSW.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

