Deep Contract Design via Discontinuous Networks

Tonghan Wang
Harvard University
twang1@g.harvard.edu

Paul Dütting
Google Switzerland
duetting@google.com

Inbal Talgam-Cohen
Israel Institute of Technology
italgam@cs.technion.ac.il

Dmitry Ivanov
Israel Institute of Technology
divanov@campus.technion.ac.il
David C. Parkes
Harvard University∗
parkes@eecs.harvard.edu

Abstract
Contract design involves a principal who establishes contractual agreements about
payments for outcomes that arise from the actions of an agent. In this paper, we
initiate the study of deep learning for the automated design of optimal contracts. We
introduce a novel representation: the Discontinuous ReLU (DeLU) network, which
models the principal’s utility as a discontinuous piecewise affine function of the
design of a contract where each piece corresponds to the agent taking a particular
action. DeLU networks implicitly learn closed-form expressions for the incentive
compatibility constraints of the agent and the utility maximization objective of the
principal, and support parallel inference on each piece through linear programming
or interior-point methods that solve for optimal contracts. We provide empirical
results that demonstrate success in approximating the principal’s utility function
with a small number of training samples and scaling to find approximately optimal
contracts on problems with a large number of actions and outcomes.

1

Introduction

Contract theory studies the setting where a principal seeks to design a contract for rewarding an agent
on the basis of the uncertain outcomes caused by the agent’s private actions [8, 45]. Typical examples
include a landlord who enters into a summer rental with a contract that includes penalties in the case
of damage; a homeowner who engages a firm to complete a kitchen renovation with a contract that
conditions payments on timely completion or functioning appliances; or an individual who employs a
freelancer to do some design work with a contract that includes bonuses for completing the job.
A contract specifies payments to the agent, conditioned on outcomes. The principal is self-interested,
with a value for each outcome and a cost for making payments. The agent is also self-interested, and
responds to a contract by choosing an action that maximizes its expected utility (expected payment
minus the cost of an action). The problem is to find a contract that maximizes the principal’s utility
(expected value minus expected payment), given that the agent will best respond to the contract. In
economics, this is referred to as a problem of moral hazard, in that the agent is willing to privately
act in its best interest given the contract (the “hazard" is that the behavior of the agent may be to the
detriment of the principal).
The importance of contract design is evidenced by the 2016 Nobel Prize awarded to O. Hart and
B. Holmström [51] and its broad application to real-world problems. Contract design is one of the
three fundamental problems in the realm of economics involving asymmetric information and incentives, along with mechanism design [9] and signalling (Bayesian persuasion) [41]. However, while
* Also DeepMind, London UK

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

