StateMask: Explaining Deep Reinforcement Learning
through State Mask

Zelei Cheng∗
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
zelei.cheng@northwestern.edu
Jiahao Yu∗
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
jiahao.yu@northwestern.edu

Xian Wu∗
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
xianwu2024@u.northwestern.edu

Wenhai Sun
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
sun841@purdue.edu

Wenbo Guo
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
henrygwb@purdue.edu

Xinyu Xing
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
xinyu.xing@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Despite the promising performance of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents in
many challenging scenarios, the black-box nature of these agents greatly limits their
applications in critical domains. Prior research has proposed several explanation
techniques to understand the deep learning-based policies in RL. Most existing
methods explain why an agent takes individual actions rather than pinpointing
the critical steps to its final reward. To fill this gap, we propose StateMask, a
novel method to identify the states most critical to the agent’s final reward. The
high-level idea of StateMask is to learn a mask net that blinds a target agent and
forces it to take random actions at some steps without compromising the agent’s
performance. Through careful design, we can theoretically ensure that the masked
agent performs similarly to the original agent. We evaluate StateMask in various
popular RL environments and show its superiority over existing explainers in
explanation fidelity. We also show that StateMask has better utilities, such as
launching adversarial attacks and patching policy errors.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning has shown promising performance in a variety of challenging scenarios,
such as allowing a robot to learn a control policy directly from the camera or sensor inputs [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
or training an agent to master Go games [6, 7, 8]. However, DRL policies typically lack explainability,
which is intrinsically difficult for humans to comprehend and establish trust. To broaden the adoption
of DRL-based applications in critical fields, there is a pressing need to increase the transparency of
DRL agents through explanation.
Prior research has proposed various methods to derive an explanation for DRL. For example, researchers utilized the saliency map (e.g., [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]) and model approximation methods
∗

Equal Contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

