Inference-Time Intervention:
Eliciting Truthful Answers from a Language Model

Kenneth Li∗ Oam Patel∗

Fernanda Viégas Hanspeter Pfister
Harvard University

Martin Wattenberg

Abstract
We introduce Inference-Time Intervention (ITI), a technique designed to enhance
the “truthfulness” of large language models (LLMs). ITI operates by shifting model
activations during inference, following a set of directions across a limited number of attention heads. This intervention significantly improves the performance
of LLaMA models on the TruthfulQA benchmark. On an instruction-finetuned
LLaMA called Alpaca, ITI improves its truthfulness from 32.5% to 65.1%. We
identify a trade-off between truthfulness and helpfulness and demonstrate how to
balance it by tuning the intervention strength. ITI is minimally invasive and computationally inexpensive. Moreover, the technique is data efficient: while approaches
like RLHF require extensive annotations, ITI locates truthful directions using only
few hundred examples. Our findings suggest that LLMs may have an internal representation of the likelihood of something being true, even as they produce falsehoods
on the surface. Code: https://github.com/likenneth/honest_llama.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) are capable of
generating text that seems correct—but often
only at first glance. Close inspection sometimes
reveals a range of inaccuracies, from minor errors to flat-out “hallucinations” (Shuster et al.,
2021) (Figure 1). Such mistakes are a clear issue
in contexts where correctness counts.
Enhancing the correctness of LLMs is a multifaceted challenge. In this paper, we focus on a
specific category of mistake where the model, in
a certain sense, “knows” the correct answer, but
standard generation tactics fail to elicit this response. Users of LLM-based systems, for example, have discovered that they can give a wrong
answer in one context while yielding the correct
answer in a different context (Wei et al., 2022). Figure 1: Answers to the same question from
Indeed, evidence from several directions sug- LLaMA without (red) and with (blue) inferencegests that LLMs sometimes “know” more than time intervention. Gold standard answers are:
they “say”. Wang et al. (2021) construct high- “Scholars thought the Earth was round” and “I have
quality knowledge graphs from LLMs without no comment,” respectively. The first question rehuman supervision. Kadavath et al. (2022) find flects a common misconception; the second is an
language models can generate and then self- example of hallucination.
evaluate their own answers with high accuracy.
∗

Correspondence to Kenneth Li <ke_li@g.harvard.edu>. First two authors made equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

