Mobilizing Personalized Federated Learning in
Infrastructure-Less and Heterogeneous Environments
via Random Walk Stochastic ADMM
Ziba Parsons
CIS Department
University of Michigan
Dearborn, MI
zibapars@umich.edu

Fei Dou
School of Computing
University of Georgia
Athens, GA
fei.dou@uga.edu

Zheng Song
CIS Department
University of Michigan
Dearborn, MI
zhesong@umich.edu

Houyi Du
CIS Department
University of Michigan
Dearborn, MI
houyidu@umich.edu

Jin Lu
School of Computing
University of Georgia
Athens, GA
jin.lu@uga.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the challenges of implementing Federated Learning (FL) in
practical scenarios featuring isolated nodes with data heterogeneity, which can only
be connected to the server through wireless links in an infrastructure-less environment. To overcome these challenges, we propose a novel mobilizing personalized
FL approach, which aims to facilitate mobility and resilience. Specifically, we
develop a novel optimization algorithm called Random Walk Stochastic Alternating
Direction Method of Multipliers (RWSADMM). RWSADMM capitalizes on the
server’s random movement toward clients and formulates local proximity among
their adjacent clients based on hard inequality constraints rather than requiring
consensus updates or introducing bias via regularization methods. To mitigate
the computational burden on the clients, an efficient stochastic solver of the approximated optimization problem is designed in RWSADMM, which provably
converges to the stationary point almost surely in expectation. Our theoretical
and empirical results demonstrate the provable fast convergence and substantial
accuracy improvements achieved by RWSADMM compared to baseline methods,
along with its benefits of reduced communication costs and enhanced scalability.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) [1, 2, 3, 4] is a distributed machine learning paradigm that enables clients
to learn a shared model without sharing their private data. Unlike traditional machine learning
approaches that rely on central servers for model training, FL allows clients to collaborate and train
the model in a distributed manner, overcoming privacy issues related to passing data to a central
server. Despite its advancements, real-world applications in environments with insufficient network
support continue to face challenges. a) Maintaining consistent and reliable connections between
the central server and clients becomes exceedingly challenging in environments lacking network
infrastructures, e.g., natural disasters or military warzones. While intermittent connectivity may be
available through satellite networks, the instability and limited capacity of such networks prevent
the transmission of large data volumes, making it difficult to collect model updates from soldiers or
first responders. b) The non-IID (non-independent and identically distributed) nature of clients’ data,
characterized by heterogeneity across the network, can hinder the generalization of the global model
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023), New Orleans, USA.

