Generative Modelling of Stochastic Actions with
Arbitrary Constraints in Reinforcement Learning

Chen Changyu1 , Ramesha Karunasena1 , Thanh Hong Nguyen2 ,
Arunesh Sinha3 , Pradeep Varakantham1
Singapore Management University1 ,University of Oregon2 , Rutgers University3
cychen.2020@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, rameshak@smu.edu.sg,
thanhhng@cs.uoregon.edu, arunesh.sinha@rutgers.edu, pradeepv@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Many problems in Reinforcement Learning (RL) seek an optimal policy with large
discrete multidimensional yet unordered action spaces; these include problems
in randomized allocation of resources such as placements of multiple security
resources and emergency response units, etc. A challenge in this setting is that
the underlying action space is categorical (discrete and unordered) and large, for
which existing RL methods do not perform well. Moreover, these problems require
validity of the realized action (allocation); this validity constraint is often difficult
to express compactly in a closed mathematical form. The allocation nature of the
problem also prefers stochastic optimal policies, if one exists. In this work, we
address these challenges by (1) applying a (state) conditional normalizing flow
to compactly represent the stochastic policy — the compactness arises due to the
network only producing one sampled action and the corresponding log probability
of the action, which is then used by an actor-critic method; and (2) employing
an invalid action rejection method (via a valid action oracle) to update the base
policy. The action rejection is enabled by a modified policy gradient that we derive.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments to show the scalability of our approach
compared to prior methods and the ability to enforce arbitrary state-conditional
constraints on the support of the distribution of actions in any state1 .

1

Introduction

Adaptive resource allocation problems with multiple resource types (e.g., fire trucks, ambulances,
police vehicles) are ubiquitous in the real world [13, 23, 32]. One example is allocating security
resources and emergency response vehicles to different areas depending on incidents [23]. There are
many other similar problems in aggregation systems for mobility/transportation, logistics etc [13]. In
this paper, we are interested in addressing the multiple difficult challenges present in such adaptive
resource allocation problems: (a) Combinatorial action space, as the number of resource allocations
is combinatorial; (b) Categorical action space, as there is no ordering of resource allocations with
respect to the overall objective (as increasing or decreasing different resource types at different
locations can have different impact on overall objective) ; (c) Constraints on feasible allocations and
switching between allocations; and (d) Finally, uncertainty in demand for resources.
Existing research in RL for constrained action spaces has considered resource allocation problems
with a single type of resource, thereby introducing order in action space [1]. In such ordered action
spaces, actions can be converted into continuous space and this allows for the usage of continuous
action RL methods (e.g., DDPG). In problems of interest in this paper, we are interested in problems
1

Our implementation is available at https://github.com/cameron-chen/flow-iar.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

