What can a Single Attention Layer Learn?
A Study Through the Random Features Lens

Hengyu Fu∗
Peking University
2100010881@stu.pku.edu.cn

Tianyu Guo∗
UC Berkeley
tianyu_guo@berkeley.edu

Yu Bai
Salesforce AI Research
yu.bai@salesforce.com

Song Mei
UC Berkeley
songmei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Attention layers—which map a sequence of inputs to a sequence of outputs—are
core building blocks of the Transformer architecture which has achieved significant
breakthroughs in modern artificial intelligence. This paper presents a rigorous
theoretical study on the learning and generalization of a single multi-head attention
layer, with activation function replaced by ReLU, which have recently shown
comparable performance with the original Softmax activation. We consider the
random feature setting where the attention layer has a large number of heads, with
randomly sampled frozen query and key matrices, and trainable value matrices.
We show that such a random-feature attention layer can express a broad class
of target functions that are permutation invariant to the key vectors. We further
provide quantitative excess risk bounds for learning these target functions from
finite samples, using random feature attention with finitely many heads.
Our results feature several implications unique to the attention structure compared
with existing random features theory for neural networks, such as (1) Advantages
over standard fully connected random-feature models; (2) Concrete and natural
classes of functions that can be learned efficiently by a random-feature attention
layer. Additionally, we show that the sampling distribution of the query-key
matrix (the product of the query and key matrix) matters—A biased Gaussian
random matrix results in better sample complexities over the standard zero-mean
counterpart for learning certain natural target functions.Experiments on simulated
data corroborate our theoretical findings and further illustrate the interplay between
the sample size and the complexity of the target function.

1

Introduction

The transformer architecture [86] has achieved remarkable recent successes in many areas of artificial
intelligence (AI) such as vision, language, speech, graph processing, reinforcement learning, and
more recently general AI capabilities [29–31, 19, 73, 101, 22, 77, 65, 20]. A central building block
in transformers is the attention layers [10]—sequence-to-sequence mappings that allow each token
within the input sequence to “attend to” other tokens that are most relevant to the present token, and
produce outputs based on those tokens. Attention layers implement this mechanism in a compact
way that allows them to handle sequences of arbitrary length using a fixed set of parameters, a crucial
reason behind their success in handling long input sequences.
∗

Equal contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

