Contrastive Training of Complex-Valued Autoencoders
for Object Discovery

Aleksandar Stanić1∗ Anand Gopalakrishnan1∗ Kazuki Irie2† Jürgen Schmidhuber1,3
1
The Swiss AI Lab, IDSIA, USI & SUPSI, Lugano, Switzerland
2
Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA
3
AI Initiative, KAUST, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
{aleksandar, anand, juergen}@idsia.ch kirie@fas.harvard.edu

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art object-centric models use slots and attention-based routing
for binding. However, this class of models has several conceptual limitations: the
number of slots is hardwired; all slots have equal capacity; training has high computational cost; there are no object-level relational factors within slots. Synchronybased models in principle can address these limitations by using complex-valued
activations which store binding information in their phase components. However,
working examples of such synchrony-based models have been developed only very
recently, and are still limited to toy grayscale datasets and simultaneous storage of
less than three objects in practice. Here we introduce architectural modifications
and a novel contrastive learning method that greatly improve the state-of-the-art
synchrony-based model. For the first time, we obtain a class of synchrony-based
models capable of discovering objects in an unsupervised manner in multi-object
color datasets and simultaneously representing more than three objects.1

1

Introduction

The visual binding problem [1, 2] is of great importance to human perception [3] and cognition
[4–6]. It is fundamental to our visual capabilities to integrate several features together such as color,
shape, texture, etc., into a unified whole [7]. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in
deep learning models [8–19] capable of grouping visual inputs into a set of ‘meaningful’ entities
in a fully unsupervised fashion (often called object-centric learning). Such compositional objectcentric representations facilitate relational reasoning and generalization, thereby leading to better
performance on downstream tasks such as visual question-answering [20, 21], video game playing
[22–26], and robotics [27–29], compared to other monolithic representations of the visual input.
The current mainstream approach to implement such object binding mechanisms in artificial neural
networks is to maintain a set of separate activation vectors (so-called slots) [15]. Various segregation
mechanisms [30] are then used to route requisite information from the inputs to infer each slot in
a iterative fashion. Such slot-based approaches have several conceptual limitations. First, the binding
information (i.e., addresses) about object instances are maintained only by the constant number of
slots—a hard-wired component which cannot be adapted through learning. This restricts the ability
of slot-based models to flexibly represent varying number of objects with variable precision without
tuning the slot size, number of slots, number of iterations, etc. Second, the inductive bias used by the
grouping module strongly enforces independence among all pairs of slots. This restricts individual
∗

Equal contribution.
Work done at IDSIA.
1
Official code repository: https://github.com/agopal42/ctcae

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

