Marginal Density Ratio for Off-Policy Evaluation in
Contextual Bandits
Muhammad Faaiz Taufiq∗
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Arnaud Doucet
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Rob Cornish
Department of Statistics
University of Oxford

Jean-François Ton
ByteDance Research
ByteDance

Abstract
Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE) in contextual bandits is crucial for assessing new
policies using existing data without costly experimentation. However, current OPE
methods, such as Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW) and Doubly Robust (DR)
estimators, suffer from high variance, particularly in cases of low overlap between
target and behavior policies or large action and context spaces. In this paper, we
introduce a new OPE estimator for contextual bandits, the Marginal Ratio (MR)
estimator, which focuses on the shift in the marginal distribution of outcomes
Y instead of the policies themselves. Through rigorous theoretical analysis, we
demonstrate the benefits of the MR estimator compared to conventional methods
like IPW and DR in terms of variance reduction. Additionally, we establish a
connection between the MR estimator and the state-of-the-art Marginalized Inverse
Propensity Score (MIPS) estimator, proving that MR achieves lower variance
among a generalized family of MIPS estimators. We further illustrate the utility
of the MR estimator in causal inference settings, where it exhibits enhanced
performance in estimating Average Treatment Effects (ATE). Our experiments on
synthetic and real-world datasets corroborate our theoretical findings and highlight
the practical advantages of the MR estimator in OPE for contextual bandits.

1

Introduction

In contextual bandits, the objective is to select an action A, guided by contextual information X, to
maximize the resulting outcome Y . This paradigm is prevalent in many real-world applications such
as healthcare, personalized recommendation systems, or online advertising [1–3]. The objective is
to perform actions, such as prescribing medication or recommending items, which lead to desired
outcomes like improved patient health or higher click-through rates. Nonetheless, updating the
policy presents challenges, as naïvely implementing a new, untested policy may raise ethical or
financial concerns. For instance, prescribing a drug based on a new policy poses risks, as it may
result in unexpected side effects. As a result, recent research [4–11] has concentrated on evaluating
the performance of new policies (target policy) using only existing data that was generated using the
current policy (behaviour policy). This problem is known as Off-Policy Evaluation (OPE).
Current OPE methods in contextual bandits, such as the Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW) [12]
and Doubly Robust (DR) [13] estimators primarily account for the policy shift by re-weighting the
∗
Part of the work was done during an internship at ByteDance Research.
Correspondence to muhammad.taufiq@stats.ox.ac.uk and jeanfrancois@bytedance.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

