Compact Neural Volumetric Video Representations
with Dynamic Codebooks

Haoyu Guo1 Sida Peng1† Yunzhi Yan1 Linzhan Mou1
Yujun Shen2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1
1

Zhejiang University

2

Ant Group

Abstract
This paper addresses the challenge of representing high-fidelity volumetric videos
with low storage cost. Some recent feature grid-based methods have shown superior
performance of fast learning implicit neural representations from input 2D images.
However, such explicit representations easily lead to large model sizes when
modeling dynamic scenes. To solve this problem, our key idea is reducing the
spatial and temporal redundancy of feature grids, which intrinsically exist due to
the self-similarity of scenes. To this end, we propose a novel neural representation,
named dynamic codebook, which first merges similar features for the model
compression and then compensates for the potential decline in rendering quality
by a set of dynamic codes. Experiments on the NHR and DyNeRF datasets
demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art rendering quality,
while being able to achieve more storage efficiency. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zju3dv/compact_vv.

1

Introduction

Volumetric videos record the content of dynamic 3D scenes and allow users to watch captured scenes
from arbitrary viewpoints, which has a wide range of applications, such as virtual reality, augmented
reality, telepresence, and so on. Traditional methods typically represent volumetric videos as a
sequence of textured meshes, which are reconstructed by the multi-view stereo [36, 37, 12, 15] or
depth fusion [10, 27]. Such techniques require sophisticated hardware, e.g., multi-view RGB-D
sensors, to achieve high reconstruction accuracy, which is expensive and limits their application
scenarios.
Recently, implicit neural representations [24, 1, 49, 2] have emerged as a promising strategy to
recover 3D scenes from only 2D images. As a representative work, neural radiance field (NeRF) [24]
employs an MLP network to predict the density and color for any 3D point, and effectively learns the
model parameters from 2D images through the volumetric rendering technique. DyNeRF [17] extends
NeRF to dynamic scenes by introducing time-varying latent codes as an additional input of the MLP
network, thereby enabling the model to encode the per-frame content of the scene. Although these
methods achieve impressive rendering quality, they are extremely slow to train, especially in dynamic
scenes. For example, DyNeRF requires over 1000 GPU hours to learn a 10-second volumetric video.
To overcome this problem, some methods exploit explicit representations, such as feature volumes
[8, 50, 20] or feature planes [35, 4, 38], to accelerate the training process. They typically store
learnable feature vectors at explicit structures and use the interpolation technique to assign a feature
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

