How to Scale Your EMA
Dan Busbridge∗

Jason Ramapuram∗

Eeshan Gunesh Dhekane

Pierre Ablin∗
Xavier Suau

Tatiana Likhomanenko∗
Russ Webb

Apple
{dbusbridge, jramapuram, p_ablin, antares,
eeshan, xsuaucuadros, rwebb}@apple.com

Abstract
Preserving training dynamics across batch sizes is an important tool for practical
machine learning as it enables the trade-off between batch size and wall-clock
time. This trade-off is typically enabled by a scaling rule, for example, in stochastic gradient descent, one should scale the learning rate linearly with the batch size.
Another important machine learning tool is the model EMA, a functional copy of a
target model, whose parameters move towards those of its target model according
to an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) at a rate parameterized by a momentum
hyperparameter. This model EMA can improve the robustness and generalization
of supervised learning, stabilize pseudo-labeling, and provide a learning signal for
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL). Prior works have not considered the optimization
of the model EMA when performing scaling, leading to different training dynamics across batch sizes and lower model performance. In this work, we provide a
scaling rule for optimization in the presence of a model EMA and demonstrate
the rule’s validity across a range of architectures, optimizers, and data modalities. We also show the rule’s validity where the model EMA contributes to the
optimization of the target model, enabling us to train EMA-based pseudo-labeling
and SSL methods at small and large batch sizes. For SSL, we enable training of
BYOL up to batch size 24,576 without sacrificing performance, a 6× wall-clock
time reduction under idealized hardware settings.

1

Introduction

With data and models becoming progressively larger (Chen et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2022), the ability to reduce training wall–clock time is a requirement for practical Machine Learning (ML) at scale. Optimizer scaling rules allow us to find
faster learning procedures that produce similar results. For example, the linear scaling rule for
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) (Krizhevsky, 2014; Goyal et al., 2017), states that the learning
rate should be scaled linearly with the batch size. This optimizer scaling works both ways. Access to
larger computational resources means one can train equivalent models in reduced wall-clock time.
Alternatively, with access to limited computational resources, larger distributed computations can
be replicated at increased wall-clock time.
∗ Primary contributor. For a detailed breakdown of author contributions see Appendix J.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

