What can Large Language Models do in chemistry? A
comprehensive benchmark on eight tasks

Taicheng Guo∗, Kehan Guo∗, Bozhao Nan, Zhenwen Liang, Zhichun Guo,
Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, Xiangliang Zhang†
University of Notre Dame
{tguo2, kguo2, bnan, zliang6, zguo5, nchawla, owiest, xzhang33}@nd.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) with strong abilities in natural language processing tasks have emerged and have been applied in various kinds of areas such as
science, finance and software engineering. However, the capability of LLMs to
advance the field of chemistry remains unclear. In this paper, rather than pursuing
state-of-the-art performance, we aim to evaluate capabilities of LLMs in a wide
range of tasks across the chemistry domain. We identify three key chemistryrelated capabilities including understanding, reasoning and explaining to explore
in LLMs and establish a benchmark containing eight chemistry tasks. Our analysis draws on widely recognized datasets facilitating a broad exploration of the
capacities of LLMs within the context of practical chemistry. Five LLMs (GPT-4,
GPT-3.5, Davinci-003, Llama and Galactica) are evaluated for each chemistry
task in zero-shot and few-shot in-context learning settings with carefully selected
demonstration examples and specially crafted prompts. Our investigation found
that GPT-4 outperformed other models and LLMs exhibit different competitive
levels in eight chemistry tasks. In addition to the key findings from the comprehensive benchmark analysis, our work provides insights into the limitation of current
LLMs and the impact of in-context learning settings on LLMs’ performance across
various chemistry tasks. The code and datasets used in this study are available at
https://github.com/ChemFoundationModels/ChemLLMBench.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have recently demonstrated impressive reasoning abilities across
a wide array of tasks. These tasks are not limited to natural language processing, but also extend
to various language-related applications within scientific domains [56, 30, 24, 10]. Much of the
research on the capacity of LLMs in science has been focused on tasks such as answering medical
[30] and scientific questions [24, 25]. However, the exploration of their application to practical tasks
in the field of chemistry remains underinvestigated. Although some studies [6, 27, 63, 48] have been
conducted, they tend to focus on specific case studies rather than a comprehensive or systematic
evaluation. The exploration of LLMs’ capabilities within the field of chemistry has the potential to
revolutionize this domain and expedite research and development activities [62]. Thus, the question,
“What can LLMs do in chemistry?” is a compelling topic of inquiry for both AI researchers and
chemists. Nevertheless, there exist two challenges that hinder the answer to the topic and the further
development of LLMs in chemistry:
∗
Both authors contribute equally to the work, under the support of NSF Center for Computer Assisted
Synthesis (C-CAS). https://ccas.nd.edu.
†
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

