How do Minimum-Norm Shallow Denoisers Look in
Function Space?

Chen Zeno
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion

Greg Ongie
Department Mathematical and Statistical Sciences
Marquette University

Yaniv Blumenfeld, Nir Weinberger, Daniel Soudry
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technion
{chenzeno,yanivbl}@campus.technion.ac.il, gregory.ongie@marquette.edu
nirwein@technion.ac.il, daniel.soudry@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural network (NN) denoisers are an essential building block in many common
tasks, ranging from image reconstruction to image generation. However, the
success of these models is not well understood from a theoretical perspective. In
this paper, we aim to characterize the functions realized by shallow ReLU NN
denoisers — in the common theoretical setting of interpolation (i.e., zero training
loss) with a minimal representation cost (i.e., minimal ℓ2 norm weights). First, for
univariate data, we derive a closed form for the NN denoiser function, find it is
contractive toward the clean data points, and prove it generalizes better than the
empirical MMSE estimator at a low noise level. Next, for multivariate data, we find
the NN denoiser functions in a closed form under various geometric assumptions on
the training data: data contained in a low-dimensional subspace, data contained in a
union of one-sided rays, or several types of simplexes. These functions decompose
into a sum of simple rank-one piecewise linear interpolations aligned with edges
and/or faces connecting training samples. We empirically verify this alignment
phenomenon on synthetic data and real images.

1

Introduction

The ability to reconstruct an image from a noisy observation has been studied extensively in the last
decades, as it is useful for many practical applications (e.g., Hasinoff et al. [2010]). In recent years,
Neural Network (NN) denoisers commonly replace classical expert-based approaches as they achieve
substantially better results than the classical approaches (e.g., Zhang et al. [2017]). Beyond this
natural usage, NN denoisers also serve as essential building blocks in a variety of common computer
vision tasks, such as solving inverse problems [Zhang et al., 2021] and image generation [Song
and Ermon, 2019, Ho et al., 2020]. To better understand the role of NN denoisers in such complex
applications, we first wish to theoretically understand the type of solutions they converge to.
In practice, when training denoisers, we sample multiple noisy samples for each clean image and
minimize the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss for recovering the clean image. Since we sample
numerous noisy samples per clean sample, the number of training samples is typically larger than
the number of parameters in the network. Interestingly, even in such an under-parameterized regime,
the loss has multiple global minima corresponding to distinct denoiser functions which achieve zero
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

