Information Theoretic Lower Bounds for Information
Theoretic Upper Bounds

Roi Livni
Department Electrical Engineering
Tel Aviv University
rlivni@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We examine the relationship between the mutual information between the output
model and the empirical sample and the generalization of the algorithm in the
context of stochastic convex optimization. Despite increasing interest in informationtheoretic generalization bounds, it is uncertain if these bounds can provide insight
into the exceptional performance of various learning algorithms. Our study of
stochastic convex optimization reveals that, for true risk minimization, dimensiondependent mutual information is necessary. This indicates that existing informationtheoretic generalization bounds fall short in capturing the generalization capabilities
of algorithms like SGD and regularized ERM, which have dimension-independent
sample complexity.

1

Introduction

One of the crucial challenges facing contemporary generalization theory is to understand and explain
the behavior of overparameterized models. These models have a large number of parameters compared
to the available training examples. But nonetheless, they tend to perform well on unseen test data.
The significance of this issue has become more pronounced in recent years, as it has become evident
that many state-of-the-art learning algorithms are highly overparameterized Neyshabur et al. [2014],
Zhang et al. [2021]. The classical generalization bounds, which are well designed to describe the
learning behavior of underparameterized models, seem to fail to explain these algorithms.
Understanding the success of overparameterized models seems challenging. Partly, due to the
counter-intuitive nature of the process. Common wisdom suggests that, inorder to learn, one has
to have certain good bias of the problem at hand, and that in learning we need to restrict ourselves
to a class of models that cannot overfit the data. This intuition has been justified by classical
learning models such as PAC learningValiant [1984] as well as regression Alon et al. [1997]. In
these classical models, it can be even demonstrated Vapnik and Chervonenkis [2015], Blumer et al.
[1989] that learning requires more examples than the capacity of the class of model to be learnt, and
that avoiding interpolation is necessary for generalization. These results, though, are obtained in
distribution-independent setups where one assumes worst-cast distributions over the data.
For this reason, researchers have been searching for new, refined models, as well as improved
generalization bounds that incorporate distributional as well as algorithmic assumptions. A promising
approach, in this direction, tries to connect the generalization performance to the amount of information
the learner holds regarding the data Russo and Zou [2019], Xu and Raginsky [2017], Bassily et al.
[2018]. For example, Xu and Raginsky [2017] demonstrated an upper bound on the generalization
gap which informally states:

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

