FedGCN: Convergence-Communication Tradeoffs in
Federated Training of Graph Convolutional Networks

Yuhang Yao
Carnegie Mellon University
yuhangya@andrew.cmu.edu

Weizhao Jin
University of Southern California
weizhaoj@usc.edu

Srivatsan Ravi
University of Southern California
sravi@isi.edu

Carlee Joe-Wong
Carnegie Mellon University
cjoewong@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Methods for training models on graphs distributed across multiple clients have
recently grown in popularity, due to the size of these graphs as well as regulations
on keeping data where it is generated. However, the cross-client edges naturally
exist among clients. Thus, distributed methods for training a model on a single
graph incur either significant communication overhead between clients or a loss of
available information to the training. We introduce the Federated Graph Convolutional Network (FedGCN) algorithm, which uses federated learning to train GCN
models for semi-supervised node classification with fast convergence and little
communication. Compared to prior methods that require extra communication
among clients at each training round, FedGCN clients only communicate with
the central server in one pre-training step, greatly reducing communication costs
and allowing the use of homomorphic encryption to further enhance privacy. We
theoretically analyze the tradeoff between FedGCN’s convergence rate and communication cost under different data distributions. Experimental results show that our
FedGCN algorithm achieves better model accuracy with 51.7% faster convergence
on average and at least 100× less communication compared to prior work1 .

1

Introduction

Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have been widely used for applications ranging from fake
news detection in social networks to anomaly detection in sensor networks (Benamira et al., 2019;
Zhang et al., 2020). This data, however, can be too large to store on a single server, e.g., records of
billions of users’ website visits. Strict data protection regulations such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) in Europe and Payment Aggregators and Payment Gateways (PAPG) in India
also require that private data only be stored in local clients. In non-graph settings, federated learning
has recently shown promise for training models on data that is kept at multiple clients (Zhao et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2021). Some papers have proposed federated training of GCNs (He et al., 2021a;
Zhang et al., 2021). Typically, these consider a framework in which each client has access to a subset
of a large graph, and clients iteratively compute local updates to a semi-supervised model on their
local subgraphs, which are occasionally aggregated at a central server. Figure 1(left) illustrates the
federated node classification task of predicting unknown labels of local nodes in each client.
1

Code in https://github.com/yh-yao/FedGCN

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

