Fed-GraB: Federated Long-tailed Learning with
Self-Adjusting Gradient Balancer
∗

∗

Zikai Xiao1 ,
Zihan Chen2
Songshang Liu1
Hualiang Wang3
Yang Feng4
†
5
6
1
Jin Hao
Joey Tianyi Zhou
Jian Wu
Howard Hao Yang1
†
Zuozhu Liu1
1
Zhejiang University,
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design,
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
4
Angelalign Technology Inc,
5
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University,
6
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR , Singapore
zikai@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Data privacy and long-tailed distribution are the norms rather than the exceptions
in many real-world tasks. This paper investigates a federated long-tailed learning
(Fed-LT) task in which each client holds a locally heterogeneous dataset; if the
datasets can be globally aggregated, they jointly exhibit a long-tailed distribution.
Under such a setting, existing federated optimization and/or centralized longtailed learning methods hardly apply due to challenges in (a) characterizing the
global long-tailed distribution under privacy constraints and (b) adjusting the local
learning strategy to cope with the head-tail imbalance. In response, we propose
a method termed Fed-GraB, comprised of a Self-adjusting Gradient Balancer
(SGB) module that re-weights clients’ gradients in a closed-loop manner based
on the feedback of global long-tailed prior derived from a Direct Prior Analyzer
(DPA) module. Using Fed-GraB, clients can effectively alleviate the distribution
drift caused by data heterogeneity during the model training process and obtain a
global model with better performance on the minority classes while maintaining
the performance of the majority classes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
Fed-GraB achieves state-of-the-art performance on representative datasets such
as CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT, ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/ZackZikaiXiao/FedGraB.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) is an approach for massively distributed clients to train a global machine
learning model collaboratively without exposing their private data, which has garnered ever-increasing
attention in academia and industry alike [1, 2]. Unlike conventional machine learning methods, FL
brings the learning objective directly onto the end-user devices for local training, where only the
intermediate parameters (e.g., gradients) need to be sent to a server for model aggregation and update.
This approach not only substantially reduces the communication overheads but, more importantly,
facilitates the clients in obtaining a generic global model without sharing their private data, thereby
contributing to the development of trustworthy intelligent systems [3]. Despite its great potential,
∗
†

Co-first author.
Co-Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

