Towards a Comprehensive Benchmark for High-Level
Synthesis Targeted to FPGAs

Yunsheng Bai, Atefeh Sohrabizadeh, Zongyue Qin, Ziniu Hu, Yizhou Sun, Jason Cong
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
{yba,atefehsz,qinzongyue,bull,yzsun,cong}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
High-level synthesis (HLS) aims to raise the abstraction layer in hardware design,
enabling the design of domain-specific accelerators (DSAs) targeted for fieldprogrammable gate arrays (FPGAs) using C/C++ instead of hardware description
languages (HDLs). Compiler directives in the form of pragmas play a crucial
role in modifying the microarchitecture within the HLS framework. However,
the number of possible microarchitectures grows exponentially with the number
of pragmas. Moreover, the evaluation of each candidate design using the HLS
tool consumes significant time, ranging from minutes to hours, leading to a slow
optimization process. To accelerate this process, machine learning models have
been used to predict design quality in milliseconds. However, existing open-source
datasets for training such models are limited in terms of design complexity and
available optimizations. In this paper, we present HLS YN, a new benchmark
that addresses these limitations. It contains more complex programs with a wider
range of optimization pragmas, making it a comprehensive dataset for training and
evaluating design quality prediction models. The HLS YN benchmark consists of 42
unique programs/kernels, each of which has many different pragma configurations,
resulting in over 42,000 labeled designs. We conduct an extensive comparison of
state-of-the-art baselines to assess their effectiveness in predicting design quality.
As an ongoing project, we anticipate expanding the HLS YN benchmark in terms
of both quantity and variety of programs to further support the development of this
field.

1

Introduction

In recent decades, the demand for specialized computing systems tailored to specific applications
has significantly increased. This has led to the emergence of domain-specific accelerators (DSAs)
being implemented in either application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) or field-programmable
gate arrays (FPGAs). By leveraging the unique characteristics of specific workloads, the designer
can design DSAs to enhance performance and energy efficiency. This becomes particularly valuable
when general-purpose processors like CPUs and GPUs cannot meet the performance or efficiency
requirements of certain applications due to the end of Dennard scaling [8, 14]. For instance, Google
has developed its custom-designed DSA in the form of an ASIC named the Tensor Processing Unit
(TPU) [21], which is highly optimized for machine learning workloads, offering remarkably faster
performance and improved energy efficiency compared to CPUs and GPUs. In addition, FPGAs
offer a cost-effective alternative with reconfigurability, making them increasingly appealing for
accelerating applications across various domains, including search engines and numerous datacenter
applications [25, 9, 19], machine learning inference acceleration [15, 17, 32, 1, 27], and autonomous
vehicles [7], among others.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

