Transformers are uninterpretable with myopic
methods: a case study with bounded Dyck grammars

Kaiyue Wen
Tsinghua University
wenky20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Bingbin Liu
Carnegie Mellon University
bingbinl@cs.cmu.edu

Yuchen Li
Carnegie Mellon University
yuchenl4@cs.cmu.edu
Andrej Risteski
Carnegie Mellon University
aristesk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Transformer interpretability aims to understand the algorithm implemented by
a learned Transformer by examining various aspects of the model, such as the
weight matrices or the attention patterns. In this work, through a combination
of theoretical results and carefully controlled experiments on synthetic data, we
take a critical view of methods that exclusively focus on individual parts of the
model, rather than consider the network as a whole. We consider a simple synthetic
setup of learning a (bounded) Dyck language. Theoretically, we show that the
set of models that (exactly or approximately) solve this task satisfy a structural
characterization derived from ideas in formal languages (the pumping lemma).
We use this characterization to show that the set of optima is qualitatively rich;
in particular, the attention pattern of a single layer can be “nearly randomized”,
while preserving the functionality of the network. We also show via extensive
experiments that these constructions are not merely a theoretical artifact: even with
severe constraints to the architecture of the model, vastly different solutions can
be reached via standard training. Thus, interpretability claims based on inspecting
individual heads or weight matrices in the Transformer can be misleading.

1

Introduction

Transformer-based models power many leading approaches to natural language processing. With
their growing deployment in various applications, it is increasingly essential to understand the inner
working of these models. Towards addressing this, there have been great advancement in the field
of interpretability presenting various types of evidence (Clark et al., 2019; Vig & Belinkov, 2019;
Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019; Nanda et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023), some of which, however, can be
misleading despite being highly intuitive (Jain & Wallace, 2019; Serrano & Smith, 2019; Rogers
et al., 2020; Grimsley et al., 2020; Brunner et al., 2020; Meister et al., 2021).
In this work, we aim to understand the theoretical limitation of certain interpretability methods
by characterizing the set of viable solutions. We focus on myopic interpretability methods, i.e.
methods based on examining individual components only. We adopt a particular toy setup in which
Transformers are trained to generate Dyck grammars, a classic type of formal language grammar
consisting of balanced parentheses of multiple types. Dyck is a useful sandbox, as it captures
properties like long-range dependency and hierarchical tree-like structure that commonly appear in
natural and programming language syntax, and has been an object of interest in many theoretical
studies (Hahn, 2020; Yao et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022b, 2023). Dyck is canonically parsed using
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

