DDF-HO: Hand-Held Object Reconstruction via
Conditional Directed Distance Field
Chenyangguang Zhang1∗ , Yan Di2∗ , Ruida Zhang1∗ , Guangyao Zhai2 ,
Fabian Manhardt3 , Federico Tombari2,3 , Xiangyang Ji1
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Technical University of Munich, 3 Google,
{zcyg22@mails., zhangrd21@mails., xyji@}tsinghua.edu.cn, {yan.di@}tum.de

Abstract
Reconstructing hand-held objects from a single RGB image is an important and
challenging problem. Existing works utilizing Signed Distance Fields (SDF) reveal
limitations in comprehensively capturing the complex hand-object interactions,
since SDF is only reliable within the proximity of the target, and hence, infeasible
to simultaneously encode local hand and object cues. To address this issue, we
propose DDF-HO, a novel approach leveraging Directed Distance Field (DDF) as
the shape representation. Unlike SDF, DDF maps a ray in 3D space, consisting
of an origin and a direction, to corresponding DDF values, including a binary
visibility signal determining whether the ray intersects the objects and a distance
value measuring the distance from origin to target in the given direction. We
randomly sample multiple rays and collect local to global geometric features for
them by introducing a novel 2D ray-based feature aggregation scheme and a 3D
intersection-aware hand pose embedding, combining 2D-3D features to model handobject interactions. Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that DDF-HO consistently outperforms all baseline methods by a large
margin, especially under Chamfer Distance, with about 80% leap forward. Codes
are available at https://github.com/ZhangCYG/DDFHO.

1

Introduction

Hand-held object reconstruction refers to creating a 3D model for the object grasped by the hand. It is
an essential and versatile technique with many practical applications, e.g. robotics [78, 66, 39, 73, 72],
augmented and virtual reality [37], medical imaging [50]. Hence, in recent years, significant research
efforts have been directed towards the domain of reconstructing high-quality shapes of hand-held
objects, without relying on object templates or depth information. Despite the progress made, most
existing methods rely on the use of Signed Distance Fields (SDF) as the primary shape representation,
which brings about two core challenges in hand-held object reconstruction due to the inherent
characteristics of SDF.
First, SDF is an undirected function in 3D space. Consequently, roughly determining the nearest
point on the target object to a sampled point in the absence of object shape knowledge is infeasible.
This limitation poses a significant challenge for single image hand-held object reconstruction as it is
difficult to extract the necessary features to represent both the sampled point and its nearest neighbor
on the object surface. Previous methods [67] have attempted to address this challenge by aggregating
features within a local patch centered around the projection of the point, as shown in Fig. 1 (S-2).
However, this approach is unreliable when the sampled point is far from the object surface since
the local patch may not include the information of its nearest point. Therefore, for hand-held object
*Authors with equal contributions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

