Differentiable and Stable Long-Range Tracking of
Multiple Posterior Modes

Ali Younis and Erik B. Sudderth
{ayounis, sudderth}@uci.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine

Abstract
Particle filters flexibly represent multiple posterior modes nonparametrically, via a
collection of weighted samples, but have classically been applied to tracking problems with known dynamics and observation likelihoods. Such generative models
may be inaccurate or unavailable for high-dimensional observations like images.
We instead leverage training data to discriminatively learn particle-based representations of uncertainty in latent object states, conditioned on arbitrary observations via
deep neural network encoders. While prior discriminative particle filters have used
heuristic relaxations of discrete particle resampling, or biased learning by truncating gradients at resampling steps, we achieve unbiased and low-variance gradient
estimates by representing posteriors as continuous mixture densities. Our theory
and experiments expose dramatic failures of existing reparameterization-based
estimators for mixture gradients, an issue we address via an importance-sampling
gradient estimator. Unlike standard recurrent neural networks, our mixture density particle filter represents multimodal uncertainty in continuous latent states,
improving accuracy and robustness. On a range of challenging tracking and robot
localization problems, our approach achieves dramatic improvements in accuracy,
while also showing much greater stability across multiple training runs.

1

Introduction

A particle filter (PF) [1–4] uses weighted samples to provide a flexible, nonparametric representation
of uncertainty in continuous latent states. Classical PFs are generative models that typically require
human experts to specify the latent state dynamics and measurement models. With the growing
popularity of deep learning and abundance of time-series data, recent work has instead sought
to discriminatively learn PF variants that (unlike conventional recurrent neural networks) capture
uncertainty in latent states [5–8]. These approaches are especially promising for high-dimensional
observations like images, where learning accurate generative models is extremely challenging.
The key challenge in learning discriminative PFs is the non-differentiable particle resampling step,
which is key to robustly maintaining diverse particle representations, but inhibits end-to-end learning
by preventing gradient propagation. Prior discriminative PFs have typically used heuristic relaxations
of discrete particle resampling, or biased learning by truncating gradients. These methods severely
compromise the effectiveness of PF training; prior work has often assumed exact dynamical models
are known, or used very large numbers of particles for test data, due to these limitations.
After reviewing prior work on generative (Sec. 2) and discriminative (Sec. 3) training of PFs, Sec. 4
demonstrates dramatic failures of popular reparameterization-based gradient estimators for mixture
models. This motivates our importance weighted samples gradient estimator, which provides the
foundation for the mixture density particle filter of Sec. 5. Experiments in Sec. 6 show substantial
advances over prior discriminative PF for several challenging tracking and visual localization tasks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

