OpenIllumination: A Multi-Illumination Dataset for
Inverse Rendering Evaluation on Real Objects

Isabella Liu1∗ , Linghao Chen2∗ , Ziyang Fu1 , Liwen Wu1 , Haian Jin2 , Zhong Li3 ,
Chin Ming Ryan Wong3 , Yi Xu3 , Ravi Ramamoorthi1 , Zexiang Xu4 , Hao Su1
1

UC San Diego, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 OPPO US Research Center,
4
Adobe Research, ∗ Equal Contribution,
{lal005,zifu,liw026,ravi,haosu}@ucsd.edu
{chenlinghao,haian}@zju.edu.cn
zexiangxu@gmail.com
{zhong.li,ryan.wong,yi.xu}@oppo.com

Abstract
We introduce OpenIllumination, a real-world dataset containing over 108K images of 64 objects with diverse materials, captured under 72 camera views and
a large number of different illuminations. For each image in the dataset, we
provide accurate camera parameters, illumination ground truth, and foreground
segmentation masks. Our dataset enables the quantitative evaluation of most inverse rendering and material decomposition methods for real objects. We examine
several state-of-the-art inverse rendering methods on our dataset and compare
their performances. The dataset and code can be found on the project page:
https://oppo-us-research.github.io/OpenIllumination.

1

Introduction

Recovering object geometry, material, and lighting from images is a crucial task for various applications, such as image relighting and view synthesis. While recent works have shown promising results by using a differentiable renderer to optimize these parameters using the photometric
loss [51, 53, 52, 20, 32], they can only perform a quantitative evaluation on synthetic datasets since it
is easy to obtain ground-truth information. In contrast, they can only show qualitative results instead
of providing quantitative evaluations in real scenes.
Nevertheless, it is crucial to acknowledge the inherent gap between synthetic and real-world data,
for real-world scenes exhibit intricate complexities, such as natural illuminations, diverse materials,
and complex geometry, which may present challenges that synthetic data fails to model accurately.
Consequently, it becomes imperative to complement synthetic evaluation with real-world data to
validate and assess the ability of inverse rendering algorithms in practical settings.
It is highly challenging to capture real objects in practice. A common approach to capturing realworld data is using a handheld camera [20, 53]. Unfortunately, this approach frequently introduces
the occlusion of ambient light by photographers and cameras, consequently resulting in different
illuminations for each photograph. Such discrepancies are unreasonable for most methods that
assume a single constant illumination. Furthermore, capturing images under multiple illuminations
with a handheld camera often produces images with highly different appearances and results in
inaccurate and even fail camera pose estimation, particularly for feature matching-based methods
such as COLMAP [37]. Recent efforts have introduced some datasets [33, 43, 21] that incorporate
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

