S3: Increasing GPU Utilization during Generative
Inference for Higher Throughput

Yunho Jin
Harvard University

Chun-Feng Wu
National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University

David Brooks
Harvard University

Gu-Yeon Wei
Harvard University

Abstract
Generating texts with a large language model (LLM) consumes massive amounts
of memory. Apart from the already-large model parameters, the key/value (KV)
cache that holds information about previous tokens in a sequence can grow to
be even larger than the model itself. This problem is exacerbated in one of the
current LLM serving frameworks which reserves the maximum sequence length of
memory for the KV cache to guarantee generating a complete sequence as they do
not know the output sequence length. This restricts us to use a smaller batch size
leading to lower GPU utilization and above all, lower throughput. We argue that
designing a system with a priori knowledge of the output sequence can mitigate
this problem. To this end, we propose S3 , which predicts the output sequence
length, schedules generation queries based on the prediction to increase device
resource utilization and throughput, and handle mispredictions. Our proposed
method achieves 6.49× throughput over those systems that assume the worst case
for the output sequence length.

1

Introduction

Text generation has become increasingly popular in various services, leading to a surge in the use of
large language models (LLMs) known for their high accuracy. LLMs have distinct features that differentiate them from non-Transformer-based models, including a requirement for massive amounts
of compute and memory resources. Specifically, we observe that Transformer-based LLMs are often
limited by memory capacity and bandwidth, resulting in significant underutilization of compute resources. When serving GPT-J on an NVIDIA A100 GPU, the utilization of GPU compute resources
can be as low as 0.4%. This highlights the memory-bound nature of the LLMs and the need for
efficient memory utilization to increase the utilization of GPU compute resources.
A common approach to boost GPU utilization and enhance throughput is to increase batch size. This
is due to the fact that inputs within a batch share the same model weights, thus the GPU only needs
to load the model weight from its high bandwidth memory (HBM) to the on-chip SRAM once and
reuse it for all inputs within the batch. The GPU uses more of its compute resources when processing
the same model weights. Increasing batch size is a simple optimization technique and is, therefore,
commonly used in serving convolutional and fully-connected neural network models [1, 2].
However, the self-attention layer in Transformer-based text generation LLMs presents a challenge
to this simple optimization due to its autoregressive nature. Specifically, when generating a new
token in a sequence, the model needs to attend to all previous tokens in the sequence, requiring the
model to retain all information from previous tokens and store them in HBM. We call this region
in the HBM holding the information key/value cache (KV cache). The size of the KV cache grows
with larger batch sizes and longer sequences, which limits the maximum batch size, thereby lowering GPU utilization and ultimately reducing throughput. To support the growing KV cache size,
Huggingface’s Transformers library [3] constantly allocates new memory at each token generation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

