Learning Causal Models under Independent Changes

Sarah Mameche
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
sarah.mameche@cispa.de

David Kaltenpoth
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
david.kaltenpoth@cispa.de

Jilles Vreeken
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
jv@cispa.de

Abstract
In many scientific applications, we observe a system in different conditions in
which its components may change, rather than in isolation. In our work, we are
interested in explaining the generating process of such a multi-context system using
a finite mixture of causal mechanisms. Recent work shows that this causal model is
identifiable from data, but is limited to settings where the sparse mechanism shift
hypothesis [1] holds and only a subset of the causal conditionals change. As this
assumption is not easily verifiable in practice, we study the more general principle
that mechanism shifts are independent, which we formalize using the algorithmic
notion of independence. We introduce an approach for causal discovery beyond
partially directed graphs using Gaussian process models and give conditions under
which we provably identify the correct causal model. In our experiments, we show
that our method performs well in a range of synthetic settings, on realistic gene
expression simulations, as well as on real-world cell signaling data.

1

Introduction

Most of statistical learning theory rests on the assumption that all data is i.i.d. and comes from a single
distribution. In reality, this assumption rarely holds: observations often stem from heterogeneous
environments, different time domains, or interventional experiments. This results in non-i.i.d. data
which may contain spurious correlations, such that naive analysis could be subject to serious learning
bias [2]. Recent research tackles this problem via causal discovery, where given different context
distributions, we want to discover robust, causal relationships that transfer to novel conditions [3].
Existing approaches however commonly discover only an equivalence class of the true model [4–9].
Here, we investigate under which conditions we can identify causal directions.
To determine causal orientations, Schölkopf et al. [1] proposed the Sparse Mechanism Shift (SMS)
hypothesis, which asserts that distribution shifts are a consequence of a small number of causal
mechanism changes. It relies on the idea that causal functions exhibit robustness over different
contexts, whereas spurious correlations typically fail to generalize to modified conditions [3, 10, 11].
While the SMS assumption permits causal identification via counting of distribution shifts [12, 13],
this approach is limited to settings where only a subset of the causal conditionals change, does not
apply in the i.i.d. case, and needs conditional independence tests in practice, which suffer from a
multiple testing problem and, depending on the use case, limited power [14, 15]. To address these
issues, we propose a functional modeling approach based on algorithmic independence and give
identifiability guarantees under general assumptions. Instead of counting mechanism changes, our
approach identifies the model that achieves the most succinct lossless description of the data.
To illustrate this idea, we consider three variables in five environments (Fig. 1). The environments
correspond to different conditions that we observe our system in, such as interventional experiments
in genomics [16, 17]. In our example, there exists some mechanism responsible for generating Y
from its cause X which we call f . It remains the same in Contexts 1-4, even when the underlying
causal mechanisms and hence distributions of the covariates X, Z differ (f1 ), and only changes in
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

