Cognitive Model Discovery via Disentangled RNNs

Kevin J. Miller
Google DeepMind and University College London
London, UK
kevinjmiller@deepmind.com
Matthew M. Botvinick
Google DeepMind
London, UK
botvinick@deepmind.com

Maria Eckstein
Google DeepMind
London, UK
mariaeckstein@deepmind.com

Zeb Kurth-Nelson
Google DeepMind and University College London
London, UK
zebk@deepmind.com

Abstract
Computational cognitive models are a fundamental tool in behavioral neuroscience.
They instantiate in software precise hypotheses about the cognitive mechanisms
underlying a particular behavior. Constructing these models is typically a difficult
iterative process that requires both inspiration from the literature and the creativity
of an individual researcher. Here, we adopt an alternative approach to learn
parsimonious cognitive models directly from data. We fit behavior data using
a recurrent neural network that is penalized for carrying information forward in
time, leading to sparse, interpretable representations and dynamics. When fitting
synthetic behavioral data from known cognitive models, our method recovers the
underlying form of those models. When fit to laboratory data from rats performing
either a reward learning task or a decision-making task, our method recovers simple
and interpretable models that make testable predictions about neural mechanisms.

1

Introduction

Fitting quantitative cognitive models to behavioral data is a fundamental tool in many areas of
psychology and neuroscience [51, 12, 10, 39]. These models can be viewed as mechanistic hypotheses
about the cognitive processes used by the brain. Viewed in this way, they act as an explicit software
instantiation of a particular cognitive hypothesis, and can be used to make precise quantitative
predictions about behavioral and neural data. A traditional modeling pipeline is for a human
researcher to iterate over a three-step process: first to propose a candidate model structure (e.g.
Q-learning), second to optimize model parameters (e.g. learning rate) with respect to a behavioral
dataset, and finally to check whether the resulting model reproduces scientifically important features
of the dataset. However, discovering an appropriate model structure is difficult (there are many
possible structures to explore) as well as biased (the best structure may be one that the researcher has
not thought of).
An alternative approach is fitting recurrent neural networks (RNNs) directly to behavior using
supervised learning [16, 19, 46, 2]. RNNs are highly expressive and can approximate a wide variety
of model structures in their weights. This is therefore a way of discovering a well-fitting model from
data automatically. The drawback of this approach is that the resulting RNN is a “black box”: a
complex system that itself requires further analysis if it is to yield insight into cognitive mechanism.
Here, we propose a solution that aims to achieve the best of both worlds: automated discovery of
human-interpretable cognitive models. Our approach, which we call disentangled RNN or “DisRNN”,
draws on recently developed methods from machine learning for “disentangling” [23, 24, 8, 21].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

