Sharp Spectral Rates for Koopman Operator Learning
Vladimir R. Kostic
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University of Novi Sad

Karim Lounici
CMAP-Ecole Polytechnique
karim.lounici@polytechnique.edu

vladimir.kostic@iit.it

Pietro Novelli
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

Massimiliano Pontil
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
University College London

pietro.novelli@iit.it

massimiliano.pontil@iit.it

Abstract
Nonlinear dynamical systems can be handily described by the associated Koopman
operator, whose action evolves every observable of the system forward in time.
Learning the Koopman operator and its spectral decomposition from data is enabled
by a number of algorithms. In this work we present for the first time non-asymptotic
learning bounds for the Koopman eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. We focus
on time-reversal-invariant stochastic dynamical systems, including the important
example of Langevin dynamics. We analyze two popular estimators: Extended
Dynamic Mode Decomposition (EDMD) and Reduced Rank Regression (RRR).
Our results critically hinge on novel minimax estimation bounds for the operator
norm error, that may be of independent interest. Our spectral learning bounds are
driven by the simultaneous control of the operator norm error and a novel metric
distortion functional of the estimated eigenfunctions. The bounds indicates that
both EDMD and RRR have similar variance, but EDMD suffers from a larger
bias which might be detrimental to its learning rate. Our results shed new light on
the emergence of spurious eigenvalues, an issue which is well known empirically.
Numerical experiments illustrate the implications of the bounds in practice.

1

Introduction

Recently, researchers have emphasized the utmost importance of developing physically-informed
machine learning models that prioritize interpretability and foster physical insight and intuition, see
for example [22] and references therein. One technique highlighted in these works is the Koopman
operator regression framework to learn and interpret nonlinear dynamical systems see, e.g. [8, 26] and
references therein. A key component of this approach is the Koopman Mode Decomposition (KMD),
which decomposes complex dynamical systems into simpler, coherent structures. When ordinary least
squares are used to learn Koopman operator from data, estimated KMD is known as the Dynamic
Mode Decomposition (DMD) [36]. Koopman operator estimators and their modal decomposition
find many applications, including fluid dynamics, molecular kinetics and robotics [7, 19].
The Koopman operator returns the expected value of observables of the system in the future given the
present, and one relies on estimators of this operator to in turn estimate its spectral decomposition
that leads to the estimation of KMD. Our goal is to study the statistical properties of the eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions of the Koopman operator estimators via two mainstream algorithms: Principal
Component Regression (PCR) and Reduced Rank Regression (RRR) studied in [21, 24]. PCR encompasses as particular cases the popular Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition (EDMD), which
is the de-facto estimator in the data-driven dynamical system literature [see 26, 45, and references
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

