LoCoOp: Few-Shot Out-of-Distribution Detection
via Prompt Learning

1

Atsuyuki Miyai1 Qing Yu1,2 Go Irie3 Kiyoharu Aizawa1
The University of Tokyo 2 LY Corporation 3 Tokyo University of Science
{miyai,yu,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

goirie@ieee.org

Abstract
We present a novel vision-language prompt learning approach for few-shot out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection. Few-shot OOD detection aims to detect OOD images
from classes that are unseen during training using only a few labeled in-distribution
(ID) images. While prompt learning methods such as CoOp [60] have shown
effectiveness and efficiency in few-shot ID classification, they still face limitations
in OOD detection due to the potential presence of ID-irrelevant information in
text embeddings. To address this issue, we introduce a new approach called Local
regularized Context Optimization (LoCoOp), which performs OOD regularization
that utilizes the portions of CLIP local features as OOD features during training.
CLIP’s local features have a lot of ID-irrelevant nuisances (e.g., backgrounds),
and by learning to push them away from the ID class text embeddings, we can
remove the nuisances in the ID class text embeddings and enhance the separation
between ID and OOD. Experiments on the large-scale ImageNet OOD detection
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our LoCoOp over zero-shot, fully
supervised detection methods and prompt learning methods. Notably, even in a
one-shot setting – just one label per class, LoCoOp outperforms existing zeroshot and fully supervised detection methods. The code is available via https:
//github.com/AtsuMiyai/LoCoOp.

1

Introduction

Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) samples is crucial for deploying machine learning models in
real-world scenarios, where new classes of samples can naturally arise and require caution. Common
approaches for OOD detection use single-modal supervised learning [15, 17, 19, 28, 45, 29, 26, 50, 1].
These supervised methods achieve good results but have limitations e.g., these methods require a
lot of computational and annotation costs for training. These days, CLIP [37] achieves surprising
performances for various downstream tasks, and the application of CLIP to OOD detection is
beginning to attract increasing attention [11, 30, 33, 46].
Previous studies on CLIP-based OOD detection have focused on extreme settings. Some studies [12,
11, 30, 33] have explored zero-shot OOD detection methods that do not require any in-distribution
(ID) training data, whereas other studies [46] have developed fully supervised methods that require
the entire ID training data. These methods have comparable performances, but both approaches
have their own limitations. On the one hand, the zero-shot methods [30, 33] do not require any
training data, but they may encounter a domain gap with ID downstream data, which limits the
performance of zero-shot methods. On the other hand, fully supervised methods [46] utilize the
entire ID training data but may destroy the rich representations of CLIP by fine-tuning, which also
limits the performance despite requiring enormous training costs. To overcome the limitations of
fully supervised and zero-shot methods, it is essential to develop a few-shot OOD detection method
that utilizes a few ID training images for OOD detection. By finding a balance between the zero-shot
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

