RGMIL: Guide Your Multiple-Instance Learning
Model with Regressor

Zhaolong Du1 , Shasha Mao1∗, Yimeng Zhang1 , Shuiping Gou1 , Licheng Jiao1 , Lin Xiong2
1
Xidian University, 2 SenseTime.

Abstract
In video analysis, an important challenge is insufficient annotated data due to the
rare occurrence of the critical patterns, and we need to provide discriminative
frame-level representation with limited annotation in some applications. Multiple
Instance Learning (MIL) is suitable for this scenario. However, many MIL models
paid attention to analyzing the relationships between instance representations and
aggregating them, but neglecting the critical information from the MIL problem
itself, which causes difficultly achieving ideal instance-level performance compared
with the supervised model. To address this issue, we propose the Regressor-Guided
MIL network (RGMIL), which effectively produces discriminative instance-level
representations in a multi-classification scenario. In the proposed method, we make
full use of the regressor through our newly introduced aggregator, RegressorGuided Pooling (RGP). RGP focuses on simulating the correct inference process of
humans while facing similar problems without introducing new parameters, and the
MIL problem can be accurately described through the critical information from the
regressor in our method. In experiments, RGP shows dominance on more than 20
MIL benchmark datasets, with the average bag-level classification accuracy close to
1. We also perform a series of comprehensive experiments on the MMNIST dataset.
Experimental results illustrate that our aggregator outperforms existing methods
under different challenging circumstances. Instance-level predictions are even
possible under the guidance of RGP information table in a long sequence. RGMIL
also presents comparable instance-level performance with S-O-T-A supervised
models in complicated applications. Statistical results demonstrate the assumption
that a MIL model can compete with a supervised model at the instance level, as
long as a structure that accurately describes the MIL problem is provided. The
codes are available on https://github.com/LMBDA-design/RGMIL.

1

Introduction

Multiple-instance learning (MIL) [3][33] is commonly used for the binary classification tasks in
which instances lack individual labels and are grouped into bags. In MIL, a bag is labeled as positive
if it contains at least one positive instance, otherwise, it is negative. Its goal is to learn the patterns
that characterize positive bags. The models of MIL have been widely applied in various applications,
such as anomaly detection [16, 13], pathology diagnosis [24, 4], etc.
At present, many deep MIL models adopt attention-based modules [12] to solve the MIL problems,
which aggregate instance-level representations in various ways. Such approaches work during the
stage of aggregating instance-level representations and perform well when the given instance-level
representations are with good discriminability. However, in some applications, such as facial pain
estimation, we face a scenario where there are no discriminative instance-level representations or the
instance-level representations need to be explicitly learned. For them, simply learning the aggregation
∗

Corresponding author. email:ssmao@xidian.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

