VoxDet: Voxel Learning for Novel Instance Detection

Bowen Li1
1

Jiashun Wang1

Yaoyu Hu1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Chen Wang2

Sebastian Scherer1

State University of New York at Buffalo

Abstract
Detecting unseen instances based on multi-view templates is a challenging problem
due to its open-world nature. Traditional methodologies, which primarily rely
on 2D representations and matching techniques, are often inadequate in handling
pose variations and occlusions. To solve this, we introduce VoxDet, a pioneer 3D
geometry-aware framework that fully utilizes the strong 3D voxel representation
and reliable voxel matching mechanism. VoxDet first ingeniously proposes template voxel aggregation (TVA) module, effectively transforming multi-view 2D
images into 3D voxel features. By leveraging associated camera poses, these features are aggregated into a compact 3D template voxel. In novel instance detection,
this voxel representation demonstrates heightened resilience to occlusion and pose
variations. We also discover that a 3D reconstruction objective helps to pre-train the
2D-3D mapping in TVA. Second, to quickly align with the template voxel, VoxDet
incorporates a Query Voxel Matching (QVM) module. The 2D queries are first
converted into their voxel representation with the learned 2D-3D mapping. We find
that since the 3D voxel representations encode the geometry, we can first estimate
the relative rotation and then compare the aligned voxels, leading to improved
accuracy and efficiency. In addition to method, we also introduce the first instance
detection benchmark, RoboTools, where 20 unique instances are video-recorded
with camera extrinsic. RoboTools also provides 24 challenging cluttered scenarios
with more than 9k box annotations. Exhaustive experiments are conducted on the
demanding LineMod-Occlusion, YCB-video, and RoboTools benchmarks, where
VoxDet outperforms various 2D baselines remarkably with faster speed. To the
best of our knowledge, VoxDet is the first to incorporate implicit 3D knowledge
for 2D novel instance detection tasks. Our code, data, raw results, and pre-trained
models are public at https://github.com/Jaraxxus-Me/VoxDet.

1

Introduction

Consider the common scenarios of locating the second sock of a pair in a pile of laundry or identifying
luggage amid hundreds of similar suitcases at an airport. These activities illustrate the remarkable
capability of human cognition to swiftly and accurately identify a specific instance among other
similar objects. Humans can rapidly create a mental picture of a novel instance with a few glances
even if they see such an instance for the first time or have never seen instances of the same type.
Searching for instances using mental pictures is a fundamental ability for humans, however, even the
latest object detectors [1–7] still cannot achieve this task.
We formulate the above tasks as novel instance detection, that is identification of an unseen instance
in a cluttered query image, utilizing its multi-view support references. Previous attempts mainly
work in 2D space, such as correlation [8, 5], attention mechanisms [6], or similarity matching [9],
thereby localizing and categorizing the desired instance, as depicted in Fig. 1 gray part. However,
these techniques struggle to maintain their robustness when faced with significant disparities between
the query and templates. In comparison to novel instance detection, there is a vast amount of work
centered around few-shot category-level object detection [7, 1, 2]. Yet, these class-level matching
techniques prove insufficient when it comes to discerning specific instance-level features.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

