GNeSF: Generalizable Neural Semantic Fields
Hanlin Chen Chen Li Mengqi Guo Zhiwen Yan Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{hanlin.chen, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
3D scene segmentation based on neural implicit representation has emerged recently with the advantage of training only on 2D supervision. However, existing
approaches still requires expensive per-scene optimization that prohibits generalization to novel scenes during inference. To circumvent this problem, we introduce a
generalizable 3D segmentation framework based on implicit representation. Specifically, our framework takes in multi-view image features and semantic maps as
the inputs instead of only spatial information to avoid overfitting to scene-specific
geometric and semantic information. We propose a novel soft voting mechanism
to aggregate the 2D semantic information from different views for each 3D point.
In addition to the image features, view difference information is also encoded in
our framework to predict the voting scores. Intuitively, this allows the semantic
information from nearby views to contribute more compared to distant ones. Furthermore, a visibility module is also designed to detect and filter out detrimental
information from occluded views. Due to the generalizability of our proposed
method, we can synthesize semantic maps or conduct 3D semantic segmentation for
novel scenes with solely 2D semantic supervision. Experimental results show that
our approach achieves comparable performance with scene-specific approaches.
More importantly, our approach can even outperform existing strong supervisionbased approaches with only 2D annotations. Our source code is available at:
https://github.com/HLinChen/GNeSF.

1

Introduction

Understanding high-level semantics of 3D scenes in digital images and videos is a fundamental
research in computer vision. Several extensively studied tasks such as scene classification [22], object
detection [34], and semantic segmentation [10] facilitate the extraction of semantic descriptions
from RGB and other sensor data. These tasks form the foundation for applications such as visual
navigation [4] and robotic interaction [2].
Several commonly used 3D representations include 3D point clouds [11, 32], voxel grids [42], and
polygonal meshes [28, 18]. A direct learning of semantics on these 3D representations require large
amounts of well-annotated 3D ground truths for training. Unfortunately, these 3D ground truths are
often much more laborious and expensive to obtain compared to its 2D counterparts. Recently, Neural
Radiance Field (NeRF) [30, 52] has emerged as a new 3D representation, which can capture intricate
geometric details [41] using solely RGB images. Many researchers utilize this 3D representation to
propose the concept of Neural Semantic Field [55, 17, 3], where semantics is assigned to each 3D
point. However, these existing works on neural semantic fields inherited the per-scene optimization
limitation of the vanilla NeRF and thus cannot generalize across novel scenes. As a result, the
practicality of the approaches for semantic segmentation is severely restricted.
In view of the limitations in existing neural semantic field works, this paper addresses the challenging
task of generalizable neural semantic fields. The objective is to construct a generalizable semantic
field capable of producing high-quality semantic rendering from novel views and 3D semantic
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

