Contextual Stochastic Bilevel Optimization

Yifan Hu∗
EPFL & ETH Zürich
Switzerland

Jie Wang
Gatech
United States

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
Switzerland

Yao Xie
Gatech
United States
Daniel Kuhn
EPFL
Switzerland

Abstract
We introduce contextual stochastic bilevel optimization (CSBO) – a stochastic
bilevel optimization framework with the lower-level problem minimizing an expectation conditioned on some contextual information and the upper-level decision
variable. This framework extends classical stochastic bilevel optimization when
the lower-level decision maker responds optimally not only to the decision of
the upper-level decision maker but also to some side information and when there
are multiple or even infinite many followers. It captures important applications
such as meta-learning, personalized federated learning, end-to-end learning, and
Wasserstein distributionally robust optimization with side information (WDRO-SI).
Due to the presence of contextual information, existing single-loop methods for
classical stochastic bilevel optimization are unable to converge. To overcome this
challenge, we introduce an efficient double-loop gradient method based on the
Multilevel Monte-Carlo (MLMC) technique and establish its sample and computational complexities. When specialized to stochastic nonconvex optimization, our
method matches existing lower bounds. For meta-learning, the complexity of our
method does not depend on the number of tasks. Numerical experiments further
validate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

A contextual stochastic bilevel optimization (CSBO) problem differs from a classical stochastic
bilevel optimization problem only in that its lower-level problem is conditioned on a given context ξ.
min

F (x) := Eξ∼Pξ ,η∼Pη|ξ [f (x, y ∗ (x; ξ); η, ξ)]

where

y ∗ (x; ξ) := argminy∈Rdy Eη∼Pη|ξ [g(x, y; η, ξ)]

x∈Rdx

(upper level)
∀ ξ and x.

(1)
(lower level)

Here ξ ∼ Pξ and η ∼ Pη|ξ are random vectors, with Pη|ξ denoting the conditional distribution
of η for a given ξ. The dimensions of the upper-level decision variable x and the lower-level
decision variable y are dx and dy , respectively. The functions f and g are continuously differentiable
in (x, y) for any given sample pair (ξ, η). The function f (x, y; η, ξ) can be nonconvex in x, but
the function g(x, y; η, ξ) must be strongly convex in y for any given x, η and ξ. Thus, y ∗ (x; ξ)
is the unique minimizer of the strongly convex lower-level problem for any given x and ξ. Note
that, on its own, the lower-level problem can be viewed as a contextual stochastic optimization
problem [Bertsimas and Kallus, 2020] parametrized in x. We assume that the joint distribution of ξ
and η is unknown. However, we assume that we have access to any number of independent and
∗

Correspondence: yifan.hu@epfl.ch.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

