Effective Targeted Attacks for
Adversarial Self-Supervised Learning

1

Minseon Kim1 , Hyeonjeong Ha1 , Sooel Son1 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 2 DeepAuto.ai
{minseonkim, hyeonjeongha, sl.son, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, unsupervised adversarial training (AT) has been highlighted as a means
of achieving robustness in models without any label information. Previous studies
in unsupervised AT have mostly focused on implementing self-supervised learning (SSL) frameworks, which maximize the instance-wise classification loss to
generate adversarial examples. However, we observe that simply maximizing the
self-supervised training loss with an untargeted adversarial attack often results
in generating ineffective adversaries that may not help improve the robustness of
the trained model, especially for non-contrastive SSL frameworks without negative examples. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel positive mining for
targeted adversarial attack to generate effective adversaries for adversarial SSL
frameworks. Specifically, we introduce an algorithm that selects the most confusing
yet similar target example for a given instance based on entropy and similarity,
and subsequently perturbs the given instance towards the selected target. Our
method demonstrates significant enhancements in robustness when applied to noncontrastive SSL frameworks, and less but consistent robustness improvements with
contrastive SSL frameworks, on the benchmark datasets.

1

Introduction

Enhancing the robustness of deep neural networks (DNN) remains a crucial challenge for their
real-world safety-critical applications, such as autonomous driving. DNNs have been shown to be
vulnerable to various forms of attacks, such as imperceptible perturbations [14], various types of image
corruptions [20], and distribution shifts [25], which can lead DNNs to make incorrect predictions.
Many prior studies have proposed using supervised adversarial training (AT) [29, 40, 38, 37] to
mitigate susceptibility to imperceptible adversarial perturbation, exploiting class label information to
generate adversarial examples. However, achieving robustness in the absence of labeled information
has been relatively understudied, despite the recent successes of self-supervised learning across
various domains and tasks.
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) frameworks have been proposed to obtain transferable
visual representations by learning the similarity and differences between instances of augmented
training data. Such prior approaches include those utilizing contrastive learning between positive and
negative pairs (e.g., Chen et al. [6] (SimCLR), He et al. [19] (MoCo), Zbontar et al. [39] (Barlowtwins)), as well as those utilizing similarity loss solely between positive pairs (e.g., Grill et al. [17]
(BYOL), Chen and He [7] (SimSiam)). To achieve robustness in these frameworks, Kim et al. [23]
and Jiang et al. [22] have proposed adversarial SSL methods using contrastive learning [6], which
generate adversarial examples that maximize the instance-wise classification loss.
Unfortunately, deploying this contrastive framework often becomes computationally expensive as it
requires a large batch size for training in order to attain a high level of performance [6]. Specifically,
when a given memory and computational budget is limited, such as with edge devices, performing
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

