Towards Anytime Classification in Early-Exit
Architectures by Enforcing Conditional Monotonicity

Metod Jazbec
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
m.jazbec@uva.nl

James Urquhart Allingham
University of Cambridge
jua23@cam.ac.uk

Dan Zhang
Bosch Center for AI &
University of Tübingen
dan.zhang2@de.bosch.com

Eric Nalisnick
UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
University of Amsterdam
e.t.nalisnick@uva.nl

Abstract
Modern predictive models are often deployed to environments in which computational budgets are dynamic. Anytime algorithms are well-suited to such environments as, at any point during computation, they can output a prediction whose
quality is a function of computation time. Early-exit neural networks have garnered
attention in the context of anytime computation due to their capability to provide
intermediate predictions at various stages throughout the network. However, we
demonstrate that current early-exit networks are not directly applicable to anytime
settings, as the quality of predictions for individual data points is not guaranteed
to improve with longer computation. To address this shortcoming, we propose an
elegant post-hoc modification, based on the Product-of-Experts, that encourages an
early-exit network to become gradually confident. This gives our deep models the
property of conditional monotonicity in the prediction quality—an essential stepping stone towards truly anytime predictive modeling using early-exit architectures.
Our empirical results on standard image-classification tasks demonstrate that such
behaviors can be achieved while preserving competitive accuracy on average.

1

Introduction

When deployed in the wild, predictive models are often subject to dynamic constraints on their computation. Consider a vision system for an autonomous vehicle: the same system should perform well
in busy urban environments and on deserted rural roads. Yet the former environment often requires
quick decision-making, unlike the latter. Hence, it would be beneficial for our models to be allowed
to ‘think’ as long as its environment allows. Deploying models to resource-constrained devices
has similar demands. For example, there are roughly 25, 000 different computing configurations
of Android devices [Yu et al., 2019], and developers often need to balance poor user experience in
low-resource settings with under-performance in high-resource settings.
Anytime algorithms can ease, if not resolve, these issues brought about by dynamic constraints on
computations. An algorithm is called anytime if it can quickly produce an approximate solution and
subsequently employ additional resources, if available, to incrementally decrease the approximation
error [Dean and Boddy, 1988, Zilberstein, 1996].1 Anytime computation is especially valuable when
resources can fluctuate during test time. Returning to the example of mobile devices, an anytime
1

We give a complete definition in Section 2.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

