Unsupervised Graph Neural Architecture Search
with Disentangled Self-supervision

1

Zeyang Zhang1∗, Xin Wang1†, Ziwei Zhang1 , Guangyao Shen2 , Shiqi Shen2 , Wenwu Zhu1†
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University, 2 Wechat, Tencent
zy-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang, zwzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{lucasgyshen, shiqishen}@tencent.com, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The existing graph neural architecture search (GNAS) methods heavily rely on
supervised labels during the search process, failing to handle ubiquitous scenarios where supervisions are not available. In this paper, we study the problem of
unsupervised graph neural architecture search, which remains unexplored in the
literature. The key problem is to discover the latent graph factors that drive the
formation of graph data as well as the underlying relations between the factors
and the optimal neural architectures. Handling this problem is challenging given
that the latent graph factors together with architectures are highly entangled due to
the nature of the graph and the complexity of the neural architecture search process. To address the challenge, we propose a novel Disentangled Self-supervised
Graph Neural Architecture Search (DSGAS) model, which is able to discover the
optimal architectures capturing various latent graph factors in a self-supervised
fashion based on unlabeled graph data. Specifically, we first design a disentangled graph super-network capable of incorporating multiple architectures with
factor-wise disentanglement, which are optimized simultaneously. Then, we estimate the performance of architectures under different factors by our proposed
self-supervised training with joint architecture-graph disentanglement. Finally, we
propose a contrastive search with architecture augmentations to discover architectures with factor-specific expertise. Extensive experiments on 11 real-world
datasets demonstrate that the proposed DSGAS model is able to achieve state-ofthe-art performance against several baseline methods in an unsupervised manner.

1

Introduction

Graph neural architecture search (GNAS), aiming to automatically discover the optimal architecture
for graph neural network (GNN) based on graph-structured data and task, has shown remarkable
progress in enhancing the predictive power and saving human endeavors for various graph applications [1]. The existing GNAS methods generally follow a supervised paradigm such that they
optimize the weights within architectures given a training dataset with a supervised loss (e.g., the
cross entropy loss of label predictions) and estimate the architecture performance based on the
validation dataset with supervision signals. For example, the label prediction accuracy is adopted for
architecture ranking during the neural architecture search process [2, 3, 4]. As a result, supervised
labels become indispensable for applying the existing GNAS methods.
However, ground-truth labels in reality may be extremely scarce or hardly available in many graph
applications. For example, a variety of biological problems require a significant amount of human
labors and time costs in clinical tests to obtain labels for supervision [5, 6, 7]. As the existing
∗
†

This work was done during the author’s internship at Wechat, Tencent
Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

