MVDoppler: Unleashing the Power of Multi-View
Doppler for MicroMotion-Based Gait Classification

Soheil Hor, Shubo Yang, Jaeho Choi, and Amin Arbabian
Department of Electrical Engineering
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
(soheilh,shuboy,jhochoi,arbabian)@stanford.edu
Project page: https://mvdoppler.github.io
Code and dataset toolbox: https://github.com/soheilhr/MVDoppler

Abstract
Modern perception systems rely heavily on high-resolution cameras, LiDARs, and
advanced deep neural networks, enabling exceptional performance across various
applications. However, these optical systems predominantly depend on geometric
features and shapes of objects, which can be challenging to capture in long-range
perception applications. To overcome this limitation, alternative approaches such
as Doppler-based perception using high-resolution radars have been proposed.
Doppler-based systems are capable of measuring micro-motions of targets remotely
and with very high precision. When compared to geometric features, the resolution
of micro-motion features exhibits significantly greater resilience to the influence
of distance. However, the true potential of Doppler-based perception has yet to
be fully realized due to several factors. These include the unintuitive nature of
Doppler signals, the limited availability of public Doppler datasets, and the current
datasets’ inability to capture the specific co-factors that are unique to Dopplerbased perception, such as the effect of the radar’s observation angle and the target’s
motion trajectory. This paper introduces a new large multi-view Doppler dataset
together with baseline perception models for micro-motion-based gait analysis and
classification. The dataset captures the impact of the subject’s walking trajectory
and radar’s observation angle on the classification performance. Additionally,
baseline multi-view data fusion techniques are provided to mitigate these effects.
This work demonstrates that sub-second micro-motion snapshots can be sufficient
for reliable detection of hand movement patterns and even changes in a pedestrian’s
walking behavior when distracted by their phone. Overall, this research not only
showcases the potential of Doppler-based perception, but also offers valuable
solutions to tackle its fundamental challenges.

1

Introduction

Today’s perception systems typically benefit from the integration of high-resolution optical sensors
and advanced deep neural networks surpassing even human perception in various applications.
However, such systems also suffer from inherent limitations of optical system design and the physics
of energy propagation in 3D space, which cannot be solved even using the most advanced perception
neural networks. As an example, camera-based perception systems typically rely on extracting
geometrical (spatial) features of the environment with the effective observed resolution decreasing
quadratically as a function of distance. This results in a significantly lower performance in longrange perception applications. Alternatively, there exist perception approaches that do not rely on
geometrical features and therefore offer enhanced resilience against distance-related information loss.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

