DatasetDM: Synthesizing Data with Perception
Annotations Using Diffusion Models

Weijia Wu1,3
1

Yuzhong Zhao2 Hao Chen1 Yuchao Gu3 Rui Zhao3
Hong Zhou1∗ Mike Zheng Shou3∗ Chunhua Shen1,4

Yefei He1

Zhejiang University, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 4 Ant Group

Abstract
Current deep networks are very data-hungry and benefit from training on largescale datasets, which are often time-consuming to collect and annotate. By contrast,
synthetic data can be generated infinitely using generative models such as DALL-E
and diffusion models, with minimal effort and cost. In this paper, we present
DatasetDM, a generic dataset generation model that can produce diverse synthetic
images and the corresponding high-quality perception annotations (e.g., segmentation masks, and depth). Our method builds upon the pre-trained diffusion model
and extends text-guided image synthesis to perception data generation. We show
that the rich latent code of the diffusion model can be effectively decoded as accurate perception annotations using a decoder module. Training the decoder only
needs less than 1% (around 100 images) manually labeled images, enabling the
generation of an infinitely large annotated dataset. Then these synthetic data can
be used for training various perception models for downstream tasks.
To showcase the power of the proposed approach, we generate datasets with rich
dense pixel-wise labels for a wide range of downstream tasks, including semantic
segmentation, instance segmentation, and depth estimation. Notably, it achieves
(1) state-of-the-art results on semantic segmentation and instance segmentation; (2)
significantly more robust on domain generalization than using the real data alone;
and state-of-the-art results in zero-shot segmentation setting; and (3) flexibility for
efficient application and novel task composition (e.g., image editing).
The project website is at: weijiawu.github.io/DatasetDM.

1

Introduction

Modern deep-learning models for perception tasks often require a large amount of labeled data to
achieve good performance. Unfortunately, collecting large-scale data and labeling the corresponding
pixel-level annotations is a time-consuming and expensive process. For example, collecting images of
urban driving scenes requires physical car infrastructure, and labeling a segmentation annotation for
a single urban image in Cityscapes [10] can take up to 60 minutes. Moreover, in certain specialized
domains, such as medical or human facial data, collecting relevant information can be challenging or
even impossible, owing to privacy concerns or other factors. The above challenges can be a barrier to
advancing artificial intelligence in computer vision.
To reduce costs, many previous researchers have primarily focused on weakly supervised [57] and
unsupervised solutions [51] to address the problem. For instance, certain segmentation priors [1, 2, 32]
use weak or inexpensive labels to train robust segmentation models. With the advancement of
∗

H. Zhou and M. Shou are the corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

