Defending against Data-Free Model Extraction by
Distributionally Robust Defensive Training

Zhenyi Wang1 , Li Shen2 , Tongliang Liu3 , Tiehang Duan4 ,
Yanjun Zhu5 , Donglin Zhan6 , David Doermann7 , Mingchen Gao7
1
University of Maryland, College Park, USA 2 JD Explore Academy, China
3
The University of Sydney, Australia 4 West Virginia University, USA
5
Northeastern University, USA 6 Columbia University, USA
7
University at Buffalo, USA
zwang169@umd.edu; mathshenli@gmail.com; tongliang.liu@sydney.edu;
tiehang.duan@gmail.com; ya.zhu@northeastern.edu;
dz2478@columbia.edu; {doermann, mgao8}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Data-Free Model Extraction (DFME) aims to clone a black-box model without
knowing its original training data distribution, making it much easier for attackers
to steal commercial models. Defense against DFME faces several challenges: (i)
effectiveness; (ii) efficiency; (iii) no prior on the attacker’s query data distribution
and strategy. However, existing defense methods: (1) are highly computation and
memory inefficient; or (2) need strong assumptions about attack data distribution;
or (3) can only delay the attack or prove a model theft after the model stealing has
happened. In this work, we propose a Memory and Computation efficient defense
approach, named MeCo, to prevent DFME from happening while maintaining the
model utility simultaneously by distributionally robust defensive training on the
target victim model. Specifically, we randomize the input so that it: (1) causes a
mismatch of the knowledge distillation loss for attackers; (2) disturbs the zerothorder gradient estimation; (3) changes the label prediction for the attack query data.
Therefore, the attacker can only extract misleading information from the black-box
model. Extensive experiments on defending against both decision-based and scorebased DFME demonstrate that MeCo can significantly reduce the effectiveness of
existing DFME methods and substantially improve running efficiency.

1

Introduction

Model extraction attack aims to replicate the functionality of a public API with only query access.
Most model extraction methods focus on data-based model extraction, i.e., an attacker can access a
small subset of the in-distribution training data [41], or a relevant surrogate dataset [36] of the target
model. Beyond data-based model extraction (DBME), recent promising results with data-free model
extraction (DFME) 2 show that the attacker can clone a model with performance close to that of the
target black-box model even without prior knowledge of the distribution of the proprietary training
data. Those DFME techniques make it much easier for attackers to steal the model without collecting
and annotating relevant training data. DFME can be further categorized into score-based DFME
[21, 51], where the target model provides softmax probability outputs to the users; and decision-based
DFME [54, 47], where the target model only provides the top-1 label. Thus, the model owners
1

Corresponding author: Zhenyi Wang, Li Shen and Mingchen Gao
The problem setting name, DFME, coincides with the method name in [51]. We use DFME to denote the
problem setting of model extraction without accessing the in-distribution training data, not a specific method.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

