Investigating how ReLU-networks encode symmetries

Georg Bökman Fredrik Kahl
Chalmers University of Technology
{bokman, fredrik.kahl}@chalmers.se

Abstract
Many data symmetries can be described in terms of group equivariance and the
most common way of encoding group equivariances in neural networks is by
building linear layers that are group equivariant. In this work we investigate
whether equivariance of a network implies that all layers are equivariant. On the
theoretical side we find cases where equivariance implies layerwise equivariance,
but also demonstrate that this is not the case generally. Nevertheless, we conjecture
that CNNs that are trained to be equivariant will exhibit layerwise equivariance
and explain how this conjecture is a weaker version of the recent permutation
conjecture by Entezari et al. [2022]. We perform quantitative experiments with
VGG-nets on CIFAR10 and qualitative experiments with ResNets on ImageNet to
illustrate and support our theoretical findings. These experiments are not only of
interest for understanding how group equivariance is encoded in ReLU-networks,
but they also give a new perspective on Entezari et al.’s permutation conjecture
as we find that it is typically easier to merge a network with a group-transformed
version of itself than merging two different networks.
.

1

Introduction

Understanding the inner workings of deep neural networks is a key problem in machine learning and
it has been investigated from many different perspectives, ranging from studying the loss landscape
and its connection to generalization properties to understanding the learned representations of the
networks. Such an understanding may lead to improved optimization techniques, better inductive
biases of the network architecture and to more explainable and predictable results. In this paper, we
focus on ReLU-networks—networks with activation function ReLU(x) := max(0, x)—and how they
encode and learn data symmetries via equivariance.
Equivariances can be built into a neural network by design. The most classical example is of course
the CNN where translational symmetry is obtained via convolutional layers. Stacking such equivariant
layers in combination with pointwise ReLU activations results in an equivariant network. We will
pursue a different research path and instead start with a neural network which has been trained to be
equivariant and ask how the equivariance is encoded in the network. This approach in itself is not
new and has been, for instance, experimentally explored in [24] where computational methods for
quantifying layerwise equivariance are developed. We will shed new light on the problem by deriving
new theoretical results when network equivariance implies layerwise equivariance. We will also give
counterexamples for when this is not the case. Another insight is obtained via the recent conjecture
by Entezari et al. [13] which states that networks with the same architecture trained on the same data
are often close to each other in weight space modulo permutation symmetries of the network weights.
Our new conjecture 3.2 which we derive from the conjecture of Entezari et al. states that most SGD
CNN solutions will be close to group equivariant CNNs (GCNNs).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

