On the Generalization Properties of Diffusion Models

Puheng Li*∗
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
puhengli@stanford.edu

Zhong Li*†
Machine Learning Group
Microsoft Research Asia
lzhong@microsoft.com

Huishuai Zhang†
Machine Learning Group
Microsoft Research Asia
huzhang@microsoft.com

Jiang Bian
Machine Learning Group
Microsoft Research Asia
jiabia@microsoft.com

Abstract
Diffusion models are a class of generative models that serve to establish a stochastic
transport map between an empirically observed, yet unknown, target distribution
and a known prior. Despite their remarkable success in real-world applications,
a theoretical understanding of their generalization capabilities remains underdeveloped. This work embarks on a comprehensive theoretical exploration of the
generalization attributes of diffusion models. We establish theoretical estimates
of the generalization gap that evolves in tandem with the training dynamics of
score-based diffusion models, suggesting a polynomially small generalization error
(O(n−2/5 + m−4/5 )) on both the sample size n and the model capacity m, evading
the curse of dimensionality (i.e., not exponentially large in the data dimension)
when early-stopped. Furthermore, we extend our quantitative analysis to a datadependent scenario, wherein target distributions are portrayed as a succession of
densities with progressively increasing distances between modes. This precisely
elucidates the adverse effect of “modes shift” in ground truths on the model generalization. Moreover, these estimates are not solely theoretical constructs but have
also been confirmed through numerical simulations. Our findings contribute to the
rigorous understanding of diffusion models’ generalization properties and provide
insights that may guide practical applications.

1

Introduction

As an emerging family of deep generative models, diffusion models (DMs; [16, 45]) have experienced
a surge in popularity, owing to their unparalleled performance in a wide range of applications
([22, 39, 68, 15, 3, 35, 4, 60, 33, 69, 64, 63, 53]). This has led to notable commercial successes, such
as DALL·E ([34]), Imagen ([38]), and Stable Diffusion ([36]). Mathematically, diffusion models learn
an unknown underlying distribution through a two-stage process: (i) first, successively and gradually
injecting random noises (forward process); (ii) then reversing the forward process through denoising
for sampling purposes (reverse process). To achieve this, an equivalent formulation of diffusion
models called score-based generative models (SGMs; [50, 52]) is employed. SGMs implement
the aforementioned two-stage process via the continuous dynamics represented by a joint group of
coupled stochastic differential equations (SDEs) ([54, 20]).
∗
This work was done when Puheng Li was an undergraduate student at Peking University and a research
intern at MSRA. The first two authors contributed equally to this work and are ordered alphabetically.
†
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

