POP-3D: Open-Vocabulary 3D Occupancy Prediction
from Images

Antonin Vobecky1,2,3

Oriane Siméoni1

Andrei Bursuc1
1

valeo.ai, Paris, France

David Hurych1

Patrick Pérez1
2

CIIRC CTU in Prague

Spyros Gidaris1
Josef Sivic2

3

FEE CTU in Prague

Abstract
We describe an approach to predict open-vocabulary 3D semantic voxel occupancy map from input 2D images with the objective of enabling 3D grounding,
segmentation and retrieval of free-form language queries. This is a challenging
problem because of the 2D-3D ambiguity and the open-vocabulary nature of the
target tasks, where obtaining annotated training data in 3D is difficult. The contributions of this work are three-fold. First, we design a new model architecture
for open-vocabulary 3D semantic occupancy prediction. The architecture consists
of a 2D-3D encoder together with occupancy prediction and 3D-language heads.
The output is a dense voxel map of 3D grounded language embeddings enabling a
range of open-vocabulary tasks. Second, we develop a tri-modal self-supervised
learning algorithm that leverages three modalities: (i) images, (ii) language and (iii)
LiDAR point clouds, and enables training the proposed architecture using a strong
pre-trained vision-language model without the need for any 3D manual language
annotations. Finally, we demonstrate quantitatively the strengths of the proposed
model on several open-vocabulary tasks: Zero-shot 3D semantic segmentation
using existing datasets; 3D grounding and retrieval of free-form language queries,
using a small dataset that we propose as an extension of nuScenes. You can find
the project page here https://vobecant.github.io/POP3D.

1

Introduction

The detailed analysis of 3D environments –both geometrically and semantically– is a fundamental
perception brick in many applications, from augmented reality to autonomous robots and vehicles. It
is usually conducted with cameras and/or laser scanners (LiDAR). In its most complete version, called
semantic 3D occupancy prediction, this analysis amounts to labelling each voxel of the perceived
volume as occupied by a certain class of object or empty. This is extremely challenging since both
cameras and LiDAR only capture information about visible surfaces, which may be projected from
3D into 2D without the loss of information, but not for every point in the 3D space. This one extra
dimension makes prediction arduous and hugely complicates the manual annotation task.
Recent works, e.g., [26], propose to leverage manually-annotated LiDAR data to produce a partial
annotation of the 3D occupancy space. However, relying on manual semantic annotation of point
clouds remains difficult to scale, even if sparse, and limits the learned representation to encode solely
a closed vocabulary, i.e., a limited predefined set of classes. In this work, we tackle these challenges
and propose an open-vocabulary approach to 3D semantic occupancy prediction that relies only on
2

Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech Technical University in Prague

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

