Revisiting Adversarial Robustness Distillation from
the Perspective of Robust Fairness

Xinli Yue, Ningping Mou, Qian Wang, Lingchen Zhao∗
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of
Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{xinliyue, ningpingmou, qianwang, lczhaocs}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD) aims to transfer the robustness of large
teacher models to small student models, facilitating the attainment of robust performance on resource-limited devices. However, existing research on ARD primarily
focuses on the overall robustness of student models, overlooking the crucial aspect
of robust fairness. Specifically, these models may demonstrate strong robustness
on some classes of data while exhibiting high vulnerability on other classes. Unfortunately, the "buckets effect" implies that the robustness of the deployed model
depends on the classes with the lowest level of robustness. In this paper, we first
investigate the inheritance of robust fairness during ARD and reveal that student
models only partially inherit robust fairness from teacher models. We further validate this issue through fine-grained experiments with various model capacities and
find that it may arise due to the gap in capacity between teacher and student models,
as well as the existing methods treating each class equally during distillation. Based
on these observations, we propose Fair Adversarial Robustness Distillation (FairARD), a novel framework for enhancing the robust fairness of student models by
increasing the weights of difficult classes, and design a geometric perspective-based
method to quantify the difficulty of different classes for determining the weights.
Extensive experiments show that Fair-ARD surpasses both state-of-the-art ARD
methods and existing robust fairness algorithms in terms of robust fairness (e.g., the
worst-class robustness under AutoAttack is improved by at most 12.3% and 5.3%
using ResNet18 on CIFAR10, respectively), while also slightly improving overall
robustness. Our code is available at: https://github.com/NISP-official/Fair-ARD.

1

Introduction

Knowledge distillation [15, 29, 19, 5] is currently a popular technique for transferring knowledge
from large models (teacher models) to small models (student models). This practice is particularly
vital in resource-constrained environments such as mobile or embedded devices. However, as
neural networks are notably vulnerable to adversarial examples [31, 10], where the addition of small
perturbations to input examples can potentially lead to misclassification, student models obtained
through knowledge distillation are also susceptible to these adversarial attacks [4, 7, 2, 8]. Therefore,
Adversarial Robustness Distillation (ARD) [9, 44, 45, 43] have been proposed to train robust student
models by integrating adversarial training (AT) [24, 40, 34, 37].
However, some recent works [38, 33] have revealed the issue of robust fairness in AT, where
adversarially trained models may exhibit high robustness on some classes while demonstrating
significantly low robustness on others. Due to the "buckets effect," the security of a system often
depends on the security of its weakest component. Therefore, even if the overall robustness of a
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

