Lightweight Vision Transformer with Bidirectional
Interaction
Qihang Fan 1,2 , Huaibo Huang1 , Xiaoqiang Zhou1,3 , Ran He1,2∗
MAIS & CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
fanqihang.159@gmail.com, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn,
xq525@mail.ustc.edu.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Recent advancements in vision backbones have significantly improved their performance by simultaneously modeling images’ local and global contexts. However,
the bidirectional interaction between these two contexts has not been well explored
and exploited, which is important in the human visual system. This paper proposes a Fully Adaptive Self-Attention (FASA) mechanism for vision transformer
to model the local and global information as well as the bidirectional interaction
between them in context-aware ways. Specifically, FASA employs self-modulated
convolutions to adaptively extract local representation while utilizing self-attention
in down-sampled space to extract global representation. Subsequently, it conducts
a bidirectional adaptation process between local and global representation to model
their interaction. In addition, we introduce a fine-grained downsampling strategy
to enhance the down-sampled self-attention mechanism for finer-grained global
perception capability. Based on FASA, we develop a family of lightweight vision
backbones, Fully Adaptive Transformer (FAT) family. Extensive experiments
on multiple vision tasks demonstrate that FAT achieves impressive performance.
Notably, FAT accomplishes a 77.6% accuracy on ImageNet-1K using only 4.5M
parameters and 0.7G FLOPs, which surpasses the most advanced ConvNets and
Transformers with similar model size and computational costs. Moreover, our
model exhibits faster speed on modern GPU compared to other models.

1

Introduction

Vision Transformers (ViTs) have recently garnered significant attention in the computer vision
community due to their exceptional ability for long-range modeling and context-aware characteristics.
However, because of the quadratic complexity of self-attention in ViT [13], its computational cost is
extremely high. As a result, many studies have emerged to improve ViT’s computational efficiency
and performance in various ways. For instance, some methods restrict tokens that perform selfattention to a specific region and introduce inductive bias to ViT [34; 12; 66; 55]. Further, some
methods aim to transform ViT into lightweight backbones with fewer parameters and computational
requirements [38; 40; 4; 30; 37], achieving promising results but still not matching the performance
of the most advanced ConvNets [51]. How to design an excellent lightweight Vision Transformer
remains a challenge.
In current state-of-the-art Vision Transformers, some either excel in creating local feature extraction
modules [34; 12; 66] or employing efficient global information aggregation modules [57; 58], while
others incorporate both [42; 41]. For instance, LVT [66] unfolds tokens into separate windows and
∗

Ran He is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

