Complex-valued Neurons Can Learn More but Slower
than Real-valued Neurons via Gradient Descent
Jin-Hui Wu, Shao-Qun Zhang, Yuan Jiang, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{wujh,zhangsq,jiangy,zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Complex-valued neural networks potentially possess better representations and
performance than real-valued counterparts when dealing with some complicated
tasks such as acoustic analysis, radar image classification, etc. Despite empirical
successes, it remains unknown theoretically when and to what extent complexvalued neural networks outperform real-valued ones. We take one step in this
direction by comparing the learnability of real-valued neurons and complex-valued
neurons via gradient descent. We show that a complex-valued neuron can efficiently
learn functions expressed by any one real-valued neuron and any one complexvalued neuron with convergence rate O(t−3 ) and O(t−1 ) where t is the iteration
index of gradient descent, respectively, whereas a two-layer real-valued neural
network with finite width cannot learn a single non-degenerate complex-valued
neuron. We prove that a complex-valued neuron learns a real-valued neuron with
rate Ω(t−3 ), exponentially slower than the O(e−ct ) rate of learning one real-valued
neuron using a real-valued neuron with a constant c. We further verify and extend
these results via simulation experiments in more general settings.

1

Introduction

Complex-valued neural networks (CVNNs) utilize neuron models and operations in the complexvalued domain and are good at handling many complicated scenarios. Pioneering works successfully
apply CVNNs to various areas, such as synthetic aperture radar image classification [1], acoustic
analysis [2], and magnetic resonance image reconstruction [3]. In these applications, input signals
naturally contain phase information. CVNNs seem more suitable than real-valued neural networks
(RVNNs) in phase-dependent tasks since empirical experiments and intuitive explanations suggest that
CVNNs can possess better data representations of phase information and grasp the phase-rotational
dynamics more accurately [4, 5].
Beyond the seemingly promising performance of CVNNs, many efforts have been devoted to the
theoretical understanding of CVNNs. Most existing works demonstrate some desirable properties of
CVNNs such as universal approximation [6, 7], the minimum width for universal approximation [8],
boundedness and complete stability [9], most critical points not being local minimum [10], and
local-minimum-free conditions [11]. Some recent works demonstrate the approximation advantage
of CVNNs in phase-invariant tasks by proving that neuromorphic networks with complex-valued
operations can approximate radial functions with exponentially fewer parameters than RVNNs [11,
12]. However, those studies do not explain why CVNNs outperform RVNNs mostly in phasedependent tasks, particularly when considering the fact that there are functions that can be efficiently
approximated but not efficiently learned with gradient methods [13, 14]. Indeed, the general functional
difference between CVNNs and RVNNS remains unknown.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

