Sampling from Structured Log-Concave
Distributions via a Soft-Threshold Dikin Walk
Oren Mangoubi
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
Yale University

Abstract
Given a Lipschitz or smooth convex function f : K → Rd for a bounded
polytope K := {θ ∈ Rd : Aθ ≤ b}, where A ∈ Rm×d and b ∈ Rm ,
we consider the problem of sampling from the log-concave distribution
π(θ) ∝ e−f (θ) constrained to K. Interest in this problem derives from
its applications to Bayesian inference and differential privacy. We present
a generalization of the Dikin walk to this setting that requires at most
O((md + dL2 R2 ) × mdω−1 log( wδ )) arithmetic operations to sample from π
within error δ > 0 in the total variation distance from a w-warm start. Here
L is the Lipschitz constant of f , K is contained in a ball of radius R and
contains a ball of smaller radius r, and ω ≈ 2.37 is the matrix-multiplication
constant. This improves on the running time of prior works for a range of
structured settings important for the aforementioned inference and privacy
applications. Technically, we depart from previous Dikin walks by adding
a soft-threshold regularizer derived from the Lipschitz or smoothness properties of f to a barrier function for K that allows our version of the Dikin
walk to propose updates that have a high Metropolis acceptance ratio for
f , while at the same time remaining inside the polytope K.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of sampling from a log-concave distribution supported on a polytope: Given a polytope K := {θ ∈ Rd : Aθ ≤ b}, where A ∈ Rm×d and b ∈ Rm , and a convex
function f : K → R, output a sample θ ∈ K from the distribution π(θ) ∝ e−f (θ) . Our interest in this problem derives from its applications to Bayesian inference and differentially
private optimization. In Bayesian inference, the ability to sample from π(θ) ∝ e−f (θ) allows
one to compute Bayesian confidence intervals and other statistics for the Bayesian posterior
distribution of many machine learning models (see e.g. [17, 20, 6]). In differentially private
optimization, sampling from the “exponential mechanism” [36] allows one to get optimal
utility bounds for the problem of minimizing f under ε-differential privacy [2].
The instances of the polytope-constrained sampling problem that arise in these applications
are more general than the two well-studied special cases– the uniform density case (f ≡ 0)
and the unconstrained case (K = Rd ). However, they still have more structure than the
case of a general log-concave function supported
Pn on an arbitrary convex body. For instance,
in Bayesian Lasso logistic regression, f (θ) = i=1 ℓ(θ; xi ), where ℓ is the logistic loss and xi
are datapoints with ∥xi ∥2 ≤ 1, and K = {θ ∈ Rd : ∥θ∥1 ≤ O(1)}; see [44, 43, 26, 47]. Since
the logistic function is both O(1)-smooth and O(1)-Lipschitz, f is both O(n)-Lipschitz and
O(n)-smooth, and K is defined by O(d) inequalities and contained in a ball of radius O(1).
To obtain an ε-differentially private mechanism for the Lasso logisticPregression problem,
n
using the exponential mechanism, the goal is to sample from exp(− Rε i=1 ℓ(θ; xi )), where
ℓ is the logistic loss and K is contained in a ball of radius R. Thus, the log-density is both
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

