HuggingGPT: Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and
its Friends in Hugging Face

Yongliang Shen1,2,∗ , Kaitao Song2,∗,† , Xu Tan2 ,
Dongsheng Li2 , Weiming Lu1,† , Yueting Zhuang1,†
Zhejiang University1 , Microsoft Research Asia2
{syl, luwm, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, {kaitaosong, xuta, dongsli}@microsoft.com
https://github.com/microsoft/JARVIS

Abstract
Solving complicated AI tasks with different domains and modalities is a key step
toward artiﬁcial general intelligence. While there are numerous AI models available for various domains and modalities, they cannot handle complicated AI tasks
autonomously. Considering large language models (LLMs) have exhibited exceptional abilities in language understanding, generation, interaction, and reasoning,
we advocate that LLMs could act as a controller to manage existing AI models
to solve complicated AI tasks, with language serving as a generic interface to empower this. Based on this philosophy, we present HuggingGPT, an LLM-powered
agent that leverages LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) to connect various AI models in machine learning communities (e.g., Hugging Face) to solve AI tasks. Speciﬁcally,
we use ChatGPT to conduct task planning when receiving a user request, select
models according to their function descriptions available in Hugging Face, execute
each subtask with the selected AI model, and summarize the response according
to the execution results. By leveraging the strong language capability of ChatGPT
and abundant AI models in Hugging Face, HuggingGPT can tackle a wide range
of sophisticated AI tasks spanning different modalities and domains and achieve
impressive results in language, vision, speech, and other challenging tasks, which
paves a new way towards the realization of artiﬁcial general intelligence.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], such as ChatGPT, have attracted substantial attention from both academia and industry, due to their remarkable performance on various natural
language processing (NLP) tasks. Based on large-scale pre-training on massive text corpora and reinforcement learning from human feedback [2], LLMs can exhibit superior capabilities in language
understanding, generation, and reasoning. The powerful capability of LLMs also drives many emergent research topics (e.g., in-context learning [1, 7, 8], instruction learning [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14],
and chain-of-thought prompting [15, 16, 17, 18]) to further investigate the huge potential of LLMs,
and brings unlimited possibilities for us for advancing artiﬁcial general intelligence.
Despite these great successes, current LLM technologies are still imperfect and confront some urgent
challenges on the way to building an advanced AI system. We discuss them from these aspects: 1)
Limited to the input and output forms of text generation, current LLMs lack the ability to process
complex information such as vision and speech, regardless of their signiﬁcant achievements in NLP
* The ﬁrst two authors have equal contributions. This work was done when the ﬁrst author was an intern at
Microsoft Research Asia.
†
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

