On Learning Necessary and Sufficient Causal Graphs

Hengrui Cai
University of California, Irvine
hengrc1@uci.edu
Michael I. Jordan
University of California, Berkeley
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu

Yixin Wang
University of Michigan
yixinw@umich.edu
Rui Song
North Carolina State University
songray@gmail.com

Abstract
The causal revolution has stimulated interest in understanding complex relationships in various fields. Most of the existing methods aim to discover causal
relationships among all variables within a complex large-scale graph. However, in
practice, only a small subset of variables in the graph are relevant to the outcomes
of interest. Consequently, causal estimation with the full causal graph—particularly
given limited data—could lead to numerous falsely discovered, spurious variables
that exhibit high correlation with, but exert no causal impact on, the target outcome.
In this paper, we propose learning a class of necessary and sufficient causal graphs
(NSCG) that exclusively comprises causally relevant variables for an outcome of
interest, which we term causal features. The key idea is to employ probabilities of
causation to systematically evaluate the importance of features in the causal graph,
allowing us to identify a subgraph relevant to the outcome of interest. To learn
NSCG from data, we develop a necessary and sufficient causal structural learning
(NSCSL) algorithm, by establishing theoretical properties and relationships between
probabilities of causation and natural causal effects of features. Across empirical
studies of simulated and real data, we demonstrate that NSCSL outperforms existing algorithms and can reveal crucial yeast genes for target heritable traits of
interest.

1

Introduction

Causal discovery has gained significant attention in recent years for disentangling complex causal
relationships in various fields. Building upon the causal graphical model [see e.g., 23], many causal
structural learning algorithms have been developed [see e.g., 35; 7; 34; 14; 4; 27; 46; 44; 48; 5] to
infer the causal knowledge (e.g., causal graphs) from observed data. These algorithms are based
on the assumption of causal sufficiency (the absence of unmeasured confounders). In real-world
applications, to satisfy such an assumption, we strive to learn large-scale causal graphs [see e.g.,
20; 6; 38; 21], in the hope of sufficiently describing how an outcome of interest depends on its
relevant variables.
In addition to sufficiency, it is also crucial to account for the concept of necessity by excluding
redundant variables in explaining the outcome of interest. Failure to do so can result in the inclusion
of spurious variables in the learned causal graphs, which are highly correlated but have no causal
impact on the outcome. These variables can impede causal estimation with limited data and lead to
falsely discovered spurious relationships, leading to poor generalization performance for downstream
prediction [31]. For example, it might be observed that men aged 30 to 40 who buy diapers are also
likely to buy beer. However, beer purchase is a spurious feature for diaper purchases: their correlation
is not necessarily causal, as both purchases might be confounded by a shared cause, such as new
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

