Automatic Grouping for Efficient Cooperative
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning

Yifan Zang1,2 , Jinmin He1,2 , Kai Li1,2∗ , Haobo Fu3 , Qiang Fu3 , Junliang Xing4 , Jian Cheng1,2∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Tencent AI Lab, 4 Tsinghua University
{zangyifan2019,hejinmin2021,kai.li}@ia.ac.cn,
{haobofu,leonfu}@tencent.com,jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn,jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Grouping is ubiquitous in natural systems and is essential for promoting efficiency
in team coordination. This paper proposes a novel formulation of Group-oriented
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (GoMARL), which learns automatic grouping without domain knowledge for efficient cooperation. In contrast to existing
approaches that attempt to directly learn the complex relationship between the joint
action-values and individual utilities, we empower subgroups as a bridge to model
the connection between small sets of agents and encourage cooperation among
them, thereby improving the learning efficiency of the whole team. In particular,
we factorize the joint action-values as a combination of group-wise values, which
guide agents to improve their policies in a fine-grained fashion. We present an automatic grouping mechanism to generate dynamic groups and group action-values.
We further introduce a hierarchical control for policy learning that drives the agents
in the same group to specialize in similar policies and possess diverse strategies
for various groups. Experiments on the StarCraft II micromanagement tasks and
Google Research Football scenarios verify our method’s effectiveness. Extensive
component studies show how grouping works and enhances performance.

1

Introduction

Cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) aims to coordinate multiple agents’ actions
through shared team rewards and has become a helpful tool for solving multi-agent decision-making
problems [47, 9, 44]. Learning centralized policies to address this problem conditions on the full
state, which is usually unavailable during execution due to partial observability or communication
constraints [4, 3]. An alternative paradigm is to learn decentralized policies based on local observations [36, 31]. However, simultaneous exploration suffers from non-stationarity that may cause
unstable learning [7, 50]. The centralized training with decentralized execution (CTDE) inherits the
advantages of these two paradigms and learns decentralized policies in a centralized fashion [23, 15].
Value Function Factorization (VFF) under the CTDE paradigm is a popular approach to MARL,
where a centralized value function is learned from global rewards and factorized into local values to
train decentralized policies. In recent years, value factorization methods have been widely proposed.
Existing methods usually adopt the flat VFF scheme [24], which directly estimates the joint actionvalue from local utilities. These methods achieve remarkable performances from various perspectives,
such as enhancing the expressiveness of the mixing network [27, 33, 38, 37] and encouraging
exploration [21, 19]. However, learning efficient cooperation by directly estimating the joint actionvalues from individual utilities is exceptionally difficult. Phan et al.[24] illustrate that the flat VFF
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

