A Data-Free Approach to Mitigate Catastrophic
Forgetting in Federated Class Incremental Learning
for Vision Tasks
Sara Babakniya
Computer Science
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
babakniy@usc.edu
Chaoyang He
FedML
Sunnyvale, CA
ch@fedml.ai

Zalan Fabian
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
zfabian@usc.edu

Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
soltanol@usc.edu

Salman Avestimehr
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
avestime@usc.edu

Abstract
Deep learning models often suffer from forgetting previously learned information
when trained on new data. This problem is exacerbated in federated learning (FL),
where the data is distributed and can change independently for each user. Many
solutions are proposed to resolve this catastrophic forgetting in a centralized setting.
However, they do not apply directly to FL because of its unique complexities, such
as privacy concerns and resource limitations. To overcome these challenges, this
paper presents a framework for federated class incremental learning that utilizes
a generative model to synthesize samples from past distributions. This data can
be later exploited alongside the training data to mitigate catastrophic forgetting.
To preserve privacy, the generative model is trained on the server using data-free
methods at the end of each task without requesting data from clients. Moreover,
our solution does not demand the users to store old data or models, which gives
them the freedom to join/leave the training at any time. Additionally, we introduce
SuperImageNet, a new regrouping of the ImageNet dataset specifically tailored for
federated continual learning. We demonstrate significant improvements compared
to existing baselines through extensive experiments on multiple datasets.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [40, 29] is a decentralized machine learning technique that enables privacypreserving collaborative learning. In FL, multiple users (clients) train a common (global) model in
coordination with a server without sharing personal data. In recent years, FL has attracted tremendous
attention in both research and industry and has been successfully employed in various fields, such as
autonomous driving [17], next-word prediction [21], health care [13], and many more.
Despite its popularity, deploying FL in practice requires addressing critical challenges, such as
resource limitation and statistical and system heterogeneity [27, 33]. While tackling these challenges
is an essential step towards practical and efficient FL, there are still common assumptions in most FL
frameworks that are too restrictive in realistic scenarios.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

