LIBERO: Benchmarking Knowledge Transfer for
Lifelong Robot Learning
Bo Liu⇤, † Yifeng Zhu⇤ , ‡ Chongkai Gao⇤ , † Yihao Feng
†
Qiang Liu, † Yuke Zhu, †,§ Peter Stone
†
The University of Texas at Austin, § Sony AI, ‡ Tsinghua University
{bliu,yifengz,lqiang,yukez,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
yihao.ac@gmail.com, gck20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
†

Abstract
Lifelong learning offers a promising paradigm of building a generalist agent that
learns and adapts over its lifespan. Unlike traditional lifelong learning problems in
image and text domains, which primarily involve the transfer of declarative knowledge of entities and concepts, lifelong learning in decision-making (LLDM) also
necessitates the transfer of procedural knowledge, such as actions and behaviors.
To advance research in LLDM, we introduce LIBERO, a novel benchmark of
lifelong learning for robot manipulation. Specifically, LIBERO highlights five key
research topics in LLDM: 1) how to efficiently transfer declarative knowledge,
procedural knowledge, or the mixture of both; 2) how to design effective policy
architectures and 3) effective algorithms for LLDM; 4) the robustness of a lifelong
learner with respect to task ordering; and 5) the effect of model pretraining for
LLDM. We develop an extendible procedural generation pipeline that can in
principle generate infinitely many tasks. For benchmarking purpose, we create
four task suites (130 tasks in total) that we use to investigate the above-mentioned
research topics. To support sample-efficient learning, we provide high-quality
human-teleoperated demonstration data for all tasks. Our extensive experiments
present several insightful or even unexpected discoveries: sequential finetuning
outperforms existing lifelong learning methods in forward transfer, no single visual
encoder architecture excels at all types of knowledge transfer, and naive supervised
pretraining can hinder agents’ performance in the subsequent LLDM.2

1

Introduction

A longstanding goal in machine learning is to develop a generalist agent that can perform a wide
range of tasks. While multitask learning [10] is one approach, it is computationally demanding and
not adaptable to ongoing changes. Lifelong learning [65], however, offers a practical solution by
amortizing the learning process over the agent’s lifespan. Its goal is to leverage prior knowledge to
facilitate learning new tasks (forward transfer) and use the newly acquired knowledge to enhance
performance on prior tasks (backward transfer).
The main body of the lifelong learning literature has focused on how agents transfer declarative
knowledge in visual or language tasks, which pertains to declarative knowledge about entities and
concepts [7, 40]. Yet it is understudied how agents transfer knowledge in decision-making tasks,
which involves a mixture of both declarative and procedural knowledge (knowledge about how to do
something). Consider a scenario where a robot, initially trained to retrieve juice from a fridge, fails
⇤

2

Equal contribution.
Check the website at https://libero-project.github.io for the code and the datasets.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

