Toward Re-Identifying Any Animal

Bingliang Jiao1,2,3,5
Lingqiao Liu4
Liying Gao1,2,3
Ruiqi Wu1,2,3
5†
1,2,3†
Guosheng Lin
Peng Wang
Yanning Zhang1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean, China
4
5
The University of Adelaide, Australia
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
The current state of re-identification (ReID) models poses limitations to their
applicability in the open world, as they are primarily designed and trained for
specific categories like person or vehicle. In light of the importance of ReID
technology for tracking wildlife populations and migration patterns, we propose
a new task called “Re-identify Any Animal in the Wild” (ReID-AW). This task
aims to develop a ReID model capable of handling any unseen wildlife category it
encounters. To address this challenge, we have created a comprehensive dataset
called Wildlife-71, which includes ReID data from 71 different wildlife categories.
This dataset is the first of its kind to encompass multiple object categories in
the realm of ReID. Furthermore, we have developed a universal re-identification
model named UniReID specifically for the ReID-AW task. To enhance the model’s
adaptability to the target category, we employ a dynamic prompting mechanism
using category-specific visual prompts. These prompts are generated based on
knowledge gained from a set of pre-given images within the target category. Additionally, we leverage explicit semantic knowledge derived from the large-scale
pre-trained language model, GPT-4. This allows UniReID to focus on regions
that are particularly useful for distinguishing individuals within the target category. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the remarkable generalization
capability of our UniReID model. It showcases promising performance in handling arbitrary wildlife categories, offering significant advancements in the field
of ReID for wildlife conservation and research purposes. Our work is available in
https://github.com/JiaoBL1234/wildlife.

1

Introduction

Object Re-identification (ReID) aims to match identical target objects across non-overlapping camera
views. Although existing ReID methods [7, 22, 24, 31, 33] have made the remarkable process,
their identification capabilities heavily rely on their training benchmarks. This reliance often results
in overfitting to base categories in the training set, e.g., vehicle [22, 33] and person [7, 24, 31].
However, in open-world scenarios, the categories of target objects could be diverse. For example,
ReID technologies are widely used toward animal objects for the purposes of analyzing population
counts and migration patterns. To adapt these ReID methods to new animal categories, users have
to compile large-scale datasets first. This process is time-consuming and poses a significant hurdle
to the open-world applications of ReID methods. This limitation motivates us to propose a novel
and practical task named “Re-identify Any Animal in the Wild”, which aims to construct a universal
†Corresponding author,
bingliang.jiao@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

