The Gain of Ordering in Online Learning

Vasilis Kontonis
UT Austin
vasilis@cs.utexas.edu

Mingchen Ma
UW-Madison
mingchen@cs.wisc.edu

Christos Tzamos
UW-Madison
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
We study fixed-design online learning where the learner is allowed to choose the
order of the datapoints in order to minimize their regret (aka self-directed online
learning). We focus on the fundamental task of online linear regression: the learner
is given a dataset X with n examples in d dimensions and at step t they select a
point xt ∈ X, predict a value yet , and suffer loss (e
yt − w∗ · xt )2 . The goal is to
design algorithms that order the examples and achieve better regret than randomor worst-order online algorithms.
For an arbitrary dataset X, we show that, under the Exponential Time Hypothesis,
no efficient algorithm can approximate the optimal (best-order) regret within a
factor of d1/poly(log log d) .
We then show that, for structured datasets, we can bypass the above hardness result
and achieve nearly optimal regret. When the examples of X are drawn i.i.d. from
the uniform distribution on the sphere, we present an algorithm based on the greedy
heuristic of selecting “easiest” examples first that achieves a log d-approximation
of the optimal regret.

1

Introduction

In online learning [Rob51, Han57, B+ 54, CBL06] the learner receives an example and outputs a
prediction about its label. The true label of the example is then revealed and the learner suffers loss
depending on the “distance” of their prediction from the true label. The goal is to minimize the total
loss over all learning rounds given the knowledge of the correct labels of previous rounds. Under
worst-case assumptions, where an adversary controls the sequence of examples and labels presented
to the learner, a wide range of algorithms based on exponential reweighting [Vov90, LW94, FS97,
Vov95, CBL06] and online convex optimization [Haz16, Ora19] have been developed.
Beyond Worst-Case Online Learning A less adversarial setting is fixed-design (aka transductive)
online learning first considered in [BDKM97] and subsequently studied in [KK05, CBS13, WHGS22].
In fixed-design online learning the pool of potential examples that the learner is going to face during
the learning phase is fixed in advance and known to the learner. There are three main variants of fixeddesign online learning considered in the literature (see, [BDKM97]): the worst or adversarial order
setting, i.e., when an adversary controls the order of examples presented to the learner, the random
order, i.e., when the examples are presented to the learner in a random order, and the best-order
or self-directed setting [GS94], where the learner can choose the next example to predict its label
at every round. Ordering examples during learning is common in practice: in the context of deeplearning, designing the order of examples when training a model is known as curriculum learning
[BLCW09, HW19, WCZ21], where the focus is on finding ways to rank the training examples from
“easy” to “hard”, as well as using the right pacing function for introducing more difficult data. Another
application is direct marketing [LL98, NL11], one common business intelligence task, which is a
process of identifying likely buyers to market products accordingly. In particular, an agent must study
customers’ characteristics and needs, and select customers to market their products. For example, a
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

