P ERFOGRAPH: A Numerical Aware Program Graph
Representation for Performance Optimization and
Program Analysis

Ali TehraniJamsaz1* , Quazi Ishtiaque Mahmud1* , Le Chen1 , Nesreen K. Ahmed2 , Ali Jannesari1
1
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA
{tehrani, mahmud, lechen, jannesari}@iastate.edu
2
Intel Labs, Santa Clara, CA, USA
nesreen.k.ahmed@intel.com

Abstract
The remarkable growth and significant success of machine learning have expanded
its applications into programming languages and program analysis. However, a
key challenge in adopting the latest machine learning methods is the representation of programming languages, which directly impacts the ability of machine
learning methods to reason about programs. The absence of numerical awareness,
aggregate data structure information, and improper way of presenting variables
in previous representation works have limited their performances. To overcome
the limitations and challenges of current program representations, we propose
a graph-based program representation called P ERFOGRAPH. P ERFOGRAPH can
capture numerical information and the aggregate data structure by introducing
new nodes and edges. Furthermore, we propose an adapted embedding method
to incorporate numerical awareness. These enhancements make P ERFOGRAPH
a highly flexible and scalable representation that effectively captures programs’
intricate dependencies and semantics. Consequently, it serves as a powerful tool
for various applications such as program analysis, performance optimization, and
parallelism discovery. Our experimental results demonstrate that P ERFOGRAPH
outperforms existing representations and sets new state-of-the-art results by reducing the error rate by 7.4% (AMD dataset) and 10% (NVIDIA dataset) in the
well-known Device Mapping challenge. It also sets new state-of-the-art results in
various performance optimization tasks like Parallelism Discovery and NUMA and
Prefetchers Configuration prediction.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the remarkable success of machine learning has led to transformative advancements
across numerous fields, including compiler optimization and program analysis. The applications
include compiler heuristics prediction, optimization decisions, parallelism detection, etc. [4, 15].
The training process generally involves feeding program data as input and transforming it into a
representation suitable for machine learning models. The selection of program representation is
crucial, as it can significantly impact the performance of the machine learning model [12]. With
the development of graph neural networks (GNNs), an increasing number of graph representations
of programs have been incorporated into GNN models for program analysis [3, 28, 10]. One of
the pioneering efforts in developing a comprehensive graph representation for programs is P RO G RA ML [14]. P RO G RA ML incorporates control, data, and call dependencies as integral components
of a program’s representation. In contrast to prior sequential learning systems for code, P RO G RA ML
*

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

