CAMEL: Communicative Agents for “Mind”
Exploration of Large Language Model Society
https://www.camel-ai.org

Guohao Li⇤

Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud*

Hani Itani*

Dmitrii Khizbullin

Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

Abstract
The rapid advancement of chat-based language models has led to remarkable
progress in complex task-solving. However, their success heavily relies on human
input to guide the conversation, which can be challenging and time-consuming.
This paper explores the potential of building scalable techniques to facilitate autonomous cooperation among communicative agents, and provides insight into
their “cognitive” processes. To address the challenges of achieving autonomous
cooperation, we propose a novel communicative agent framework named roleplaying . Our approach involves using inception prompting to guide chat agents
toward task completion while maintaining consistency with human intentions. We
showcase how role-playing can be used to generate conversational data for studying
the behaviors and capabilities of a society of agents, providing a valuable resource
for investigating conversational language models. In particular, we conduct comprehensive studies on instruction-following cooperation in multi-agent settings.
Our contributions include introducing a novel communicative agent framework,
offering a scalable approach for studying the cooperative behaviors and capabilities of multi-agent systems, and open-sourcing our library to support research on
communicative agents and beyond: https://github.com/camel-ai/camel.

1

Introduction

“What magical trick makes us intelligent? The trick is that there is no trick. The power of intelligence
stems from our vast diversity, not from any single, perfect principle.”
- Marvin Minsky, The Society of Mind, p. 308
Confronted with the complexities of real-world tasks, solving them often requires multiple steps.
The rapid progress of chat-based large-scale language models (LLMs) has yielded remarkable
achievements in complex task-solving [82, 84, 116, 89, 5, 10, 122, 13]. Nevertheless, it is worth
noting that their success is heavily reliant on human input to guide the conversation in the right
direction. This reliance necessitates users to provide relevant and precise prompts based on their
intentions and the chat agent’s feedback. This can be challenging, time-consuming, and sometimes
impossible. Crafting effective prompts often demands a deep understanding and expertise of a
particular domain of knowledge. Consider an individual who lacks trading expertise; they would find
it difficult to create suitable prompts for directing a chat agent to develop a trading application. This
predicament is raising a crucial question: can we replace human intervention with an autonomous
communicative agent capable of steering the conversation toward task completion with minimal
human supervision? To tackle this issue, it is crucial to conduct more research exploring the potential,
⇤

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

