Learning Mixtures of Gaussians Using the DDPM
Objective
Kulin Shah
UT Austin
kulinshah@utexas.edu

Sitan Chen
Harvard University
sitan@seas.harvard.edu

Adam Klivans
UT Austin
klivans@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Recent works have shown that diffusion models can learn essentially any distribution provided one can perform score estimation. Yet it remains poorly understood
under what settings score estimation is possible, let alone when practical gradientbased algorithms for this task can provably succeed.
In this work, we give the first provably efficient results along these lines for one
of the most fundamental distribution families, Gaussian mixture models. We
prove that gradient descent on the denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM)
objective can efficiently recover the ground truth parameters of the mixture model
in the following two settings:
1. We show gradient descent with random initialization learns mixtures of two
spherical Gaussians in d dimensions with 1/poly(d)-separated centers.
2. We show gradient p
descent with a warm start learns mixtures of K spherical
Gaussians with ⌦( log(min(K, d)))-separated centers.

A key ingredient in our proofs is a new connection between score-based methods
and two other approaches to distribution learning, the expectation-maximization
(EM) algorithm and spectral methods.

1

Introduction

In recent years diffusion models [SSDK+ 20, SDWMG15, SE19] have emerged as a powerful framework for generative modeling and now form the backbone of notable image generation systems like
DALL·E 2 [RDN+ 22], Imagen [SCS+ 22], and Stable Diffusion [RBL+ 22]. At the heart of this
framework is a reduction from distribution learning to denoising or score estimation. That is, in
order to generate new samples from a data distribution q given a collection of independent samples, it
suffices to learn the score function, i.e., the gradient of the log-density of the data distribution when
convolved with varying levels of noise (see Section 1.3). A popular and well-studied objective for
score matching is the denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) objective due to [HJA20].
Optimizing this objective amounts to solving the following type of problem: given a noisy observation
x
e of a sample x from q, estimate the mean of the posterior distribution over x.

While a number of theoretical works [DBTHD21, BMR22, CLL22, DB22, LLT22, LWYL22, Pid22,
WY22, CCL+ 23b, CDD23, LLT23, CCL+ 23a, LWCC23, BDD23] have established rigorous convergence guarantees for diffusion models under mild assumptions on the data distribution, these
works assume the existence of an oracle for score estimation and leave open whether one can actually
provably implement such an oracle for interesting families of data distributions. In practice, the
algorithm of choice for score estimation is simply to train a student network via gradient descent
(GD) to fit a set of examples (x, x
e). We thus ask:
Are there natural data distributions under which GD provably achieves accurate score estimation?

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

