PromptRestorer: A Prompting Image Restoration
Method with Degradation Perception

Cong Wang1∗, Jinshan Pan2∗ , Wei Wang3∗ , Jiangxin Dong2 , Mengzhu Wang4 ,
Yakun Ju1 , Junyang Chen5
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
3
Dalian University of Technology, 4 Hebei University of Technology, 5 Shenzhen University

Abstract
We show that raw degradation features can effectively guide deep restoration
models, providing accurate degradation priors to facilitate better restoration. While
networks that do not consider them for restoration forget gradually degradation
during the learning process, model capacity is severely hindered. To address this,
we propose a Prompting image Restorer, termed as PromptRestorer. Specifically,
PromptRestorer contains two branches: a restoration branch and a prompting
branch. The former is used to restore images, while the latter perceives degradation
priors to prompt the restoration branch with reliable perceived content to guide the
restoration process for better recovery. To better perceive the degradation which is
extracted by a pre-trained model from given degradation observations, we propose
a prompting degradation perception modulator, which adequately considers the
characters of the self-attention mechanism and pixel-wise modulation, to better
perceive the degradation priors from global and local perspectives. To control the
propagation of the perceived content for the restoration branch, we propose gated
degradation perception propagation, enabling the restoration branch to adaptively
learn more useful features for better recovery. Extensive experimental results show
that our PromptRestorer achieves state-of-the-art results on 4 image restoration
tasks, including image deraining, deblurring, dehazing, and desnowing.

1

Introduction

Image restoration aims to recover clear high-quality images from given degraded ones. It is highly
ill-posed since only degraded images can be exploited, statistical observations are thus required to
well-pose the problems [37, 67, 66, 41, 42]. Although conventional approaches can recover images
to some extent, they typically involve solving optimization algorithms that are difficult due to the
non-convexity and non-smooth problems. Additionally, the observations may not always hold, which
can cause algorithms to fail.
With the emergence of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [48] and Transformers [22, 45], which
perform well at implicitly learning the priors from large-scale data, learning-based methods have
dominated recent image restoration tasks and achieved impressive performance [81, 51, 103, 72, 61,
93, 33, 13]. However, these methods are usually built without explicitly considering the specific
degradation information, which accordingly limits model capacity (Case 1 in Fig. 1). An alternative
approach is to design a conditional branch to learn additional information to provide the restoration
network with useful content for modulation [30, 17, 34, 35] (Case 2 in Fig. 1). However, we note
that while conditional branches in these models are learnable, they may not effectively provide
degradation information, as the optimizable parameters result in gradually clearer features during the
learning process, leading to the degradation vanishing which accordingly limits model performance.
∗

These authors equally contribute to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

