Recasting Continual Learning as Sequence Modeling

Soochan Lee
Seoul National University
soochan.lee@vision.snu.ac.kr

Jaehyeon Son
Seoul National University
sjh9876@snu.ac.kr

Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University
gunhee@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In this work, we aim to establish a strong connection between two significant bodies
of machine learning research: continual learning and sequence modeling. That
is, we propose to formulate continual learning as a sequence modeling problem,
allowing advanced sequence models to be utilized for continual learning. Under
this formulation, the continual learning process becomes the forward pass of a
sequence model. By adopting the meta-continual learning (MCL) framework, we
can train the sequence model at the meta-level, on multiple continual learning
episodes. As a specific example of our new formulation, we demonstrate the
application of Transformers and their efficient variants as MCL methods. Our
experiments on seven benchmarks, covering both classification and regression,
show that sequence models can be an attractive solution for general MCL.1

1

Introduction

Continual learning (CL) refers to the ability to learn from a non-stationary stream of data. A CL
data stream is typically a series of distinct tasks, and the model cannot access previous data while
learning the current one. For example, in CL benchmarks based on image classification, each task
typically consists of a small subset of classes. Since the model’s access to the past data is restricted,
standard training with stochastic gradient descent (SGD) consistently overwrites previously learned
knowledge, which often leads to catastrophic forgetting. As learning usually implies SGD updates in
the deep learning literature, most CL approaches try to combat catastrophic forgetting while relying
on SGD to update model parameters. However, using SGD is generally not a necessity of CL; one
may choose any update rule other than SGD.
In this regard, we point out that CL is inherently a sequence modeling problem. The basic structure of CL, which trains a model on a training stream ((x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xT , yT )) and evaluates it
on a test set {(xn , yn )}n , can be considered as predicting the next token yn of the sequence
(x1 , y1 , · · · , xT , yT , xn ). From this perspective, the CL process and the test-time inference are
a sequence model’s forward pass, with no SGD update. Instead, we can train the sequence model
at the meta-level with a set of CL episodes. This meta-continual learning (MCL) framework is
technically equivalent to conventional sequence model training, where a sequence model is trained
on a set of sequences. Therefore, we argue that any recent and future advances in sequence models
can be directly applied to MCL research. As a precaution, our approach should not be confused with
continually learning a sequence model [40, 5], which is a conventional CL setting (not MCL) where
each datapoint x is a sequence.
As a particular instance of our new framework, we test Transformers [43], which are considered as the
current state-of-the-art sequence model. In the past several years, Transformers have revolutionized
various sequence modeling tasks such as language modeling [28, 29, 6], translation [43, 1], speech
recognition/generation [30, 44], and protein analysis [33, 31], to name a few. When Transformerbased language models (LMs) are scaled up and trained with a massive collection of text data, they
1

Code is available at https://github.com/soochan-lee/cl-as-seq

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

