Perturbation Towards Easy Samples Improves
Targeted Adversarial Transferability
Junqi Gao∗,1 , Biqing Qi∗,2,3,4 , Yao Li†, 1 , Zhichang Guo1 , Dong Li1 , Yuming Xing1 , Dazhi
Zhang1
1

2

School of Mathematics, Harbin Institute of Technology
Department of Control Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology
3 3
C I, Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
4
Frontis.AI
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.
{gjunqi97, qibiqing7, mathgzc, arvinlee826}@gmail.com
{yaoli0508, xyuming, zhangdazhi}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
The transferability of adversarial perturbations provides an effective shortcut for
black-box attacks. Targeted perturbations have greater practicality but are more difficult to transfer between models. In this paper, we experimentally and theoretically
demonstrated that neural networks trained on the same dataset have more consistent
performance in High-Sample-Density-Regions (HSDR) of each class instead of
low sample density regions. Therefore, in the target setting, adding perturbations
towards HSDR of the target class is more effective in improving transferability.
However, density estimation is challenging in high-dimensional scenarios. Further
theoretical and experimental verification demonstrates that easy samples with low
loss are more likely to be located in HSDR. Perturbations towards such easy samples in the target class can avoid density estimation for HSDR location. Based on
the above facts, we verified that adding perturbations to easy samples in the target
class improves targeted adversarial transferability of existing attack methods. A
generative targeted attack strategy named Easy Sample Matching Attack (ESMA)
is proposed, which has a higher success rate for targeted attacks and outperforms
the SOTA generative method. Moreover, ESMA requires only 5% of the storage
space and much less computation time comparing to the current SOTA, as ESMA
attacks all classes with only one model instead of seperate models for each class.
Our code is available at https://github.com/gjq100/ESMA

1

Introduction

Deep learning models exhibits substantial computational capacity in many downstream tasks, but
are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [1, 2]. Such attacks tend to be transferable [3, 4] as well as
real-world achievable [5], which makes it implementable in black-box scenarios. Targeted attacks are
known to be more difficult to transfer [4, 6] compared with non-targeted attacks.
Intuitively, directions and transferability of adversarial attacks are closely related, but their relationship
is rarely discussed. [7] found that samples in low density regions of ground truth distribution are more
susceptible to adversarial attacks. They also verified that adversarial perturbations that aligned with
the low density direction of ground truth distribution can lead to better transferability. For targeted
attack scenarios, the direction that can bring more transferability has not been fully researched yet is
not clear.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

