Time Series Kernels based on
Nonlinear Vector AutoRegressive Delay Embeddings

Giovanni De Felice John Y. Goulermas∗ Vladimir V. Gusev
Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool
gdefe@liverpool.ac.uk gusev@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Kernel design is a pivotal but challenging aspect of time series analysis, especially in the context of small datasets. In recent years, Reservoir Computing (RC)
has emerged as a powerful tool to compare time series based on the underlying
dynamics of the generating process rather than the observed data. However, the
performance of RC highly depends on the hyperparameter setting, which is hard
to interpret and costly to optimize because of the recurrent nature of RC. Here,
we present a new kernel for time series based on the recently established equivalence between reservoir dynamics and Nonlinear Vector AutoRegressive (NVAR)
processes. The kernel is non-recurrent and depends on a small set of meaningful
hyperparameters, for which we suggest an effective heuristic. We demonstrate
excellent performance on a wide range of real-world classification tasks, both
in terms of accuracy and speed. This further advances the understanding of RC
representation learning models and extends the typical use of the NVAR framework
to kernel design and representation of real-world time series data.

1

Introduction

Time series are arguably one of the most important types of data in the modern era (Hamilton,
2020) and ubiquitous both in scientific research (Strogatz, 2018) and practical applications (Zhang
et al., 2018; Zeroual et al., 2020). A key element in the design of most machine learning protocols
for time series is a quantification of similarity (Ding et al., 2008; Abanda et al., 2019; Echihabi
et al., 2020). This is especially true for kernel methods (Schölkopf et al., 2001), which search
for linear solutions after projecting the data into a higher (possibly infinite) dimensional space
and represent an effective alternative to non-linear models. The performance of kernel methods
is heavily impacted by the definition of a positive semi-definite (PSD) similarity function for the
type of data at hand, i.e., a kernel. However, their design is challenging for structured data such
as univariate (UTS) and multivariate time series (MTS), which exhibit temporal autocorrelation,
inter-attributes (or dimensions) dependencies and possibly a variety of temporal distortions and
misalignments (Paparrizos et al., 2020).
To overcome this, a promising approach is to identify and compare the underlying dynamics rather
than the raw observed data. Notably, kernels based on Reservoir Computing (RC) stand out in this
context (Chen et al., 2013; Bianchi et al., 2020). RC-based kernels use a randomized and untrained
layer of recurrently connected nodes (the reservoir) to map each time series into a rich dynamical
feature space. The similarity is then obtained by comparing individual readouts capturing dynamics.
In practice, RC is highly sensitive to a large set of hyperparameters having little interpretability, the
optimization of which is challenging for the comprehensive range of values.
∗

Deceased May 2022

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

