A Unified Algorithm Framework for
Unsupervised Discovery of Skills based on
Determinantal Point Process
Jiayu Chen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
chen3686@purdue.edu

Vaneet Aggarwal
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
vaneet@purdue.edu

Tian Lan
The George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
tlan@gwu.edu

Abstract
Learning rich skills under the option framework without supervision of external
rewards is at the frontier of reinforcement learning research. Existing works mainly
fall into two distinctive categories: variational option discovery that maximizes
the diversity of the options through a mutual information loss (while ignoring
coverage) and Laplacian-based methods that focus on improving the coverage of
options by increasing connectivity of the state space (while ignoring diversity). In
this paper, we show that diversity and coverage in unsupervised option discovery
can indeed be unified under the same mathematical framework. To be specific, we
explicitly quantify the diversity and coverage of the learned options through a novel
use of Determinantal Point Process (DPP) and optimize these objectives to discover
options with both superior diversity and coverage. Our proposed algorithm, ODPP,
has undergone extensive evaluation on challenging tasks created with Mujoco
and Atari. The results demonstrate that our algorithm outperforms state-of-the-art
baselines in both diversity- and coverage-driven categories.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has achieved impressive performance in a variety of scenarios, such
as games [1, 2], robotic control [3, 4], and transportation [5, 6]. However, most of its applications
rely on carefully-crafted, task-specific rewards to drive exploration and learning, limiting its use
in real-life scenarios often with sparse or no rewards. To this end, utilizing unsupervised option
discovery – acquiring rich skills without supervision of environmental rewards by building temporal
action-sequence abstractions (denoted as options), to support efficient learning can be essential. The
acquired skills are not specific to a single task and thus can be utilized to solve multiple downstream
tasks by implementing a corresponding meta-controller that operates hierarchically on these skills.
Existing unsupervised option discovery approaches broadly fall into two categories: (1) Variational
option discovery, e.g., [7, 8, 9], which aims to improve diversity of discovered options by maximizing
the mutual information [10] between the options and trajectories they generate. It tends to reinforce
already discovered behaviors for improved diversity rather than exploring (e.g., visiting poorlyconnected states) to discover new ones, so the learned options may have limited coverage of the
state space. (2) Laplacian-based option discovery, e.g., [11, 12], which clusters the state space using
a Laplacian spectrum embedding of the state transition graph, and then learns options to connect
different clusters. This approach is shown to improve the algebraic connectivity of the state space
[13] and reduce expected covering time during exploration. However, the discovered options focus on
improving connectivity between certain clusters and thus could be homogeneous and lack diversity.
Note that coverage in this paper is defined as a property with respect to a single option, which can be
measured as the number of state clusters traversed by an option trajectory. By maximizing coverage
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

