Optimal Excess Risk Bounds for Empirical Risk
Minimization on p-Norm Linear Regression

Ayoub El Hanchi
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
aelhan@cs.toronto.edu

Murat A. Erdogdu
University of Toronto & Vector Institute
erdogdu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We study the performance of empirical risk minimization on the p-norm linear
regression problem for p ∈ (1, ∞). We show that, in the realizable case, under no
moment assumptions, and up to a distribution-dependent constant, O(d) samples
are enough to exactly recover the target. Otherwise, for p ∈ [2, ∞), and under weak
moment assumptions on the target and the covariates, we prove a high probability
excess risk bound on the empirical risk minimizer whose leading term matches, up
to a constant that depends only on p, the asymptotically exact rate. We extend this
result to the case p ∈ (1, 2) under mild assumptions that guarantee the existence of
the Hessian of the risk at its minimizer.

1

Introduction

Real-valued linear prediction is a fundamental problem in machine learning. Traditionally, the square
loss has been the default choice for this problem. The performance of empirical risk minimization
(ERM) on linear regression under the square loss, as measured by the excess risk, has been studied
extensively both from an asymptotic [Whi82; LC83; Vaa98] and a non-asymptotic point of view
[AC11; HKZ12; Oli16; LM16; Sau18; Mou22]. An achievement of the last decade has been the
development of non-asymptotic excess risk bounds for ERM on this problem under weak assumptions,
and which match, up to constant factors, the asymptotically exact rate.
In this paper, we consider the more general family of p-th power losses t 7→ |t|p for a user-chosen
p ∈ (1, ∞). Under mild assumptions, the classical asymptotic theory can still be applied to ERM
under these losses, yielding the asymptotic distribution of the excess risk. However, to the best of our
knowledge, the problem of deriving non-asymptotic excess risk bounds for ERM for p ∈ (1, ∞) \ {2}
remains open, and, as we discuss below, resists the application of standard tools from the literature.
Our motivation for extending the case p = 2 to p ∈ (1, ∞) is twofold. Firstly, the freedom in the
choice of p allows us to better capture our prediction goals. For example, we might only care about
how accurate our prediction is on average, in which case, the choice p = 1 is appropriate. At the other
extreme, we might insist that we do as well as possible on a subset of inputs of probability 1, in which
case the choice p = ∞ is best. A choice of p ∈ (1, ∞) therefore allows us to interpolate between
these two extremes, with the case p = 2 offering a balanced choice. Secondly, different choices of
p have complementary qualities. On the one hand, small values of p allow us to operate with weak
moment assumptions, making them applicable in more general cases. On the other, larger values of
p yield predictions whose optimality is less sensitive to changes in the underlying distribution: for
p = ∞, the best predictor depends only on the support of this distribution.
To sharpen our discussion, let us briefly formalize our problem. There is an input random vector
X ∈ Rd and output random variable Y ∈ R, and we are provided
(Xi , Yi )ni=1 .
 with n i.i.d. samples
d
We select our set of predictors to be the class of linear functions x 7→ ⟨w, x⟩ | w ∈ R , and choose
a value p ∈ (1, ∞) with the corresponding loss ℓp (t) := |t|p /[p(p − 1)]. Using this loss, we define
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

