Evaluating and Inducing Personality
in Pre-trained Language Models

Guangyuan Jiang 1, 2, ‹
jgy@stu.pku.edu.cn

Manjie Xu 1, ‹
manjietsu@gmail.com

Wenjuan Han 4,
wjhan@bjtu.edu.cn

Chi Zhang 3,
zhangchi@bigai.ai

Song-Chun Zhu 1, 3
s.c.zhu@pku.edu.cn
Yixin Zhu 1,
yixin.zhu@pku.edu.cn

‹

1

G. Jiang and M. Xu contributed equally.
corresponding authors
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University 2 Yuanpei College, Peking University
3
National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
4
Beijing Jiaotong University
https://sites.google.com/view/machinepersonality

Abstract
Standardized and quantified evaluation of machine behaviors is a crux of understanding LLMs. In this study, we draw inspiration from psychometric studies by
leveraging human personality theory as a tool for studying machine behaviors.
Originating as a philosophical quest for human behaviors, the study of personality delves into how individuals differ in thinking, feeling, and behaving. Toward
building and understanding human-like social machines, we are motivated to ask:
Can we assess machine behaviors by leveraging human psychometric tests in a
principled and quantitative manner? If so, can we induce a specific personality in LLMs? To answer these questions, we introduce the Machine Personality
Inventory (MPI) tool for studying machine behaviors; MPI follows standardized
personality tests, built upon the Big Five Personality Factors (Big Five) theory
and personality assessment inventories. By systematically evaluating LLMs with
MPI, we provide the first piece of evidence demonstrating the efficacy of MPI in
studying LLMs behaviors. We further devise a P ERSONALITY P ROMPTING (P2 )
method to induce LLMs with specific personalities in a controllable way, capable
of producing diverse and verifiable behaviors. We hope this work sheds light on
future studies by adopting personality as the essential indicator for various downstream tasks, and could further motivate research into equally intriguing human-like
machine behaviors.

1

Introduction

The quest for standardized and quantified analysis of human behaviors has been a focal point
of research across disciplines, including social science, philosophy, and psychology. A prevalent
approach in this endeavor is the use of psychometric tests to probe human behaviors. Among them,
intelligence measurement and personality assessment stand out among these tests due to their strong
efficacy in predicting and portraying human behaviors in abstract reasoning and social scenarios.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

