InstanT: Semi-supervised Learning with
Instance-dependent Thresholds

Muyang Li1 , Runze Wu2 , Haoyu Liu2 , Jun Yu3 , Xun Yang3 , Bo Han4 , Tongliang Liu1∗
3

1
Sydney AI Center, The University of Sydney; 2 FUXI AI Lab, NetEase;
University of Science and Technology of China; 4 Hong Kong Baptist University

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been a fundamental challenge in machine learning for decades. The primary family of SSL algorithms, known as pseudo-labeling,
involves assigning pseudo-labels to confident unlabeled instances and incorporating
them into the training set. Therefore, the selection criteria of confident instances
are crucial to the success of SSL. Recently, there has been growing interest in the
development of SSL methods that use dynamic or adaptive thresholds. Yet, these
methods typically apply the same threshold to all samples, or use class-dependent
thresholds for instances belonging to a certain class, while neglecting instance-level
information. In this paper, we propose the study of instance-dependent thresholds,
which has the highest degree of freedom compared with existing methods. Specifically, we devise a novel instance-dependent threshold function for all unlabeled
instances by utilizing their instance-level ambiguity and the instance-dependent
error rates of pseudo-labels, so instances that are more likely to have incorrect
pseudo-labels will have higher thresholds. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our
instance-dependent threshold function provides a bounded probabilistic guarantee
for the correctness of the pseudo-labels it assigns. Our implementation is available
at https://github.com/tmllab/2023_NeurIPS_InstanT.

1

Introduction

In recent years, machine learning algorithms trained on abundant accurately labeled data have
demonstrated unparalleled performance across different domains. However, in practice, it is often
financially infeasible to collect reliable labels for all samples in large-scale datasets. A more practical
solution is to select a subset of the data and use expert annotations to assign labels to them [39]. This
scenario, where the majority of the data is unlabeled and only a portion has reliable labels, is known
as semi-supervised learning (SSL). In SSL, our aim is usually to learn a classifier that has comparable
performance to the one trained in a fully supervised manner. To achieve this, the majority of existing
approaches adopt a training strategy named pseudo-labeling. More specifically, a model will be
trained on a small set of labeled data first, and this model will then be applied to the larger unlabeled
set to assign predicted pseudo-labels to them. If the model’s confidence in an instance exceeds a
certain threshold, then this instance along with its predicted pseudo-label will be added to the training
set for this iteration. Thus by iteratively expanding the training set, if the expanded instances are
indeed assigned with correct labels, then the classification error will be gradually reduced [43].
However, since the model is bound to make mistakes, the newly added training samples are not
always assigned with correct labels, which generates label noise [5, 46, 44]. Under the influence of
label noise, the model will gradually over-fits to noisy supervision, hence accumulating generalization
error. Since the model makes predictions based on instance features, it is usually assumed that for
∗

Correspondence to Tongliang Liu (tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

