FreeMask: Synthetic Images with Dense
Annotations Make Stronger Segmentation Models

Lihe Yang1 Xiaogang Xu2,3 Bingyi Kang4 Yinghuan Shi5 Hengshuang Zhao1∗
1
2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Zhejiang Lab
Zhejiang University
4
5
ByteDance
Nanjing University
https://github.com/LiheYoung/FreeMask

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has witnessed tremendous progress due to the proposal
of various advanced network architectures. However, they are extremely hungry
for delicate annotations to train, and the acquisition is laborious and unaffordable.
Therefore, we present FreeMask in this work, which resorts to synthetic images
from generative models to ease the burden of both data collection and annotation
procedures. Concretely, we first synthesize abundant training images conditioned
on the semantic masks provided by realistic datasets. This yields extra well-aligned
image-mask training pairs for semantic segmentation models. We surprisingly
observe that, solely trained with synthetic images, we already achieve comparable
performance with real ones (e.g., 48.3 vs. 48.5 mIoU on ADE20K, and 49.3 vs. 50.5
on COCO-Stuff). Then, we investigate the role of synthetic images by joint training
with real images, or pre-training for real images. Meantime, we design a robust
filtering principle to suppress incorrectly synthesized regions. In addition, we
propose to inequally treat different semantic masks to prioritize those harder ones
and sample more corresponding synthetic images for them. As a result, either
jointly trained or pre-trained with our filtered and re-sampled synthesized images,
segmentation models can be greatly enhanced, e.g., 48.7 → 52.0 on ADE20K.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims to provide pixel-wise dense predictions for a whole image. With
advanced network architectures, the performance has been steadily boosted over the years, and
has been applied to various real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving [40, 3], semantic
editing [39, 56], scene reconstruction [36], etc. However, both academic benchmarks and realistic
scenarios, suffer from the laborious labeling process and unaffordable cost, leading to limited training
pairs, e.g., Cityscapes [16] with only 3K labeled images and ADE20K [76] with only 20K labeled
images. We are wondering, whether these modern architectures can be further harvested when more
synthetic training data from the corresponding scenes are fed.
Fortunately, the research of generative models has reached certain milestones. Especially, denoising
diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [27, 51], are achieving astonishing text-to-image synthesis
ability in the recent three years. Can these synthetic images from generative models benefit our
semantic segmentation task? There have been some concurrent works [25, 54, 4, 2, 64] sharing
similar motivations as ours, i.e., using synthetic data to enhance the semantic understanding tasks.
However, they have only explored the classification task, which is relatively easier to be boosted even
with raw unlabeled images [11, 24, 12, 23]. Moreover, they mostly focus on the few-shot scenario,
rather than taking the challenging fully-supervised scenario into account. In comparison, in this work,
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

