Residual Alignment:
Uncovering the Mechanisms of Residual Networks

Jianing Li
University of Toronto
jrobert.li@mail.utoronto.ca

Vardan Papyan
University of Toronto
vardan.papyan@utoronto.ca

Abstract
The ResNet architecture has been widely adopted in deep learning due to its
significant boost to performance through the use of simple skip connections, yet
the underlying mechanisms leading to its success remain largely unknown. In
this paper, we conduct a thorough empirical study of the ResNet architecture in
classification tasks by linearizing its constituent residual blocks using Residual
Jacobians and measuring their singular value decompositions. Our measurements
(code) reveal a process called Residual Alignment (RA) characterized by four
properties:
(RA1) intermediate representations of a given input are equispaced on a line,
embedded in high dimensional space, as observed by Gai and Zhang [2021];
(RA2) top left and right singular vectors of Residual Jacobians align with each
other and across different depths;
(RA3) Residual Jacobians are at most rank C for fully-connected ResNets, where
C is the number of classes; and
(RA4) top singular values of Residual Jacobians scale inversely with depth.
RA consistently occurs in models that generalize well, in both fully-connected
and convolutional architectures, across various depths and widths, for varying
numbers of classes, on all tested benchmark datasets, but ceases to occur once the
skip connections are removed. It also provably occurs in a novel mathematical
model we propose. This phenomenon reveals a strong alignment between residual
branches of a ResNet (RA2+4), imparting a highly rigid geometric structure to the
intermediate representations as they progress linearly through the network (RA1)
up to the final layer, where they undergo Neural Collapse.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background

The Residual Network (ResNet) architecture [He et al., 2016a], a special case of Highway Networks
[Srivastava et al., 2015], has taken the field of deep learning by storm, since its proposal in 2015. The
incredibly simple architectural modification of adding a skip connection, spanning a set of layers, has
become a go-to architectural choice for deep learning researchers and practitioners alike. Initially
applied in computer vision, it has since been integrated as a crucial component in biomedical imaging
and generative models via the U-Net [Ronneberger et al., 2015], natural language processing through
the Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017], and reinforcement learning as seen in the case of AlphaGo
Zero [Silver et al., 2017].
The ResNet architecture first passes an input x through initial layers I (comprising a sequence of
convolution, batch normalization, and ReLU operations), depending on trainable parameters W0 , to
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

