Uni-ControlNet: All-in-One Control to
Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Shihao Zhao†
The University of Hong Kong
shzhao@cs.hku.hk

Dongdong Chen∗
Microsoft
cddlyf@gmail.com

Jianmin Bao
Microsoft
jianmin.bao@microsoft.com

Shaozhe Hao
The University of Hong Kong
szhao@cs.hku.hk

Yen-Chun Chen
Microsoft
yen-chun.chen@microsoft.com
Lu Yuan
Microsoft
luyuan@microsoft.com

Kwan-Yee K. Wong∗
The University of Hong Kong
kykwong@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Text-to-Image diffusion models have made tremendous progress over the past two
years, enabling the generation of highly realistic images based on open-domain
text descriptions. However, despite their success, text descriptions often struggle to
adequately convey detailed controls, even when composed of long and complex
texts. Moreover, recent studies have also shown that these models face challenges
in understanding such complex texts and generating the corresponding images.
Therefore, there is a growing need to enable more control modes beyond text
description. In this paper, we introduce Uni-ControlNet, a unified framework that
allows for the simultaneous utilization of different local controls (e.g., edge maps,
depth map, segmentation masks) and global controls (e.g., CLIP image embeddings)
in a flexible and composable manner within one single model. Unlike existing
methods, Uni-ControlNet only requires the fine-tuning of two additional adapters
upon frozen pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models, eliminating the huge cost
of training from scratch. Moreover, thanks to some dedicated adapter designs,
Uni-ControlNet only necessitates a constant number (i.e., 2) of adapters, regardless
of the number of local or global controls used. This not only reduces the fine-tuning
costs and model size, making it more suitable for real-world deployment, but also
facilitate composability of different conditions. Through both quantitative and
qualitative comparisons, Uni-ControlNet demonstrates its superiority over existing
methods in terms of controllability, generation quality and composability. Code is
available at https://github.com/ShihaoZhaoZSH/Uni-ControlNet.

1

Introduction

In recent two years, diffusion models [1–10] have gained significant attention due to their remarkable
performance in image synthesis tasks. Therefore, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [6, 7, 11–19]
have emerged as a popular choice for synthesizing high-quality images based on textual inputs. By
training on large-scale datasets with large models, these T2I diffusion models demonstrate exceptional
ability in creating images that closely resemble the content described in text descriptions, and facilitate
∗

Corresponding Author, † Intern at Microsoft

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

