Neural-Logic Human-Object Interaction Detection

Liulei Li1 ,
1

Jianan Wei2 ,

Wenguan Wang2∗,

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

2

Yi Yang2

CCAI, Zhejiang University

https://github.com/weijianan1/LogicHOI

Abstract
The interaction decoder utilized in prevalent Transformer-based HOI detectors
typically accepts pre-composed human-object pairs as inputs. Though achieving
remarkable performance, such paradigm lacks feasibility and cannot explore novel
combinations over entities during decoding. We present L OGIC HOI, a new HOI
detector that leverages neural-logic reasoning and Transformer to infer feasible
interactions between entities. Specifically, we modify the self-attention mechanism in
vanilla Transformer, enabling it to reason over the ⟨human, action, object⟩ triplet
and constitute novel interactions. Meanwhile, such reasoning process is guided by
two crucial properties for understanding HOI: affordances (the potential actions
an object can facilitate) and proxemics (the spatial relations between humans and
objects). We formulate these two properties in first-order logic and ground them
into continuous space to constrain the learning process of our approach, leading
to improved performance and zero-shot generalization capabilities. We evaluate
L OGIC HOI on V-COCO and HICO-DET under both normal and zero-shot setups,
achieving significant improvements over existing methods.

1

Introduction

The main purpose of human-object interaction (HOI) detection is to interpret the intricate relationships
between human and other objects within a given scene[1]. Rather than traditional visual perception
tasks that focus on the recognition of objects or individual actions, HOI detection places a greater
emphasis on reasoning over entities[2], and can thus benefit a wide range of scene understanding
tasks, including image synthesis[3], visual question answering[4, 5], and caption generation[6, 7], etc.
Current top-leading HOI detection methods typically adopt a Transformer [8]-based architecture,
wherein the ultimate predictions are delivered by an interaction decoder. Such decoder takes consolidated embeddings of predetermined human-object pairs[9–20] as inputs, and it solely needs to infer
the action or interaction categories of given entity pairs. Though achieving remarkable performance over
CNN-based work, such paradigm suffers from several limitations: first, the principal focus of them
is to optimize the samples with known concepts, ignoring a large number of feasible combinations
that were never encountered within the training dataset, resulting in poor zero-shot generalization
ability[21]. Second, the human-object pairs are usually proposed by a simple MLP layer[2, 22–37] or
simultaneously constructed when predicting humans and objects[10–17], without explicit modeling
of the complex relationships among subjects, objects, and the ongoing interactions that happened
between them. Third, existing methods lack the reasoning ability, caused by ignoring the key nature
of HOI detection, i.e., the interaction should be mined between entities, but not pre-given pairs.
In light of the above, we propose to solve HOI detection via the integration of Transformer and
logic-induced HOI relation learning, resulting in L OGIC HOI, which enjoys the advantage of robust
distributed representation of entities as well as principled symbolic reasoning [38, 39]. Though
∗

Corresponding Author: Wenguan Wang.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

