PAPR: Proximity Attention Point Rendering

Yanshu Zhang∗, Shichong Peng∗ , Alireza Moazeni, Ke Li
APEX Lab
School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
{yanshu_zhang,shichong_peng,seyed_alireza_moazenipourasil,keli}@sfu.ca

Abstract
Learning accurate and parsimonious point cloud representations of scene surfaces
from scratch remains a challenge in 3D representation learning. Existing pointbased methods often suffer from the vanishing gradient problem or require a large
number of points to accurately model scene geometry and texture. To address
these limitations, we propose Proximity Attention Point Rendering (PAPR), a novel
method that consists of a point-based scene representation and a differentiable renderer. Our scene representation uses a point cloud where each point is characterized
by its spatial position, influence score, and view-independent feature vector. The
renderer selects the relevant points for each ray and produces accurate colours using
their associated features. PAPR effectively learns point cloud positions to represent
the correct scene geometry, even when the initialization drastically differs from the
target geometry. Notably, our method captures fine texture details while using only
a parsimonious set of points. We also demonstrate four practical applications of
our method: zero-shot geometry editing, object manipulation, texture transfer, and
exposure control. More results and code are available on our project website.

1

Introduction

Learning 3D representations is crucial for computer vision and graphics applications. Recent neural
rendering methods [22, 42, 50, 23, 15, 48] leverage deep neural networks within the rendering
pipelines to capture complex geometry and texture details from multi-view RGB images. These
methods have many practical applications, such as generating high-quality 3D models [18, 43, 3, 7]
and enabling interactive virtual reality experiences [29, 25, 52]. However, balancing representation
capacity and computational complexity remains a challenge. Large-scale representations offer better
quality but demand more resources. In contrast, parsimonious representations strike a balance
between efficiency and quality, enabling efficient learning, processing, and manipulation of 3D data.
3D representations can be categorized into volumetric and surface representations. Recent advances
in volumetric representations [22, 48, 50, 37, 17] have shown impressive results in rendering quality.
However, the cubic growth in encoded information as the scene radius increases makes volumetric
representations computationally expensive to process. For example, to render a volumetric representation, all the information along a ray needs to be aggregated, which requires evaluating many
samples along each ray. In contrast, surface representations are more parsimonious and efficient since
the encoded information grows quadratically. So surface representations can be rendered with much
fewer samples.
Efficient surface representations include meshes and surface point clouds. Meshes are difficult to learn
from scratch, since many constraints (e.g., no self-intersection) need to be enforced. Additionally, the
topology of the initial mesh is fixed, making it impossible to change during training [43]. In contrast,
∗

Denotes equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

