A Causal Framework for
Decomposing Spurious Variations

Drago Plecko and Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
One of the fundamental challenges found throughout the data sciences is to explain why things happen in specific ways, or through which mechanisms a certain
variable X exerts influences over another variable Y . In statistics and machine
learning, significant efforts have been put into developing machinery to estimate
correlations across variables efficiently. In causal inference, a large body of literature is concerned with the decomposition of causal effects under the rubric of
mediation analysis. However, many variations are spurious in nature, including
different phenomena throughout the applied sciences. Despite the statistical power
to estimate correlations and the identification power to decompose causal effects,
there is still little understanding of the properties of spurious associations and how
they can be decomposed in terms of the underlying causal mechanisms. In this
manuscript, we develop formal tools for decomposing spurious variations in both
Markovian and Semi-Markovian models. We prove the first results that allow a
non-parametric decomposition of spurious effects and provide sufficient conditions
for the identification of such decompositions. The described approach has several
applications, ranging from explainable and fair AI to questions in epidemiology
and medicine, and we empirically demonstrate its use.

1

Introduction

Understanding the relationships of cause and effect is one of the core tenets of scientific inquiry and
the human ability to explain why events occurred in the way they did. Hypotheses on possible causal
relations in the sciences are often generated based on observing correlations in the world, after which
a rigorous process using either observational or experimental data is employed to ascertain whether
the observed relationships are indeed causal. One common way of articulating questions of causation
is through the average treatment effect (ATE), also known as the total effect (TE), given by

E[y | do(x1 )] − E[y | do(x0 )],

(1)

where do(·) symbolizes the do-operator [9], and x0 , x1 are two distinct values attained by the variable
X. Instead of just quantifying the causal effect, researchers are more broadly interested in determining
which causal mechanisms transmit the change from X to Y . Such questions have received much
attention and have been investigated under the rubric of causal mediation analysis [3, 12, 10, 14].
Often, however, the causal relationship may be entirely absent or account only for a part of the
initially observed correlation. In these cases, the spurious (or confounded) variations between X
and Y play a central role in explaining the phenomenon at hand. Interestingly, though, tools for
decomposing spurious variations are almost entirely missing from the literature in causal inference 1 .
1

The only previous work which considers decompositions of spurious effects is [16]. However, this work
considers the specific case of the covariance operator, and no claims are made about the general setting.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

