Fine-Grained Human Feedback Gives Better Rewards
for Language Model Training

Zeqiu Wu1∗ Yushi Hu1∗ Weijia Shi1 Nouha Dziri2 Alane Suhr3
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu45 Noah A. Smith12 Mari Ostendorf1 Hannaneh Hajishirzi12
1
University of Washington 2 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
3
University of California, Berkeley 4 University of California, San Diego 5 MosaicML

Abstract
Language models (LMs) often exhibit undesirable text generation behaviors, including generating false, toxic, or irrelevant outputs. Reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF)—where human preference judgments on LM outputs are
transformed into a learning signal—has recently shown promise in addressing these
issues. However, such holistic feedback conveys limited information on long text
outputs; it does not indicate which aspects of the outputs influenced user preference;
e.g., which parts contain what type(s) of errors. In this paper, we use fine-grained
human feedback (e.g., which sentence is false, which sub-sentence is irrelevant) as
an explicit training signal. We introduce F INE -G RAINED R LHF, a framework that
enables training and learning from reward functions that are fine-grained in two
respects: (1) density, providing a reward after every segment (e.g., a sentence) is
generated; and (2) incorporating multiple reward models associated with different
feedback types (e.g., factual incorrectness, irrelevance, and information incompleteness). We conduct experiments on detoxification and long-form question
answering to illustrate how learning with such reward functions leads to improved
performance, supported by both automatic and human evaluation. Additionally,
we show that LM behaviors can be customized using different combinations of
fine-grained reward models. We release all data, collected human feedback, and
codes at https://FineGrainedRLHF.github.io.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art AI is built on pre-trained language models that are then trained through interaction
with humans [29, 28, 9], with a combination of supervised learning and reinforcement learning.
Incorporating human feedback into the process of language model (LM) training has been shown
as effective to reduce false, toxic and other undesired model generation outputs [29, 3, 2, 33, 10].
Many of these studies adopt reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [46], a framework
that converts human feedback into an effective LM training signal to reach these goals. Specifically,
humans are presented with two or more outputs and asked to select one or rank them, and this signal
is then used to train a reward model, which computes a single scalar reward for each LM-generated
sequence. The LM is then trained with RL to optimize the reward it receives (from the reward model).
Such a reward provides a relatively sparse training signal, especially for tasks that require the
generation of long-form text—making RLHF in such domains unreliable [33]. Furthermore, previous
research [8, 18, 11, 45, 25, 43] into automated evaluation of generated text shows that it can be
challenging for human annotators to reliably compare the overall quality of two or more model
outputs when the outputs contain a mixture of diverse undesired behaviors. They demonstrate how
categorizing and localizing model errors (i.e., fine-grained evaluation) provides explicit insights about
which part of the model output has what type of problem. We thus ask the question: how can we
improve rewards for LM training via RLHF by using more fine-grained human feedback?
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to <Zeqiu Wu: zeqiuwu1@uw.edu>, <Yushi Hu: yushihu@uw.edu>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

