Context Shift Reduction for Offline
Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Yunkai Gao1,2,3 Rui Zhang2 Jiaming Guo2 Fan Wu2,3,4,5 Qi Yi1,2,3
Shaohui Peng5 Siming Lan1,2,3 Ruizhi Chen5 Zidong Du2,6 Xing Hu2,6
Qi Guo2 Ling Li4,5 Yunji Chen2,4 ∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China, USTC, Hefei, China
2
State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Cambricon Technologies
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, Beijing, China
5
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
6
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC, Shanghai, China
{gyk314, yiqi, lansm}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{wufan2020, pengshaohui, ruizhi, liling}@iscas.ac.cn
{zhangrui, guojiaming, duzidong, huxing, guoqi, cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Offline meta-reinforcement learning (OMRL) utilizes pre-collected offline datasets
to enhance the agent’s generalization ability on unseen tasks. However, the context
shift problem arises due to the distribution discrepancy between the contexts used
for training (from the behavior policy) and testing (from the exploration policy).
The context shift problem leads to incorrect task inference and further deteriorates
the generalization ability of the meta-policy. Existing OMRL methods either
overlook this problem or attempt to mitigate it with additional information. In this
paper, we propose a novel approach called Context Shift Reduction for OMRL
(CSRO) to address the context shift problem with only offline datasets. The key
insight of CSRO is to minimize the influence of policy in context during both the
meta-training and meta-test phases. During meta-training, we design a max-min
mutual information representation learning mechanism to diminish the impact of
the behavior policy on task representation. In the meta-test phase, we introduce the
non-prior context collection strategy to reduce the effect of the exploration policy.
Experimental results demonstrate that CSRO significantly reduces the context shift
and improves the generalization ability, surpassing previous methods across various
challenging domains.

1

Introduction

Meta-Reinforcement Learning (RL) has made significant strides in enhancing agents’ generalization
capabilities for unseen tasks. Meta-RL methods [6, 5, 27] leverage vast amounts of trajectories
gathered across a task set during the meta-training phase to learn the shared structures of tasks.
During meta-testing, these meta-RL methods exhibit swift adaptation to new tasks with a limited
number of trials. Context-based meta-RL methods [27, 39, 7] have emerged as the most popular
approaches, showcasing remarkable performance and rapid task adaptation. These methods first
acquire task information by learning a task representation from the context (i.e., the set of transitions)
and subsequently condition the policy on the task representation to execute appropriate actions.
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

