State-space Models with Layer-wise Nonlinearity are
Universal Approximators with Exponential Decaying
Memory

Shida Wang
Department of Mathematics
National University of Singapore
e0622338@u.nus.edu

Beichen Xue
Department of Statistics and Data Science
National University of Singapore
e0773769@u.nus.edu

Abstract
State-space models have gained popularity in sequence modelling due to their
simple and efficient network structures. However, the absence of nonlinear activation along the temporal direction limits the model’s capacity. In this paper,
we prove that stacking state-space models with layer-wise nonlinear activation is
sufficient to approximate any continuous sequence-to-sequence relationship. Our
findings demonstrate that the addition of layer-wise nonlinear activation enhances
the model’s capacity to learn complex sequence patterns. Meanwhile, it can be seen
both theoretically and empirically that the state-space models do not fundamentally
resolve the issue of exponential decaying memory. Theoretical results are justified
by numerical verifications.

1

Introduction

State-space model [1–5] is an emerging family of neural networks specialized in learning long
sequence relationships. It achieves significantly better performance compared with attention-based
transformers in the long range arena (LRA) dataset [6, 7]. Despite its effectiveness, the statespace model is built on a relatively simple foundation of linear-RNN-like layers. One of the key
advantages of state-space models is their simple recurrence, which enables efficient acceleration. In
fact, this recurrence allows for an asymptotic computational complexity of only O(T log T ), which is
significantly better than the O(T 2 ) complexity of traditional full-attention approaches [8]. A natural
question would be whether SSM achieves this speedup with certain sacrifices in model capacity or
memory property. It is currently unclear whether the state-space model’s linear architecture with
layerwise nonlinearity possesses sufficient expressive capacity to approximate any target sequence-tosequence relationship. This knowledge would be important to answer pertinent questions regarding
the model’s ability to handle the complexity of real-world datasets characterized by diverse and
intricate sequence relationships. In particular, considering the speed advantage of SSM over attentionbased transformers, the universal approximation property impacts whether a state-space model could
be a suitable replacement for a transformer.
In this paper, we study the universality of state-space model. Furthermore, the memory property is
investigated and we show that state-space models also have an asymptotically exponential decaying
memory.
The main contributions can be summarized as follow
1. We give a constructive proof for the universal approximation property for multi-layer statespace models. The width dependency on sequence length is analyzed.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

