Scalable Fair Influence Maximization
Xiaobin Rui
China University of Mining and Technology
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China
ruixiaobin@cumt.edu.cn

Zhixiao Wang∗
China University of Mining and Technology
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China
zhxwang@cumt.edu.cn

Jiayu Zhao
China University of Mining and Technology
Xuzhou, Jiangsu, China
zhaojy@cumt.edu.cn

Lichao Sun
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA, USA
lis221@lehigh.edu

Wei Chen∗
Microsoft Research Asia
Beijing, China,
weic@microsoft.com

Abstract
Given a graph G, a community structure C, and a budget k, the fair influence maximization problem aims to select a seed set S (|S| ≤ k) that maximizes the influence
spread while narrowing the influence gap between different communities. While
various fairness notions exist, the welfare fairness notion, which balances fairness
level and influence spread, has shown promising effectiveness. However, the lack of
efficient algorithms for optimizing the welfare fairness objective function restricts
its application to small-scale networks with only a few hundred nodes. In this paper,
we adopt the objective function of welfare fairness to maximize the exponentially
weighted summation over the influenced fraction of all communities. We first
introduce an unbiased estimator for the fractional power of the arithmetic mean.
Then, by adapting the reverse influence sampling (RIS) approach, we convert the
optimization problem to a weighted maximum coverage problem. We also analyze
the number of reverse reachable sets needed to approximate the fair influence
at a high probability. Further, we present an efficient algorithm that guarantees
1 − 1/e − ε approximation.

1

Introduction

Influence maximization (IM) is a well-studied problem in the field of social network analysis. Given
a graph G and a positive integer k, the problem asks to find a node set S (|S| ≤ k) which can spread
certain information to trigger the largest expected number of remaining nodes. There have been various
IM variants, such as adaptive influence maximization [1], multi-round influence maximization [2],
competitive influence maximization [3], and time-critical influence maximization [4]. Influence
maximization and these variants have important applications in viral marketing, rumor control, health
interventions, etc [5].
Considering the situation that when disseminating public health interventions, for example, suicide/HIV prevention [6] or community preparedness against natural disasters, we can select individuals who act as peer-leaders to spread such information to maximize the outreach following influence
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

