Spectral Invariant Learning for Dynamic Graphs
under Distribution Shifts
Zeyang Zhang1∗, Xin Wang1†, Ziwei Zhang1 , Zhou Qin2 ,
Weigao Wen2 , Hui Xue2 , Haoyang Li1 , Wenwu Zhu1†
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Tsinghua University, 2 Alibaba Group
zy-zhang20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {xin_wang, zwzhang}@tsinghua.edu.cn,
{qinzhou.qinzhou, weigao.wen, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com,
lihy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Dynamic graph neural networks (DyGNNs) currently struggle with handling distribution shifts that are inherent in dynamic graphs. Existing work on DyGNNs
with out-of-distribution settings only focuses on the time domain, failing to handle
cases involving distribution shifts in the spectral domain. In this paper, we discover
that there exist cases with distribution shifts unobservable in the time domain while
observable in the spectral domain, and propose to study distribution shifts on dynamic graphs in the spectral domain for the first time. However, this investigation
poses two key challenges: i) it is non-trivial to capture different graph patterns that
are driven by various frequency components entangled in the spectral domain; and
ii) it remains unclear how to handle distribution shifts with the discovered spectral
patterns. To address these challenges, we propose Spectral Invariant Learning for
Dynamic Graphs under Distribution Shifts (SILD), which can handle distribution
shifts on dynamic graphs by capturing and utilizing invariant and variant spectral
patterns. Specifically, we first design a DyGNN with Fourier transform to obtain the
ego-graph trajectory spectrums, allowing the mixed dynamic graph patterns to be
transformed into separate frequency components. We then develop a disentangled
spectrum mask to filter graph dynamics from various frequency components and
discover the invariant and variant spectral patterns. Finally, we propose invariant
spectral filtering, which encourages the model to rely on invariant patterns for
generalization under distribution shifts. Experimental results on synthetic and
real-world dynamic graph datasets demonstrate the superiority of our method for
both node classification and link prediction tasks under distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

Dynamic graph neural networks (DyGNNs) have achieved remarkable success in many predictive
tasks over dynamic graphs [1, 2]. Existing DyGNNs exhibit limitations in handling distribution shifts,
which naturally exist in dynamic graphs due to multiple uncontrollable factors [3, 4, 5, 6]. Existing
work on out-of-distribution generalized DyGNNs focuses on handling distribution shifts in the time
domain. For example, DIDA [7] utilizes dynamic graph attention to mask the graph trajectories
to capture the invariant patterns on dynamic graphs, which assumes that in the time domain, the
distribution shift is observable and the invariant and variant patterns can be easily disentangled.
However, there exist cases that the distribution shift is unobservable in the time domain while
observable in the spectral domain, as shown in Figure 1. The shift in frequency components can
∗
†

This work was done during the author’s internship at Alibaba Group
Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

