ConRad: Image Constrained Radiance Fields for 3D
Generation from a Single Image

Senthil Purushwalkam∗
Salesforce AI Research
spurushwalkam@salesforce.com

Nikhil Naik
Salesforce AI Research
nnaik@salesforce.com

Abstract
We present a novel method for reconstructing 3D objects from a single RGB image.
Our method leverages the latest image generation models to infer the hidden 3D
structure while remaining faithful to the input image. While existing methods[1, 2]
obtain impressive results in generating 3D models from text prompts, they do not
provide an easy approach for conditioning on input RGB data. Naïve extensions of
these methods often lead to improper alignment in appearance between the input
image and the 3D reconstructions. We address these challenges by introducing
Image Constrained Radiance Fields (ConRad), a novel variant of neural radiance
fields. ConRad is an efficient 3D representation that explicitly captures the appearance of an input image in one viewpoint. We propose a training algorithm that
leverages the single RGB image in conjunction with pretrained Diffusion Models
to optimize the parameters of a ConRad representation. Extensive experiments
show that ConRad representations can simplify preservation of image details while
producing a realistic 3D reconstruction. Compared to existing state-of-the-art baselines, we show that our 3D reconstructions remain more faithful to the input and
produce more consistent 3D models while demonstrating significantly improved
quantitative performance on a ShapeNet object benchmark.

1

Introduction

Humans posses the ability to accurately infer the full 3D structure of an object even after observing
just one viewpoint. Since the RGB and depth observed for one viewpoint does not provide sufficient
information, we have to rely on our past experiences to make intelligent inferences about a realistic
reconstruction of the full 3D structure. This ability helps us navigate and interact with the 3D world
around us seamlessly. Capturing a similar capability of generating the full 3D structure from a single
image has been a long-standing problem in Computer Vision. Such systems could facilitate advances
in robotic manipulation and navigation systems, and has applications in video games, augmented
reality and e-commerce. Despite the importance of this capability, success on solving this problem
has been limited.
This lack of success can partly be attributed to the lack of useful large scale data. While we have
made progress on collecting large scale image datasets, the scale of 3D object or multi-view image
datasets has been severely limited. The availability of billions of RGB images and captions [3]
has facilitated significant advances in semantic understanding of images [4–6]. Over the last few
years in particular, approaches for generative modeling of the image manifold have demonstrated
capabilities including controllable generation of highly realistic images [7, 8], inpainting of occluded
images [9] and realistic image editing [10–12]. These success stories demonstrate the ability of the
2D generative models to capture prior knowledge about the visual world. In light of this evidence,
∗

Project webpage: https://www.senthilpurushwalkam.com/publication/conrad/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

