Robust Matrix Sensing in the Semi-Random Model
Xing Gao
University of Illinois at Chicago
xgao53@uic.edu

Yu Cheng
Brown University
yu_cheng@brown.edu

Abstract
Low-rank matrix recovery is a fundamental problem in machine learning with
numerous applications. In practice, the problem can be solved by convex optimization namely nuclear norm minimization, or by non-convex optimization as it
is well-known that for low-rank matrix problems like matrix sensing and matrix
completion, all local optima of the natural non-convex objectives are also globally
optimal under certain ideal assumptions.
In this paper, we relax the assumptions and study new approaches for matrix
sensing in a semi-random model where an adversary can add any number of
arbitrary sensing matrices. More precisely, the problem is to recover a low-rank
matrix X ∗ from linear measurements bi = ⟨Ai , X ∗ ⟩, where an unknown subset of
the sensing matrices satisfies the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) and the rest of
the Ai ’s are chosen adversarially.
It is known that in the semi-random model, existing non-convex objectives can have
bad local optima. To fix this, we present a descent-style algorithm that provably
recovers the ground-truth matrix X ∗ . For the closely-related problem of semirandom matrix completion, prior work [CG18] showed that all bad local optima
can be eliminated by reweighting the input data. However, the analogous approach
for matrix sensing requires reweighting a set of matrices to satisfy RIP, which is a
condition that is NP-hard to check. Instead, we build on the framework proposed
in [KLL+ 23] for semi-random sparse linear regression, where the algorithm in
each iteration reweights the input based on the current solution, and then takes
a weighted gradient step that is guaranteed to work well locally. Our analysis
crucially exploits the connection between sparsity in vector problems and lowrankness in matrix problems, which may have other applications in obtaining robust
algorithms for sparse and low-rank problems.

1

Introduction

Low-rank matrix recovery is a popular inverse problem with many applications in machine learning
such as collaborative filtering, image compression, and robust principal component analysis (PCA)
[RS05, FCRP08, CLMW11]. In this paper, we study one of the most basic low-rank matrix recovery
problems namely matrix sensing [CRT06, RFP10]. In the matrix sensing problem, we want to
reconstruct a low-rank ground-truth matrix X ∗ ∈ Rd1 ×d2 from a collection of sensing matrices
{Ai }ni=1 and the corresponding linear measurements bi = ⟨Ai , X⟩.
For notational convenience, we define a sensing operator A[·] : Rd1 ×d2 → Rn such that A[X] = b
with bi = ⟨Ai , X⟩ for i = 1 . . . n. The goal is to solve the following rank-constrained optimization
problem:
min

X∈Rd1 ×d2

2

∥A[X] − b∥2 subject to rank(X) ≤ r .

As optimizing over low-rank matrices are often computationally hard, one common approach is to
replace the non-convex low-rank constraint with its convex-relaxation, which results in the following
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

