Learning Dynamic Attribute-factored World Models
for Efficient Multi-object Reinforcement Learning

Fan Feng
City University of Hong Kong
ffeng1017@gmail.com

Sara Magliacane
University of Amsterdam
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
sara.magliacane@gmail.com

Abstract
In many reinforcement learning tasks, the agent has to learn to interact with many
objects of different types and generalize to unseen combinations and numbers
of objects. Often a task is a composition of previously learned tasks (e.g. block
stacking). These are examples of compositional generalization, in which we
compose object-centric representations to solve complex tasks. Recent works have
shown the benefits of object-factored representations and hierarchical abstractions
for improving sample efficiency in these settings. On the other hand, these methods
do not fully exploit the benefits of factorization in terms of object attributes. In this
paper, we address this opportunity and introduce the Dynamic Attribute FacTored
RL (DAFT-RL) framework. In DAFT-RL, we leverage object-centric representation
learning to extract objects from visual inputs. We learn to classify them into classes
and infer their latent parameters. For each class of object, we learn a class template
graph that describes how the dynamics and reward of an object of this class factorize
according to its attributes. We also learn an interaction pattern graph that describes
how objects of different classes interact with each other at the attribute level.
Through these graphs and a dynamic interaction graph that models the interactions
between objects, we can learn a policy that can then be directly applied in a new
environment by estimating the interactions and latent parameters. We evaluate
DAFT-RL in three benchmark datasets and show our framework outperforms the
state-of-the-art in generalizing across unseen objects with varying attributes and
latent parameters, as well as in the composition of previously learned tasks.

1

Introduction

Model-based reinforcement learning (MBRL) and world models [1–3] have demonstrated improved
performance in many RL tasks by providing better sample efficiency. However, most world models
focus only on modeling a single object or holistic modeling over the environment, while in realworld tasks, we often have environments with multiple objects that interact, and we are interested
in generalizing to unseen combinations and numbers of objects. In recent years, there have been
several studies exploring and learning object-oriented environment models or policy models [4–17]
and tackling the problem of compositional or combinatorial generalization, in which we consider
combining the modeling of multiple objects or tasks to solve a new task.
Although these methods have effectively leveraged object-centric and object-factored representations
in RL and thus improved the sample efficiency in multi-object settings, they have not fully exploited
the benefits of factorization in terms of object attributes. Often an object’s transition and reward
functions are influenced only by a sparse subset of attributes, e.g. an object’s position and reward
are affected by its previous position, but not by its appearance or activation state once the object of
interest is identified (e.g., “the red block”). In these environments, interactions between objects are
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

