On Generalization Bounds for Projective Clustering

Maria Sofia Bucarelli1 Matilde Fjeldsø Larsen2 Chris Schwiegelshohn2 Mads Bech Toftrup2
1
Department of Computer, Control and Management Engineering Antonio Ruberti,
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
2
Department of Computer Science, Aarhus University, Denmark
mariasofia.bucarelli@uniroma1.it
201805091@post.au.dk
{schwiegelshohn,toftrup}@cs.au.dk

Abstract
Given a set of points, clustering consists of finding a partition of a point set into k
clusters such that the center to which a point is assigned is as close as possible. Most
commonly, centers are points themselves, which leads to the famous k-median and
k-means objectives. One may also choose centers to be j dimensional subspaces,
which gives rise to subspace clustering. In this paper, we consider learning bounds
for these problems. That is, given a set of n samples P drawn independently from
some unknown, but fixed distribution D, how quickly does a solution computed on
P converge to the optimal clustering of D? We give several near optimal results.
In particular,

p
1. For center-based objectives, we show a convergence rate of Õ
k/n . This
matches the known optimal bounds of [Fefferman, Mitter, and Narayanan,
Journal of the Mathematical Society 2016] and [Bartlett, Linder, and Lugosi,
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 1998] for k-means and extends it to other important
objectives such as k-median.
2. For subspace
pclustering
 with j-dimensional subspaces, we show a convergence
kj 2/n . These are the first provable bounds for most of these
rate of Õ
problems. For the specific case of projective clustering,
 which generalizes
p
kj
k-means, we show a convergence rate of Ω
/n is necessary, thereby
proving that the bounds from [Fefferman, Mitter, and Narayanan, Journal of
the Mathematical Society 2016] are essentially optimal.

1

Introduction

Among the central questions in machine learning is, given a sample of n points P drawn from
some unknown but fixed distribution D, how well does a classifier trained on P generalize to D?
The probably most popular way to formalize this question is, given a loss function L and optimal
solutions SP and SD for sample P and distribution D, respectively, how the empirical excess
risk L(D, SP ) − L(D, SD ) decreases as a function of n. This paper focuses on loss functions
associated with the clustering problem. Popular examples
include (k, z) clustering, which asks
P
for a set of k centers S ⊂ Rd minimizing the cost p∈P mins∈S ∥p − s∥z2 and more generally,
(k,
asks for a set of k subspaces U := {U1 , U2 , . . . Uk } minimizing
P j, z) subspace clusteringTwhich
z
p∈P minUi ∈U ∥(I − Ui Ui )p∥2 . Special cases include (k, 1) clustering, known as k-median, (k, 2)
clustering known as k-means and (k, j, 2) clustering known as projective clustering. Generally, there
seems to be an interest in varying z, as letting z tend towards 1 tends to result in outlier-robust
clusterings. The problem is less widely explored for z > 2, although in particular for subspace
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

