CADet: Fully Self-Supervised Anomaly Detection
With Contrastive Learning

Charles Guille-Escuret
ServiceNow Research, Mila,
Université de Montréal
guillech@mila.quebec

Pau Rodriguez
ServiceNow Research
pau.rodriguez@servicenow.com

David Vazquez
ServiceNow Research
david.vazquez@servicenow.com
Ioannis Mitliagkas
Mila, Université de Montréal,
Canada CIFAR AI chair
ioannis@mila.quebec
Joao Monteiro
ServiceNow Research
joao.monteiro@servicenow.com

Abstract
Handling out-of-distribution (OOD) samples has become a major stake in the
real-world deployment of machine learning systems. This work explores the use
of self-supervised contrastive learning to the simultaneous detection of two types
of OOD samples: unseen classes and adversarial perturbations. First, we pair
self-supervised contrastive learning with the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
two-sample test. This approach enables us to robustly test whether two independent sets of samples originate from the same distribution, and we demonstrate its
effectiveness by discriminating between CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-10.1 with higher
confidence than previous work. Motivated by this success, we introduce CADet
(Contrastive Anomaly Detection), a novel method for OOD detection of single
samples. CADet draws inspiration from MMD, but leverages the similarity between contrastive transformations of a same sample. CADet outperforms existing
adversarial detection methods in identifying adversarially perturbed samples on
ImageNet and achieves comparable performance to unseen label detection methods
on two challenging benchmarks: ImageNet-O and iNaturalist. Significantly, CADet
is fully self-supervised and requires neither labels for in-distribution samples nor
access to OOD examples.1

1

Introduction

While modern machine learning systems have achieved countless successful real-world applications,
handling out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs remains a tough challenge of significant importance. The
1

Our code to compute CADet scores is publicly available as an OpenOOD fork at https://github.com/
charlesGE/OpenOOD-CADet.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

