CluB: Cluster Meets BEV for LiDAR-Based 3D Object
Detection
Yingjie Wang1,2∗ , Jiajun Deng3† , Yuenan Hou2 , Yao Li1 , Yu Zhang1 ,
Jianmin Ji1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Yanyong Zhang1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 The University of Adelaide, AIML

Abstract
Currently, LiDAR-based 3D detectors are broadly categorized into two groups,
namely, BEV-based detectors and cluster-based detectors. BEV-based detectors
capture the contextual information from the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) and fill their
center voxels via feature diffusion with a stack of convolution layers, which, however, weakens the capability of presenting an object with the center point. On the
other hand, cluster-based detectors exploit the voting mechanism and aggregate the
foreground points into object-centric clusters for further prediction. In this paper,
we explore how to effectively combine these two complementary representations
into a unified framework. Specifically, we propose a new 3D object detection
framework, referred to as CluB, which incorporates an auxiliary cluster-based
branch into the BEV-based detector by enriching the object representation at both
feature and query levels. Technically, CluB is comprised of two steps. First, we
construct a cluster feature diffusion module to establish the association between
cluster features and BEV features in a subtle and adaptive fashion. Based on that,
an imitation loss is introduced to distill object-centric knowledge from the cluster
features to the BEV features. Second, we design a cluster query generation module
to leverage the voting centers directly from the cluster branch, thus enriching the
diversity of object queries. Meanwhile, a direction loss is employed to encourage
a more accurate voting center for each cluster. Extensive experiments are conducted on Waymo and nuScenes datasets, and our CluB achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both benchmarks.

1

Introduction

3D perception on point clouds has attracted much attention from both industry and academia thanks
to its wide applications in various fields such as autonomous driving and robotics [29, 17, 11, 28, 32].
LiDAR-based 3D object detection is one of the vital tasks, which takes sparse point clouds as input
to estimate the 3D positions and categories of objects [20, 7, 30, 40].
Currently, the mainstream 3D object detectors [35, 21, 18, 38, 22, 1, 39] convert unstructured point
clouds into regular grids in the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) for feature representation (Figure 1 (a)), named
as BEV-based 3D object detectors. The regular grids in BEV are beneficial to feature extraction and
contextual information capturing. As the key point to make a prediction, i.e., the center point of an
object, can be empty, the features of the center points are often diffused from the surrounding points
via a stack of convolution layers. This practice significantly weakens the capability of presenting an
object with the center point.
∗ This work was done during Yingjie’s internship at Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory.
† Corresponding Authors: Jiajun Deng and Yanyong Zhang.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

