Repetition In Repetition Out: Towards Understanding
Neural Text Degeneration from the Data Perspective

Huayang Li♡
Lemao Liu♠
♡

Tian Lan♠

Nigel Collier♣

Zihao Fu♣

Taro Watanabe♡

Nara Institute of Science and Technology
♣

Deng Cai♠

University of Cambridge

♢

♠

Yixuan Su♣,♢

Tencent AI Lab

Cohere

{li.huayang.lh6, taro}@is.naist.jp lantiangmftby@gmail.com
{jcykcai, redmondliu}@tencent.com {zf268, nhc30, ys484}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
There are a number of diverging hypotheses about the neural text degeneration
problem, i.e., generating repetitive and dull loops, which makes this problem both
interesting and confusing. In this work, we aim to advance our understanding
by presenting a straightforward and fundamental explanation from the data perspective. Our preliminary investigation reveals a strong correlation between the
degeneration issue and the presence of repetitions in training data. Subsequent
experiments also demonstrate that by selectively dropping out the attention to
repetitive words in training data, degeneration can be significantly minimized.
Furthermore, our empirical analysis illustrates that prior works addressing the
degeneration issue from various standpoints, such as the high-inflow words, the
likelihood objective, and the self-reinforcement phenomenon, can be interpreted
by one simple explanation. That is, penalizing the repetitions in training data is a
common and fundamental factor for their effectiveness. Moreover, our experiments
reveal that penalizing the repetitions in training data remains critical even when
considering larger model sizes and instruction tuning. Our code is available at
https://github.com/gmftbyGMFTBY/Rep-Dropout.

1

Introduction

The emergence of neural language models (LM) has led to significant achievements in various text
generation tasks, such as machine translation [3, 24, 31], summarization [22], and open-ended text
generation [17, 20]. However, in open-ended text generation, neural LMs exhibit a strikingly severe
degeneration issue, producing unreasonably repetitive texts, particularly when employing maximum
a posteriori (MAP) decoding algorithms. As illustrated in Fig. 1, even a well-trained LM [20] may
suffer from a severe degeneration issue.
There have been numerous attempts to explain the phenomenon of neural text degeneration, with
many attributing this problem to flaws in the learning process. Fu et al. [8] claim that high-inflow
words increase the probability of generating repetitions. A collection of studies [11, 15, 26, 34]
argue that the likelihood objective is the primary factor, because it has the problem of exposure
bias and focuses more on next-token prediction rather than sequence generation. Meanwhile, both
Chiang and Chen [4] and Xu et al. [36] assert that the self-reinforcement mechanism can make neural
LMs fall into the repetitive loops. Intriguingly, despite the divergence in these explanations, all
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

