Analyzing the Sample Complexity of Self-Supervised
Image Reconstruction Methods

Tobit Klug, Dogukan Atik, Reinhard Heckel
School of Computation, Information and Technology
Technical University of Munich
tobit.klug, dogukan.atik, reinhard.heckel {@tum.de}

Abstract
Supervised training of deep neural networks on pairs of clean image and noisy
measurement achieves state-of-the-art performance for many image reconstruction
tasks, but such training pairs are difficult to collect. Self-supervised methods enable
training based on noisy measurements only, without clean images. In this work, we
investigate the cost of self-supervised training in terms of sample complexity for a
class of self-supervised methods that enable the computation of unbiased estimates
of gradients of the supervised loss, including noise2noise methods. We analytically
show that a model trained with such self-supervised training is as good as the same
model trained in a supervised fashion, but self-supervised training requires more
examples than supervised training. We then study self-supervised denoising and
accelerated MRI empirically and characterize the cost of self-supervised training in
terms of the number of additional samples required, and find that the performance
gap between self-supervised and supervised training vanishes as a function of the
training examples, at a problem-dependent rate, as predicted by our theory.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks trained in a supervised fashion to map a noisy measurement to a clean image
achieve state-of-the-art performance for image reconstruction tasks including image denoising [48,
12], image super-resolution [8, 26] and accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [13, 11].
However, collecting clean training images is sometimes not possible, and is often expensive and
time-consuming. For example, to collect clean target images for denoising is difficult since a sensor
in a camera only collects noisy images [33]. To collect target images for MRI is difficult as it requires
acquiring fully sampled data with long scan times which, introduces difficulties like increased motion
artifacts.
This has motivated research on self-supervised methods that enable the training of neural networks
from noisy measurements of images only. Self-supervised approaches are generally based on
constructing a self-supervised loss. For example, noise2noise [24] constructs a self-supervised loss
based on a noisy image and a second noisy observation of the same image. Noisier2noise [30],
noise2self [2], and neighbor2neighbor [18] construct losses based on a single noisy image for
denoising. One might expect that a model trained with a self-supervised loss computed from noisy
images performs worse than the same model trained in a supervised manner. And indeed, for
image reconstruction problems a model trained with many of the self-supervised losses (in particular
noisier2noise, noise2self, and neighbor2neighbor) performs worse than a model trained with a
supervised loss, even when abundant training data is available.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

