Practical Contextual Bandits with Feedback Graphs

Mengxiao Zhang ∗
University of Southern California
mengxiao.zhang@usc.edu

Yuheng Zhang ∗
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yuhengz2@illinois.edu

Olga Vrousgou
Microsoft Research
Olga.Vrousgou@microsoft.com

Haipeng Luo
University of Southern California
haipengl@usc.edu

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Abstract
While contextual bandit has a mature theory, effectively leveraging different feedback patterns to enhance the pace of learning remains unclear. Bandits with feedback graphs, which interpolates between the full information and bandit regimes,
provides a promising framework to mitigate the statistical complexity of learning.
In this paper, we propose and analyze an approach to contextual bandits with
feedback graphs based upon reduction to regression. The resulting algorithms are
computationally practical and achieve established minimax rates, thereby reducing
the statistical complexity in real-world applications.

1

Introduction

This paper is primarily concerned with increasing the pace of learning for contextual bandits [Auer
et al., 2002, Langford and Zhang, 2007]. While contextual bandits have enjoyed broad applicability [Bouneffouf et al., 2020], the statistical complexity of learning with bandit feedback imposes a
data lower bound for application scenarios [Agarwal et al., 2012]. This has inspired various mitigation
strategies, including exploiting function class structure for improved experimental design [Zhu and
Mineiro, 2022], and composing with memory for learning with fewer samples [Rucker et al., 2022].
In this paper we exploit alternative graph feedback patterns to accelerate learning: intuitively, there is
no need to explore a potentially suboptimal action if a presumed better action, when exploited, yields
the necessary information.
The framework of bandits with feedback graphs is mature and provides a solid theoretical foundation
for incorporating additional feedback into an exploration strategy [Mannor and Shamir, 2011, Alon
et al., 2015, 2017]. Succinctly, in this framework, the observation of the learner is decided by a
directed feedback graph G: when an action is played, the learner observes the loss of every action
to which the chosen action is connected. When the graph only contains self-loops, this problem
reduces to the classic bandit case. For non-contextual bandits with feedback graphs, [Alon et al.,
2015] provides a full characterization on the minimax regret bound with respect to different graph
theoretic quantities associated with G according to the type of the feedback graph.
However, contextual bandits with feedback graphs have received less attention [Singh et al., 2020,
Wang et al., 2021]. Specifically, there is no prior work offering a solution for general feedback graphs
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

