D2CSG: Unsupervised Learning of Compact CSG
Trees with Dual Complements and Dropouts

Fenggen Yu1
Qimin Chen1
Ali Mahdavi Amiri1
1
Simon Fraser University

Maham Tanveer1
Hao Zhang1,2
2
Amazon

Abstract
Abstract: We present D2 CSG, a neural model composed of two dual and complementary network branches, with dropouts, for unsupervised learning of compact
constructive solid geometry (CSG) representations of 3D CAD shapes. Our network is trained to reconstruct a 3D shape by a fixed-order assembly of quadric
primitives, with both branches producing a union of primitive intersections or
inverses. A key difference between D2 CSG and all prior neural CSG models is its
dedicated residual branch to assemble the potentially complex shape complement,
which is subtracted from an overall shape modeled by the cover branch. With the
shape complements, our network is provably general, while the weight dropout
further improves compactness of the CSG tree by removing redundant primitives.
We demonstrate both quantitatively and qualitatively that D2 CSG produces compact CSG reconstructions with superior quality and more natural primitives than
all existing alternatives, especially over complex and high-genus CAD shapes.

1

Introduction

CAD shapes have played a central role in the advancement of geometric deep learning, with most
neural models to date trained on datasets such as ModelNet [51], ShapeNet [2], and PartNet [33] for
classification, reconstruction, and generation tasks. These shape collections all possess well-defined
category or class labels, and more often than not, the effectiveness of the data-driven methods is tied
to how well the class-specific shape features can be learned. Recently, the emergence of datasets of
CAD parts and assemblies such as ABC [21] and Fusion360 [49] has fueled the need for learning
shape representations that are agnostic to class labels, without any reliance on class priors. Case in
point, the ABC dataset does not provide any category labels, while another challenge to the ensuing
representation learning problem is the rich topological varieties exhibited by the CAD shapes.
Constructive solid geometry (CSG) is a classical CAD representation; it models a 3D shape as a
recursive assembly of solid primitives, e.g., cuboids, cylinders, etc., through Boolean operations
including union, intersection, and difference. Of particular note is the indispensable role the difference
operation plays when modeling holes and high shape genera, which are common in CAD. Recently,
there have been increased interests in 3D representation learning using CSG [9, 50, 41, 40, 19, 57, 6,
3], striving for generality, compactness, and reconstruction quality of the learned models.
In terms of primitive counts, a direct indication of compactness of the CSG trees, and reconstruction
quality, CAPRI-Net [57] represents the state of the art. However, it is not a general neural model,
e.g., it is unable to represent CAD shapes whose assembly necessitates nested difference operations
(i.e., needing to subtract a part that requires primitive differences to build itself, e.g., see the CAD
model in Fig. 2). Since both operands of the (single) difference operation in CAPRI-Net can only
model intersections and unions, their network cannot produce a natural and compact CSG assembly
for relatively complex CAD shapes with intricate concavities and topological details; see Fig. 1.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

