Towards Last-layer Retraining for Group
Robustness with Fewer Annotations

1

Tyler LaBonte1 Vidya Muthukumar2,1 Abhishek Kumar3
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
2
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
3
Google DeepMind
{tlabonte, vmuthukumar8}@gatech.edu
abhishk@google.com

Abstract
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) of neural networks is prone to over-reliance
on spurious correlations and poor generalization on minority groups. The recent
deep feature reweighting (DFR) technique [33] achieves state-of-the-art group
robustness via simple last-layer retraining, but it requires held-out group and class
annotations to construct a group-balanced reweighting dataset. In this work, we
examine this impractical requirement and find that last-layer retraining can be
surprisingly effective with no group annotations (other than for model selection)
and only a handful of class annotations. We first show that last-layer retraining can
greatly improve worst-group accuracy even when the reweighting dataset has only a
small proportion of worst-group data. This implies a “free lunch” where holding out
a subset of training data to retrain the last layer can substantially outperform ERM
on the entire dataset with no additional data or annotations. To further improve
group robustness, we introduce a lightweight method called selective last-layer finetuning (SELF), which constructs the reweighting dataset using misclassifications or
disagreements. Our empirical and theoretical results present the first evidence that
model disagreement upsamples worst-group data, enabling SELF to nearly match
DFR on four well-established benchmarks across vision and language tasks with
no group annotations and less than 3% of the held-out class annotations. Our code
is available at https://github.com/tmlabonte/last-layer-retraining.

1

Introduction

Classification tasks in machine learning often suffer from spurious correlations: patterns which are
predictive of the target class in the training dataset but irrelevant to the true classification function.
These spurious correlations, often in conjunction with the target class, create minority groups which
are underrepresented in the training dataset. For example, in the task of classifying cows and camels,
the training dataset may be biased so that a desert background is spuriously correlated with the camel
class, creating a minority group of camels on grass backgrounds [5]. Beyond this simple scenario,
spurious correlations have been observed in high-consequence applications including medicine [79],
justice [9], and facial recognition [42].
Neural networks trained via the standard procedure of empirical risk minimization (ERM) [68],
which minimizes the average training loss, tend to overfit to spurious correlations and generalize
poorly on minority groups [18]. Even worse, it is possible for ERM models to rely exclusively on the
spurious feature and incur minority group performance that is no better than random guessing [60].
Therefore, maximizing the model’s group robustness, quantified by its worst accuracy on any group,
is a desirable objective in the presence of spurious correlations [58].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

