Tight Bounds for Volumetric Spanners and
Applications

Aditya Bhaskara
University of Utah
bhaskaraaditya@gmail.com

Sepideh Mahabadi
Microsoft Research–Redmond
smahabadi@microsoft.com

Ali Vakilian
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago (TTIC)
vakilian@ttic.edu

Abstract
Given a set of points of interest, a volumetric spanner is a subset of the points using
which all the points can be expressed using “small” coefficients (measured in an
appropriate norm). Formally, given a set of vectors X = {v1 ,P
v2 , . . . , vn }, the goal
is to find T ⊆ [n] such that every v ∈ X can be expressed as i∈T αi vi , with ∥α∥
being small. This notion, which has also been referred to as a well-conditioned
basis, has found several applications, including bandit linear optimization, determinant maximization, and matrix low rank approximation. In this paper, we give
almost optimal bounds on the size of volumetric spanners for all ℓp norms, and
show that they can be constructed using a simple local search procedure. We then
show the applications of our result to other tasks and in particular the problem of
finding coresets for the Minimum Volume Enclosing Ellipsoid (MVEE) problem.

1

Introduction

In many applications in machine learning and signal processing, it is important to find the right
“representation” for a collection of data points or signals. As one classic example, in the column
subset selection problem (used in applications like feature selection, [Boutsidis et al., 2008]), the goal
is to find a small subset of a given set of vectors that can represent all the other vectors via linear
combinations. In the sparse coding problem, the goal is to find a basis or dictionary under which a
collection of vectors admit a sparse representation (see [Olshausen and Field, 1997]).
In this paper, we focus on finding “bases” that allow us to represent a given set of vectors using
small coefficients. A now-classic example is the notion of an Auerbach basis. Auerbach used an
extremal argument to prove that for any compact subset X of Rd , there exists a basis of size d (that is
a subset of X) such that every v ∈ X can be expressed as a linear combination of the basis vectors
using coefficients of magnitude ≤ 1 (see, e.g., [Lindenstrauss and Tzafriri, 2013]). This notion was
rediscovered in the ML community in the well-known work of Awerbuch and Kleinberg [2008],
and subsequently in papers that used such a basis as directions of exploration in bandit algorithms.
The term barycentric spanner has been used to refer to Auerbach bases. More recently, the paper
of Hazan and Karnin [2016] introduced an ℓ2 version of barycentric spanners, which they called
volumetric spanners, and use them to obtain improved bandit algorithms.
The same notion has been used in the literature on matrix sketching and low rank approximation,
where it has been referred to as a “well-conditioned basis” (or a spanning subset); see Dasgupta et al.
[2009]. These works use well-conditioned bases to ensure that every small norm vector (in some
normed space) can be expressed as a combination of the vectors in the basis using small coefficients.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

