Generalized equivalences between
subsampling and ridge regularization

Pratik Patil
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

Jin-Hong Du
Department of Statistics and Data Science
& Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

pratikpatil@berkeley.edu

jinhongd@andrew.cmu.edu

Department of Statistics

Abstract
We establish precise structural and risk equivalences between subsampling and
ridge regularization for ensemble ridge estimators. Specifically, we prove that linear
and quadratic functionals of subsample ridge estimators, when fitted with different
ridge regularization levels λ and subsample aspect ratios ψ, are asymptotically
equivalent along specific paths in the (λ, ψ)-plane (where ψ is the ratio of the
feature dimension to the subsample size). Our results only require bounded moment
assumptions on feature and response distributions and allow for arbitrary joint
distributions. Furthermore, we provide a data-dependent method to determine
the equivalent paths of (λ, ψ). An indirect implication of our equivalences is that
optimally tuned ridge regression exhibits a monotonic prediction risk in the data
aspect ratio. This resolves a recent open problem raised by Nakkiran et al. [1]
for general data distributions under proportional asymptotics, assuming a mild
regularity condition that maintains regression hardness through linearized signalto-noise ratios.

1

Introduction

Ensemble methods, such as bagging [2, 3], are powerful tools that combine weak predictors to
improve predictive stability and accuracy. This paper focuses on sampling-based ensembles, which
exhibit an implicit regularization effect [4–6]. Specifically, we investigate subsample ridge ensembles,
where the ridge predictors are fitted on independently subsampled datasets [7–9]. Recent work has
demonstrated that a full ensemble (that is fitted on all possible subsampled datasets) of ridgeless [10]
predictors achieves the same squared prediction risk as a ridge predictor fitted on full data [11–13].
To be precise, let ϕ be the limiting dataset aspect ratio p/n, where p is the feature dimension, and
n is the number of observations. For a given ϕ, the limiting prediction risk of subsample ridge
ensembles is parameterized by (λ, ψ), where λ ≥ 0 is the ridge regularization parameter and ψ ≥ ϕ
is the limiting subsample aspect ratio p/k, with k being the subsample size [11, 12]. Under isotropic
features and a well-specified linear model, [11, 12] show that the squared prediction risk at (0, ψ ∗ )
(the optimal ridgeless ensemble) is the same as the risk at (λ∗ , ϕ) (the optimal ridge), where ψ ∗
and λ∗ are the optimal subsample aspect ratio and ridge penalty, respectively. Furthermore, this
equivalence of prediction risk between subsampling and ridge regularization is extended in [13] to
anisotropic linear models. As an application, [13] also demonstrates how generalized cross-validation
for ridge regression can be naturally transferred to subsample ridge ensembles. In essence, these
results suggest that subsampling a smaller number of observations has the same effect as adding an
appropriately larger level of ridge penalty. These findings prompt two important open questions:
(a) The extent of equivalences. The previous works all focus on equivalences of the squared
prediction risk when the test distribution matches the train distribution. In real-world scenarios,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

