On the Convergence and Sample Complexity Analysis
of Deep Q-Networks with ε-Greedy Exploration

Shuai Zhang
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Meng Wang
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Sijia Liu
Michigan State University

Miao Liu
IBM Research

Hongkang Li
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Pin-Yu Chen
IBM Research

Keerthiram Murugesan
IBM Research

Songtao Lu
IBM Research

Subhajit Chaudhury
IBM Research

Abstract
This paper provides a theoretical understanding of Deep Q-Network (DQN) with
the ε-greedy exploration in deep reinforcement learning. Despite the tremendous
empirical achievement of the DQN, its theoretical characterization remains underexplored. First, the exploration strategy is either impractical or ignored in the
existing analysis. Second, in contrast to conventional Q-learning algorithms, the
DQN employs the target network and experience replay to acquire an unbiased
estimation of the mean-square Bellman error (MSBE) utilized in training the Qnetwork. However, the existing theoretical analysis of DQNs lacks convergence
analysis or bypasses the technical challenges by deploying a significantly overparameterized neural network, which is not computationally efficient. This paper
provides the first theoretical convergence and sample complexity analysis of the
practical setting of DQNs with ε-greedy policy. We prove an iterative procedure
with decaying ε converges to the optimal Q-value function geometrically. Moreover, a higher level of ε values enlarges the region of convergence but slows down
the convergence, while the opposite holds for a lower level of ε values. Experiments justify our established theoretical insights on DQNs.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a sequential decision-making process for a learning agent taking
actions in the environment. RL has found important applications in autonomous control [37, 36],
healthcare [16], Internet of Things [40, 33], and natural language processing [70]. The environment
of an RL problem is modeled as a Markov decision process (MDP) with an underlying state transition probability matrix. The goal of the problem is to find an optimal policy to select the best actions
to maximize the immediate and future rewards. Q-learning [77] has been recognized as one of the
most promising and efficient learning algorithms for seeking the optimal policy because it does not
require the knowledge of the model of the environment (namely, “model free”) and can learn from
data generated from a non-optimal policy (namely, “off-policy”). Traditional Q-learning approaches
are centered on tabular methods [82, 41] or linear function approximations [65, 13] to estimate the
optimal action-value (Q-value) function. However, tabular methods require sample complexity scaling in the order of state space, which is impractical for modern RL problems involving large or even
infinite state space [82]. Q-learning with linear function approximation is limited to applications
only when the transition matrix admits a linear feature representation [23].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

