Markovian Sliced Wasserstein Distances: Beyond
Independent Projections

Khai Nguyen
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
khainb@utexas.edu

Tongzheng Ren
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
tongzheng@utexas.edu

Nhat Ho
Department of Statistics and Data Sciences
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
minhnhat@utexas.edu

Abstract
Sliced Wasserstein (SW) distance suffers from redundant projections due to independent uniform random projecting directions. To partially overcome the issue,
max K sliced Wasserstein (Max-K-SW) distance (K ≥ 1), seeks the best discriminative orthogonal projecting directions. Despite being able to reduce the
number of projections, the metricity of the Max-K-SW cannot be guaranteed in
practice due to the non-optimality of the optimization. Moreover, the orthogonality
constraint is also computationally expensive and might not be effective. To address
the problem, we introduce a new family of SW distances, named Markovian sliced
Wasserstein (MSW) distance, which imposes a first-order Markov structure on
projecting directions. We discuss various members of the MSW by specifying the
Markov structure including the prior distribution, the transition distribution, and
the burning and thinning technique. Moreover, we investigate the theoretical properties of MSW including topological properties (metricity, weak convergence, and
connection to other distances), statistical properties (sample complexity, and Monte
Carlo estimation error), and computational properties (computational complexity
and memory complexity). Finally, we compare MSW distances with previous SW
variants in various applications such as gradient flows, color transfer, and deep
generative modeling to demonstrate the favorable performance of the MSW1 .

1

Introduction

Sliced Wasserstein (SW) [7] distance has been well-known as a great alternative statistical distance
for Wasserstein distance [57, 49]. In short, SW takes the average of Wasserstein distances between
corresponding pairs of one-dimensional projected measures as the distance between the two original
measures. Hence, the SW has a low computational complexity compared to the conventional
Wasserstein distance due to the closed-form solution of optimal transport in one dimension. When
the probability measures have at most n supports, the computational complexity of the SW is only
O(n log n). This complexity is much lower than the computational complexity O(n3 log n) of
Wasserstein distance and the complexity O(n2 ) [1, 34, 35, 33] of entropic Wasserstein [11] (Sinkhorn
1

Code for this paper is published at https://github.com/UT-Austin-Data-Science-Group/MSW.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

