Language Models Meet World Models:
Embodied Experiences Enhance Language Models

Jiannan Xiang∗ ♠ , Tianhua Tao∗♣ , Yi Gu♠ , Tianmin Shu♢△ ,
Zirui Wang♠ , Zichao Yang♡ , Zhiting Hu♠
♠
UC San Diego, ♣ UIUC, ♢ MIT, △ JHU, ♡ CMU

Abstract
While large language models (LMs) have shown remarkable capabilities across
numerous tasks, they often struggle with simple reasoning and planning in physical
environments, such as understanding object permanence or planning household activities. The limitation arises from the fact that LMs are trained only on written text
and miss essential embodied knowledge and skills. In this paper, we propose a new
paradigm of enhancing LMs by finetuning them with world models, to gain diverse
embodied knowledge while retaining their general language capabilities. Our approach deploys an embodied agent in a world model, particularly a simulator of the
physical world (VirtualHome), and acquires a diverse set of embodied experiences
through both goal-oriented planning and random exploration. These experiences
are then used to finetune LMs to teach diverse abilities of reasoning and acting in
the physical world, e.g., planning and completing goals, object permanence and
tracking, etc. Moreover, it is desirable to preserve the generality of LMs during
finetuning, which facilitates generalizing the embodied knowledge across tasks
rather than being tied to specific simulations. We thus further introduce the classical
elastic weight consolidation (EWC) for selective weight updates, combined with
low-rank adapters (LoRA) for training efficiency. Extensive experiments show
our approach substantially improves base LMs on 18 downstream tasks by 64.28%
on average. In particular, the small LMs (1.3B, 6B, and 13B) enhanced by our
approach match or even outperform much larger LMs (e.g., ChatGPT). 1

1

Introduction

Language Models (LMs) have demonstrated impressive performance on a wide range of natural
language processing tasks [34, 48, 4, 7, 54]. In particular, recent studies show that LMs can assist
decision-making for embodied tasks [1, 18, 25, 45, 19], demonstrating a certain level of understanding
of the physical world. However, such understanding is not robust enough for many reasoning and
planning tasks in physical environments. As shown in Figure 1, even the latest large LMs like
ChatGPT2 can still make mistakes in seemingly simple inquiries, such as counting objects in a
location. We hypothesize that this is because current LMs trained merely with large-scale text corpora
are devoid of embodied experiences such as navigating in an environment, interacting with objects,
and sensing as well as tracking the world state. Consequently, they lack robust and comprehensive
embodied knowledge necessary for reasoning and planning associated with physical environments.
A related line of research finetunes LMs in order to improve specific embodied tasks, resulting in
task-specialized models [6, 58, 21, 57].
∗

Equal contribution.
The code is available at https://github.com/szxiangjn/world-model-for-language-model.
2
Based on GPT-3.5-turbo.
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

