Stable Bias:
Evaluating Societal Representations in Diffusion Models

Alexandra Sasha Luccioni
Hugging Face, Canada
sasha.luccioni@huggingface.co

Christopher Akiki
Leipzig University and ScaDS.AI
christopher.akiki@uni-leipzig.de

Margaret Mitchell,
Hugging Face, USA

Yacine Jernite,
Hugging Face, USA

Abstract
As machine learning-enabled Text-to-Image (TTI) systems are becoming increasingly
prevalent and seeing growing adoption as commercial services, characterizing the social
biases they exhibit is a necessary first step to lowering their risk of discriminatory
outcomes. This evaluation, however, is made more difficult by the synthetic nature
of these systems’ outputs: common definitions of diversity are grounded in social
categories of people living in the world, whereas the artificial depictions of fictive
humans created by these systems have no inherent gender or ethnicity. To address
this need, we propose a new method for exploring the social biases in TTI systems.
Our approach relies on characterizing the variation in generated images triggered by
enumerating gender and ethnicity markers in the prompts, and comparing it to the
variation engendered by spanning different professions. This allows us to (1) identify
specific bias trends, (2) provide targeted scores to directly compare models in terms
of diversity and representation, and (3) jointly model interdependent social variables
to support a multidimensional analysis. We leverage this method to analyze images
generated by 3 popular TTI systems (Dall·E 2, Stable Diffusion v 1.4 and 2) and find
that while all of their outputs show correlations with US labor demographics, they
also consistently under-represent marginalized identities to different extents. We also
release the datasets and low-code interactive bias exploration platforms developed for
this work, as well as the necessary tools to similarly evaluate additional TTI systems.

1 Introduction
Diffusion-based approaches are one of the most recent Machine Learning (ML) techniques in prompted
image generation, with models such as Stable Diffusion [52], Make-a-Scene [24], Imagen [53] and
Dall·E 2 [50] gaining considerable popularity in a matter of months. These generative approaches are
inspired by the principles of non-equilibrium thermodynamics [66] and trained to reverse the gradual
addition of noise that is layered onto an image. One key difference that has led to the widespread adoption
of diffusion models is that they are simpler to train than previous generations of generative models owing
to their likelihood-based loss function, whose mode-covering characteristic [38] is also one of the main
reasons why model outputs are so diverse compared to other classes of generative models. However,
this iterative approach also makes it particularly difficult to directly access the latent space of the model,
making it difficult to directly access and analyze the latent space of diffusion models.
Both the training and inference functions of diffusion models also rely on additional phases of text and
image processing (e.g. safety filters, embeddings, etc.), which is why we refer to them as Text-to-Image
(TTI) Systems as opposed to models: they are an assemblage of components and modules that all contribute
to generating the final image, and it is hard to disentangle which module is responsible for downstream
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

