Non-autoregressive Machine Translation with
Probabilistic Context-free Grammar
Shangtong Gui1,2,3 ,Chenze Shao2,3 ,Zhengrui Ma2,3 ,Xishan Zhang1,4 ,Yunji Chen1,3 ,Yang Feng2,3∗
1
State Key Lab of Processors,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Cambricon Technologies

Abstract
Non-autoregressive Transformer(NAT) significantly accelerates the inference of
neural machine translation. However, conventional NAT models suffer from limited
expression power and performance degradation compared to autoregressive (AT)
models due to the assumption of conditional independence among target tokens.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel approach called PCFG-NAT,
which leverages a specially designed Probabilistic Context-Free Grammar (PCFG)
to enhance the ability of NAT models to capture complex dependencies among
output tokens. Experimental results on major machine translation benchmarks
demonstrate that PCFG-NAT further narrows the gap in translation quality between
NAT and AT models. Moreover, PCFG-NAT facilitates a deeper understanding of
the generated sentences, addressing the lack of satisfactory explainability in neural
machine translation.2

1

Introduction

Autoregressive machine translation models rely on sequential generation, leading to slow generation
speeds and potential errors due to the cascading nature of the process. In contrast, non-autoregressive
Transformer (NAT) models [13] have emerged as promising alternatives for machine translation. The
Vanilla NAT model assumes that the target tokens are independent of each other given the source
sentence. This assumption enables the parallel generation of all tokens. However, it neglects the
contextual dependencies among target language words, resulting in a severe multi-modality problem
[13] caused by the rich expressiveness and diversity inherent in natural languages. Consequently,
Vanilla NAT models exhibit significant performance degradation compared to their autoregressive
counterparts.
Several approaches have been proposed to alleviate the multi-modality problem in NAT models
while maintaining their computational efficiency. CTC-based NAT [11, 22] depicted in Figure 1(b)
addresses this issue by implicitly modeling linear adjacent dependencies through token repetition
and blank probability. This approach helps alleviate the multi-modality of token distributions at
each position compared to Vanilla NAT. Similarly, DA-Transformer [14, 37, 26] shown in Figure
1(c) introduces a hidden Markov model and employs a directed acyclic graph to model sentence
probability, enabling the model to capture dependencies between adjacent tokens and reduce the
multi-modal nature of the distribution.
∗
2

Corresponding author: Yang Feng
Code is publicly available at https://github.com/ictnlp/PCFG-NAT.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

