A Hierarchical Training Paradigm for Antibody
Structure-sequence Co-design

Fang Wu∗
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Stan Z. Li
Westlake University
Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Therapeutic antibodies are an essential and rapidly expanding drug modality. The
binding specificity between antibodies and antigens is decided by complementaritydetermining regions (CDRs) at the tips of these Y-shaped proteins. In this paper, we
propose a hierarchical training paradigm (HTP) for the antibody sequence-structure
co-design. HTP consists of four levels of training stages, each corresponding to
a specific protein modality within a particular protein domain. Through carefully
crafted tasks in different stages, HTP seamlessly and effectively integrates geometric graph neural networks (GNNs) with large-scale protein language models to
excavate evolutionary information from not only geometric structures but also vast
antibody and non-antibody sequence databases, which determines ligand binding
pose and strength. Empirical experiments show that HTP sets the new state-ofthe-art performance in the co-design problem as well as the fix-backbone design.
Our research offers a hopeful path to unleash the potential of deep generative
architectures and seeks to illuminate the way forward for the antibody sequence
and structure co-design challenge.

1

Introduction

Antibodies, known as immunoglobulins (Ig), are large Y-shaped proteins that the immune system
uses to identify and neutralize foreign objects such as pathogenic bacteria and viruses [1, 2]. They
recognize a unique molecule of the pathogen, called an antigen. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a),
each tip of the “Y" of an antibody contains a paratope that is specific for one particular epitope
on an antigen, allowing these two structures to bind together with precision. Notably, the binding
specificity of antibodies is largely determined by their complementarity-determining regions (CDRs).
Consequently, unremitting efforts have been made to automate the creation of CDR subsequences
with desired constraints of binding affinity, stability, and synthesizability [3]. However, the search
space is vast, with up to 20L possible combinations for a L-length CDR sequence. This makes it
infeasible to solve the protein structures and then examine their corresponding binding properties via
experimental approaches. As a remedy, a group of computational antibody design mechanisms has
been introduced to accelerate this filtering process.
Some prior studies [4, 5] prefer to generate only 1D sequences, which has been considered suboptimal
because it lacks valuable geometric information. Meanwhile, since the target structure for antibodies
is rarely given as a prerequisite [6], more attention has been paid to co-designing the sequence and
structure. One conventional line of research [7–9] resorts to sampling protein sequences and structures
on the complex energy landscape constructed by physical and chemical principles. But it is found
to be time-exhausted and vulnerable to being trapped in local energy optima. Another line [10–12]
relies on deep generative models to simultaneously design antibodies’ sequences and structures.
They take advantage of the most advanced geometric deep learning (DL) techniques and can seize
∗

Corresponding Authors, emails: fw2359@columbia.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

