Inverse Reinforcement Learning with the Average
Reward Criterion
Feiyang Wu
feiyangwu@gatech.edu

Jingyang Ke
jingyang.ke@gatech.edu

Anqi Wu
anqiwu@gatech.edu
School of Computational Science and Engineering
College of Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332

Abstract
We study the problem of Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) with an averagereward criterion. The goal is to recover an unknown policy and a reward function
when the agent only has samples of states and actions from an experienced agent.
Previous IRL methods assume that the expert is trained in a discounted environment,
and the discount factor is known. This work alleviates this assumption by proposing
an average-reward framework with efficient learning algorithms. We develop
novel stochastic first-order methods to solve the IRL problem under the averagereward setting, which requires solving an Average-reward Markov Decision Process
(AMDP) as a subproblem. To solve the subproblem, we develop a Stochastic Policy
Mirror Descent (SPMD) method under general state and action spaces that needs
O(1/") steps of gradient computation. Equipped with SPMD, we propose the
Inverse Policy Mirror Descent (IPMD) method for solving the IRL problem with a
O(1/"2 ) complexity. To the best of our knowledge, the aforementioned complexity
results are new in IRL literature with the average reward criterion. Finally, we
corroborate our analysis with numerical experiments using the MuJoCo benchmark
and additional control tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) problems are frequently formulated as Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs). The agent learns a policy to maximize the reward gained over time. However, in numerous
engineering challenges, we are typically presented with a set of state-action samples from experienced
agents, or experts, without an explicit reward signal. Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) aspires
to recover the expert’s policy and reward function from these collected samples.
Methods like Imitation Learning [29, 15, 10] reduces the IRL problem to predicting an expert’s
behavior without estimating the reward signal. Such formulation is undesirable in some scenarios
when we either wish to continue training or analyze the structure of the agent’s reward signal, e.g., in
reward discovery for animal behavior study [31, 34, 26, 14]. Furthermore, as a popular methodology
in Imitation Learning, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [15, 42] suffers from unstable training
due to mode collapse [32]. The sampling-based Bayesian IRL (BIRL) approach [8, 9, 6] treats
the reward function as a posterior distribution from the observation. This approach is conceptually
straightforward but suffers from slow convergence of sampling. Another line of research reformulates
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

