Tree-Rings Watermarks: Invisible Fingerprints for
Diffusion Images

Yuxin Wen, John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Tom Goldstein
University of Maryland
{ywen, jkirchen, jgeiping, tomg}@umd.edu

Abstract
Watermarking the outputs of generative models is a crucial technique for tracing
copyright and preventing potential harm from AI-generated content. In this paper,
we introduce a novel technique called Tree-Ring Watermarking that robustly fingerprints diffusion model outputs. Unlike existing methods that perform post-hoc
modifications to images after sampling, Tree-Ring Watermarking subtly influences
the entire sampling process, resulting in a model fingerprint that is invisible to
humans. The watermark embeds a pattern into the initial noise vector used for
sampling. These patterns are structured in Fourier space so that they are invariant to convolutions, crops, dilations, flips, and rotations. After image generation,
the watermark signal is detected by inverting the diffusion process to retrieve the
noise vector, which is then checked for the embedded signal. We demonstrate
that this technique can be easily applied to arbitrary diffusion models, including text-conditioned Stable Diffusion, as a plug-in with negligible loss in FID.
Our watermark is semantically hidden in the image space and is far more robust
than watermarking alternatives that are currently deployed. Code is available at
https://github.com/YuxinWenRick/tree-ring-watermark.

1

Introduction

The development of diffusion models has led to a surge in image generation quality. Modern textto-image diffusion models, like Stable Diffusion and Midjourney, are capable of generating a wide
variety of novel images in an innumerable number of styles. These systems are general-purpose
image generation tools, able to generate new art just as well as photo-realistic depictions of fake
events for malicious purposes.
The potential abuse of text-to-image models motivates the development of watermarks for their
outputs. A watermarked image is a generated image containing a signal that is invisible to humans
and yet marks the image as machine-generated. Watermarks document the use of image generation
systems, enabling social media, news organizations, and the diffusion platforms themselves to
mitigate harms or cooperate with law enforcement by identifying the origin of an image [Bender
et al., 2021, Grinbaum and Adomaitis, 2022].
Research and applications of watermarking for digital content have a long history, with many
approaches being considered over the last decade [O’Ruanaidh and Pun, 1997, Langelaar et al.,
2000]. However, so far research has always conceptualized the watermark as a minimal modification
imprinted onto an existing image [Solachidis and Pitas, 2001, Chang et al., 2005, Liu et al., 2019, Fei
et al., 2022]. For example, the watermark currently deployed in Stable Diffusion [Cox et al., 2007],
works by modifying a specific Fourier frequency in the generated image.
The watermarking approach we propose in this work is conceptually different: This is the first
watermark that is truly invisible, as no post-hoc modifications are made to the image. Instead,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

