Online Corrupted User Detection and Regret
Minimization
Zhiyong Wang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zywang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Tong Yu
Adobe Research
worktongyu@gmail.com

Jize Xie
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
xjzzjl@sjtu.edu.cn
Shuai Li∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

John C.S. Lui
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
cslui@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In real-world online web systems, multiple users usually arrive sequentially into
the system. For applications like click fraud and fake reviews, some users can
maliciously perform corrupted (disrupted) behaviors to trick the system. Therefore, it is crucial to design efficient online learning algorithms to robustly learn
from potentially corrupted user behaviors and accurately identify the corrupted
users in an online manner. Existing works propose bandit algorithms robust to
adversarial corruption. However, these algorithms are designed for a single user,
and cannot leverage the implicit social relations among multiple users for more
efficient learning. Moreover, none of them consider how to detect corrupted users
online in the multiple-user scenario. In this paper, we present an important online learning problem named LOCUD to learn and utilize unknown user relations
from disrupted behaviors to speed up learning, and identify the corrupted users in
an online setting. To robustly learn and utilize the unknown relations among potentially corrupted users, we propose a novel bandit algorithm RCLUB-WCU. To
detect the corrupted users, we devise a novel online detection algorithm OCCUD
based on RCLUB-WCU’s inferred user relations. We prove a regret upper bound
for RCLUB-WCU, which asymptotically matches the lower bound with respect
to T up to logarithmic factors, and matches the state-of-the-art results in degenerate cases. We also give a theoretical guarantee for the detection accuracy of
OCCUD. With extensive experiments, our methods achieve superior performance
over previous bandit algorithms and high corrupted user detection accuracy.

1

Introduction

In real-world online recommender systems, data from many users arrive in a streaming fashion [4,
15, 2, 7, 35, 27, 26]. There may exist some corrupted (malicious) users, whose behaviors (e.g., click,
rating) can be adversarially corrupted (disrupted) over time to fool the system [29, 30, 12, 10, 9].
These corrupted behaviors could disrupt the user preference estimations of the algorithm. As a
result, the system would easily be misled and make sub-optimal recommendations [14, 23, 7, 41],
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

