Learning Shared Safety Constraints
from Multi-task Demonstrations
Konwoo Kim∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Gokul Swamy∗
Carnegie Mellon University

Zuxin Liu
Carnegie Mellon University

Ding Zhao
Carnegie Mellon University

Sanjiban Choudhury
Cornell University

Zhiwei Steven Wu
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Regardless of the particular task we want them to perform in an environment, there
are often shared safety constraints we want our agents to respect. For example,
regardless of whether it is making a sandwich or clearing the table, a kitchen
robot should not break a plate. Manually specifying such a constraint can be both
time-consuming and error-prone. We show how to learn constraints from expert
demonstrations of safe task completion by extending inverse reinforcement learning
(IRL) techniques to the space of constraints. Intuitively, we learn constraints that
forbid highly rewarding behavior that the expert could have taken but chose not
to. Unfortunately, the constraint learning problem is rather ill-posed and typically
leads to overly conservative constraints that forbid all behavior that the expert did
not take. We counter this by leveraging diverse demonstrations that naturally occur
in multi-task settings to learn a tighter set of constraints. We validate our method
with simulation experiments on high-dimensional continuous control tasks.

1

Introduction

If a friend was in your kitchen and you told them to “make toast" or “clean the dishes," you would
probably be rather surprised if they broke some of your plates during this process. The underlying
safety constraint that forbids these kinds of behavior is both a) implicit and b) agnostic to the
particular task they were asked to perform. Now, let’s bring a household robot into the equation,
operating within your kitchen. How can we ensure that it adheres to these implicit safety constraints,
regardless of its assigned tasks?
One approach might be to write down specific constraints (e.g. joint torque limits) and pass them to
the decision-making system of the robot. Unfortunately, more complex constraints like the ones we
consider above are both difficult to formalize mathematically and easy for an end-user to forget to
specify (as they would be inherently understood by a human helper). This problem is paralleled in the
field of reinforcement learning (RL), where defining reward functions that lead to desirable behaviors
for the learning agent is a recurring challenge [Hadfield-Menell et al., 2017]. For example, it is rather
challenging to handcraft the exact function one should be optimized to be a good driver. The standard
solution to this sort of “reward design" problem is to instead demonstrate the desired behavior of
the agent and then extract a reward function that would incentivize such behavior. Such inverse
reinforcement learning (IRL) techniques have found application in fields as diverse as robotics [Silver
et al., 2010, Ratliff et al., 2009, Kolter et al., 2008, Ng et al., 2006, Zucker et al., 2011], computer
vision [Kitani et al., 2012], and human-computer interaction [Ziebart et al., 2008b, 2012]. Given
the success of IRL techniques and the similarity between reward and constraint design, we propose
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to gswamy@cmu.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

