Accurate Interpolation for Scattered Data through
Hierarchical Residual Refinement
Shizhe Ding1,2 , Boyang Xia1,2 , Dongbo Bu1,2,3∗
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Central China Institute for Artificial Intelligence Technologies, Zhengzhou, China
{dingshizhe19s,xiaboyang20s,dbu}@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Accurate interpolation algorithms are highly desired in various theoretical and
engineering scenarios. Unlike the traditional numerical algorithms that have exact
zero-residual constraints on observed points, the neural network-based interpolation
methods exhibit non-zero residuals at these points. These residuals, which provide
observations of an underlying residual function, can guide predicting interpolation
functions, but have not been exploited by the existing approaches. To fill this gap,
we propose Hierarchical INTerpolation Network (HINT), which utilizes the residuals on observed points to guide target function estimation in a hierarchical fashion.
HINT consists of several sequentially arranged lightweight interpolation blocks.
The first interpolation block estimates the main component of the target function,
while subsequent blocks predict the residual components using observed points
residuals of the preceding blocks. The main component and residual components
are accumulated to form the final interpolation results. Furthermore, under the
assumption that finer residual prediction requires a more focused attention range
on observed points, we utilize hierarchical local constraints in correlation modeling
between observed and target points. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HINT
outperforms existing interpolation algorithms significantly in terms of interpolation
accuracy across a wide variety of datasets, which underscores its potential for
practical scenarios.

1

Introduction

Scattered data interpolation aims to estimate the unknown values of a continuous function at some
target points based on a finite set of observed data points [11]. This technique plays a significant role
in extensive theoretical and engineering domains, e.g., partial differential equations (PDEs) solving,
physical analysis and thermal engineering, etc [7, 20, 28, 2]. For instance, in thermal engineering,
scattered data interpolation is employed to estimate the environmental temperature distribution of
buildings [28] and electronic devices [2] based on temperature sensor readings obtained at dispersed
points. In many applications, the function distributions are complex and the scattered points are
non-uniformly distributed, which poses significant challenges for accurate interpolation algorithms.
Traditional scattered data interpolation algorithms follow a well-established pipeline: firstly a suitable
set of basis functions is prepared (e.g. polynomial, Spline and radial basis functions), then a possible
target function is generated by constructing a linear combination of these basis functions [11]. Basis
function are selected depending on application scenarios, which highly relies on domain knowledge
and human experience. This makes traditional algorithms hardly able to generalize between problems
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

