Structured Neural-PI Control with End-to-End
Stability and Output Tracking Guarantees

Wenqi Cui1 Yan Jiang1 Baosen Zhang1 Yuanyuan Shi2
University of Washington, WA 98195 2 University of California San Diego, CA 92093
wenqicui@uw.edu jiangyan@uw.edu zhangbao@uw.edu yyshi@eng.ucsd.edu

1

Abstract
We study the optimal control of multiple-input and multiple-output dynamical
systems via the design of neural network-based controllers with stability and output
tracking guarantees. While neural network-based nonlinear controllers have shown
superior performance in various applications, their lack of provable guarantees has
restricted their adoption in high-stake real-world applications. This paper bridges
the gap between neural network-based controllers and the need for stabilization
guarantees. Using equilibrium-independent passivity, a property present in a wide
range of physical systems, we propose neural Proportional-Integral (PI) controllers
that have provable guarantees of stability and zero steady-state output tracking error.
The key structure is the strict monotonicity on proportional and integral terms,
which is parameterized as gradients of strictly convex neural networks (SCNN). We
construct SCNN with tunable softplus-β activations, which yields universal approximation capability and is also useful in incorporating communication constraints.
In addition, the SCNNs serve as Lyapunov functions, providing end-to-end stability
and tracking guarantees. Experiments on traffic and power networks demonstrate
that the proposed approach improves both transient and steady-state performances,
while unstructured neural networks lead to unstable behaviors.

1

Introduction

Learning-based methods have the potential to solve difficult problems in control and have received
significant attention from both the machine learning and control communities. A common problem
in many applications is to design controllers that–with as little control effort as possible–stabilize a
system at a prescribed output. A canonical example is the LQR problem and its variants, which finds
optimal linear controllers for linear systems [1, 2].
For nonlinear systems, the problem is considerably harder. Neither of the two control goals, system
stabilization and output tracking at the steady state, is easy to achieve. Their combination, optimizing
controller costs while guaranteeing stability and output tracking at the steady state, is even more
challenging. For example, vehicles in a platoon should stay in formation (stability) while cruising at
the desired speed (output tracking) [3]. The optimization is then done over the set of all controllers
that achieves both of these goals, e.g., reaching a platoon while consuming the least amount of fuel.
Another pertinent application is the stability of electric grids with high amounts of renewables. Unlike
systems with conventional generators, the power electronic interfaces of the inverters need to be
actively controlled such that the grid synchronizes to the same frequency (output tracking), at the
minimum operational costs. Currently, learning becomes a popular tool to parameterize nonlinear
controllers as neural networks and train them to optimize performance, but provable guarantees on
stability and steady-state error for these controllers are nontrivial to obtain [4–7].
Many real-world applications have multiple (possibly a continuous set of) equilibria that may be
of interest. For example, a group of vehicles may need to cruise at different speeds. Moreover, the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

