Feature Adaptation for Sparse Linear Regression

Jonathan A. Kelner∗
MIT

Frederic Koehler†
Stanford

Raghu Meka‡
UCLA

Dhruv Rohatgi§
MIT

Abstract
Sparse linear regression is a central problem in high-dimensional statistics. We
study the correlated random design setting, where the covariates are drawn from a
multivariate Gaussian N (0, Σ), and we seek an estimator with small excess risk.
If the true signal is t-sparse, information-theoretically, it is possible to achieve
strong recovery guarantees with only O(t log n) samples. However, computationally efficient algorithms have sample complexity linear in (some variant of)
the condition number of Σ. Classical algorithms such as the Lasso can require
significantly more samples than necessary even if there is only a single sparse
approximate dependency among the covariates.
We provide a polynomial-time algorithm that, given Σ, automatically adapts the
Lasso to tolerate a small number of approximate dependencies. In particular, we
achieve near-optimal sample complexity for constant sparsity and if Σ has few
“outlier” eigenvalues. Our algorithm fits into a broader framework of feature
adaptation for sparse linear regression with ill-conditioned covariates. With this
framework, we additionally provide the first polynomial-factor improvement over
brute-force search for constant sparsity t and arbitrary covariance Σ.

1

Introduction

Sparse linear regression is a fundamental problem in high-dimensional statistics. In a natural random
design formulation of this problem, we are given m independent and identically distributed samples
(Xi , yi )m
i=1 where each sample’s covariates are drawn from an n-dimensional Gaussian random
vector Xi ∼ N (0, Σ), and each response is yi = ⟨Xi , v ∗ ⟩ + ξi for independent noise ξi ∼ N (0, σ 2 )
and a t-sparse ground truth regressor v ∗ ∈ Rn , where t is much smaller than n. The goal5 is to
output a vector v̂ ∈ Rn for which the excess risk
2

E(⟨X0 , v̂⟩ − y0 )2 − σ 2 = (v̂ − v ∗ )⊤ Σ(v̂ − v ∗ ) =: ∥v̂ − v ∗ ∥Σ
is as small as possible, where (X0 , y0 ) is an independent sample from the same model.
Without the sparsity assumption, the number of samples needed to achieve small excess risk (say,
O(σ 2 )) is linear in the dimension; with O(n) samples, simple and computationally
algo efficient

rithms such as ordinary least squares achieve the statistically optimal excess risk O
∗

σ2 n
m

. Sparsity

kelner@mit.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF Large CCF-1565235, NSF Medium CCF1955217, and NSF TRIPODS 1740751.
†
fkoehler@stanford.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF award CCF-1704417, NSF award
IIS-1908774, and N. Anari’s Sloan Research Fellowship
‡
raghum@cs.ucla.edu. This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER Award CCF-1553605 and
NSF Small CCF-2007682
§
drohatgi@mit.edu. This work was supported by a U.S. DoD NDSEG Fellowship.
5
More generally, from a learning theory perspective, we could consider an arbitrary improper learner outputting a function fˆ(X0 ), rather than specifically learning a linear function ⟨X0 , v̂⟩. At least when Σ is known,
there is no advantage as we can always project fˆ onto the space of linear functions.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

