NeRF-IBVS: Visual Servo Based on NeRF for Visual
Localization and Navigation

Yuanze Wang1,2∗ Yichao Yan1∗ Dianxi Shi1,2† Wenhan Zhu1 Jianqiang Xia2,3
Tan Jeff3 Songchang Jin2 Ke Gao4 Xiaobo Li4 Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Intelligent Game and Decision Lab (IGDL), Beijing, China
3
Tianjin Artificial Intelligence Innovation Center 4 Alibaba Group
{yz.wang,yanyichao,zhuwenhan823,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
dxshi@nudt.edu.cn,jianqiang.xia@foxmail.com,jsc04@tsinghua.org.cn
{xiaobo.lixb,gaoke.gao}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Visual localization is a fundamental task in computer vision and robotics. Training
existing visual localization methods requires a large number of posed images to
generalize to novel views, while state-of-the-art methods generally require ground
truth 3D labels for supervision. However, acquiring a large number of posed images
and 3D labels in the real world is challenging and costly. In this paper, we present
a novel visual localization method that achieves accurate localization while using
only a few posed images compared to other localization methods. To achieve this,
we first use a few posed images with coarse pseudo-3D labels provided by NeRF
to train a coordinate regression network. Then a coarse pose is estimated from the
regression network with PNP. Finally, we use the image-based visual servo (IBVS)
with the scene prior provided by NeRF for pose optimization. Furthermore, our
method can provide effective navigation prior, which enables navigation based on
IBVS without using custom markers and the depth sensor. Extensive experiments
on 7-Scenes and 12-Scenes datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms
state-of-the-art methods under the same setting, with only 5% to 25% training data.
Furthermore, our framework can be naturally extended to the visual navigation task
based on IBVS, and its effectiveness is verified in simulation experiments.

1

Introduction

The estimation of camera positions and orientation based on a query image is a fundamental task
in computer vision. It has wide applications in various fields such as robotics, virtual reality,
and autonomous driving. Existing works that tackle this task can be generally divided into two
categories. The first line of approaches are structure-based [6, 28, 31, 37, 46], which first establish
correspondences between 3D points and 2D pixels, and then compute camera pose with PnP [16]
solver utilizing RANSAC [12]. These methods typically achieve satisfactory results at the cost of a
complex pipeline. The other line of approaches is regression-based [2, 3, 40, 21, 42, 41], which either
regress the 3D coordinates or directly regress the absolute pose. These methods yield a more compact
framework and have fast inference performance. All the above methods require a substantial number
of posed images (generally thousands of posed images per scene) to guarantee the generalization
ability to novel viewpoints. Moreover, state-of-the-art methods [6, 4, 21] also require dense ground
truth 3D labels for supervision, such as depth and 3D model. However, acquiring a large number
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

