One Less Reason for Filter-Pruning:
Gaining Free Adversarial Robustness with Structured
Grouped Kernel Pruning
Shaochen (Henry) Zhong1 , Zaichuan You*2 , Jiamu Zhang*2 , Sebastian Zhao*3 , Zachary
LeClaire2 , Zirui Liu1 , Daochen Zha1 , Vipin Chaudhary2 , Shuai Xu2 , and Xia Hu1
1

Department of Computer Science, Rice University
{shaochen.zhong, zirui.liu, daochen.zha, xia.hu}@rice.edu
2
Department of Computer and Data Sciences, Case Western Reserve University
{zxy456, jxz1217, zjl16, vipin, sxx214}@case.edu
3
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley
sebbyzhao@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Densely structured pruning methods utilizing simple pruning heuristics can deliver immediate compression and acceleration benefits with acceptable benign
performances. However, empirical findings indicate such naïvely pruned networks
are extremely fragile under simple adversarial attacks. Naturally, we would be
interested in knowing if such a phenomenon also holds for carefully designed
modern structured pruning methods. If so, then to what extent is the severity?
And what kind of remedies are available? Unfortunately, both questions remain
largely unaddressed: no prior art is able to provide a thorough investigation on the
adversarial performance of modern structured pruning methods (spoiler: it is not
good), yet the few works that attempt to provide mitigation often do so at various
extra costs with only to-be-desired performance.
In this work, we answer both questions by fairly and comprehensively investigating
the adversarial performance of 10+ popular structured pruning methods. Solutionwise, we take advantage of Grouped Kernel Pruning (GKP)’s recent success in
pushing densely structured pruning freedom to a more fine-grained level. By
mixing up kernel smoothness — a classic robustness-related kernel-level metric —
into a modified GKP procedure, we present a one-shot-post-train-weight-dependent
GKP method capable of advancing SOTA performance on both the benign and
adversarial scale, while requiring no extra (in fact, often less) cost than a standard
pruning procedure. Please refer to our GitHub repository for code implementation,
tool sharing, and model checkpoints.

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have demonstrated solid performance on tasks centered
around computer vision. However, with modern CNNs growing in both widths and depths, the issue
of over-parameterization has drawn increasing attention due to such networks often requiring large
computational resources and memory capacity. To mitigate the burden, network pruning — the study
of removing redundant parameters from original networks without significant performance loss —
has become a popular approach for its simplicity and directness [LeCun et al., 1989, Blalock et al.,
2020, He and Xiao, 2023].
* Equal contribution. Order determined alphabetically by last names.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

