Suggesting Variable Order for Cylindrical Algebraic
Decomposition via Reinforcement Learning
Fuqi Jia1, 3 * , Yuhang Dong2, 3 * , Minghao Liu1, 3 , Pei Huang4 , Feifei Ma2, 3 † , and Jian Zhang1, 3 †
1

State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
2
Laboratory of Parallel Software and Computational Science, Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Stanford University, Stanford, USA
{jiafq,liumh,maff,zj}@ios.ac.cn, dongyuhang22@mails.ucas.ac.cn,
huangpei@stanford.edu

Abstract
Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition (CAD) is one of the pillar algorithms of
symbolic computation, and its worst-case complexity is double exponential to the
number of variables. Researchers found that variable order dramatically affects
efficiency and proposed various heuristics. The existing learning-based methods
are all supervised learning methods that cannot cope with diverse polynomial
sets. This paper proposes two Reinforcement Learning (RL) approaches combined
with Graph Neural Networks (GNN) for Suggesting Variable Order (SVO). One
is GRL-SVO(UP), a branching heuristic integrated with CAD. The other is GRLSVO(NUP), a fast heuristic providing a total order directly. We generate a random
dataset and collect a real-world dataset from SMT-LIB. The experiments show
that our approaches outperform state-of-the-art learning-based heuristics and are
competitive with the best expert-based heuristics. Interestingly, our models show
a strong generalization ability, working well on various datasets even if they are
only trained on a 3-var random dataset. The source code and data are available at
https://github.com/dongyuhang22/GRL-SVO.

1

Introduction

As learned in school, we know how to answer the question of whether a quadratic equation for x has
a real root. For example,
x2 + bx + c = 0,
where b, c are unknowns. We can answer it by checking whether the discriminant is non-negative,
i.e., b2 − 4c ≥ 0. What if the number and degree of variables increase, and the formula involves the
combination of the universal quantifier (∀), existential quantifier (∃), and logical operators (and(∧),
or(∨), not(¬))? Checking whether polynomials satisfy some mathematical constraints is a difficult
problem and has puzzled mathematicians since ancient times. Until the 1930s, Alfred Tarski [1]
answered the question by proving that the theory of real closed fields admits the elimination of
quantifiers and gives a quantifier elimination procedure. Unfortunately, the procedure was impractical
due to its non-elementary complexity. In 1975, George Collins discovered the first relatively efficient
algorithm, Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition (CAD) [2]. Currently, CAD (and variants) has
* These authors contributed equally.
†

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

