An Information-Theoretic Evaluation of Generative
Models in Learning Multi-modal Distributions

Mohammad Jalali
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Isfahan University of Technology
mjalali@ec.iut.ac.ir

Cheuk Ting Li
Department of Information Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
ctli@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Farzan Farnia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
farnia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The evaluation of generative models has received significant attention in the machine learning community. When applied to a multi-modal distribution which is
common among image datasets, an intuitive evaluation criterion is the number of
modes captured by the generative model. While several scores have been proposed
to evaluate the quality and diversity of a model’s generated data, the correspondence
between existing scores and the number of modes in the distribution is unclear. In
this work, we propose an information-theoretic diversity evaluation method for
multi-modal underlying distributions. We utilize the Rényi Kernel Entropy (RKE)
as an evaluation score based on quantum information theory to measure the number
of modes in generated samples. To interpret the proposed evaluation method, we
show that the RKE score can output the number of modes of a mixture of subGaussian components. We also prove estimation error bounds for estimating the
RKE score from limited data, suggesting a fast convergence of the empirical RKE
score to the score for the underlying data distribution. Utilizing the RKE score, we
conduct an extensive evaluation of state-of-the-art generative models over standard
image datasets. The numerical results indicate that while the recent algorithms for
training generative models manage to improve the mode-based diversity over the
earlier architectures, they remain incapable of capturing the full diversity of real
data. Our empirical results provide a ranking of widely-used generative models
based on the RKE score of their generated samples1 .

1

Introduction

Deep generative models trained by generative adversarial networks (GANs) [1] and diffusion models
[2] have achieved impressive results in various unsupervised learning settings [3, 4, 5, 6]. Due to their
success in generating image samples with high visual quality, the analysis of large-scale generative
models has received great attention in the machine learning community. In particular, the evaluation
of generative models has been extensively studied in the recent literature to understand the benefits
and drawbacks of existing approaches to training generative models.
To address the evaluation task for generative models, multiple assessment scores have been proposed
in the literature. The existing evaluation metrics can be divided into two general categories: 1)
1

The code repository is available at https://github.com/mjalali/renyi-kernel-entropy.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

