TFLEX: Temporal Feature-Logic Embedding
Framework for Complex Reasoning over Temporal
Knowledge Graph

Xueyuan Lin1 Haihong E1 * Chengjin Xu2 * Gengxian Zhou1
Haoran Luo1 Tianyi Hu1 Fenglong Su3 Ningyuan Li1 Mingzhi Sun1
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
University of Bonn
3
National University of Defense Technology
linxy59@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, ehaihong@bupt.edu.cn, xuc@iai.uni-bonn.de
z.gengxian@se18.qmul.ac.uk, {luohaoran, hutianyi}@bupt.edu.cn
sufenglong18@nudt.edu.cn, {jason.ningyuan.li, sunmingzhi}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-hop logical reasoning over knowledge graph plays a fundamental role in
many artificial intelligence tasks. Recent complex query embedding methods for
reasoning focus on static KGs, while temporal knowledge graphs have not been
fully explored. Reasoning over TKGs has two challenges: 1. The query should
answer entities or timestamps; 2. The operators should consider both set logic on
entity set and temporal logic on timestamp set. To bridge this gap, we introduce the
multi-hop logical reasoning problem on TKGs and then propose the first temporal
complex query embedding named Temporal Feature-Logic Embedding framework
(TFLEX) to answer the temporal complex queries. Specifically, we utilize fuzzy
logic to compute the logic part of the Temporal Feature-Logic embedding, thus
naturally modeling all first-order logic operations on the entity set. In addition,
we further extend fuzzy logic on timestamp set to cope with three extra temporal
operators (After, Before and Between). Experiments on numerous query patterns
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1

Introduction

Multi-hop logical reasoning over knowledge graphs (KGs) is a fundamental issue in artificial intelligence. It aims to find the answer entities for a first-order logic (FOL) query which involves logical
operators (existential quantification ∃, conjunction ∧, disjunction∨ and negation¬). Generally, the
query is parsed into computation graph, according to which subgraph matching is executed on KG to
find the answers. The computation graph is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose nodes represent
entity sets, and edges represent logical operators acting on entity sets. However, results are inevitably
incorrect as KGs are incomplete and noisy. Besides, the computation complexity will spiral for
large-scale KGs or large queries. Therefore, people propose to embed query into low-dimensional
space to solve the problem.
Query embedding (QE) learns the embeddings of queries and entities, so that answer entities are close
to its queries in the embedding space. It has attracted arising attention, as low-dimension embeddings
can model implicit dependency and reduce computation. There follows a series of QE methods,
including GQE[1], Query2box[2], BetaE[3], ConE[4], etc. However, existing works only focus

* Corresponding Authors
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

