Relative Entropic Optimal Transport: a (Prior-aware)
Matching Perspective to (Unbalanced) Classification

Liangliang Shi, Haoyu Zhen, Gu Zhang, Junchi Yan∗
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{shiliangliang, anye_zhen, blake-nash, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
PyTorch Code: https://github.com/LiangliangShi/RE-OT

Abstract
Classification is a fundamental problem in machine learning, and considerable
efforts have been recently devoted to the demanding long-tailed setting due to
its prevalence in nature. Departure from the Bayesian framework, this paper
rethinks classification from a matching perspective by studying the matching
probability between samples and labels with optimal transport (OT) formulation.
Specifically, we first propose a new variant of optimal transport, called Relative
Entropic Optimal Transport (RE-OT), which guides the coupling solution to a
known prior information matrix. We gives some theoretical results and their proof
for RE-OT and surprisingly find RE-OT can help to deblur for barycenter images.
Then we adopt inverse RE-OT for training long-tailed data and find that the loss
derived from RE-OT has a similar form to Softmax-based cross-entropy loss,
indicating a close connection between optimal transport and classification and
the potential for transferring concepts between these two academic fields, such
as barycentric projection in OT, which can map the labels back to the feature
space. We further derive an epoch-varying RE-OT loss, and do the experiments
on unbalanced image classification, molecule classification, instance segmentation
and representation learning. Experimental results show its effectiveness.

1

Introduction

Long-tailed label distribution or unbalanced classification in training given more balanced testing set
has been a challenge for existing neural models [42, 3, 62]. Various approaches have been developed,
such as Class Re-balancing [3, 25, 35, 8, 45, 52], Information Augmentation [36, 7], and Module
Improvement [65, 16, 62]. However, the problem is still far from being solved.
Most existing methods on (long-tailed) classification study the conditional probability function p(y|x)
or their joint distribution given the label y and sample x, almost taking it for granted. For instance,
[45] shows that in the long-tailed case, according to Bayes’ theorem, the vanilla Softmax classification
is affected by the label distribution shift, which makes the classifier more inclined to consider the
samples as belonging to the majority class. To address this issue, the work explicitly considers
the label distribution shift and re-derives the Softmax function. [22] argues that the conditional
distribution p(y|x) is not the same between training and testing data, which can result in target-shift.
To enhance class-unbalanced learning, the authors propose to relax the assumption that the source
and target domains share the same conditional distribution p(x|y). Despite the de-facto Bayesian
perspective for understanding classification, in this paper, we take a matching view and demonstrate
how new insights and approaches can be derived, especially for the challenging long-tail cases.
∗

Correspondence author. This work was partly supported by NSFC (62222607, 61972250, U19B2035) and
Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

