A Unified Fast Gradient Clipping Framework
for DP-SGD
Weiwei Kong
Google Research
weiweikong@google.com

Andres Muñoz Medina
Google Research
ammedina@google.com

Abstract
A well-known numerical bottleneck in the differentially-private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm is the computation of the gradient norm for
each example in a large input batch. When the loss function in DP-SGD consists of
an intermediate linear operation, existing methods in the literature have proposed
decompositions of gradients that are amenable to fast norm computations. In this
paper, we present a framework that generalizes the above approach to arbitrary
(possibly nonlinear) intermediate operations. Moreover, we show that for certain
operations, such as fully-connected and embedding layer computations, further
improvements to the runtime and storage costs of existing decompositions can
be deduced using certain components of our framework. Finally, preliminary
numerical experiments are given to demonstrate the substantial effects of the
aforementioned improvements.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models — more specifically, neural network-based models — are becoming
more popular in industrial applications, in user-facing products, and different scientific fields. The
popularity of these models lies on their flexibility and ability to be trained on ever bigger datasets,
which may contain personal information about individuals. As these models become bigger and
more descriptive, ML practitioners need to ensure that the models, and their black-box interactions,
do not reveal information about the data used to train the model. In fact, it has been shown repeatedly
[18] that large neural-network models can be used to know if a particular example was used in
the training data. Another line of attacks has demonstrated that one can actually reconstruct some
training instances with simple interactions with a trained model [3].
The only known robust way of protecting against these attacks is to train models using differential
privacy [10, 11]. Using this approach, ML practitioners provide an information theoretic guarantee
that ensures that the final model does not depend on any individual example1 . To date, the most
popular method for training models with differential privacy is the differentially private stochastic
gradient descent (DP-SGD) [1] method. In theory, the DP-SGD algorithm requires only minimal
changes with respect to its non-private counterpart; one only requires to clip gradients observed in
the training process and add some noise proportional to the clipping value. However, in practice,
the (naı̈ve) gradient clipping step has been shown to increase memory and computational costs in
all popular learning platforms (JAX, Tensorflow, and Pytorch). More precisely, for a batch of size
n a naı̈ve implementation of DP-SGD requires calculating n gradients (one for each example in the
batch) so they can be clipped. This is in stark contrast with most back-propagation-based training
algorithms which calculate a single gradient. This implies a dependency on the runtime and memory
in proportion to the batch size used to train the model, and for large models, this cost makes the
1
In particular, it is impossible to distinguish whether or not an individual example is in the dataset, let alone
reconstruct it.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

