Scalable 3D Captioning with Pretrained Models

Tiange Luo1,∗ Chris Rockwell1,∗ Honglak Lee1,2,† Justin Johnson1,†
1
University of Michigan 2 LG AI Research

Abstract
We introduce Cap3D, an automatic approach for generating descriptive text for
3D objects. This approach utilizes pretrained models from image captioning,
image-text alignment, and LLM to consolidate captions from multiple views of
a 3D asset, completely side-stepping the time-consuming and costly process of
manual annotation. We apply Cap3D to the recently introduced large-scale 3D
dataset, Objaverse, resulting in 785k 3D-text pairs. Our evaluation, conducted using
41k human annotations from the same dataset, demonstrates that Cap3D surpasses
human-authored descriptions in terms of quality, cost, and speed. Through effective
prompt engineering, Cap3D rivals human performance in generating geometric descriptions on 17k collected annotations from the ABO dataset. Finally, we finetune
text-to-3D models on Cap3D and human captions, and show Cap3D outperforms;
and benchmark the SOTA including Point·E, Shap·E, and DreamFusion. Our data,
code, and finetuned models can be found at https://cap3d-um.github.io/.

A 3D model of a blue grand
piano with spikes and sharp
teeth resembling a shark
mouth.

A 3D model of a metal cube
featuring a skull, pizza, and
various stickers.

3D model of a yellow Pikachuthemed Pokémon ball with a
black and gold stripe and
lightning bolt.

3D model of Notre Dame
Cathedral, a Gothic cathedral
with spires in Paris.

Loki bust 3D model
featuring a green and yellow
horned helmet.

A 3D model featuring a
basketball hoop, ball, racquet,
bowling ball, stand, and pin.

3D model of a purple and
green Halloween spider bowl
on a metal stand, containing
purple liquid.

3D model of an armored
character with purple horns and
spikes on the back.

3D model of a robotic
scorpion with multiple arms
and guns.

A cluster of five glass sphere
light bulbs suspended from a
single thin wire.

L-shaped sectional sofa with a
chaise, U-shaped backrest,
curved armrests, and a
footstool on one side.

3D model of a sakura soft drink
can with purple and yellow
gradient, Japanese writing, and
purple flowers.

z

Figure 1: Cap3D provides detailed descriptions of 3D objects by leveraging pretrained models in
captioning, alignment, and LLM to consolidate multi-view information. Two views of 3D objects are
shown here, Cap3D uses eight. Additional examples are available in Appendix B.
∗

joint first authorship; † equal advising

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

