Predicting Global Label Relationship Matrix for
Graph Neural Networks under Heterophily

Langzhang Liang
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
lazylzliang@gmail.com

Xiangjing Hu
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
starry.hxj@gmail.com

Zenglin Xu∗
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen & Pengcheng Lab
zenglin@gmail.com
Zixing Song
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zxsong@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Irwin King
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
king@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been shown to achieve remarkable performance on node classification tasks by exploiting both graph structures and
node features. The majority of existing GNNs rely on the implicit homophily
assumption. Recent studies have demonstrated that GNNs may struggle to model
heterophilous graphs where nodes with different labels are more likely connected.
To address this issue, we propose a generic GNN applicable to both homophilous
and heterophilous graphs, namely Low-Rank Graph Neural Network (LRGNN).
Our analysis demonstrates that a signed graph’s global label relationship matrix
has a low rank. This insight inspires us to predict the label relationship matrix
by solving a robust low-rank matrix approximation problem, as prior research
has proven that low-rank approximation could achieve perfect recovery under
certain conditions. The experimental results reveal that the solution bears a strong
resemblance to the label relationship matrix, presenting two advantages for graph
modeling: a block diagonal structure and varying distributions of within-class and
between-class entries.

1

Introduction

Graphs (or networks) are ubiquitous in various fields, such as social networks [Tang et al., 2013, Xu
et al., 2015, 2019b], biology [Guzzi and Zitnik, 2022], and chemistry [Gilmer et al., 2017]. Many
real-world networks follow the Homophily assumption, i.e., linked nodes tend to share the same label
or have similar features; while for graphs with heterophily, nodes with different labels are more likely
to form a link. For example, many people tend to connect with people of the opposite sex in dating
networks. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [Kipf and Welling, 2017, Velickovic et al., 2018] have
shown significant success in tackling a diverse set of graph mining tasks, such as NLP [Song and
King, 2022, Chen et al., 2023] and clustering [Huang et al., 2023, Kang et al., 2020]. There are also
studies dedicated to enhancing the representational power of GNNs [Liang et al., 2023, Xu et al.,
2019a]. Recently, researchers have observed that GNNs may face difficulties in learning on graphs
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

