Window-Based Distribution Shift Detection for Deep
Neural Networks
Guy Bar-Shalom
Department of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
guy.b@cs.technion.ac.il

Yonatan Geifman
Deci.AI
yonatan@deci.ai

Ran El-Yaniv
Department of Computer Science
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Deci.AI
rani@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
To deploy and operate deep neural models in production, the quality of their predictions, which might be contaminated benignly or manipulated maliciously by input
distributional deviations, must be monitored and assessed. Specifically, we study
the case of monitoring the healthy operation of a deep neural network (DNN) receiving a stream of data, with the aim of detecting input distributional deviations over
which the quality of the network’s predictions is potentially damaged. Using selective prediction principles, we propose a distribution deviation detection method for
DNNs. The proposed method is derived from a tight coverage generalization bound
computed over a sample of instances drawn from the true underlying distribution.
Based on this bound, our detector continuously monitors the operation of the network over a test window and fires off an alarm whenever a deviation is detected. Our
novel detection method performs on-par or better than the state-of-the-art, while
consuming substantially lower computation time (five orders of magnitude reduction) and space complexity. Unlike previous methods, which require at least linear
dependence on the size of the source distribution for each detection, rendering them
inapplicable to “Google-Scale” datasets, our approach eliminates this dependence,
making it suitable for real-world applications. Code is available at https://
github.com/BarSGuy/Window-Based-Distribution-Shift-Detection.

1

Introduction

A wide range of artificial intelligence applications and services rely on deep neural models because of
their remarkable accuracy. When a trained model is deployed in production, its operation should be
monitored for abnormal behavior, and a flag should be raised if such is detected. Corrective measures
can be taken if the underlying cause of the abnormal behavior is identified. For example, simple
distributional changes may only require retraining with fresh data, while more severe cases may
require redesigning the model (e.g., when new classes emerge).
In this paper we focus on distribution shift detection in the context of deep neural models and consider
the following setting. Pretrained model f is given, and we presume it was trained with data sampled
from some distribution P . In addition to the dataset used in training f , we are also given an additional
unlabeled sample of data from the same distribution, which is used to train a detector D (we refer to
this as the detection-training set or source set). While f is used in production to process a stream of
emerging input data, we continually feed D with the most recent window Wk of k input elements.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

