ProtoDiff: Learning to Learn Prototypical Networks
by Task-Guided Diffusion

1

Yingjun Du1 , Zehao Xiao1 , Shencai Liao2 , Cees G. M. Snoek1
AIM Lab, University of Amsterdam 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Prototype-based meta-learning has emerged as a powerful technique for addressing
few-shot learning challenges. However, estimating a deterministic prototype using
a simple average function from a limited number of examples remains a fragile
process. To overcome this limitation, we introduce ProtoDiff, a novel framework
that leverages a task-guided diffusion model during the meta-training phase to
gradually generate prototypes, thereby providing efficient class representations.
Specifically, a set of prototypes is optimized to achieve per-task prototype overfitting, enabling accurately obtaining the overfitted prototypes for individual tasks.
Furthermore, we introduce a task-guided diffusion process within the prototype
space, enabling the meta-learning of a generative process that transitions from a
vanilla prototype to an overfitted prototype. ProtoDiff gradually generates taskspecific prototypes from random noise during the meta-test stage, conditioned on
the limited samples available for the new task. Furthermore, to expedite training
and enhance ProtoDiff’s performance, we propose the utilization of residual prototype learning, which leverages the sparsity of the residual prototype. We conduct
thorough ablation studies to demonstrate its ability to accurately capture the underlying prototype distribution and enhance generalization. The new state-of-the-art
performance on within-domain, cross-domain, and few-task few-shot classification
further substantiates the benefit of ProtoDiff.

1

Introduction

This paper considers prototype-based meta-learning, where models are trained to swiftly adapt
to current tasks and perform classification through metric-based comparisons between examples
and newly introduced variables - the prototypes of the classes. This approach, rooted in works by
Reed [34] and further developed by Snell et al.[42], generalizes deep learning models to scenarios
where labeled data is scarce. The fundamental idea is to compute the distances between queried
examples and class prototypes and perform classification based on these distances to predict classes
for queried examples. Derived from the prototypical network [42], several prototype-based methods
have demonstrated their effectiveness in few-shot learning [2, 8, 11, 61]. However, as prototypes
are estimated from a limited number of sampled examples, they may not accurately capture the
overall distribution [54, 61]. Such biased distributions could lead to biased prototypes and subsequent
classification errors, suggesting that the current prototype modeling approach might lack the ability to
represent universal class-level information effectively. Rather than relying on points in the prototype
embedding space by using a simple average function, we propose to generate the distribution of
prototypes for each task.
To overcome the challenges of estimating deterministic prototypes from limited examples in few-shot
learning, we propose ProtoDiff, an innovative framework that leverages a task-guided diffusion model
during the meta-training phase. ProtoDiff introduces a three-step process to address these limitations
comprehensively. Firstly, we optimize a set of prototypes to achieve per-task prototype overfitting,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

