Interaction Measures, Partition Lattices and Kernel
Tests for High-Order Interactions

Zhaolu Liu1

Robert L. Peach2,3

Pedro A.M. Mediano4

Mauricio Barahona1∗

1

Department of Mathematics, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
2
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Würzburg, Germany
3
Department of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
4
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, United Kingdom

Abstract
Models that rely solely on pairwise relationships often fail to capture the complete
statistical structure of the complex multivariate data found in diverse domains,
such as socio-economic, ecological, or biomedical systems. Non-trivial dependencies between groups of more than two variables can play a significant role in the
analysis and modelling of such systems, yet extracting such high-order interactions from data remains challenging. Here, we introduce a hierarchy of d-order
interaction measures, increasingly inclusive of possible factorisations of the joint
probability distribution, and define non-parametric, kernel-based tests to establish
systematically the statistical significance of d-order interactions. We also establish
mathematical links with lattice theory, which elucidate the derivation of the interaction measures and their composite permutation tests; clarify the connection of
simplicial complexes with kernel matrix centring; and provide a means to enhance
computational efficiency. We illustrate our results numerically with validations on
synthetic data, and through an application to neuroimaging data.

1

Introduction

There is increasing evidence that pairwise relationships are insufficient to model many real world
systems [1, 2, 3]. The relevance of high-order interactions has been emphasised in many contexts,
as relationships within social [4], ecological [5, 6], and biological systems [7, 8] frequently involve
groups of three or more agents, beyond pairwise associations. Such high-order interactions can
be neither trivially represented by a linear combination of dyadic relationships, as the presence of
high-order interactions can significantly impact the dynamics on networked systems [9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15], nor can they be simply detected by joint independence tests which inherently ignore other
possible factorisations of the joint distribution.
Direct measurements of group interactions are seldom available, leading to their omission, partial
representation as projected pairwise interactions [16, 17, 18], or limited recovery through inference
methods [19, 20]. Often, only indirect measurements of underlying interactions in real-world complex
systems are available, in the form of iid or time-series data. Methods that learn high-order interactions
from time-series data have been developed [11, 21], however, their reliance on heuristic measures
makes their interpretation difficult. Alternative methods have been developed with strong foundations
in statistics [22] and information theory[23, 24, 25], however, as we show later, these are often based
∗

Corresponding author: m.barahona@imperial.ac.uk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

