PROTES: Probabilistic Optimization with Tensor
Sampling

Anastasia Batsheva∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
a.batsheva@skoltech.ru

Andrei Chertkov∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
and AIRI, Moscow, Russia
a.chertkov@skoltech.ru

Gleb Ryzhakov∗
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
Moscow, Russia
g.ryzhakov@skoltech.ru

Ivan Oseledets
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
and AIRI, Moscow, Russia
i.oseledets@skoltech.ru

Abstract
We developed a new method PROTES for black-box optimization, which is based
on the probabilistic sampling from a probability density function given in the
low-parametric tensor train format. We tested it on complex multidimensional
arrays and discretized multivariable functions taken, among others, from real-world
applications, including unconstrained binary optimization and optimal control
problems, for which the possible number of elements is up to 21000 . In numerical
experiments, both on analytic model functions and on complex problems, PROTES
outperforms popular discrete optimization methods (Particle Swarm Optimization,
Covariance Matrix Adaptation, Differential Evolution, and others).

1

Introduction

The multidimensional optimization problem is one of the most common in machine learning. It
includes the important case of gradient-free discrete optimization [30, 20, 21, 41]:
xmin = min f(x),
x

s.t. x = [n1 , n2 , . . . , nd ],

ni ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Ni },

(1)

where d is the dimensionality of the problem, and N1 , N2 , . . . , Nd are the numbers of items for
each dimension. Such settings arise when searching for the minimum or maximum element in an
implicitly given multidimensional array (tensor1 ), including when considering the discretization of
functions from a continuous argument. Multidimensional discrete optimization problems are still
computationally difficult in the case of complex target functions or large dimensions, and efficient
direct gradient-free optimization procedures are highly needed.
The development of methods for low-rank tensor approximations has made it possible to introduce
fundamentally new approaches for the approximation, storage, and operation with multidimensional
∗

Equal contribution.
A tensor is a multidimensional array with several dimensions d (d ≥ 1). A two-dimensional tensor (d = 2)
is a matrix, one-dimensional (d = 1) - a vector. We use lower case and upper case (where this does not
lead to confusion) letters for scalars, bold letters (a, b, c, . . .) for vectors, upper case letters (A, B, C, . . .) for
matrices, and calligraphic upper case letters (A, B, C, . . .) for tensors with d > 2. The (n1 , n2 , . . . , nd )-th
entry of a d-dimensional tensor Y ∈ RN1 ×N2 ×...×Nd is denoted by y = Y[n1 , n2 , . . . , nd ], where ni =
1, 2, . . . , Ni (i = 1, 2, . . . , d), and Ni is a size of the i-th mode. The mode-i slice of such tensor is denoted by
Y[n1 , . . . , ni−1 , :, ni+1 , . . . , nd ].
1

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

