FAMO: Fast Adaptive Multitask Optimization

†

Bo Liu, ‡ Yihao Feng, †,§ Peter Stone, † Qiang Liu
The University of Texas at Austin, ‡ Salesforce AI Research, § Sony AI
{bliu, pstone, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu, yihaof@salesforce.com
†

Abstract
One of the grand enduring goals of AI is to create generalist agents that can learn
multiple different tasks from diverse data via multitask learning (MTL). However,
in practice, applying gradient descent (GD) on the average loss across all tasks
may yield poor multitask performance due to severe under-optimization of certain
tasks. Previous approaches that manipulate task gradients for a more balanced
loss decrease require storing and computing all task gradients (O(k) space and
time where k is the number of tasks), limiting their use in large-scale scenarios.
In this work, we introduce Fast Adaptive Multitask Optimization (FAMO), a dynamic weighting method that decreases task losses in a balanced way using O(1)
space and time. We conduct an extensive set of experiments covering multi-task
supervised and reinforcement learning problems. Our results indicate that FAMO
achieves comparable or superior performance to state-of-the-art gradient manipulation techniques while offering significant improvements in space and computational
efficiency. Code is available at https://github.com/Cranial-XIX/FAMO.

1

Introduction

Large models trained on diverse data have advanced both computer vision [20] and natural language
processing [4], paving the way for generalist agents capable of multitask learning (MTL) [5]. Given
the substantial size of these models, it is crucial to design MTL methods that are effective in terms of
task performance and efficient in terms of space and time complexities for managing training costs
and environmental impacts. This work explores such methods through the lens of optimization.
Perhaps the most intuitive way of solving an MTL problem is to optimize the average loss across
all tasks. However, in practice, doing so can lead to models with poor multitask performance: a
subset of tasks are severely under-optimized. A major reason behind such optimization failure is that
a subset of tasks are under-optimized because the average gradient constantly results in small (or
even negative) progress on these tasks (see details in Section 2).
To mitigate this problem, gradient manipulation methods [43, 25, 7, 24] compute a new update vector
in place of the gradient to the average loss, such that all task losses decrease in a more balanced
way. The new update vector is often determined by solving an additional optimization problem that
involves all task gradients. While these approaches exhibit improved performance, they become
computationally expensive when the number of tasks and the model size are large [41]. This is
because they require computing and storing all task gradients at each iteration, thus demanding
O(k) space and time complexities, not to mention the overhead introduced by solving the additional
optimization problem. In contrast, the average gradient can be efficiently computed in O(1) space
and time per iteration because one can first average the task losses and then take the gradient of the
average loss.1 To this end, we ask the following question:
1

Here, we refer to the situation where a single data x can be used to compute all task losses.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

