Coneheads: Hierarchy Aware Attention

Albert Tseng
Cornell University
albert@cs.cornell.edu

Tao Yu
Cornell University
tyu@cs.cornell.edu

Toni J.B. Liu
Cornell University
jl3499@cornell.edu

Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Attention networks such as transformers have achieved state-of-the-art performance
in many domains. These networks rely heavily on the dot product attention operator, which computes the similarity between two points by taking their inner product.
However, the inner product does not explicitly model the complex structural properties of real world datasets, such as hierarchies between data points. To remedy
this, we introduce cone attention, a drop-in replacement for dot product attention
based on hyperbolic entailment cones. Cone attention associates two points by the
depth of their lowest common ancestor in a hierarchy defined by hyperbolic cones,
which intuitively measures the divergence of two points and gives a hierarchy
aware similarity score. We test cone attention on a wide variety of models and
tasks and show that it improves task-level performance over dot product attention
and other baselines, and is able to match dot-product attention with significantly
fewer parameters. Our results suggest that cone attention is an effective way to
capture hierarchical relationships when calculating attention.

1

Introduction

In recent years, attention networks have achieved highly competitive performance in a variety of
settings, often outperforming highly-engineered deep neural networks [5, 8, 31]. The majority of
these networks use dot product attention, which defines the similarity between two points u, v ∈ Rd
by their inner product u⊤ v [31]. Although dot product attention empirically performs well, it also
suffers from drawbacks that limit its ability to scale to and capture complex relationships in large
datasets [33, 27]. The most well known of these issues is the quadratic time and memory cost of
computing pairwise attention. While many works on attention mechanisms have focused on reducing
the computational cost of dot product attention, few have considered the properties of the dot product
operator itself [33, 6].
Many real world datasets exhibit complex structural patterns and relationships which may not be well
captured by an inner product [30, 16]. For example, NLP tasks often contain hierarchies over tokens,
and images may contain clusters over pixels [34, 14]. Motivated by this, we propose a new framework
based on hyperbolic entailment cones to compute attention between sets of points [10, 37]. Our
attention mechanism, which we dub “cone attention”, utilizes partial orderings defined by hyperbolic
cones to better model hierarchical relationships between data points. More specifically, we associate
two points by the depth of their lowest common ancestor (LCA) in the cone partial ordering, which is
analogous to finding their LCA in a latent tree and captures how divergent two points are.
Cone attention effectively relies on two components: hyperbolic embeddings and entailment cones.
Hyperbolic embeddings, which use the underlying geometric properties of hyperbolic space, give low37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

