Asymmetric Certified Robustness via
Feature-Convex Neural Networks
Samuel Pfrommer∗

Brendon G. Anderson∗
Julien Piet
Somayeh Sojoudi
University of California, Berkeley
{sam.pfrommer,bganderson,piet,sojoudi}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Real-world adversarial attacks on machine learning models often feature an asymmetric structure wherein adversaries only attempt to induce false negatives (e.g.,
classify a spam email as not spam). We formalize the asymmetric robustness
certification problem and correspondingly present the feature-convex neural network architecture, which composes an input-convex neural network (ICNN) with
a Lipschitz continuous feature map in order to achieve asymmetric adversarial
robustness. We consider the aforementioned binary setting with one “sensitive”
class, and for this class we prove deterministic, closed-form, and easily-computable
certified robust radii for arbitrary `p -norms. We theoretically justify the use of these
models by extending the universal approximation theorem for ICNN regression to
the classification setting, and proving a lower bound on the probability that such
models perfectly fit even unstructured uniformly distributed data in sufficiently
high dimensions. Experiments on Malimg malware classification and subsets of
the MNIST, Fashion-MNIST, and CIFAR-10 datasets show that feature-convex
classifiers attain substantial certified `1 , `2 , and `∞ -radii while being far more
computationally efficient than competitive baselines. 1

1

Introduction

Although neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance across a range of machine learning
tasks, researchers have shown that they can be highly sensitive to adversarial inputs that are maliciously designed to fool the model [11, 61, 52]. For example, the works Eykholt et al. [22] and Liu
et al. [42] show that small physical and digital alterations of vehicle traffic signs can cause image
classifiers to fail. In safety-critical applications of neural networks, such as autonomous driving
[12, 69] and medical diagnostics [1, 71], this sensitivity to adversarial inputs is clearly unacceptable.
A line of heuristic defenses against adversarial inputs has been proposed, only to be defeated by
stronger attack methods [14, 36, 7, 64, 46]. This has led researchers to develop certifiably robust
methods that provide a provable guarantee of safe performance. The strength of such certificates can
be highly dependent on network architecture; general off-the-shelf models tend to have large Lipschitz
constants, leading to loose Lipschitz-based robustness guarantees [29, 23, 73]. Consequently, lines
of work that impose certificate-amenable structures onto networks have been popularized, e.g.,
specialized model layers [63, 77], randomized smoothing-based networks [41, 18, 76, 72, 3], and
ReLU networks that are certified using convex optimization and mixed-integer programming [68, 67,
54, 4, 45]. The first category only directly certifies against one specific choice of norm, producing
poorly scaled radii for other norms in high dimensions. The latter two approaches incur serious
computational challenges: randomized smoothing typically requires the classification of thousands
∗
1

Equal contribution.
Code for reproducing our results is available on GitHub.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

