A Unified Model and Dimension
for Interactive Estimation
Nataly Brukhim
Princeton University
nbrukhim@princeton.edu

Miro Dudik
Microsoft Research
mdudik@microsoft.com

Aldo Pacchiano
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard & Boston University
apacchia@broadinstitute.org

Robert Schapire
Microsoft Research
schapire@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study an abstract framework for interactive learning called interactive estimation in which the goal is to estimate a target from its “similarity” to points
queried by the learner. We introduce a combinatorial measure called dissimilarity
dimension which is used to derive learnability bounds in our model. We present
a simple, general, and broadly-applicable algorithm, for which we obtain both
regret and PAC generalization bounds that are polynomial in the new dimension.
We show that our framework subsumes and thereby unifies two classic learning
models: statistical-query learning and structured bandits. We also delineate how the
dissimilarity dimension is related to well-known parameters for both frameworks,
in some cases yielding significantly improved analyses.

1

Introduction

We study a general interactive learning protocol called interactive estimation. In this model, the
learner repeatedly queries the environment with an element from a set of alternatives, and observes a
stochastic reward whose expectation is given by an arbitrary measure of the “similarity” between
the queried alternative and the unknown ground truth. Thus, in rough terms, the goal is to estimate a
target from its similarity to queried alternatives. By studying such a general abstraction of interactive
learning, we are able to reason about the properties of a very broad family of learning settings, and to
make connections across a variety of contexts.
Our results are based on a combinatorial complexity measure we introduce called the dissimilarity
dimension, which is used to derive learnability bounds in our model. Intuitively, this measure
corresponds to the length of the longest sequence of alternatives in which each one has a similar
suboptimal value of similarity to all its predecessors. We then use the measure to analyze the
performance of a simple, broadly-applicable class of algorithms which repeatedly make new queries
that best fit the preceding observations. We prove both regret bounds and PAC generalization bounds
that are all polynomial in the dissimilarity dimension.
We show that our learning framework subsumes two classic learning models that were seemingly
unrelated prior to this work:
First, our model subsumes the statistical query (SQ) model, introduced by Kearns [19] for designing
noise-tolerant learning algorithms. In the SQ model, the learner can sequentially ask certain queries of
an oracle, who responds with answers that are only approximately correct, with the goal of correctly
estimating a target. Despite its simplicity, it has been proven to be a powerful model. Indeed, a wide
range of algorithmic techniques in machine learning are implementable using SQ learning. Thus, it
has been proven useful, not only for designing noise-tolerant algorithms, but also for its connections
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

