Deep Neural Collapse Is Provably Optimal
for the Deep Unconstrained Features Model

Peter Súkeník
Institute of Science and Technology
Klosterneuburg, Austria
peter.sukenik@ista.ac.at

Marco Mondelli∗
Institute of Science and Technology
Klosterneuburg, Austria
marco.mondelli@ista.ac.at

Christoph H. Lampert∗
Institute of Science and Technology
Klosterneuburg, Austria
chl@ist.ac.at

Abstract
Neural collapse (NC) refers to the surprising structure of the last layer of deep
neural networks in the terminal phase of gradient descent training. Recently, an
increasing amount of experimental evidence has pointed to the propagation of NC
to earlier layers of neural networks. However, while the NC in the last layer is
well studied theoretically, much less is known about its multi-layered counterpart –
deep neural collapse (DNC). In particular, existing work focuses either on linear
layers or only on the last two layers at the price of an extra assumption. Our paper
fills this gap by generalizing the established analytical framework for NC – the
unconstrained features model – to multiple non-linear layers. Our key technical
contribution is to show that, in a deep unconstrained features model, the unique
global optimum for binary classification exhibits all the properties typical of DNC.
This explains the existing experimental evidence of DNC. We also empirically show
that (i) by optimizing deep unconstrained features models via gradient descent, the
resulting solution agrees well with our theory, and (ii) trained networks recover
the unconstrained features suitable for the occurrence of DNC, thus supporting the
validity of this modeling principle.

1

Introduction

In the thought-provoking paper [22], Papyan et al. uncovered a remarkable structure in the last layer
of sufficiently expressive and well-trained deep neural networks (DNNs). This phenomenon is dubbed
“neural collapse” (NC), and it has been linked to robustness and generalization of DNNs. In particular,
in [22] it is shown that all training samples from a single class have the same feature vectors after
the penultimate layer (a property called NC1); the globally centered class-means form a simplex
equiangular tight frame, the most “spread out” configuration of equally-sized vectors geometrically
possible (NC2); the last layer’s classifier vectors computing scores for each of the classes align with
the centered class-means (NC3); finally, these three properties make the DNN’s last layer act as a
nearest class-center classifier on the training data (NC4).
The intriguing phenomenon of neural collapse has spurred a flurry of interest aimed at understanding
its emergence, and the unconstrained features model (UFM) [21] has emerged as a widely accepted
theoretical framework for its analysis. In this model, one assumes that the network possesses such an
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

