Mind the spikes: Benign overfitting of kernels and
neural networks in fixed dimension
Moritz Haas1∗ David Holzmüller2 ∗ Ulrike von Luxburg1 Ingo Steinwart2
1
University of Tübingen and Tübingen AI Center, Germany
2
Institute for Stochastics and Applications, University of Stuttgart, Germany
{mo.haas,ulrike.luxburg}@uni-tuebingen.de
{david.holzmueller,ingo.steinwart}@mathematik.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract
The success of over-parameterized neural networks trained to near-zero training
error has caused great interest in the phenomenon of benign overfitting, where
estimators are statistically consistent even though they interpolate noisy training
data. While benign overfitting in fixed dimension has been established for some
learning methods, current literature suggests that for regression with typical kernel
methods and wide neural networks, benign overfitting requires a high-dimensional
setting where the dimension grows with the sample size. In this paper, we show
that the smoothness of the estimators, and not the dimension, is the key: benign
overfitting is possible if and only if the estimator’s derivatives are large enough.
We generalize existing inconsistency results to non-interpolating models and more
kernels to show that benign overfitting with moderate derivatives is impossible
in fixed dimension. Conversely, we show that rate-optimal benign overfitting
is possible for regression with a sequence of spiky-smooth kernels with large
derivatives. Using neural tangent kernels, we translate our results to wide neural
networks. We prove that while infinite-width networks do not overfit benignly with
the ReLU activation, this can be fixed by adding small high-frequency fluctuations
to the activation function. Our experiments verify that such neural networks, while
overfitting, can indeed generalize well even on low-dimensional data sets.

1

Introduction

While neural networks have shown great practical success, our theoretical understanding of their
generalization properties is still limited. A promising line of work considers the phenomenon of
benign overfitting, where researchers try to understand when and how models that interpolate noisy
training data can generalize (Zhang et al., 2021, Belkin et al., 2018, 2019). In the high-dimensional
regime, where the dimension grows with the number of sample points, consistency of minimum-norm
interpolants has been established for linear models and kernel regression (Hastie et al., 2022, Bartlett
et al., 2020, Liang and Rakhlin, 2020, Bartlett et al., 2021). In fixed dimension, minimum-norm
interpolation with standard kernels is inconsistent (Rakhlin and Zhai, 2019, Buchholz, 2022).
In this paper, we shed a differentiated light on benign overfitting with kernels and neural networks. We
argue that the dimension-dependent perspective does not capture the full picture of benign overfitting.
In particular, we show that harmless interpolation with kernel methods and neural networks is possible,
even in small fixed dimension, with adequately designed kernels and activation functions. The key
is to properly design estimators of the form ’signal+spike’. While minimum-norm criteria have
widely been considered a useful inductive bias, we demonstrate that designing unusual norms can
resolve the shortcomings of standard norms. For wide neural networks, harmless interpolation can be
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

