DiffPack: A Torsional Diffusion Model for
Autoregressive Protein Side-Chain Packing

Yangtian Zhang1,2 ∗ Zuobai Zhang1,2 ∗ Bozitao Zhong1,2
Sanchit Misra3 Jian Tang1,4,5 †
*
1

equal contribution

†

corresponding author

Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal
4
HEC Montréal 5 CIFAR AI Research Chair

3

Intel

contacts: <yangtian.zhang, zuobai.zhang>@mila.quebec, jian.tang@hec.ca

Abstract
Proteins play a critical role in carrying out biological functions, and their 3D
structures are essential in determining their functions. Accurately predicting the
conformation of protein side-chains given their backbones is important for applications in protein structure prediction, design and protein-protein interactions.
Traditional methods are computationally intensive and have limited accuracy, while
existing machine learning methods treat the problem as a regression task and overlook the restrictions imposed by the constant covalent bond lengths and angles. In
this work, we present DiffPack, a torsional diffusion model that learns the joint distribution of side-chain torsional angles, the only degrees of freedom in side-chain
packing, by diffusing and denoising on the torsional space. To avoid issues arising
from simultaneous perturbation of all four torsional angles, we propose autoregressively generating the four torsional angles from χ1 to χ4 and training diffusion
models for each torsional angle. We evaluate the method on several benchmarks
for protein side-chain packing and show that our method achieves improvements of
11.9% and 13.5% in angle accuracy on CASP13 and CASP14, respectively, with a
significantly smaller model size (60× fewer parameters). Additionally, we show the
effectiveness of our method in enhancing side-chain predictions in the AlphaFold2
model. Code is available at https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/DiffPack.

1

Introduction

Proteins are crucial for performing a diverse range of biological functions, such as catalysis, signaling,
and structural support. Their three-dimensional structures, determined by amino acid arrangement, are
crucial for their function. Specifically, amino acid side-chains play a critical role in the stability and
specificity of protein structures by forming hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic interactions, and other noncovalent interactions with other side-chains or the protein backbone. Therefore, accurately predicting
protein side-chain conformation is an essential problem in protein structure prediction [16, 15, 11],
design [48, 54, 14, 65] and protein-protein interactions [64, 24].
Despite recent advancements in deep learning models inspired by AlphaFold2 for predicting the
positions of protein backbone atoms [32, 4], predicting the conformation of protein side-chains
remains a challenging problem due to the complex interactions between side chains. In this work, we
focus on the problem of predicting side-chain conformation with fixed backbone structure, a.k.a.,
protein side-chain packing. Traditional methods for side-chain prediction rely on techniques such as
rotamer libraries, energy functions, and Monte Carlo sampling [27, 73, 37, 3, 1, 35, 71, 7]. However,
these methods are computationally intensive and struggle to accurately capture the complex energy
landscape of protein side chains due to their reliance on search heuristics and discrete sampling.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

