Double Randomized Underdamped Langevin with
Dimension-Independent Convergence Guarantee

Yuanshi Liu∗ , Cong Fang✉∗ , Tong Zhang†
∗

†

School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{liu_yuanshi, fangcong}@pku.edu.cn, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
This paper focuses on the high-dimensional sampling of log-concave distributions
with composite structures: p∗ (dx) ∝ exp(−g(x) − f (x))dx. We develop a
double randomization technique, which leads to a fast underdamped Langevin
algorithm with a dimension-independent
convergence
guarantee. We prove that


(tr(H))1/3
e
the algorithm enjoys an overall O
iteration complexity to reach an
ϵ2/3
ϵ-tolerated sample whose distribution p admits W2 (p, p∗ ) ≤ ϵ. Here, H is an upper
bound of the Hessian matrices for f and does not explicitly depend on dimension
d. For the posterior sampling over linear models with normalized data, we show
a clear superiority of convergence rate which is dimension-free and outperforms
the previous best-known results by a d1/3 factor. The analysis to achieve a faster
convergence rate brings new insights into high-dimensional sampling.

1

Introduction

Sampling from a high-dimensional distribution serves as one of the key components in statistics,
machine learning, and scientific computing, and constitutes the foundation of the fields including
Bayesian statistics and generative models [Liu and Liu, 2001, Brooks et al., 2011, Song et al.,
2020]. Recently, there is an emerging trend in designing provably faster Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithms using techniques from first-order optimization [Dalalyan, 2017, Durmus et al.,
2019, Cheng and Bartlett, 2018, Vempala and Wibisono, 2019, Chewi et al., 2021]. One typical
MCMC algorithm that allows following the idea is the Langevin-type algorithms, which are of the
central interest of this paper.
Langevin-type algorithms originated in statistical physics discretize a stochastic differential equation
with stationary distribution corresponding to the target. For Gibbs distribution p(x) ∝ e−U (x) , the
standard overdamped Langevin algorithm
uses Euler Maruyama scheme to discretize the diffusion
√
process dxt = −∇U (xt )dt + 2dBt . The algorithm iteratively performs the updates as for
n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
√
xn+1 = xn − h∇U (xn ) + 2hϵn ,
(1.1)
where ϵn ∼ N (0, I) follows the normal distribution and h > 0 is the step size.
This paper focuses on the dimension dependence of the convergence behavior of Langevin-type
algorithms. Specifically, we consider sampling problems over potentially high-dimensional and
strongly log-concave distributions with a composite structure: p ∝ e−U (x) = e−g(x)−f (x) where
2
−g(x)
g(x) = m
corresponds to a Gaussian prior
2 ∥x∥ . Regarding p as a posterior distribution, e
−f (x)
and e
corresponds to the likelihood. This structure also includes general m-strongly convex
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

