Multi-scale Diffusion Denoised Smoothing

Jongheon Jeong
Jinwoo Shin
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
Daejeon, South Korea
{jongheonj, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Along with recent diffusion models, randomized smoothing has become one of
a few tangible approaches that offers adversarial robustness to models at scale,
e.g., those of large pre-trained models. Specifically, one can perform randomized
smoothing on any classifier via a simple “denoise-and-classify” pipeline, so-called
denoised smoothing, given that an accurate denoiser is available – such as diffusion
model. In this paper, we present scalable methods to address the current trade-off
between certified robustness and accuracy in denoised smoothing. Our key idea is
to “selectively” apply smoothing among multiple noise scales, coined multi-scale
smoothing, which can be efficiently implemented with a single diffusion model.
This approach also suggests a new objective to compare the collective robustness
of multi-scale smoothed classifiers, and questions which representation of diffusion
model would maximize the objective. To address this, we propose to further finetune diffusion model (a) to perform consistent denoising whenever the original
image is recoverable, but (b) to generate rather diverse outputs otherwise. Our
experiments show that the proposed multi-scale smoothing scheme, combined with
diffusion fine-tuning, not only allows strong certified robustness at high noise scales
but also maintains accuracy close to non-smoothed classifiers. Code is available at
https://github.com/jh-jeong/smoothing-multiscale.

1

Introduction

Arguably, one of the important lessons in modern deep learning is the effectiveness of massive
data and model scaling [38, 74], which enabled many breakthroughs in recent years [8, 53, 55, 7].
Even with the largest amount of data available on the web and computational budgets, however, the
worst-case behaviors of deep learning models are still challenging to regularize. For example, large
language models often leak private information in training data [10], and one can completely fool
superhuman-level Go agents with few meaningless moves [40]. Such unintentional behaviors can
be of critical concerns in deploying deep learning into real-world systems, and the risk has been
increasing as the capability of deep learning continues to expand.
In this context, adversarial robustness [61, 9] has been a seemingly-close milestone towards reliable
deep learning. Specifically, neural networks are even fragile to small, “imperceptible” scales of noise
when it comes to the worst-case, and consequently there have been many efforts to obtain neural
networks that are robust to such noise [47, 3, 75, 15, 65]. Although it is a reasonable premise that we
humans have an inherent mechanism to correct against adversarial examples [21, 26], yet so far the
threat still persists in the context of deep learning, e.g., even in recent large vision-language models
[48], and is known as hard to avoid without a significant reduction in model performance [66, 64].
Randomized smoothing [41, 15], the focus in this paper, is currently one of a few techniques that has
been successful in obtaining adversarial robustness from neural networks. Specifically, it constructs a
smoothed classifier by taking a majority vote from a “base” classifier, e.g., a neural network, over
random Gaussian input noise. The technique is notable for its provable guarantees on adversarial
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

