ANPL: Towards Natural Programming
with Interactive Decomposition

Di Huang1,† , Ziyuan Nan1,3,† , Xing Hu1 , Pengwei Jin1,3 , Shaohui Peng2 ,
Yuanbo Wen1 , Rui Zhang1 , Zidong Du1 , Qi Guo1 , Yewen Pu4 & Yunji Chen1,3
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
2
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Autodesk Research
https://iprc-dip.github.io/ANPL

Abstract
Though LLMs are capable of generating plausible programs, it’s challenging to
interact with the LLMs further to revise the program, especially if the user’s
specific requirements are different from the initial proposal. In this paper, we
introduce ANPL, an interactive programming system that ensures users can always
refine the generated code towards their specific programmatic intents via structured
decompositions. Borrowing the paradigm of sketching from program synthesis,
an ANPL program consists of a set of input-outputs that it must satisfy, a “sketch”
— control/data flow expressed in precise code (e.g. Python), and “holes” — submodules to be implemented by the LLM specified with natural language. The user
revises an ANPL program by either modifying the sketch, changing the language
used to describe the holes, or providing additional input-outputs to a particular hole,
turning it into a sub-ANPL program that can be solved recursively. This workflow
allows the users to offload programming burdens to the LLM as much as possible
while retaining the ability to pinpoint and resolve bugs locally, without exposing
the rest of the program to the LLM. We deploy ANPL on the Abstraction and
Reasoning Corpus (ARC), a set of unique tasks that are challenging for state-ofthe-art AI systems, showing it outperforms baseline programming systems that (a)
without the ability to decompose tasks interactively and (b) without the guarantee
that the modules can be correctly composed together. Additional evaluations on
APPS, HumanEval, and real-world programming tasks have validated that the
ANPL framework is applicable to multiple programming domains. We release the
ANPL solutions to the ARC tasks as a dataset, providing insights into how humans
decompose novel tasks programmatically.

1

Introduction

The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has made significant progress in the
realm of code generation tasks [7–10, 20, 23, 31, 33, 34, 42, 44, 47, 71]. Compared to traditional
approaches in program synthesis [21, 22] that were constrained to specific, narrow domains (e.g., text
manipulations), LLM-driven code generation can generate programs in a domain-general language
(e.g., Python), making it broadly applicable. While LLM-driven code generators can save much of
programmers’ time in compiling typical programs – programs that are similar to those present in their
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author. Contact: {huangdi, nanziyuan21s, cyj}@ict.ac.cn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

