Cause-Effect Inference in Location-Scale Noise
Models: Maximum Likelihood vs. Independence
Testing

Xiangyu Sun
Simon Fraser University
xiangyu_sun@sfu.ca

Oliver Schulte
Simon Fraser University
oschulte@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
A fundamental problem of causal discovery is cause-effect inference, learning
the correct causal direction between two random variables. Significant progress
has been made through modelling the effect as a function of its cause and a noise
term, which allows us to leverage assumptions about the generating function class.
The recently introduced heteroscedastic location-scale noise functional models
(LSNMs) combine expressive power with identifiability guarantees. LSNM model
selection based on maximizing likelihood achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, when
the noise distributions are correctly specified. However, through an extensive
empirical evaluation, we demonstrate that the accuracy deteriorates sharply when
the form of the noise distribution is misspecified by the user. Our analysis shows
that the failure occurs mainly when the conditional variance in the anti-causal
direction is smaller than that in the causal direction. As an alternative, we find that
causal model selection through residual independence testing is much more robust
to noise misspecification and misleading conditional variance.

1

Introduction

Distinguishing cause and effect is a fundamental problem in many disciplines, such as biology,
healthcare and finance [31, 8, 13]. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are the gold standard for
finding causal relationships. However, it may be unethical, expensive or even impossible to perform
RCTs in real-world domains [20, 18]. Causal discovery algorithms aim to find causal relationships
given observational data alone. Traditional causal discovery algorithms can only identify causal
relationships up to Markov equivalence classes (MECs) [26, 10, 3]. To break the symmetry in a
MEC, additional assumptions are needed [20, 22], such as the type of functional dependence of
effect on cause. Structural causal models (SCMs) specify a functional class for the causal relations in
the data [17, 20]. In this work, we focus on one particular type of SCM called location-scale noise
models (LSNMs) [29, 11, 30, 28, 9]:
Y := f (X) + g(X) · ZY

(1)

where X is the cause, Y is the effect, written X → Y , and ZY is a latent noise variable independent
of X (i.e., X ⊥
⊥ ZY ). The functions f and g are twice-differentiable on the domain of X, and g is
strictly positive on the domain of X. LSNMs generalize the widely studied additive noise models
(ANMs), where g(x) = 1 for all x. ANMs assume a constant conditional variance V[Y |X] for
different values of X, which can limit their usefulness when dealing with heteroscedastic noise in
real-world data. LSNMs allow for heteroscedasticity, meaning that V[Y |X] can vary depending on
the value of X. In our experiments on real-world data, methods assuming an LSNM outperform
those assuming ANM.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

