Aligning Optimization Trajectories with Diffusion
Models for Constrained Design Generation

Giorgio Giannone
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Technical University of Denmark
ggiorgio@mit.edu

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
akashsri@mit.edu

Ole Winther
Technical University of Denmark
University of Copenhagen
olwi@dtu.dk

Faez Ahmed
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
faez@mit.edu

Abstract
Generative models have significantly influenced both vision and language domains,
ushering in innovative multimodal applications. Although these achievements
have motivated exploration in scientific and engineering fields, challenges emerge,
particularly in constrained settings with limited data where precision is crucial.
Traditional engineering optimization methods rooted in physics often surpass
generative models in these contexts. To address these challenges, we introduce
Diffusion Optimization Models (DOM) and Trajectory Alignment (TA), a learning
framework that demonstrates the efficacy of aligning the sampling trajectory of diffusion models with the trajectory derived from physics-based iterative optimization
methods. This alignment ensures that the sampling process remains grounded in
the underlying physical principles. This alignment eliminates the need for costly
preprocessing, external surrogate models, or extra labeled data, generating feasible
and high-performance designs efficiently. We apply our framework to structural
topology optimization, a fundamental problem in mechanical design, evaluating its
performance on in- and out-of-distribution configurations. Our results demonstrate
that TA outperforms state-of-the-art deep generative models on in-distribution
configurations and halves the inference computational cost. When coupled with a
few steps of optimization, it also improves manufacturability for out-of-distribution
conditions. DOM’s efficiency and performance improvements significantly expedite design processes and steer them toward optimal and manufacturable outcomes,
highlighting the potential of generative models in data-driven design.

1

Introduction

The remarkable progress in large vision [27, 20, 43, 85] and language models [30, 21, 78] has ushered
in unparalleled capabilities for processing unstructured data, leading to innovations in multimodal
and semantic generation [79, 67, 18, 80]. This momentum in model development has influenced the
rise of Deep Generative Models (DGMs) in the realms of science [51, 61] and engineering [84, 101],
especially in constraint-bound problems like structural Topology Optimization (TO [95]), offering
potential to make the design process faster.
Many engineering design applications predominantly rely on iterative optimization algorithms. These
algorithms break down physical and chemical phenomena into discrete components and incrementally
enhance design performance while ensuring all constraint requirements are met. As an example,
topology optimization aims to determine the optimal material distribution within a given design space,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

