Bounding the Invertibility of Privacy-Preserving
Instance Encoding Using Fisher Information

Kiwan Maeng∗
Penn State University
kvm6242@psu.edu

Chuan Guo∗
FAIR, Meta
chuanguo@meta.com

Sanjay Kariyappa
Georgia Institute of Technology
sanjaykariyappa@gatech.edu

G. Edward Suh
FAIR, Meta & Cornell University
edsuh@meta.com

Abstract
Privacy-preserving instance encoding aims to encode raw data into feature vectors
without revealing their privacy-sensitive information. When designed properly,
these encodings can be used for downstream ML applications such as training and
inference with limited privacy risk. However, the vast majority of existing schemes
do not theoretically justify that their encoding is non-invertible, and their privacyenhancing properties are only validated empirically against a limited set of attacks.
In this paper, we propose a theoretically-principled measure for the invertibility
of instance encoding based on Fisher information that is broadly applicable to a
wide range of popular encoders. We show that dFIL can be used to bound the
invertibility of encodings both theoretically and empirically, providing an intuitive
interpretation of the privacy of instance encoding.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) applications often require access to privacy-sensitive data. A model that
predicts diseases with x-ray scans requires access to patient’s x-ray images. Next-word prediction
models require access to user’s text input that can contain sensitive information [23]. To enable ML
applications on privacy-sensitive data, instance encoding ([6]; Figure 1, left) aims to encode data in a
way such that it is possible to run useful ML tasks—such as model training and inference—on the
encoded data while the privacy of the raw data is preserved. The concept is widespread under many
different names: private data sharing [16, 17, 48, 5, 34, 32, 37], learnable encryption [35, 73, 71, 70],
split learning [63, 55], split inference [40, 11], and vertical federated learning (vFL; [74, 59, 45]) are
all collaborative training/inference schemes that operate on (hopefully) privately-encoded user data.
Unfortunately, the vast majority of existing instance encoding schemes rely on heuristics rather
than rigorous theoretical arguments to justify their privacy-enhancing properties. Most existing
works [35, 73, 64, 65, 45] claimed that their schemes are non-invertible by simply testing them
against certain input reconstruction attacks. However, these schemes may not be private under more
carefully designed attacks; in fact, many encoding schemes that were initially thought to be private
have been shown to be vulnerable over time [6, 7]. While there exist instance encoding schemes
that are based on a rigorous theory, e.g., metric differential privacy (metric-DP; [8, 16, 17, 44]), their
theoretical analysis is only applicable to very simple encoders and cannot be applied to more powerful
encoders (e.g., DNN-based encoders) that are common in practice [73, 64, 65, 45, 5, 34, 32].
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

