Implicit Regularization in Over-Parameterized
Support Vector Machine

Yang Sui∗ Xin He∗ Yang Bai†
School of Statistics and Management
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
suiyang1027@stu.sufe.edu.cn;he.xin17@mail.shufe.edu.cn;
statbyang@mail.shufe.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we design a regularization-free algorithm for high-dimensional support vector machines (SVMs) by integrating over-parameterization with Nesterov’s
smoothing method, and provide theoretical guarantees for the induced implicit regularization phenomenon. In particular, we construct an over-parameterized hinge
loss function and estimate the true parameters by leveraging regularization-free gradient descent on this loss function. The utilization of Nesterov’s method enhances
the computational efficiency of our algorithm, especially in terms of determining
the stopping criterion and reducing computational complexity. With appropriate
choices of initialization, step size, and smoothness parameter, we demonstrate that
unregularized gradient descent achieves a near-oracle statistical convergence rate.
Additionally, we verify our theoretical findings through a variety of numerical
experiments and compare the proposed method with explicit regularization. Our
results illustrate the advantages of employing implicit regularization via gradient
descent in conjunction with over-parameterization in sparse SVMs.

1

Introduction

In machine learning, over-parameterized models, such as deep learning models, are commonly used
for regression and classification [22, 36, 31, 10]. The corresponding optimization tasks are primarily
tackled using gradient-based methods. Despite challenges posed by the nonconvexity of the objective
function and over-parameterization [40], empirical observations show that even simple algorithms,
such as gradient descent, tend to converge to a global minimum. This phenomenon is known as the
implicit regularization of variants of gradient descent, which acts as a form of regularization without
an explicit regularization term [30, 29].
Implicit regularization has been extensively studied in many classical statistical problems, such as
linear regression [35, 23, 44] and matrix factorization [14, 24, 3]. These studies have shown that
unregularized gradient descent can yield optimal estimators under certain conditions. However, a
deeper understanding of implicit regularization in classification problems, particularly in support
vector machines (SVMs), remains limited. Existing studies have focused on specific cases and
alternative regularization approaches [33, 27, 2]. A comprehensive analysis of implicit regularization
via direct gradient descent in SVMs is still lacking. We need further investigation to explore the
implications and performance of implicit regularization in SVMs.
The practical significance of such exploration becomes evident when considering today’s complex
data landscapes and the challenges they present. In modern applications, we often face classification
∗
†

Equal contributions.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

