Equivariant Adaptation of Large Pretrained Models

Arnab Kumar Mondal∗†
Mila, McGill University
ServiceNow Research

Siba Smarak Panigrahi∗
Mila, McGill University

Sai Rajeswar
ServiceNow Research

Sékou-Oumar Kaba
Mila, McGill University

Siamak Ravanbakhsh
Mila, McGill University

Abstract
Equivariant networks are specifically designed to ensure consistent behavior with
respect to a set of input transformations, leading to higher sample efficiency and
more accurate and robust predictions. However, redesigning each component of
prevalent deep neural network architectures to achieve chosen equivariance is a
difficult problem and can result in a computationally expensive network during both
training and inference. A recently proposed alternative towards equivariance that
removes the architectural constraints is to use a simple canonicalization network
that transforms the input to a canonical form before feeding it to an unconstrained
prediction network. We show here that this approach can effectively be used
to make a large pretrained network equivariant. However, we observe that the
produced canonical orientations can be misaligned with those of the training
distribution, hindering performance. Using dataset-dependent priors to inform the
canonicalization function, we are able to make large pretrained models equivariant
while maintaining their performance. This significantly improves the robustness
of these models to deterministic transformations of the data, such as rotations.
We believe this equivariant adaptation of large pretrained models can help their
domain-specific applications with known symmetry priors.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated exceptional success in dealing with a range of data
modalities, such as image and point cloud [1–5]. The majority of these applications require working
with input data that undergoes various transformations, such as rotation, scaling, or translation
in image data. Invariant and equivariant networks are “aware” of such transformations; they are
specifically designed to ensure that the network’s behaviour is insensitive to input transformations,
leading to more accurate and robust predictions and improved sample complexity [e.g., 6, 7, 9–
11, 13, 14]. As such, they have emerged as a promising solution to a wide range of computer vision
and point cloud processing tasks [7, 9, 10, 15–20], including classification, object recognition, and
segmentation, among others.
In parallel to this, it has been shown that scaling models, both in the number of parameters and amount
of training data, systematically improve their performance [21, 23–28]. Pre-training on massive
datasets has emerged as a practical method to harness this advantage. Several large models are now
publicly available, and fine-tuning them on specific applications has proven to be a successful strategy
in a variety of applications. However, such foundation models [29] are typically not equivariant
∗
†

These authors contributed equally to this work
Correspondence: arnab.mondal@mila.quebec. Work done while at ServiceNow Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

