Balancing Memorization and Generalization in RNNs
for High Performance Brain-Machine Interfaces
Joseph T. Costello, Hisham Temmar, Luis H. Cubillos, Matthew J. Mender,
Dylan M. Wallace, Matthew S. Willsey, Parag G. Patil, Cynthia A. Chestek
Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering,
Robotics, and Neurosurgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

Abstract
Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) can restore motor function to people with paralysis but are currently limited by the accuracy of real-time decoding algorithms.
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) using modern training techniques have shown
promise in accurately predicting movements from neural signals but have yet to
be rigorously evaluated against other decoding algorithms in a closed-loop setting. Here we compared RNNs to other neural network architectures in real-time,
continuous decoding of finger movements using intracortical signals from nonhuman primates. Across one and two finger online tasks, LSTMs (a type of RNN)
outperformed convolutional and transformer-based neural networks, averaging
18% higher throughput than the convolution network. On simplified tasks with
a reduced movement set, RNN decoders were allowed to memorize movement
patterns and matched able-bodied control. Performance gradually dropped as the
number of distinct movements increased but did not go below fully continuous
decoder performance. Finally, in a two-finger task where one degree-of-freedom
had poor input signals, we recovered functional control using RNNs trained to
act both like a movement classifier and continuous decoder. Our results suggest
that RNNs can enable functional real-time BMI control by learning and generating
accurate movement patterns.

1

Introduction

Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) have the potential to restore motor function to people with paralysis.
While intracortical motor BMIs have successfully enabled paralyzed human patients to control
computer cursors [1], robotic arms [2], or even move their own muscles through functional electrical
stimulation [3], the decoding algorithm that predicts intended movement from neural signals still
lacks accurate and naturalistic movement outputs. Recently, non-linear decoding algorithms using
artificial neural networks have demonstrated higher offline kinematic prediction accuracy compared to
linear approaches, which could enable more functional BMIs. Glaser et al. 2020 found that recurrent
neural networks (RNNs), specifically the long short-term memory (LSTM, [4]) and gated-recurrent
unit (GRU, [5]), outperformed other decoding architectures for predicting movement in several brain
regions [6]. Other neural networks have improved decoding accuracy by de-noising neural signals
using RNNs (LFADS, [7]) or transformers [8]. However, offline accuracy does not necessarily predict
real-time closed-loop (online) performance [9, 10], where errors are cumulative and the user can
adjust neural activity based on feedback. With goals of improving function of real-time BMIs, it is
unclear if the high offline accuracy of RNNs translates to the online setting.
In online prediction settings, BMIs using RNNs for continuous movement prediction have demonstrated limited success but have not been evaluated against other neural network architectures. Sussillo
et al. 2016 showed that an online RNN was more robust to electrode perturbations and slightly
outperformed a linear Kalman filter in a reaching task [11]. In a closed-loop simulation, Hosman et
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

