BadTrack: A Poison-Only Backdoor Attack on Visual
Object Tracking

Bin Huang1∗ Jiaqian Yu2
1

Yiwei Chen2

Siyang Pan2

Qiang Wang2

Zhi Wang1

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2
Samsung Research China-Beijing, Beijing, China

Abstract
Visual object tracking (VOT) is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer
vision community. State-of-the-art VOT trackers extract positive and negative
examples that are used to guide the tracker to distinguish the object from the
background. In this paper, we show that this characteristic can be exploited
to introduce new threats and hence propose a simple yet effective poison-only
backdoor attack. To be specific, we poison a small part of the training data by
attaching a predefined trigger pattern to the background region of each video frame,
so that the trigger appears almost exclusively in the extracted negative examples.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that reveals the threat of poisononly backdoor attack on VOT trackers. We experimentally show that our backdoor
attack can significantly degrade the performance of both two-stream Siamese and
one-stream Transformer trackers on the poisoned data while gaining comparable
performance with the benign trackers on the clean data.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been successfully applied to numerous applications in various areas, where visual
object tracking (VOT) is one of the most fundamental tasks. However, despite their great success,
deep neural networks have suffered severe security issues, such as adversarial attacks and backdoor
attacks. Adversarial attacks on VOT have been studied for a while. For example, Yan et al. [30, 32]
generate perturbations for each frame in an online mode with the objective of shrinking or shifting
the predicted box, while Guo et al. [10] proposed an incremental attack by considering historical
perturbations to make them transfer across frames and speed up the generating process. In addition,
Chen et al. [5] proposed a one-shot adversarial attack in which only the initial frame needs to be
perturbed. Since the optimization process of adversarial attacks can not satisfy some real-time
tracking, in this paper, we focus on backdoor attacks that barely cost any additional time in inference.
Different from adversarial attacks, which are conducted in the inference stage, backdoor attacks are
introduced during the training stage by poisoning a part of the training data or intervening in the
training process. Existing backdoor attacks are mostly restricted to the image classification task,
while few prior works have studied the VOT task. Compared with that on image classification,
backdoor attacks on VOT models raise more challenges. First, VOT models are more complicated in
structure and functionality. They often contain more than one head besides a classifier. Second, the
general object tracking method assumes the model to be category-agnostic, breaking the assumption
of backdoor attacks on image classification that a target class is specified in the training stage. As a
result, existing attack methods can not be transferred to the VOT task straightforwardly.
To the best of our knowledge, the only literature [17] proposed backdoor attacks on VOT as a multitask learning paradigm, which minimizes the standard tracking loss while simultaneously maximizing
∗
Work done during an internship at Samsung Research China–Beijing (SRCB). Corresponds to:
huangbinary@gmail.com and wangzhi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

