Anytime-Competitive Reinforcement Learning
with Policy Prior
Jianyi Yang
UC Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
jyang239@ucr.edu

Pengfei Li
UC Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
pli081@ucr.edu

Adam Wierman
Caltech
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Tongxin Li
CUHK Shenzhen
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China
litongxin@cuhk.edu.cn
Shaolei Ren
UC Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of Anytime-Competitive Markov Decision Process
(A-CMDP). Existing works on Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDPs)
aim to optimize the expected reward while constraining the expected cost over
random dynamics, but the cost in a specific episode can still be unsatisfactorily
high. In contrast, the goal of A-CMDP is to optimize the expected reward while
guaranteeing a bounded cost in each round of any episode against a policy prior.
We propose a new algorithm, called Anytime-Competitive Reinforcement Learning
(ACRL), which provably guarantees the anytime cost constraints. The regret analysis
shows the policy asymptotically matches the optimal reward achievable under
the anytime competitive constraints. Experiments on the application of carbonintelligent computing verify the reward performance and cost constraint guarantee
of ACRL.

1

Introduction

In mission-critical online decision-making problems such as cloud workload scheduling [49, 20],
cooling control in datacenters [63, 16, 46], battery management for Electrical Vehicle (EV) charging
[57, 36], and voltage control in smart grids [54, 73], there is always a need to improve the reward
performances while meeting the requirements for some important cost metrics. In these missioncritical systems, there always exist some policy priors that meet the critical cost requirements, but
they may not perform well in terms of the rewards. In the application of cooling control, for example,
some rule-based heuristics [19, 46] have been programmed into the real systems for a long time and
have verified performance in maintaining a safe temperature range, but they may not achieve a high
energy efficiency. In this paper, we design a Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm with the goal of
optimizing the reward performance under the guarantee of cost constraints against a policy prior for
any round in any episode.
Constrained RL algorithms have been designed to solve various Constrained MDPs (CMDPs) with
reward objective and cost constraints. Among them, some are designed to guarantee the expected
cost constraints [61, 62], some can guarantee the cost constraints with a high probability (w.h.p.)
[13], and others guarantee a bounded violation of the cost constraints [26, 29, 21, 22, 1]. In addition,
conservative RL algorithms [27, 68, 31, 65] consider constraints that require the performance of a
learning agent is no worse than a known baseline policy in expectation or with a high probability.
[27] points out that it is impossible to guarantee the constraints for any round with probability
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

