Accessing Higher Dimensions for Unsupervised Word
Translation
Sida I. Wang
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
The striking ability of unsupervised word translation has been demonstrated recently with the help of low-dimensional word vectors / pretraining, which is used
by all successful methods and assumed to be necessary. We test and challenge this
assumption by developing a method that can also make use of high dimensional
signal. Freed from the limits of low dimensions, we show that relying on lowdimensional vectors and their incidental properties miss out on better denoising
methods and signals in high dimensions, thus stunting the potential of the data. Our
results show that unsupervised translation can be achieved more easily and robustly
than previously thought – less than 80MB and minutes of CPU time is required
to achieve over 50% accuracy for English to Finnish, Hungarian, and Chinese
translations when trained in the same domain; even under domain mismatch, the
method still works fully unsupervised on English NewsCrawl to Chinese Wikipedia
and English Europarl to Spanish Wikipedia, among others. These results challenge
prevailing assumptions on the necessity and superiority of low-dimensional vectors
and show that the higher dimension signal can be used rather than thrown away.

1

Introduction

The ability to translate words from one language to another without any parallel data nor supervision
has been demonstrated in recent works (Lample et al., 2018b; Artetxe et al., 2018b, . . . ), has
long been attempted (Rapp, 1995; Ravi and Knight, 2011, . . . ), and provides empirical answers to
scientific questions about language grounding (Bender and Koller, 2020; Søgaard, 2023). However,
this striking phenomenon has only been demonstrated with the help of pretrained word vectors
or transformer models recently, lending further support to the necessity and superiority of lowdimensional representations. In this work, we develop and test coocmap1 for unsupervised word
translation using only simple co-occurrence statistics easily computed from raw data. coocmap is dual
method of vecmap (Artetxe et al., 2018b), using co-occurrences statistics in place of low-dimensional
vectors. The greedy and deterministic coocmap establishes the most direct route from raw data to the
striking phenomenon of unsupervised word translation, and shows that pretrained representation is
not the key.
More surprisingly, coocmap greatly improves the data efficiency and robustness over the baseline
of vecmap-fasttext, showing that relying on low-dimensional vectors is not only unnecessary but
also inferior. With coocmap, 10–40MB of text data and a few minutes of CPU time is sufficient to
achieve unsupervised word translation if the training corpora are in the same domain (e.g. both on
Wikipedia, Figure 1). For context, this is less than the data used by Brown et al. (1993) to train IBM
word alignment models. On cases that were reported not to work using unsupervised methods by
Søgaard et al. (2018), we confirm their findings that using fasttext (Bojanowski et al., 2017) vectors
indeed fails, while coocmap solved many of these cases with very little data as well. For our main
results, we show that less similar language pairs such as English to Hungarian, Finnish and Chinese
posed no difficulty and also start to work with 10MB of data for Hungarian, 30MB of data for Finnish
1

code released at https://github.com/facebookresearch/coocmap

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

