Temporally Disentangled Representation Learning
under Unknown Nonstationarity

Xiangchen Song1∗ Weiran Yao2 Yewen Fan1 Xinshuai Dong1 Guangyi Chen1,3
Juan Carlos Niebles2 Eric Xing1,3 Kun Zhang1,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Salesforce Research
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
In unsupervised causal representation learning for sequential data with time-delayed
latent causal influences, strong identifiability results for the disentanglement of
causally-related latent variables have been established in stationary settings by
leveraging temporal structure. However, in nonstationary setting, existing work
only partially addressed the problem by either utilizing observed auxiliary variables (e.g., class labels and/or domain indexes) as side-information or assuming
simplified latent causal dynamics. Both constrain the method to a limited range
of scenarios. In this study, we further explored the Markov Assumption under
time-delayed causally related process in nonstationary setting and showed that
under mild conditions, the independent latent components can be recovered from
their nonlinear mixture up to a permutation and a component-wise transformation,
without the observation of auxiliary variables. We then introduce NCTRL, a principled estimation framework, to reconstruct time-delayed latent causal variables and
identify their relations from measured sequential data only. Empirical evaluations
demonstrated the reliable identification of time-delayed latent causal influences,
with our methodology substantially outperforming existing baselines that fail to
exploit the nonstationarity adequately and then, consequently, cannot distinguish
distribution shifts.

1

Introduction

Causal reasoning for time-series data is a long-lasting yet fundamental task [1–3]. The majority
of the studies focus on the temporal causal discovery among observed variables [4–6]. However,
in many real-world scenarios, the observed data (e.g., image pixels in videos) instead of having
direct causal edges, are generated by some causally related latent temporal processes or confounders.
Learning causal relations has practical use cases, which benefit a lot of downstream tasks. However,
estimating latent causal structures among those unobserved variables purely from observations
without appropriate class of assumptions is an extremely challenging task (i.e. the latent variables are
generally not identifiable) [7, 8].
Under the topic of unsupervised representation learning via nonlinear Independent Component
Analysis (ICA), some strong identifiability results of the latent variables have been established [9–14]
by introducing side information such as class labels and domain indices. Specifically focusing on
time-series data, history information is also widely used as the side information for the identifiability
of latent processes [15–18]. However, existing studies mainly focused on and derived identifiability
results in stationary settings [10, 16] (Fig 1 (a)) or nonstationary settings with explicitly observed
domain indices [12, 17, 18] (Fig 1 (b)).
∗

Part of the work was done while interning at Salesforce Research

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

