Optimal privacy guarantees for a relaxed threat model:
Addressing sub-optimal adversaries in differentially
private machine learning

Georgios Kaissis ∗
AI in Medicine and Healthcare
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
g.kaissis@tum.de
Stefan Kolek
Mathematical Foundations of AI
LMU Munich
Munich, Germany
kolek@math.lmu.de

Alexander Ziller
AI in Medicine and Healthcare
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
alex.ziller@tum.de
Anneliese Riess
Machine Learning in Biomedical Imaging
Helmholtz Munich
Neuherberg, Germany
anneliese.riess@helmholtz-munich.de

Daniel Rueckert
AI in Medicine and Healthcare
Technical University of Munich
Munich, Germany
daniel.rueckert@tum.de

Abstract
Differentially private mechanisms restrict the membership inference capabilities of
powerful (optimal) adversaries against machine learning models. Such adversaries
are rarely encountered in practice. In this work, we examine a more realistic threat
model relaxation, where (sub-optimal) adversaries lack access to the exact model
training database, but may possess related or partial data. We then formally characterise and experimentally validate adversarial membership inference capabilities in
this setting in terms of hypothesis testing errors. Our work helps users to interpret
the privacy properties of sensitive data processing systems under realistic threat
model relaxations and choose appropriate noise levels for their use-case.

1

Introduction

Machine learning (ML) offers a powerful set of techniques for addressing complex problems across
various fields, including fields where sensitive data is processed, e.g. medicine or finance. However,
the use of sensitive data in ML comes with privacy challenges: It is known that ML models memorise
their training data [1], and that some degree of memorisation may be necessary for the best model
performance [2]. When a model memorises private information, it can reveal this information when
attacked by adversaries. A very important class of attack is Membership Inference (MI) [3], which
aims to determine whether the data of a specific individual was used to train a machine learning
model. MI can lead to the disclosure of highly sensitive information about the individual, e.g. that
∗
GK is also with the Institute of Machine Learning in Biomedical Imaging, Helmholtz Munich and the
Department of Computing, Imperial College London.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

