Approximate inference of marginals using the IBIA
framework
Shivani Bathla
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
India, 600036
ee13s064@ee.iitm.ac.in

Vinita Vasudevan
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
India, 600036
vinita@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Exact inference of marginals in probabilistic graphical models (PGM) is known to
be intractable, necessitating the use of approximate methods. Most of the existing
variational techniques perform iterative message passing in loopy graphs which is
slow to converge for many benchmarks. In this paper, we propose a new algorithm
for marginal inference that is based on the incremental build-infer-approximate
(IBIA) paradigm. Our algorithm converts the PGM into a sequence of linked clique
tree forests (SLCTF) with bounded clique sizes, and then uses a heuristic belief
update algorithm to infer the marginals. For the special case of Bayesian networks,
we show that if the incremental build step in IBIA uses the topological order of
variables then (a) the prior marginals are consistent in all CTFs in the SLCTF and
(b) the posterior marginals are consistent once all evidence variables are added to
the SLCTF. In our approach, the belief propagation step is non-iterative and the
accuracy-complexity trade-off is controlled using user-defined clique size bounds.
Results for several benchmark sets from recent UAI competitions show that our
method gives either better or comparable accuracy than existing variational and
sampling based methods, with smaller runtimes.

1

Introduction

Discrete probabilistic graphical models (PGM) including Bayesian networks (BN) and Markov
networks (MN) are used for probabilistic inference in a wide variety of applications. An important
task in probabilistic reasoning is the computation of posterior marginals of all the variables in the
network. Exact inference is known to be #P-complete [Roth, 1996], thus necessitating approximations.
Approximate techniques can be broadly classified as sampling based and variational methods.
Sampling based methods include Markov chain Monte Carlo based techniques like Gibbs sampling [Gelfand, 2000, Kelly et al., 2019] and importance sampling based methods [Gogate and
Dechter, 2011, Friedman and Van den Broeck, 2018, Kask et al., 2020, Broka, 2018, Lou et al.,
2019, 2017a,b, Marinescu et al., 2019, 2018]. An advantage of these methods is that accuracy can
be improved with time without increasing the required memory. However, in many benchmarks
the improvement becomes slow with time. Moreover, many of the recent sampling/search based
techniques Kask et al. [2020], Broka [2018], Lou et al. [2019, 2017a,b], Marinescu et al. [2019,
2018] have been evaluated either for approximate inference of partition function (PR) or for finding
the marginal maximum a posteriori assignment (MMAP). Currently, there are no published results
for posterior marginals (MAR) using these methods, and the publicly available implementations do
not support the MAR task. Alternatively, variational techniques can be used. These include loopy
belief propagation (LBP) [Frey and MacKay, 1998] region-graph based techniques like generalized
belief propagation (GBP) [Yedidia et al., 2000] and its variants [Heskes et al., 2003, Mooij and
Kappen, 2007, Lin et al., 2020], mini-bucket based schemes like iterative join graph propagation
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

