Convergence of Actor-Critic Methods with
Multi-Layer Neural Networks

Haoxing Tian, Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis, Alex Olshevsky
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215, USA
{tianhx, yannisp, alexols}@bu.edu

Abstract
The early theory of actor-critic methods considered convergence using linear function approximators for the policy and value functions. Recent work has established convergence using neural network approximators with a single hidden layer.
In this work we are taking the natural next step and establish convergence using
deep neural networks with an arbitrary number of hidden layers, thus closing a gap
between theory and practice. We show that actor-critic updates projected on a ball
around the initial condition will converge to a neighborhood where the average of
√
the squared gradients is Õ (1/ m) + O (ϵ), with m being the width of the neural
network and ϵ the approximation quality of the best critic neural network over the
projected set.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful tool for solving decision-making problems
in a model-free way. Among the various RL algorithms, the Actor-Critic (AC) method (Konda &
Tsitsiklis (1999); Barto et al. (1983)) has shown great success in various domains, including robotics,
game playing, and control systems (LeCun et al. (2015); Mnih et al. (2016); Silver et al. (2017)).
AC involves simultaneous updates of two networks: an actor network that employs policy gradient
(Sutton et al. (1999)) to update a parameterized policy, and a critic network which is driven by the
Temporal Differences (TD) in the estimated value function. While AC methods with neural networks
used for both actor and critic have achieved widespread use in practice, a fully satisfactory analysis
of their convergence guarantees is currently lacking.
In recent years, a number of theoretical studies of AC have obtained provable convergence rates and
performance analyses. Almost all works in this area assumed linear, rather than neural networkbased, approximators for both actor and critic. A “two-timescale” linear AC was analysed in Wu
et al. (2020), with a convergence rate of Õ(T −1/4 ), where T is the total number of iterations and
Õ (·) refers to potential logarithmic terms omitted from the notation; the term ”two-timescale” refers
to the fact that the stepsizes for the actor update and critic update are not proportional to each other,
but rather the actor steps are asymptotically negligible compared to the critic steps. A “singletimescale” linear AC method was considered in Olshevsky& Gharesifard (2022); Chen et al. (2021)
and both works obtained a convergence rate of O T −0.5 under an i.i.d. sampling assumption on
the underlying MDP. The more realistic Markov sampling case was analyzed in the recent paper
Chen & Zhao (2022), which also established a convergence rate of Õ T −0.5 . All these results
relied on linear approximations.
To our knowledge, convergence rates for AC with neural approximators were analyzed only in two
recent works Wang et al. (2019); Cayci et al. (2022). Both of these papers considered neural net37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

