Online Constrained Meta-Learning: Provable
Guarantees for Generalization
Siyuan Xu & Minghui Zhu
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16801
{spx5032, muz16}@psu.edu

Abstract
Meta-learning has attracted attention due to its strong ability to learn experiences
from known tasks, which can speed up and enhance the learning process for new
tasks. However, most existing meta-learning approaches only can learn from
tasks without any constraint. This paper proposes an online constrained metalearning framework, which continuously learns meta-knowledge from sequential
learning tasks, and the learning tasks are subject to hard constraints. Beyond
existing meta-learning analyses, we provide the upper bounds of optimality gaps
and constraint violations of the deployed task-specific models produced by the
proposed framework. These metrics consider both the dynamic regret of online
learning and the generalization ability of the task-specific models to unseen data.
Moreover, we provide a practical algorithm for the framework and validate its
superior effectiveness through experiments conducted on meta-imitation learning
and few-shot image classification.

1

Introduction

In the setting of learning from multiple tasks, a shared prior is extracted from commonalities of
existing tasks, resulting in improved learning efficiency and prediction accuracy for task-specific
models. Conventional approaches includes multi-task learning [11], lifelong learning [46, 45, 34].
These approaches extract the prior by vanilla learning approaches on the tasks and do not explicitly
involve the task-specific learning in the prior extraction, as illustrated by [28]. In contrast, metalearning or learning-to-learn [51, 23, 47] learns a meta prior, usually a meta parameter, by evaluating
and optimizing the meta-objective, which is defined by the performance of the task-specific model
adapted from the prior. Meta-learning has been extended to accelerate reinforcement learning [23, 34],
where the tasks are modeled by Markov decision processes.
Online meta-learning considers that the meta parameter is learned from tasks that are sequentially
revealed. Papers [24, 1, 16] are shown to be no-regret with respect to the static comparator, i.e., the
gap between the aggregate performance of the meta parameter sequence and that of any fixed meta
parameter is sublinear in the number of revealed tasks. The online-MAML [24] and the MOML [1]
adopt one-step gradient descent to adapt the task-specific parameter, and paper [16] adapts it by the
ridge regression. A direct evaluation of meta-learning is the performance of the task-specific model
adapted from the meta parameter on each individual task. The methods in [4, 3, 34] consider dynamic
regret [56, 4], which compares the task-specific parameter adapted from the meta parameter with the
optimal counterpart for each task. The dynamic regrets of all the algorithms are shown to be bounded
when there are sufficiently many tasks.
In many applications of meta-learning, such as few-shot learning in computer vision [38] and robotics
[43, 5, 39], a task-specific model is expected to be quickly adapted by using a small amount of
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

