Are Vision Transformers More Data Hungry Than
Newborn Visual Systems?

Lalit Pandey
Department of Informatics
Indiana University Bloomington
lpandey@iu.edu

Samantha M. W. Wood
Department of Informatics
Indiana University Bloomington
sw113@iu.edu

Justin N. Wood
Department of Informatics
Indiana University Bloomington
woodjn@iu.edu

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) are top-performing models on many computer vision
benchmarks and can accurately predict human behavior on object recognition tasks.
However, researchers question the value of using ViTs as models of biological
learning because ViTs are thought to be more “data hungry” than brains, with ViTs
requiring more training data to reach similar levels of performance. To test this
assumption, we directly compared the learning abilities of ViTs and animals, by
performing parallel controlled-rearing experiments on ViTs and newborn chicks.
We first raised chicks in impoverished visual environments containing a single
object, then simulated the training data available in those environments by building
virtual animal chambers in a video game engine. We recorded the first-person
images acquired by agents moving through the virtual chambers and used those
images to train self-supervised ViTs that leverage time as a teaching signal, akin to
biological visual systems. When ViTs were trained “through the eyes” of newborn
chicks, the ViTs solved the same view-invariant object recognition tasks as the
chicks. Thus, ViTs were not more data hungry than newborn visual systems: both
learned view-invariant object representations in impoverished visual environments.
The flexible and generic attention-based learning mechanism in ViTs—combined
with the embodied data streams available to newborn animals—appears sufficient
to drive the development of animal-like object recognition.

1

Introduction

Vision transformers (ViTs) have emerged as leading models in computer vision, achieving state-ofthe-art performance across many tasks, including object recognition [4], scene recognition [5], object
segmentation [9], action recognition [70], and visual navigation [14]. Recent studies also suggest
that transformers share deep computational similarities with human and animal brains [8, 19, 45, 55].
For instance, transformers are closely related to current hippocampus models in computational
neuroscience and can reproduce the precisely tuned spatial representations of the hippocampal
formation (e.g., place and grid cells; [55]). ViTs also outperform convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) on challenging image classification tasks and are more likely to learn human-like shape
biases (and make human-like errors) than CNNs [18, 50].
Despite these strengths, there is a lingering worry about using ViTs as models of biological vision.
The worry relates to the large amount of data needed to train ViTs, compared to the relatively small
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

