Double Pessimism is Provably Efficient for
Distributionally Robust Offline Reinforcement Learning: Generic Algorithm and Robust Partial Coverage

Jose Blanchet1∗
Miao Lu1∗
Tong Zhang2∗
Han Zhong3∗
Department of Management Science and Engineering, Stanford University
2
Department of Mathematics, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University
1

Abstract
We study distributionally robust offline reinforcement learning (RL), which seeks
to find an optimal robust policy purely from an offline dataset that can perform well
in perturbed environments. We propose a generic algorithm framework Doubly
Pessimistic Model-based Policy Optimization (P2 MPO) for robust offline RL, which
features a novel combination of a flexible model estimation subroutine and a doubly
pessimistic policy optimization step. Here the double pessimism principle is crucial
to overcome the distribution shift incurred by i) the mismatch between behavior
policy and the family of target policies; and ii) the perturbation of the nominal
model. Under certain accuracy assumptions on the model estimation subroutine,
we show that P2 MPO is provably sample-efficient with robust partial coverage data,
which means that the offline dataset has good coverage of the distributions induced
by the optimal robust policy and perturbed models around the nominal model. By
tailoring specific model estimation subroutines for concrete examples including
tabular Robust Markov Decision Process (RMDP), factored RMDP, and RMDP
with kernel and neural function approximations, we show that P2 MPO enjoys a
e −1/2 ) convergence rate, where n is the number of trajectories in the offline
O(n
dataset. Notably, these models, except for the tabular case, are first identified and
proven tractable by this paper. To the best of our knowledge, we first propose a
general learning principle — double pessimism — for robust offline RL and show
that it is provably efficient in the context of general function approximations.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) [52] aims to learn an optimal policy that maximizes the cumulative
rewards received in an unknown environment. Typically, deep RL algorithms learn a policy in an
online trial-and-error fashion using millions to billions of data. However, data collection could be
costly and risky in some practical applications such as healthcare [56] and autonomous driving [38].
To tackle this challenge, offline RL (also known as batch RL) [21, 22] learns a near-optimal policy
based on a dataset collected a priori without further interactions with the environment. Although
there has been great progress in offline RL [72, 20, 16, 54, 62, 6], these works implicitly require that
the offline dataset is generated by the real-world environment, which may fail in practice. Taking
robotics [18, 37] as an example, the experimenter trains agents in a simulated physical environment
and then deploy them in real-world environments. Since the experimenter does not have access to the
true physical environment, there is a mismatch between the simulated environment used to generate
the offline dataset and the real-world environment used to deploy the agents. Such a mismatch is
∗

Alphabetical order. Email to miaolu@stanford.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

