Lookaround Optimizer: k steps around, 1 step average

Jiangtao Zhang1 , Shunyu Liu1 , Jie Song1, : , Tongtian Zhu1 , Zhengqi Xu1 , Mingli Song1, 2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Hangzhou City University
{zhjgtao, liushunyu, sjie, raiden, xuzhengqi, brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Weight Average (WA) is an active research topic due to its simplicity in ensembling
deep networks and the effectiveness in promoting generalization. Existing weight
average approaches, however, are often carried out along only one training trajectory in a post-hoc manner (i.e., the weights are averaged after the entire training
process is finished), which significantly degrades the diversity between networks
and thus impairs the effectiveness. In this paper, inspired by weight average, we
propose Lookaround, a straightforward yet effective SGD-based optimizer leading
to flatter minima with better generalization. Specifically, Lookaround iterates two
steps during the whole training period: the around step and the average step. In
each iteration, 1) the around step starts from a common point and trains multiple
networks simultaneously, each on transformed data by a different data augmentation, and 2) the average step averages these trained networks to get the averaged
network, which serves as the starting point for the next iteration. The around
step improves the functionality diversity while the average step guarantees the
weight locality of these networks during the whole training, which is essential
for WA to work. We theoretically explain the superiority of Lookaround by convergence analysis, and make extensive experiments to evaluate Lookaround on
popular benchmarks including CIFAR and ImageNet with both CNNs and ViTs,
demonstrating clear superiority over state-of-the-arts. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Ardcy/Lookaround.

1

Introduction

Recent research on the geometry of loss landscapes in deep neural networks has demonstrated Linear
Mode Connectivity (LMC): two neural networks, if trained similarly on the same data starting from
some common initialization, are linearly connected to each other across a path with near-constant
loss [33, 9]. LMC reveals that neural network loss minima are not isolated points in the parameter
space, but essentially forms a connected manifold [8, 35]. It has recently been attracting increasing
attention from research communities, attributed to its great potential into motivating new tools to
more efficiently reuse trained networks. A simple but effective strategy is Weight Average (WA),
which directly averages the network weights of multiple trained [46] or sampled [19, 3] networks
along the training trajectories for flatter minima and thus better generalization.
WA has become a popular approach in various fields for its efficiency in parameters and effectiveness
in performance. For example, Izmailov et al. [19] show that Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA)
of multiple points along the trajectory of SGD, with a cyclical or constant learning rate, leads to
better generalization than conventional training. Following that, Cha et al. [3] propose Stochastic
Weight Averaging Densely (SWAD), i.e., averaging weights for every iteration in a region of low
validation loss , to capture flatter minima and thus achieve superior out-of-domain generalizability.
Recently, Wortsman et al. [46] propose averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models with various
hyperparameters, coined Model Soups, to improve accuracy without increasing inference time.
†

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

