Improving day-ahead Solar Irradiance Time Series
Forecasting by Leveraging Spatio-Temporal Context

Oussama Boussif 1,2 ∗
Ghait Boukachab 1,3 ∗
1,2
Stefano Massaroli
Tianle Yuan4
Loubna Benabbou3
1

Mila - Québec AI Institute
2
Université de Montréal

Dan Assouline 1,2 ∗
Yoshua Bengio1,2

3

4

Université du Québec à Rimouski
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center

Abstract
Solar power harbors immense potential in mitigating climate change by substantially reducing CO2 emissions. Nonetheless, the inherent variability of solar
irradiance poses a significant challenge for seamlessly integrating solar power into
the electrical grid. While the majority of prior research has centered on employing
purely time series-based methodologies for solar forecasting, only a limited number
of studies have taken into account factors such as cloud cover or the surrounding
physical context. In this paper, we put forth a deep learning architecture designed
to harness spatio-temporal context using satellite data, to attain highly accurate
day-ahead time-series forecasting for any given station, with a particular emphasis
on forecasting Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI). We also suggest a methodology to extract a distribution for each time step prediction, which can serve as a
very valuable measure of uncertainty attached to the forecast. When evaluating
models, we propose a testing scheme in which we separate particularly difficult
examples from easy ones, in order to capture the model performances in crucial
situations, which in the case of this study are the days suffering from varying
cloudy conditions. Furthermore, we present a new multi-modal dataset gathering
satellite imagery over a large zone and time series for solar irradiance and other
related physical variables from multiple geographically diverse solar stations. Our
approach exhibits robust performance in solar irradiance forecasting, including
zero-shot generalization tests at unobserved solar stations, and holds great promise
in promoting the effective integration of solar power into the grid.

1

Introduction

Solar power has become an increasingly important source of renewable energy in recent years, with
the potential to help mitigate the effects of climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions
(Doblas-Reyes et al., 2021; IEA, 2021). However, the variability of solar irradiance - the amount
of solar radiation that reaches the earth’s surface - presents a challenge for integrating solar power
into the grid. Accurate forecasting of solar irradiance can assist grid operators in dealing with the
variability of solar power, leading to a more efficient and dependable integration of solar power into
the grid. As a result, this can help to reduce the requirement for costly and environmentally damaging
backup power sources.
∗
Equal contribution.
Corresponding
authors:
oussama.boussif@mila.quebec,
dan.assouline@mila.quebec
Code & dataset: https://github.com/gitbooo/CrossViVit

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

ghait.boukachab@mila.quebec,

