Learning from Rich Semantics and Coarse Locations
for Long-tailed Object Detection
Lingchen Meng1,2 Xiyang Dai3 Jianwei Yang3 Dongdong Chen3 Yinpeng Chen3
Mengchen Liu3 Yi-Ling Chen3 Zuxuan Wu1,2† Lu Yuan3 Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1

Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Microsoft

Abstract
Long-tailed object detection (LTOD) aims to handle the extreme data imbalance in
real-world datasets, where many tail classes have scarce instances. One popular
strategy is to explore extra data with image-level labels, yet it produces limited
results due to (1) semantic ambiguity—an image-level label only captures a salient
part of the image, ignoring the remaining rich semantics within the image; and (2)
location sensitivity—the label highly depends on the locations and crops of the
original image, which may change after data transformations like random cropping.
To remedy this, we propose RichSem, a simple but effective method, which is
robust to learn rich semantics from coarse locations without the need of accurate
bounding boxes. RichSem leverages rich semantics from images, which are then
served as additional “soft supervision” for training detectors. Specifically, we
add a semantic branch to our detector to learn these soft semantics and enhance
feature representations for long-tailed object detection. The semantic branch is only
used for training and is removed during inference. RichSem achieves consistent
improvements on both overall and rare-category of LVIS under different backbones
and detectors. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance without requiring
complex training and testing procedures. Moreover, we show the effectiveness
of our method on other long-tailed datasets with additional experiments. Code is
available at https://github.com/MengLcool/RichSem.

1

Introduction

Object detection for complex scenes has advanced significantly [10, 9, 40, 3, 65] thanks to large-scale
datasets [5, 22, 32, 12, 24, 4, 42]. However, current deep models depend on relatively balanced
large-scale datasets, where different classes have similar numbers of images and samples, to learn
diverse semantics and enough locations. This limits their performance on real-world data, which are
often long-tailed, i.e., only a few head classes have plenty of training samples while most classes
have very few training samples, making detection more challenging and less effective for rare classes.
A simple and effective way to improve long-tailed object detection (LTOD) is to use extra data
to increase the training samples for tail classes. However, collecting bounding box annotations,
especially for rare categories, is costly and tedious. Therefore, previous studies resort to datasets
with image-level labels to enrich the amount of samples for rare classes by exploring image-level
semantics (as shown in Figure 1 (a)). While appealing, directly learning from such data to benefit
detection is challenging since they lack bounding box annotations that are essential for object
detection. To remedy this, many works [66, 25, 60, 63] focus on estimating bounding boxes for
†

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

