Unsupervised Image Denoising with Score Function

Yutong Xie
Peking University
yutongxie_research@163.com
Bin Dong
Peking University
dongbin@bicmr.pku.edu.cn

Mingze Yuan
Peking University
mzyuan@pku.edu.cn

Quanzheng Li
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School
li.quanzheng@mgh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Though achieving excellent performance in some cases, current unsupervised learning methods for single image denoising usually have constraints in applications. In
this paper, we propose a new approach which is more general and applicable to
complicated noise models. Utilizing the property of score function, the gradient of
logarithmic probability, we define a solving system for denoising. Once the score
function of noisy images has been estimated, the denoised result can be obtained
through the solving system. Our approach can be applied to multiple noise models,
such as the mixture of multiplicative and additive noise combined with structured
correlation. Experimental results show that our method is comparable when the
noise model is simple, and has good performance in complicated cases where other
methods are not applicable or perform poorly.

1

Introduction

Image denoising [4, 20, 26] has been studied for many years. Suppose x is a clean image, y is a
noisy image of x, and p (y | x) is the noise model. Supervised learning methods try to train a model
representing a mapping from y to x. Due to the difficulty of collecting paired clean and noisy images
in practice, methods in unsupervised learning manner are focus of research. Noise2Noise [12] is
the first to use pairs of two different noisy images constructed from the same clean image to train a
denoising model. Strictly speaking, Noise2Noise is not an unsupervised learning method. Collecting
noisy pairs is still difficult. Despite all this, many other methods [2, 10, 11, 24, 25] are inspired from
Noise2Noise or borrow the idea behind of it. These methods achieve good performance in some
simple noise models.
The main drawback of current methods is the constraint of application. Once the noise model is
complicated, they either are not applicable or have poor performance. Noisier2Noise [16] can only
handle additive noise and pepper noise. Recorrupted-to-Recorrupted [17] is limited to Gaussian
noise. Neighbor2Neighbor [7] requires that the noise model is pixel-wise independent and unbiased
(i.e. E [y | x] = x). Noise2Score [9] applies Tweedie’s Formula to image denoising and provides
a unified framework for those noise models that follow exponential family distributions. However,
the practical noise model will be more complicated. It may contain both multiplicative and additive
noise, even combining with structural correlation.
In this paper, we propose a new unified approach to handle more noise models. The key of our approach is a theoretical property about score function, ∇y log p(y), which is shown in Proposition 3.1.
This property indicates that the score function of y is the average of the score function of y | x
under the posterior distribution p (x | y). Based on it, we define a system that the score function of y
equals to the score function of y | x, which turns out to be an equation about x since y is known. We
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

