SLaM: Student-Label Mixing for Distillation with
Unlabeled Examples

Vasilis Kontonis
UT Austin
vasilis@cs.utexas.edu

Fotis Iliopoulos
Google Research
fotisi@google.com

Khoa Trinh
Google Research
khoatrinh@google.com

Cenk Baykal
Google Research
baykalc@google.com

Gaurav Menghani
Google Research
gmenghani@google.com

Erik Vee
Google Research
erikvee@google.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation with unlabeled examples is a powerful training paradigm
for generating compact and lightweight student models in applications where the
amount of labeled data is limited but one has access to a large pool of unlabeled
data. In this setting, a large teacher model generates “soft” pseudo-labels for the
unlabeled dataset which are then used for training the student model. Despite its
success in a wide variety of applications, a shortcoming of this approach is that the
teacher’s pseudo-labels are often noisy, leading to impaired student performance.
In this paper, we present a principled method for knowledge distillation with
unlabeled examples that we call Student-Label Mixing (SLaM) and we show that
it consistently improves over prior approaches by evaluating it on several standard
benchmarks. Finally, we show that SLaM comes with theoretical guarantees; along
the way we give an algorithm improving the best-known sample complexity for
learning halfspaces with margin under random classification noise, and provide the
first convergence analysis for so-called “forward loss-adjustment” methods.

1

Introduction

While good quality human-labeled data are often hard to obtain, finding huge amounts of unlabeled
data is relatively easy. Therefore, in modern machine learning applications, we often face the
situation where we have a small “golden” dataset with human labels and a large unlabeled dataset. In
Distillation with Unlabeled Examples [12, 26, 16] a large teacher model is first trained (or fine-tuned)
on the human-labeled data and is then used to generate “soft” pseudo-labels for the unlabeled dataset.
Then the (typically smaller) student model, i.e., the model that will be deployed for the purposes of the
application, is trained on the combined dataset that contains both the labels generated by humans and
the pseudo-labels generated by the teacher model. This general-purpose training paradigm has been
applied in a wide variety of contexts [16, 46, 53, 54, 58, 57] including but not limited to distilling
knowledge from large-scale foundational models like BERT [18] and GPT-3 [11]. We remark that
in such settings one does not have access to the teacher model but only on its pseudo-labels (which
were generated during some previous “bulk-inference” phase). This “bulk-inference” step is typically
computationally expensive and happens once: one cannot modify the teacher network (or even use it
for inference) during the training process of student.
Despite its widespread success in practice, the effectiveness of this powerful approach generally
depends on the quality of the pseudo-labels generated by the teacher model. Indeed, training the
student model on noisy pseudo-labels often leads to significant degradation of its generalization
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

