Causal Discovery in Semi-Stationary Time Series

Shanyun Gao
Purdue University
gao565@purdue.edu

Raghavendra Addanki
Adobe Research
raddanki@adobe.com

Tong Yu
Adobe Research
tyu@adobe.com

Ryan A. Rossi
Adobe Research
ryrossi@adobe.com

Murat Kocaoglu
Purdue University
mkocaoglu@purdue.edu

Abstract
Discovering causal relations from observational time series without making the
stationary assumption is a significant challenge. In practice, this challenge is
common in many areas, such as retail sales, transportation systems, and medical
science. Here, we consider this problem for a class of non-stationary time series.
The structural causal model (SCM) of this type of time series, called the semistationary time series, exhibits that a finite number of different causal mechanisms
occur sequentially and periodically across time. This model holds considerable
practical utility because it can represent periodicity, including common occurrences
such as seasonality and diurnal variation. We propose a constraint-based, nonparametric algorithm for discovering causal relations in this setting. The resulting
algorithm, PCMCIΩ , can capture the alternating and recurring changes in the
causal mechanisms and then identify the underlying causal graph with conditional
independence (CI) tests. We show that this algorithm is sound in identifying
causal relations on discrete-valued time series. We validate the algorithm with
extensive experiments on continuous and discrete simulated data. We also apply
our algorithm to a real-world climate dataset.

1

Introduction

In modern sciences, causal discovery aims to identify the collection of causal relations from observational data, as in Pearl [1980], Peters et al. [2017] and Spirtes et al. [2000]. One of the most
popular causal discovery approaches is the so-called constraint-based method. Constraint-based
approaches assume that the probability distribution of variables is causal Markov and faithful to a
directed acyclic graph called the causal graph. Given large enough data, they can then recover the
corresponding Markov equivalence class by exploiting conditional independence relationships of the
variables. See Peters et al. [2017]. There are many constraint-based algorithms such as PC and FCI
algorithms Spirtes et al. [2000]. The standard assumption of these approaches is that data samples are
independent and identically distributed, which makes it possible to perform CI tests. See Bergsma
[2004], Zhang et al. [2012] and Shah and Peters [2020].
Recently, there have been numerous efforts to extend such constraint-based algorithms to accommodate time series data. For instance, PCMCI in Runge et al. [2019] and LPCMCI in Gerhardus and
Runge [2020] are the PC-based algorithms for time series. Inspired by FCI algorithms, approaches
designed for time series include ANLSTM in Chu and Glymour [2008], tsFCI in Entner and Hoyer
[2010] and SVAR-FCI in Malinsky and Spirtes [2018]. This setup is relevant in several industrial
applications since many data points have an associated time-point, such as root-cause analysis in
Ikram et al. [2022]. Most of the existing causal discovery algorithms make the stationary assumption.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

