YouTube-ASL: A Large-Scale, Open-Domain
American Sign Language-English Parallel Corpus

David Uthus, Garrett Tanzer, Manfred Georg
Google
{duthus,gtanzer,mgeorg}@google.com

Abstract
Machine learning for sign languages is bottlenecked by data. In this paper, we
present YouTube-ASL, a large-scale, open-domain corpus of American Sign Language (ASL) videos and accompanying English captions drawn from YouTube.
With ~1000 hours of videos and >2500 unique signers, YouTube-ASL is ~3x as
large and has ~10x as many unique signers as the largest prior ASL dataset. We
train baseline models for ASL to English translation on YouTube-ASL and evaluate
them on How2Sign, where we achieve a new finetuned state of the art of 12.39
BLEU and, for the first time, report zero-shot results.

1

Introduction

The primary bottleneck for machine learning research on sign languages is data. As minority
languages used by historically marginalized Deaf/Hard of Hearing communities, sign languages lack
the plentiful online resources that have facilitated modern machine learning advances [4, 44, 12]. This
is compounded by the fact that sign languages have no standardized written form: mining the videos
that do exist is more difficult than retrieval for spoken language text. For translation specifically,
there is the added problem of finding spoken language captions that are aligned to corresponding sign
language content, rather than a voiceover with its own timing. The result is that datasets tend to be
constructed by recording new footage in a studio or curating videos from a small number of manually
selected content creators, which limits variety.
In order to address these challenges, we present YouTube-ASL, a large-scale, open-domain corpus of
American Sign Language (ASL) videos and accompanying English captions, primarily intended for
ASL to English machine translation. We mined these videos from YouTube using a two-step process:
first, we used automatic content-based annotations to identify potentially relevant captioned videos;
and second, we used skilled human annotators to filter out videos with poor quality or misaligned
captions. The result is a dataset with 984 hours of high-quality captioned video featuring >2500
unique signers, which is ~3x as large as the largest prior ASL dataset [39] and has ~10x as many
unique signers as any sign language dataset to date.
We train simple baseline models for sentence-level ASL to English translation on YouTube-ASL
by embedding MediaPipe Holistic landmarks [26, 16] into the T5 language model [33]. Because
YouTube videos may be removed over time and therefore cannot form a stable test set—and for
comparison to prior work—we evaluate on a standard benchmark, How2Sign [13]. Borrowing from
trends in mainstream machine learning [32, 15, 10], we provide not just finetuned but also zero-shot1
results to test out-of-domain generalization. We achieve a new finetuned state of the art of 12.39
BLEU (vs. the prior SOTA of 8.03 [40]), and for the first time report a zero-shot score, 3.95 BLEU.
1

Here, “zero-shot” refers to evaluation on an independently constructed benchmark without any kind of
domain adaptation. This is different from the use of “zero-shot” in machine translation for transfer to unseen
language pairs, or “zero-shot” in prompting for prompts without in-context examples.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

