Self-Evaluation Guided Beam Search for Reasoning

Yuxi Xie1∗ Kenji Kawaguchi1 Yiran Zhao1 James Xu Zhao1
Min-Yen Kan1† Junxian He2† Michael Qizhe Xie1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Breaking down a problem into intermediate steps has demonstrated impressive
performance in Large Language Model (LLM) reasoning. However, the growth
of the reasoning chain introduces uncertainty and error accumulation, making it
challenging to elicit accurate final results. To tackle this challenge of uncertainty in
multi-step reasoning, we introduce a stepwise self-evaluation mechanism to guide
and calibrate the reasoning process of LLMs. We propose a decoding algorithm
integrating the self-evaluation guidance via stochastic beam search. The selfevaluation guidance serves as a better-calibrated automatic criterion, facilitating an
efficient search in the reasoning space and resulting in superior prediction quality.
Stochastic beam search balances exploitation and exploration of the search space
with temperature-controlled randomness. Our approach surpasses the corresponding Codex-backboned baselines in few-shot accuracy by 6.34%, 9.56%, and 5.46%
on the GSM8K, AQuA, and StrategyQA benchmarks, respectively. Experiment
results with Llama-2 on arithmetic reasoning demonstrate the efficiency of our
method in outperforming the baseline methods with comparable computational
budgets. Further analysis in multi-step reasoning finds our self-evaluation guidance
pinpoints logic failures and leads to higher consistency and robustness. Our code is
publicly available at https://guideddecoding.github.io/.

1

Introduction

The remarkable empirical achievements of Large Language Models (LLMs) have recently ushered
in a new era in machine reasoning through few-shot prompting techniques (Brown et al., 2020;
Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023a; OpenAI, 2023). In particular, breaking down a
problem into intermediate stages, or a reasoning chain, can significantly improve model performance
on reasoning tasks (Cobbe et al., 2021). Various prompting approaches have been proposed to define
these chains, such as scratchpads (Nye et al., 2021), chain-of-thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b),
least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2023), and program-aided language models (PAL) (Gao et al., 2023; Chen
et al., 2022). However, as the complexity and length of reasoning chains increase with the difficulty
of tasks, LLMs struggle with errors and imperfections that accumulate across multiple intermediate
steps (Wu et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2022). Furthermore, the growing number of
steps leads to an exponential growth in the search space for reasoning, making it exceedingly difficult
to obtain accurate final outcomes.
Confronted with the challenges of uncertainty in multi-step chaining, several previous studies have
worked on different aspects to alleviate the impact of reasoning errors. For instance, Wang et al.
(2023) introduce self-consistency as a method to determine the final answer through majority voting
using multiple sampled reasoning paths, while Li et al. (2022) investigate various prompts to diversify
the sampling outcomes. Gao et al. (2023) and Chen et al. (2022) utilize Python programs to
∗
†

Correspondence to: Yuxi Xie (xieyuxi@u.nus.edu).
Equal advising. Ordering is determined by dice rolling.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

