First Order Methods with Markovian Noise: from
Acceleration to Variational Inequalities
Aleksandr Beznosikov
Innopolis University, Skoltech, MIPT, Yandex
Alexander Gasnikov
MIPT, Skoltech, IITP RAS

Sergey Samsonov
HSE University

Alexey Naumov
HSE University

Marina Sheshukova
HSE University

Eric Moulines
Ecole polytechnique

Abstract
This paper delves into stochastic optimization problems that involve Markovian
noise. We present a unified approach for the theoretical analysis of first-order
gradient methods for stochastic optimization and variational inequalities. Our
approach covers scenarios for both non-convex and strongly convex minimization
problems. To achieve an optimal (linear) dependence on the mixing time of the
underlying noise sequence, we use the randomized batching scheme, which is
based on the multilevel Monte Carlo method. Moreover, our technique allows us to
eliminate the limiting assumptions of previous research on Markov noise, such as
the need for a bounded domain and uniformly bounded stochastic gradients. Our
extension to variational inequalities under Markovian noise is original. Additionally,
we provide lower bounds that match the oracle complexity of our method in the
case of strongly convex optimization problems.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient methods are an essential ingredient for solving various optimization problems,
with a wide range of applications in various fields such as machine learning [36, 37], empirical risk
minimization problems [96], and reinforcement learning [93, 85, 69]. Various stochastic gradient
descent methods (SGD) and their accelerated versions [75, 31] have been extensively studied under
different statistical frameworks [17, 97]. The standard assumption for stochastic optimization algorithms is to consider independent and identically distributed noise variables. However, the growing
usage of stochastic optimization methods in reinforcement learning [10, 87, 25] and distributed
optimization [63, 18, 65] has led to increased interest in problems with Markovian noise. Despite this,
existing theoretical works that consider Markov noise have significant limitations, and their analysis
often results in suboptimal finite-time error bounds.
Our research aims to fill the gap in the existing literature on the first-order Markovian setting. By
focusing on uniformly geometrically ergodic Markov chains, we obtain finite-time complexity bounds
for achieving "-accurate solutions that scale linearly with the mixing time of the underlying Markov
chain. Our approach is based on careful applications of randomized batch size schemes and provides
a unified view on both non-convex and strongly convex minimization problems, as well as variational
inequalities.
Our contributions. Our main contributions are the following:
⇧ Accelerated SGD. We provide the first analysis of SGD, including the Nesterov accelerated SGD
method, with Markov noise without the assumption of bounded domain and uniformly bounded
stochastic gradient estimates. Our results are summarised in Table 1 and Section 2.1 and cover both
strongly convex and non-convex scenarios. Our findings for non-convex minimization problems
complement the results obtained in [21].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

