Unconstrained Dynamic Regret via Sparse Coding

Zhiyu Zhang∗
Harvard University
zhiyuz@seas.harvard.edu

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Ioannis Ch. Paschalidis
Boston University
yannisp@bu.edu

Abstract
Motivated by the challenge of nonstationarity in sequential decision making, we
study Online Convex Optimization (OCO) under the coupling of two problem
structures: the domain is unbounded, and the comparator sequence u1 , . . . , uT is
arbitrarily time-varying. As no algorithm can guarantee low regret simultaneously
against all comparator sequences, handling this setting requires moving from
minimax optimality to comparator adaptivity. That is, sensible regret bounds
should depend on certain complexity measures of the comparator relative to one’s
prior knowledge. This paper achieves a new type of such adaptive regret bounds
leveraging a sparse coding framework. The complexity of the comparator is
measured by its energy and its sparsity on a user-specified dictionary, which offers
considerable versatility. For example, equipped with a wavelet dictionary, our
framework improves the state-of-the-art bound [JC22] by adapting to both (i)
PT
the magnitude of the comparator average ∥ū∥ = ∥ t=1 ut /T ∥, rather than the
PT
maximum maxt ∥ut ∥; and (ii) the comparator variability t=1 ∥ut − ū∥, rather
PT
than the uncentered sum t=1 ∥ut ∥. Furthermore, our analysis is simpler due to
decoupling function approximation from regret minimization.

1

Introduction

Nonstationarity is prevalent in sequential decision making, which poses a critical challenge to the
vast majority of existing approaches developed offline. Consider weather forecasting for example
[SBG+ 21]. A meteorologist typically starts from the governing physical equations and simulates
them online using high performance computing; the imperfection of this physical model can lead to
time-varying patterns in its forecasting error. Alternatively, a machine learning scientist may build a
data-driven model from historical weather datasets, but its online deployment is subject to distribution
shifts. If the structure of such nonstationarity can be exploited in our algorithm, then we may expect
better forecasting performance. This paper investigates the problem from a theoretical angle – we
aim to improve nonstationary online decision making by incorporating temporal representations.
Concretely, we study Online Convex Optimization (OCO), which is a repeated game between us (the
player) and an adversarial environment E. In each (the t-th) round, with a mutually known Lipschitz
constant G:
1. We make a prediction xt ∈ Rd based on the observations before the t-th round.
2. The environment E reveals a convex loss function lt : Rd → R dependent on our prediction
history x1 , . . . , xt ; lt is G-Lipschitz with respect to ∥·∥2 .
3. We suffer the loss lt (xt ).
The game ends after T rounds, and then, our total loss is compared to that of an alternative sequence
of predictions u1 , . . . , uT ∈ Rd . Without knowing the time horizon T , the environment E and the
∗

Work done at Boston University. Future versions available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.13349.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

