Toolformer:
Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools

Timo Schick Jane Dwivedi-Yu Roberto Dessì† Roberta Raileanu
Maria Lomeli Eric Hambro Luke Zettlemoyer Nicola Cancedda Thomas Scialom
FAIR, Meta † Universitat Pompeu Fabra

Abstract
Language models (LMs) exhibit remarkable abilities to solve new tasks from just a
few examples or textual instructions, especially at scale. They also, paradoxically,
struggle with basic functionality, such as arithmetic or factual lookup, where much
simpler and smaller specialized models excel. In this paper, we show that LMs
can teach themselves to use external tools via simple APIs and achieve the best of
both worlds. We introduce Toolformer, a model trained to decide which APIs to
call, when to call them, what arguments to pass, and how to best incorporate the
results into future token prediction. This is done in a self-supervised way, requiring
nothing more than a handful of demonstrations for each API. We incorporate a
range of tools, including a calculator, a Q&A system, a search engine, a translation
system, and a calendar. Toolformer achieves substantially improved zero-shot
performance across a variety of downstream tasks, often competitive with much
larger models, without sacrificing its core language modeling abilities.

1

Introduction

Large language models achieve impressive zero and few-shot results on a variety of natural language
processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022, i.a.). However, these models have
several inherent limitations that can at best be partially addressed by further scaling. These limitations
include an inability to access up-to-date information on recent events (Komeili et al., 2022) and the
related tendency to hallucinate facts (Maynez et al., 2020; Ji et al., 2022), difficulties in understanding
low-resource languages (Lin et al., 2021), a lack of mathematical skills to perform precise calculations
(Patel et al., 2021) and an unawareness of the progression of time (Dhingra et al., 2022).
A simple way to overcome the limitations of today’s language models is to give them the ability to
use external tools such as search engines, calculators, or calendars. However, existing approaches
either rely on large amounts of human annotations (Komeili et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022) or
limit tool use to task-specific settings only (e.g., Gao et al., 2022; Parisi et al., 2022), hindering a
more widespread adoption of tool use in LMs. Therefore, we propose Toolformer, a model that learns
to use tools in a novel way, which fulfills the following desiderata:
• Tool use should be learned in a self-supervised way without large amounts of human
annotations. This is important not only because of the costs associated with such annotations,
but also because what humans find useful may be different from what a model finds useful.
• The LM should not lose any of its generality and should be able to decide for itself when
and how to use which tool. In contrast to existing approaches, this enables a much more
comprehensive use of tools that is not tied to specific tasks.
Our approach for achieving these goals is based on the recent idea of using large LMs with in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020) to generate entire datasets from scratch (Schick and Schütze, 2021b;
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

