SutraNets: Sub-series Autoregressive Networks for
Long-Sequence, Probabilistic Forecasting

Shane Bergsma Timothy Zeyl Lei Guo
Huawei Cloud, Alkaid Lab Canada
{shane.bergsma,timothy.zeyl,leiguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
We propose SutraNets, a novel method for neural probabilistic forecasting of longsequence time series. SutraNets use an autoregressive generative model to factorize
the likelihood of long sequences into products of conditional probabilities. When
generating long sequences, most autoregressive approaches suffer from harmful
error accumulation, as well as challenges in modeling long-distance dependencies.
SutraNets treat long, univariate prediction as multivariate prediction over lowerfrequency sub-series. Autoregression proceeds across time and across sub-series
in order to ensure coherent multivariate (and, hence, high-frequency univariate)
outputs. Since sub-series can be generated using fewer steps, SutraNets effectively
reduce error accumulation and signal path distances. We find SutraNets to significantly improve forecasting accuracy over competitive alternatives on six real-world
datasets, including when we vary the number of sub-series and scale up the depth
and width of the underlying sequence models.

1

Introduction

As a cloud provider, we rely on long-range forecasts to allocate resources and plan capacity. In
particular, we need to predict the fine-grained pattern of demand (e.g., hourly) for a large number
of products, over a long time horizon (e.g., months). Since purchase decisions are large-scale (e.g.,
supplying regions with 100K machines), and made weeks-to-months before delivery, cloud providers
have a profound need for methods that “capture the uncertainty of the future” [43]. Fine granularity,
long histories, long forecast horizons, and quantification of uncertainty can be formalized as the
long-sequence (many-step) probabilistic forecasting problem.
Recent work applies Transformers [82] to long-sequence forecasting. In order to circumvent the
Transformer’s quadratically-scaling attention mechanism, long sequences necessitate trading off
increased signal path for reduced computational complexity [44, 92, 87, 47]. Unfortunately, the
effectiveness and even validity of these approaches have been questioned [90, 32]. Most of these
approaches do not provide probabilistic outputs (rather best-guess point predictions), and all condition
on fixed-size windows, typically of very short duration. Indeed, many recent papers on “long-term”
forecasting [87, 86, 70, 93] condition on a maximum of 96 inputs — only 4 days of history at 1-hour
granularity. Such restricted context is a serious limitation given that many time series (including in
standard evaluation datasets based on electricity and traffic) have strong weekly seasonality.
Our production forecasting system, like many in industrial settings [65, 52, 72] and cloud services [69],
is based on RNNs. The RNN’s recurrent architecture forces the compression and consolidation of
long-range information, and RNNs work well on smaller datasets as they are not as “data hungry”
as Transformers [16]. RNNs can theoretically condition on context of any length; in this paper, we
condition RNN forecasts on length-2016 contexts without difficulties in scaling.
RNNs are often used to generate probabilistic forecasts via an autoregressive approach [21, 65,
60, 7], whereby the probability over future timesteps is factorized into a product of one-step-ahead
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

