Where are we in the search for an Artificial Visual
Cortex for Embodied Intelligence?
Arjun Majumdar1∗, Karmesh Yadav1∗ , Sergio Arnaud2∗
Yecheng Jason Ma3 , Claire Chen4 , Sneha Silwal2 , Aryan Jain5 , Vincent-Pierre Berges2
Tingfan Wu2 , Jay Vakil2 , Pieter Abbeel5 , Jitendra Malik2,5 , Dhruv Batra1,2
Yixin Lin2†, Oleksandr Maksymets2† , Aravind Rajeswaran2† , Franziska Meier2†
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Meta AI, 2 UPenn, 2 Stanford University, 2 UC Berkeley
https://eai-vc.github.io

Abstract
We present the largest and most comprehensive empirical study of pre-trained visual
representations (PVRs) or visual ‘foundation models’ for Embodied AI. First, we
curate C ORTEX B ENCH, consisting of 17 different tasks spanning locomotion,
navigation, dexterous, and mobile manipulation. Next, we systematically evaluate
existing PVRs and find that none are universally dominant. To study the effect of
pre-training data size and diversity, we combine over 4,000 hours of egocentric
videos from 7 different sources (over 4.3M images) and ImageNet to train differentsized vision transformers using Masked Auto-Encoding (MAE) on slices of this
data. Contrary to inferences from prior work, we find that scaling dataset size and
diversity does not improve performance universally (but does so on average). Our
largest model, named VC-1, outperforms all prior PVRs on average but does not
universally dominate either. Next, we show that task- or domain-specific adaptation
of VC-1 leads to substantial gains, with VC-1 (adapted) achieving competitive
or superior performance than the best known results on all of the benchmarks in
C ORTEX B ENCH. Finally, we present real-world hardware experiments, in which
VC-1 and VC-1 (adapted) outperform the strongest pre-existing PVR. Overall, this
paper presents no new techniques but a rigorous systematic evaluation, a broad set
of findings about PVRs (that in some cases, refute those made in narrow domains
in prior work), and open-sourced code and models (that required over 10,000
GPU-hours to train) for the benefit of the research community.

1

Introduction

The visual cortex is a region of an organism’s brain, which together with the motor cortex, enables
sight to be converted into movement. In this work, we ask the same question that Fukushima [1,
2] asked nearly 50 years ago – how do we design an artificial visual cortex, the module in a
computational system that (together with a policy) enables an agent to convert camera input into
actions? In contemporary AI, this question has been operationalized as the design of pre-trained
visual representations (PVRs) or visual ‘foundation models’ for embodied AI (EAI).3 Indeed, recent
work has shown that PVRs can substantially improve performance and learning efficiency for
navigation [3–5] and manipulation tasks [6–9]. Unfortunately, prior studies are incommensurable –
using different self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms on different pre-training datasets, designed
∗

Equal Contribution
Equal Contribution
3
We use embodied AI (EAI) as an umbrella term for all communities studying visuomotor control such as
robot learning, vision-based reinforcement learning, egocentric computer vision, etc.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

