Equal Opportunity of Coverage in Fair Regression
Fangxin Wang
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, USA
fwang51@uic.edu

Lu Cheng
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, USA
lucheng@uic.edu

Kay Liu
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, USA
zliu234@uic.edu

Ruocheng Guo
ByteDance Research
London, UK
rguo.asu@gmail.com

Philip S. Yu
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, USA
psyu@uic.edu

Abstract
We study fair machine learning (ML) under predictive uncertainty to enable reliable
and trustworthy decision-making. The seminal work of “equalized coverage”
proposed an uncertainty-aware fairness notion. However, it does not guarantee
equal coverage rates across more fine-grained groups (e.g., low-income females)
conditioning on the true label and is biased in the assessment of uncertainty. To
tackle these limitations, we propose a new uncertainty-aware fairness – Equal
Opportunity of Coverage (EOC) – that aims to achieve two properties: (1) coverage
rates for different groups with similar outcomes are close, and (2) the coverage rate
for the entire population remains at a predetermined level. Further, the prediction
intervals should be narrow to be informative. We propose Binned Fair Quantile
Regression (BFQR), a distribution-free post-processing method to improve EOC
with reasonable width for any trained ML models. It first calibrates a hold-out set
to bound deviation from EOC, then leverages conformal prediction to maintain
EOC on a test set, meanwhile optimizing prediction interval width. Experimental
results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in improving EOC. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/fangxin-wang/bfqr.

1

Introduction

Machine Learning (ML) can bring bias and discrimination even with good intentions [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
Fair ML has been developed to counteract unfairness, but the practical use of fair ML models is limited
by predictive uncertainty. Predictive uncertainty is the extent to which ML can confidently predict
the future. Over- or under-confidence can cause an ML model to be unaware of its own knowledge
gaps and make inaccurate predictions [7, 8, 9]. This can lead to unfairness in decision-making. To
address this, we can produce predicted intervals for each sample and incorporate uncertainty into
fairness to make decisions more reliable and trustworthy.
The idea of “equalized coverage” – an uncertainty-aware notion of demographic parity [10] – was
introduced in a study [11] as a way to ensure that every group receives the same level of prediction
certainty. It works by generating prediction intervals that cover the true label Y with a specified
probability (e.g., 90%), while also reflecting uncertainty through interval width. However, even with
this approach, there are still disparities in coverage rates across groups when conditioning on Y .
For example, we observe from the empirical results (Fig. 1) for Adult dataset [4] that low-income
women are less likely to be covered than men in the same income bracket, and high-income men
are less likely to be predicted to earn as much as high-income women. Consequently, the widths of
prediction intervals for different groups, as an indicator of the uncertainty, are not comparable under
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

