How to Data in Datathons
Carlos Mougan
The Alan Turing Institute
University of Southampton

Richard Plant
The Alan Turing Institute
Edinburgh Napier University

Clare Teng
The Alan Turing Institute

Marya Bazzi
The Alan Turing Institute
University of Warwick

Alvaro Cabrejas Egea
Fujitsu Research of Europe

Ryan Sze-Yin Chan
The Alan Turing Institute

David Salvador Jasin
The Alan Turing Institute

Martin Stoffel
The Alan Turing Institute

Kirstie Jane Whitaker
The Alan Turing Institute

Jules Manser
The Alan Turing Institute
jmanser@turing.ac.uk

Abstract
The rise of datathons, also known as data or data science hackathons, has provided
a platform to collaborate, learn, and innovate in a short timeframe. Despite their
significant potential benefits, organizations often struggle to effectively work with
data due to a lack of clear guidelines and best practices for potential issues that
might arise. Drawing on our own experiences and insights from organizing ≥ 80
datathon challenges with ≥ 60 partnership organizations since 2016, we provide
guidelines and recommendations that serve as a resource for organizers to navigate
the data-related complexities of datathons. We apply our proposed framework to
10 case studies.

1

Introduction

Datathons or data hackathons, loosely defined as data or data science-centric hackathons (Anslow
et al., 2016; Chau and Gerber, 2023), have become increasingly popular in recent years, providing
a platform for participants and organisations to collaborate, innovate, and learn in the area of data
science over a short timeframe. This paper focuses on data-related challenges in datathons, including:
What does it mean for data to be “appropriate” for a datathon? How much data is “enough” data?
How can we identify, categorise, and use “sensitive” data? We aim to offer a set of guidelines and
recommendations to prepare different types of data for datathons drawn from extensive experience in
datathon organisation.
Working with and preparing data for a datathon can be challenging due to problem-specificity and the
short time scales available to prepare the data for analysis and answer a specific set of questions. In
research projects, there is significantly more time and room to explore and adapt the data and the
questions. Other factors include the type of datathon, its potential breadth (e.g., data which is publicly
available and has been previously analysed by researchers (Kitsios and Kamariotou, 2019; Concilio
et al., 2017)), datasets from a company with no or limited prior analysis (Nolte et al., 2018; Nolte,
2019), or working with multiple data sources and formats. To effectively incorporate (varied) data,
there is a need to have standardised processes and definitions that can account for the complexity
and challenges that arise during the datathon selection and preparation process. In particular, our
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

