Delayed Algorithms for Distributed Stochastic
Weakly Convex Optimization

Wenzhi Gao∗
Stanford University
gwz@stanford.edu

Qi Deng†
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
qideng@sufe.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies delayed stochastic algorithms for weakly convex optimization
in a distributed network with workers connected to a master node. Recently,
Xu et al. 2022 showed
√ that an inertial stochastic subgradient method converges
at a rate of O(τmax / K) which depends on the maximum information delay τmax .
In this work, we show that the delayed stochastic subgradient method (DSGD) obtains a tighter convergence rate which depends on the expected delay τ̄ . Furthermore, for an important class of composition weakly convex problems, we develop
a new delayed stochastic prox-linear (DSPL) method in which the delays only affect the high-order term in the complexity rate and hence, are negligible after a
certain number of DSPL iterations. In addition, we demonstrate the robustness of
our proposed algorithms against arbitrary delays. By incorporating a simple safeguarding step in both methods, we achieve convergence rates that depend solely
on the number of workers, eliminating the effect of the delay. Our numerical
experiments further confirm the empirical superiority of our proposed methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we consider the following stochastic optimization problem
min ψ(x) := Eξ∼Ξ [f (x, ξ)] + ω(x),

x∈Rn

(1)

where f (x, ξ) is a nonconvex continuous function over x and ξ is a random variable sampled from
some distribution Ξ; ω(x) is lower-semicontinuous and proximal-friendly. We assume that both
f (x, ξ) and ω(x) belong to a general class of nonsmooth nonconvex functions that exhibit weak
convexity. Here, we say that a function g(x) is κ-weakly convex if g(x) + κ2 ∥x∥2 is convex for
some κ ≥ 0. Weakly convex optimization has attracted growing interest in machine learning in
recent years, and we are particularly interested in a general type of weakly convex problems with
the following composition structure [12]
f (x, ξ) = h(c(x, ξ)),

(2)

where h is a convex Lipschitz function and c(x, ξ) is smooth. Optimization in the above composition
form is pervasive in applications arising from machine learning and data science, including robust
phase retrieval [14], blind deconvolution [8], robust PCA and matrix completion [5], among others.
Stochastic (sub)gradient method and its proximal variants [39, 10, 30, 28, 31] (all referred as SGD
in our paper) are arguably the most popular approaches for solving problem (1). Typically, SGD
iteratively solves xk+1 = arg minx {⟨f ′ (xk , ξ k ), x − xk ⟩ + ω(x) + γ2k ∥x − xk ∥2 }, where ξ k is
∗
†

Work done while at SHUFE.
The corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

