Unified Segment-to-Segment Framework for
Simultaneous Sequence Generation

Shaolei Zhang1,2 , Yang Feng1,2∗
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICT/CAS)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
zhangshaolei20z@ict.ac.cn, fengyang@ict.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Simultaneous sequence generation is a pivotal task for real-time scenarios, such as
streaming speech recognition, simultaneous machine translation and simultaneous
speech translation, where the target sequence is generated while receiving the
source sequence. The crux of achieving high-quality generation with low latency
lies in identifying the optimal moments for generating, accomplished by learning
a mapping between the source and target sequences. However, existing methods
often rely on task-specific heuristics for different sequence types, limiting the
model’s capacity to adaptively learn the source-target mapping and hindering the
exploration of multi-task learning for various simultaneous tasks. In this paper,
we propose a unified segment-to-segment framework (Seg2Seg) for simultaneous
sequence generation, which learns the mapping in an adaptive and unified manner.
During the process of simultaneous generation, the model alternates between
waiting for a source segment and generating a target segment, making the segment
serve as the natural bridge between the source and target. To accomplish this,
Seg2Seg introduces a latent segment as the pivot between source to target and
explores all potential source-target mappings via the proposed expectation training,
thereby learning the optimal moments for generating. Experiments on multiple
simultaneous generation tasks demonstrate that Seg2Seg achieves state-of-the-art
performance and exhibits better generality across various tasks2 .

1

Introduction

Recently, there has been a growing interest in simultaneous sequence generation tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9] due to the rise of real-time scenarios, such as international conferences, live broadcasts and
online subtitles. Unlike conventional sequence generation [10], simultaneous sequence generation
receives a streaming source sequence and generates the target sequence simultaneously, in order
to provide low-latency feedback [11]. To achieve high-quality generation under such low-latency
conditions, simultaneous models must learn to establish a mapping between the target sequence and
the source sequence [12] and thereby identify the optimal moments for generating [13].
Directly mapping source and target sequences is non-trivial due to inherent differences between the
two sequences, such as modalities or languages, resulting in significant representational and structural
gaps. For instance, in streaming automatic speech recognition (Streaming ASR) [8, 9, 14, 15, 16],
speech needs to be mapped to text, while simultaneous machine translation (SimulMT) [17, 11,
4, 5, 18, 13] requires the mapping from a source language to a target language (i.e., cross-lingual
∗
2

Corresponding author: Yang Feng
Code is available at: https://github.com/ictnlp/Seg2Seg.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

