Unifying Predictions of Deterministic and Stochastic
Physics in Mesh-reduced Space with Sequential Flow
Generative Model
Luning Sun∗
Lawrence Livermore National Lab
Livermore, CA 94550
sun42@llnl.gov
Han Gao
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
hgao1@seas.harvard.edu

Xu Han ∗
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
xu.han@tufts.edu

Jian-Xun Wang
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
jwang33@nd.edu

Li-Ping Liu
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
liping.liu@tufts.edu

Abstract
Accurate prediction of dynamical systems in unstructured meshes has recently
shown successes in scientific simulations. Many dynamical systems have a nonnegligible level of stochasticity introduced by various factors (e.g. chaoticity), so there
is a need for a unified framework that captures both deterministic and stochastic
components in the rollouts of these systems. Inspired by regeneration learning,
we propose a new model that combines generative and sequential networks to
model dynamical systems. Specifically, we use an autoencoder to learn compact
representations of full-space physical variables in a low-dimensional space. We
then integrate a transformer with a conditional normalizing flow model to model
the temporal sequence of latent representations. We evaluate the new model in both
deterministic and stochastic systems. The model outperforms several competitive
baseline models and makes more accurate predictions of deterministic systems.
Its own prediction error is also reflected in its uncertainty estimations. When
predicting stochastic systems, the proposed model generates high-quality rollout
samples. The mean and variance of these samples well match the statistics of
samples computed from expensive numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

Accurate prediction of long-term dynamics of physical systems is of great interest in many science
and engineering fields. The classical simulation of a system heavily relies on a spatial/temporal
discretization of the space and the numerical solution to a finite-dimensional algebraic system derived
from the governing equation [1]. However, due to the multi-scale, stochastic nature of the complex
physics and the complexity of the geometry, the simulation of large-scale real-time applications is
extremely expensive in computation [2]. In recent years, deep learning models have been applied
to predict rollouts of large and complex physical systems thanks to their flexibility and scalability
[3]. Moreover, they can handle uncertainties and non-linearity in physical problems [4–8] more
effectively than traditional methods.
Previous work has studied two types of complex dynamical systems: deterministic ones and stochastic
ones. A deterministic system is often considered under a perfectly controlled experiment with exactly
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

