NeuroEvoBench: Benchmarking Evolutionary
Optimizers for Deep Learning Applications
Robert Tjarko Lange⇤
Technical University Berlin
Science of Intelligence Cluster of Excellence

Yujin Tang
Google DeepMind

Yingtao Tian
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Recently, the Deep Learning community has become interested in evolutionary optimization (EO) as a means to address hard optimization problems, e.g. meta-learning
through long inner loop unrolls or optimizing non-differentiable operators. One
core reason for this trend has been the recent innovation in hardware acceleration
and compatible software – making distributed population evaluations much easier
than before. Unlike for gradient descent-based methods though, there is a lack of
hyperparameter understanding and best practices for EO – arguably due to severely
less “graduate student descent” and benchmarking being performed for EO methods. Additionally, classical benchmarks from the evolutionary community provide
few practical insights for Deep Learning applications. This poses challenges for
newcomers to hardware-accelerated EO and hinders significant adoption. Hence,
we establish a new benchmark of EO methods (NeuroEvoBench) tailored toward
Deep Learning applications and exhaustively evaluate traditional and meta-learned
EO. We investigate core scientific questions including resource allocation, fitness
shaping, normalization, regularization & scalability of EO. The benchmark is
open-sourced at https://github.com/neuroevobench/neuroevobench under Apache-2.0 license.

1

Introduction

The Deep Learning revolution has been largely enabled by the (arguably) “unreasonable effectiveness” of gradient descent (GD)-based optimization in high-dimensional search spaces of parameters (Kleinberg et al., 2018; Hardt et al., 2016; Ge et al., 2015). However, a plethora of challenging
high-dimensional optimization problems where GD methods are inadequate exist, including not only
hyperparameter search but also the optimization of non-differentiable operators (e.g. objective or
architecture, Tian and Ha, 2022; He et al., 2021), the computation of ill-behaved gradients through
long computational graphs (Peyré et al., 2017), and applications requiring black-box optimization
(Metz et al., 2021). Such challenges have sparked a recent resurgence of interest in modern scalable
EO methods by the machine learning community. Still, compared to widely-studied GD optimizers,
there remains a lack of intuition for EO methods. We argue that this is due to three reasons:
Hardware lottery phenomenon (Hooker, 2021): Until recently neuroevolution experimentation
required a significant amount of engineering overhead caused by the orchestration of parallelized
population rollouts (e.g. using Dask or Ray, Moritz et al., 2018). This has obstructed replicability
and hindered EO from leveraging the recent advances in hardware acceleration.
Lack of ‘graduate-student’ descent (Gencoglu et al., 2019): The last decade has seen a strong
increase in GD optimization practitioners. This facilitated the discovery of robust hyperparameter
basins that perform well on standard research tasks. EO, on the other hand, lacks behind in human
⇤

Work was partially done while being at Google DeepMind. Contact: robert.t.lange@tu-berlin.de.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

