Causal Context Connects Counterfactual Fairness
to Robust Prediction and Group Fairness

1

Jacy Reese Anthis1,2,3∗, Victor Veitch1
University of Chicago, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Sentience Institute

Abstract
Counterfactual fairness requires that a person would have been classified in the
same way by an AI or other algorithmic system if they had a different protected
class, such as a different race or gender. This is an intuitive standard, as reflected
in the U.S. legal system, but its use is limited because counterfactuals cannot be
directly observed in real-world data. On the other hand, group fairness metrics (e.g.,
demographic parity or equalized odds) are less intuitive but more readily observed.
In this paper, we use causal context to bridge the gaps between counterfactual
fairness, robust prediction, and group fairness. First, we motivate counterfactual
fairness by showing that there is not necessarily a fundamental trade-off between
fairness and accuracy because, under plausible conditions, the counterfactually fair
predictor is in fact accuracy-optimal in an unbiased target distribution. Second,
we develop a correspondence between the causal graph of the data-generating
process and which, if any, group fairness metrics are equivalent to counterfactual
fairness. Third, we show that in three common fairness contexts—measurement
error, selection on label, and selection on predictors—counterfactual fairness is
equivalent to demographic parity, equalized odds, and calibration, respectively.
Counterfactual fairness can sometimes be tested by measuring relatively simple
group fairness metrics.

1

Introduction

The increasing use of artificial intelligence and machine learning in high stakes contexts such as
healthcare, hiring, and financial lending has driven widespread interest in algorithmic fairness. A
canonical example is risk assessment in the U.S. judicial system, which became well-known after a
2016 investigation into the recidivism prediction tool COMPAS revealed significant racial disparities
[2]. There are several metrics one can use to operationalize fairness. These typically refer to a
protected class or sensitive label, such as race or gender, and define an equality of prediction rates
across the protected class. For example, demographic parity, also known as statistical parity or group
parity, requires equal classification rates across all levels of the protected class [7].
However, there is an open challenge of deciding which metrics to enforce in a given context [e.g., 24,
44]. Appropriateness can vary based on different ways to measure false positive and false negative
rates and the costs of such errors [19] as well as the potential trade-offs between fairness and accuracy
[11, 12, 21, 55]. Moreover, there are well-known technical results showing that it is impossible to
achieve the different fairness metrics simultaneously, even to an ϵ-approximation [10, 30], which
suggest that a practitioner’s context-specific perspective may be necessary to achieve satisfactory
outcomes [4].
A different paradigm, counterfactual fairness, requires that a prediction would have been the same if
the person had a different protected class [31]. This matches common intuitions and legal standards
∗

Corresponding author: anthis@uchicago.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

