Coordinating Distributed Example
Orders for Provably Accelerated Training
A. Feder Cooper⇤
Tiancheng Yuan

Wentao Guo⇤

Charlie F. Ruan

Yucheng Lu

Khiem Pham⇤
Christopher De Sa

Cornell University
{afc78, wg247, dkp45, ty373, cfr54, yl2967, cmd353}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Recent research on online Gradient Balancing (GraB) has revealed that there exist
permutation-based example orderings for SGD that are guaranteed to outperform
random reshuffling (RR). Whereas RR arbitrarily permutes training examples,
GraB leverages stale gradients from prior epochs to order examples — achieving
a provably faster convergence rate than RR. However, GraB is limited by design:
while it demonstrates an impressive ability to scale-up training on centralized data,
it does not naturally extend to modern distributed ML workloads. We therefore
propose Coordinated Distributed GraB (CD-GraB), which uses insights from prior
work on kernel thinning to translate the benefits of provably faster permutation-based
example ordering to distributed settings. With negligible overhead, CD-GraB
exhibits a linear speedup in convergence rate over centralized GraB and outperforms
distributed RR on a variety of benchmark tasks.

1

Introduction

Random reshuffling, which samples training-data examples without replacement, has become the de
facto example-ordering method in modern deep-learning libraries [34], given that it tends to accelerate
optimizer convergence in practice. However, some recent theoretical work has identified cases in
which random reshuffling can lead to data orderings that have a poor effect on convergence [8, 36, 49].
This has encouraged a line of research to investigate if there exist provably better permutation-based
orderings that afford greater scalability in training [22, 24, 31]. Notably, Lu et al. [24] connects
permuted-order SGD to the herding problem [16], and proposes the herding-based online Gradient
Balancing algorithm (GraB), which converges provably faster than random reshuffling, and does so
with little memory or computational overhead. In fact, in follow-on work, Cha et al. [6] proves that
GraB is optimal: in theory, GraB is the fastest possible permutation-based example ordering algorithm.
These results are very exciting, suggesting that GraB should unseat random reshuffling as the example
ordering method-of-choice for SGD; however, they only hold with respect to a single machine. GraB
is optimal in settings with centralized data, but does not naturally translate to problems of modern-ML
scale, which demand that training workloads be distributed across multiple parallel workers that each
only have access to a subset of the training data. This drawback raises an important question:
Can we simultaneously achieve the scalability benefits of distributed training and
provably faster permutation-based example ordering for SGD — both in theory and in practice?
In this work, we show that it is indeed possible to attain these twin objectives. To do so, we suggest
the online Coordinated Distributed Gradiant Balance algorithm (CD-GraB), which leverages insights
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
⇤

Equal contribution

