Equivariant Single View Pose Prediction
Via Induced and Restricted Representations
Owen Howell ⇤1 , David Klee2 , Ondrej Biza2 , Linfeng Zhao2 , and Robin Walters2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University
2
Khoury College of Computer Sciences, Northeastern University

Abstract
Learning about the three-dimensional world from two-dimensional images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision. An ideal neural network architecture
for such tasks would leverage the fact that objects can be rotated and translated
in three-dimensions to make predictions about novel images. However, imposing
SO(3)-equivariance on two-dimensional inputs is difficult because the group of
three-dimensional rotations does not have a natural action on the two-dimensional
plane. Specifically, it is possible that an element of SO(3) will rotate an image
out of the plane. We show that an algorithm that learns a three-dimensional
representation of the world from two-dimensional images must satisfy certain
consistency properties which we formulate as SO(2)-equivariance constraints. We
use the induced and restricted representations of SO(2) on SO(3) to construct
and classify architectures that satisfy these consistency constraints. We prove our
construction realizes all possible architectures that respect these constraints. We
show that three previously proposed neural architectures for 3D pose prediction
are special cases of our construction. We propose a new model that generalizes
previously considered methods and contains additional trainable parameters. We
test our architecture on three pose prediction tasks and achieve SOTA results on
both the PASCAL3D+ and SYMSOL pose estimation tasks.

1

Introduction

One of the fundamental problems in computer vision is learning representations of 3D objects from
2D images [1–3]. By understanding how image features correspond to a physical object, a model
can generalize better to novel views of the object, for instance, when estimating the pose of an
object. In general, neural networks that respect the symmetries of a problem are more noise robust
and data efficient, while also less prone to over-fitting [4]. Three-dimensional space has a natural
symmetry group of three-dimensional rotations and three-dimensional translations, SE(3). While
we would like to leverage this symmetry to design improved neural architectures, serious challenges
exist in incorporating 3D symmetry when applied to image data. Specifically, a projection of a threedimensional scene into a two-dimensional plane does not transform equivariantly under all elements
of SE(3). This is because there is no a priori model for how two-dimensional images transform under
out-of-plane object rotations. Cohen and Welling [5] showed how to design neural networks that
are explicitly SO(2)-equivariant and accept images as inputs. However, SO(2)-equivariant methods
ignore the fact that the group SO(3) acts on the space of pose configurations.
Equivariant neural networks are much more constrained than general multi-layer perceptrons. The
requirement of equivariance to a group G places strict restrictions on the allowed linear maps and the
⇤

howell.o@northeastern.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

