trajdata: A Unified Interface to Multiple
Human Trajectory Datasets
Boris Ivanovic1
Guanyu Song2
Igor Gilitschenski2
Marco Pavone1,3
1
2
3
NVIDIA Research
University of Toronto
Stanford University

Abstract
The field of trajectory forecasting has grown significantly in recent years, partially
owing to the release of numerous large-scale, real-world human trajectory datasets
for autonomous vehicles (AVs) and pedestrian motion tracking. While such datasets
have been a boon for the community, they each use custom and unique data formats
and APIs, making it cumbersome for researchers to train and evaluate methods
across multiple datasets. To remedy this, we present trajdata: a unified interface
to multiple human trajectory datasets. At its core, trajdata provides a simple,
uniform, and efficient representation and API for trajectory and map data. As
a demonstration of its capabilities, in this work we conduct a comprehensive
empirical evaluation of existing trajectory datasets, providing users with a rich
understanding of the data underpinning much of current pedestrian and AV motion
forecasting research, and proposing suggestions for future datasets from these
insights. trajdata is permissively licensed (Apache 2.0) and can be accessed
online at https://github.com/NVlabs/trajdata.

1

Introduction

Research in trajectory forecasting (i.e., predicting where an agent will be in the future) has grown
significantly in recent years, partially owing to the success of deep learning methods on the task [1];
availability of new large-scale, real-world datasets (see Fig. 1); and investment in its deployment
within domains such as autonomous vehicles (AVs) [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and social robots [10, 11, 12].
In addition, recent dataset releases have held associated prediction challenges which have periodically
benchmarked the field and spurned new developments [13, 14, 15, 16]. While this has been a boon for
research progress, each dataset has a unique data format and development API, making it cumbersome
for researchers to train and evaluate methods across multiple datasets. For instance, the recent Waymo
Open Motion dataset employs binary TFRecords [17] which differ significantly from nuScenes’
foreign-key format [18] and Woven Planet (Lyft) Level 5’s compressed zarr files [19]. The variety
of data formats has also hindered research on topics which either require or greatly benefit from
multi-dataset comparisons, such as prediction model generalization (e.g., [20, 21]). To remedy this,
we present trajdata: a unified interface to multiple human trajectory datasets.
Contributions. Our key contributions are threefold. First, we introduce a standard and simple data
format for trajectory and map data, as well as an extensible API to access and transform such data
for research use. Second, we conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation of existing trajectory
datasets, providing users with a richer understanding of the data underpinning much of pedestrian
and AV motion forecasting research. Finally, we leverage insights from these analyses to provide
suggestions for future dataset releases.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

