Hierarchical clustering with dot products
recovers hidden tree structure
Alexander Modell
Department of Mathematics
Imperial College London, UK
a.modell@imperial.ac.uk

Annie Gray
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol, UK
annie.gray@bristol.ac.uk
Patrick Rubin-Delanchy
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol, UK
patrick.rubin-delanchy@bristol.ac.uk

Nick Whiteley
School of Mathematics
University of Bristol, UK
nick.whiteley@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we offer a new perspective on the well established agglomerative clustering algorithm, focusing on recovery of hierarchical structure. We recommend a
simple variant of the standard algorithm, in which clusters are merged by maximum
average dot product and not, for example, by minimum distance or within-cluster
variance. We demonstrate that the tree output by this algorithm provides a bona fide
estimate of generative hierarchical structure in data, under a generic probabilistic
graphical model. The key technical innovations are to understand how hierarchical
information in this model translates into tree geometry which can be recovered
from data, and to characterise the benefits of simultaneously growing sample size
and data dimension. We demonstrate superior tree recovery performance with real
data over existing approaches such as UPGMA, Ward’s method, and HDBSCAN.

1

Introduction

Hierarchical structure is known to occur in many natural and man-made systems [32], and the problem
considered in this paper is how to recover this structure from data. Hierarchical clustering algorithms,
[25, 36, 37, 41] are very popular techniques which organise data into nested clusters, used routinely
by data scientists and machine learning researchers, and are easily accessible through open source
software packages such as scikit-learn [38]. We focus on perhaps the most popular family of such
techniques: agglomerative clustering [17], [24, Ch.3], in which clusters of data points are merged
recursively.
Agglomerative clustering methods are not model-based procedures, but rather simple algorithms.
Nevertheless, in this work we uncover a new perspective on agglomerative clustering by introducing
a general form of generative statistical model for the data, but without assuming specific parametric
families of distributions (e.g., Gaussian). In our model (section 2.1), hierarchy takes the form of a tree
defining the conditional independence structure of latent variables, using elementary concepts from
probabilistic graphical modelling [30, 28]. In a key innovation, we then augment this conditional
independence tree to form what we call a dendrogram, whose geometry is related to population
statistics of the data. The new insight which enables tree recovery in our setting (made precise and
explained in section 3) is that dot products between data vectors reveal heights of most recent common
ancestors in the dendrogram.
We suggest an agglomerative algorithm which merges clusters according to highest sample average
dot product (section 2.2). This is in contrast to many existing approaches which quantify dissimilarity
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

