Direct Diffusion Bridge using Data Consistency for
Inverse Problems
Hyungjin Chung1
Jeongsol Kim1
Jong Chul Ye2
1
Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering
2
Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{hj.chung, jeongsol, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Diffusion model-based inverse problem solvers have shown impressive performance, but are limited in speed, mostly as they require reverse diffusion sampling
starting from noise. Several recent works have tried to alleviate this problem by
building a diffusion process, directly bridging the clean and the corrupted for
specific inverse problems. In this paper, we first unify these existing works under
the name Direct Diffusion Bridges (DDB), showing that while motivated by different theories, the resulting algorithms only differ in the choice of parameters.
Then, we highlight a critical limitation of the current DDB framework, namely
that it does not ensure data consistency. To address this problem, we propose
a modified inference procedure that imposes data consistency without the need
for fine-tuning. We term the resulting method data Consistent DDB (CDDB),
which outperforms its inconsistent counterpart in terms of both perception and
distortion metrics, thereby effectively pushing the Pareto-frontier toward the optimum. Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art results on both evaluation
criteria, showcasing its superiority over existing methods. Code is open-sourced at
https://github.com/HJ-harry/CDDB

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [15, 38] have become the de facto standard of recent vision foundation models [32,
31, 33]. Among their capabilities is the use of diffusion models as generative priors that can serve
as plug-and-play building blocks for solving inverse problems in imaging [18, 38, 21, 5]. Diffusion
model-based inverse problem solvers (DIS) have shown remarkable performance and versatility, as
one can leverage the powerful generative prior regardless of the given problem at hand, scaling to
linear [18, 38, 21], non-linear [5, 36], and noisy problems [21, 5].
Although there are many advantages of DIS, one natural limitation is its slow inference. Namely, the
overall process of inference—starting from Gaussian noise and being repeatedly denoised to form
a clean image—is kept the same, although there are marginal changes made to keep the sampling
process consistent with respect to the given measurement. In such cases, the distance between the
reference Gaussian distribution and the data distribution remains large, requiring inevitably a large
number of sampling steps to achieve superior sample quality. On the other hand, the distribution
of the measurements is much more closely related to the distribution of the clean images. Thus,
intuitively, it would cost us much less compute if we were allowed to start the sampling process
directly from the measurement, as in the usual method of direct inversion in supervised learning
schemes.
Interestingly, several recent works aimed to tackle this problem under several different theoretical
motivations: 1) Schrödinger bridge with paired data [26], 2) a new formulation of the diffusion process
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

