DOSE: Diffusion Dropout with Adaptive Prior for
Speech Enhancement

Wenxin Tai1 , Yue Lei1 , Fan Zhou1,2∗, Goce Trajcevski3 , Ting Zhong1,2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Kashi Institute of Electronics and Information Industry
Iowa State University

Abstract
Speech enhancement (SE) aims to improve the intelligibility and quality of speech
in the presence of non-stationary additive noise. Deterministic deep learning
models have traditionally been used for SE, but recent studies have shown that
generative approaches, such as denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs),
can also be effective. However, incorporating condition information into DDPMs
for SE remains a challenge. We propose a model-agnostic method called DOSE that
employs two efficient condition-augmentation techniques to address this challenge,
based on two key insights: (1) We force the model to prioritize the condition
factor when generating samples by training it with dropout operation; (2) We inject
the condition information into the sampling process by providing an informative
adaptive prior. Experiments demonstrate that our approach yields substantial
improvements in high-quality and stable speech generation, consistency with
the condition factor, and inference efficiency. Codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/ICDM-UESTC/DOSE.

1

Introduction

Speech enhancement (SE) aims to improve the intelligibility and quality of speech, particularly in
scenarios where degradation is caused by non-stationary additive noise. It has significant practical
implications in various fields such as telecommunications [1], medicine [2], and entertainment [3].
Modern deep learning models are often used to learn a deterministic mapping from noisy to clean
speech. While deterministic models have long been regarded as more powerful in the field of SE,
recent advancements in generative models [4, 5] have significantly closed this gap.
One such generative approach is based on using denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [6,
7], which have been shown to effectively synthesize natural-sounding speech. Several diffusion
enhancement models have been developed [4, 5, 8], which try to learn a probability distribution over
the data and then generate clean speech conditioned on the noisy input. A key challenge in using
diffusion enhancement models is how to effectively incorporate condition information into learning
and generating faithful speech [9, 10, 8]. Previous works address this issue through designing specific
condition-injecting strategies [4, 9, 11] or devising complex network architectures [10, 5].
We conduct a thorough examination to understand the limitation of diffusion-based SE methods and
find that diffusion enhancement models are susceptible to condition collapse, where the primary cause
of inconsistent generation is the non-dominant position of the condition factor. We thus introduce
a new paradigm to effectively incorporate condition information into the diffusion enhancement
models. Specifically, we propose a Diffusion-drOpout Speech Enhancement method (DOSE), which
is a model-agnostic SE method (Figure 1) that employs two efficient condition-augmentation tech∗

Corresponding author: fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

