Incentives in Federated Learning: Equilibria,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms for Welfare Maximization

Aniket Murhekar1

Zhuowen Yuan1 Bhaskar Ray Chaudhury1 Bo Li1 Ruta Mehta1
1
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
{aniket2,zhuowen3,bryacha,lbo,rutameht}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a powerful scheme to facilitate the collaborative learning of models amongst a set of agents holding their own private
data. Although the agents benefit from the global model trained on shared data, by
participating in federated learning, they may also incur costs (related to privacy and
communication) due to data sharing. In this paper, we model a collaborative FL
framework, where every agent attempts to achieve an optimal trade-off between her
learning payoff and data sharing cost. We show the existence of Nash equilibrium
(NE) under mild assumptions on agents’ payoff and costs. Furthermore, we show
that agents can discover the NE via best response dynamics. However, some of the
NE may be bad in terms of overall welfare for the agents, implying little incentive
for some fraction of the agents to participate in the learning. To remedy this, we
design a budget-balanced mechanism involving payments to the agents, that ensures
that any p-mean welfare function of the agents’ utilities is maximized at NE. In
addition, we introduce a FL protocol FedBR-BG that incorporates our budgetbalanced mechanism, utilizing best response dynamics. Our empirical validation
on MNIST and CIFAR-10 substantiates our theoretical analysis. We show that
FedBR-BG outperforms the basic best-response-based protocol without additional
incentivization, the standard federated learning protocol FedAvg (McMahan et al.
[2017]), as well as a recent baseline MWFed (Blum et al. [2021]) in terms of
achieving superior p-mean welfare.

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as an effective collaborative training paradigm, where a
group of agents can jointly train a common machine learning model. The success of collaborative
learning paradigms is visible in the domains of autonomous vehicles (Elbir et al. [2020]), digital
healthcare (Dayan et al. [2021], Xu et al. [2021], Nvidia [2019]), multi-devices (Learning [2017]),
and biology (Bergen and Petryshen [2012]). Although such collaborative learning is immensely
beneficial to the agents, individually, they may not be incentivized to share their data. This is because
sharing data may incur costs attributed to bandwidth use, privacy leakage, and the use of computing
resources. In turn, high costs and low learning payoffs may cause some of the agents to drop out of
FL, resulting in subpar learning. As noted by Blum et al. [2021], the success of FL systems depends
on its ability to attract and retain a large number of federating agents.
Thus, it is crucial to achieve fairness and welfare guarantees for all participating agents.
This calls for game-theoretic modeling and analysis of the agent’s payoff and costs, and subsequent
mechanism design to incentivize participation. Towards the former, Blum et al. [2021] introduce a
model, where every agent receives a payoff from the collaboration measuring the “learning benefit”
the agent derives from the total data shared. In particular, when each agent i contributes si units of
data, the payoff for agent i is captured by ai (s), where s = ⟨s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ⟩ is the data contribution
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

