Simultaneous embedding of multiple attractor
manifolds in a recurrent neural network using
constrained gradient optimization

Haggai Agmon
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
and Stanford University, USA
haggai.agmon@mail.huji.ac.il

Yoram Burak
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
yoram.burak@elsc.huji.ac.il

Abstract
The storage of continuous variables in working memory is hypothesized to be
sustained in the brain by the dynamics of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) whose
steady states form continuous manifolds. In some cases, it is thought that the
synaptic connectivity supports multiple attractor manifolds, each mapped to a
different context or task. For example, in hippocampal area CA3, positions in
distinct environments are represented by distinct sets of population activity patterns,
each forming a continuum. It has been argued that the embedding of multiple
continuous attractors in a single RNN inevitably causes detrimental interference:
quenched noise in the synaptic connectivity disrupts the continuity of each attractor, replacing it by a discrete set of steady states that can be conceptualized as
lying on local minima of an abstract energy landscape. Consequently, population
activity patterns exhibit systematic drifts towards one of these discrete minima,
thereby degrading the stored memory over time. Here we show that it is possible
to dramatically attenuate these detrimental interference effects by adjusting the
synaptic weights. Synaptic weight adjustments are derived from a loss function
that quantifies the roughness of the energy landscape along each of the embedded
attractor manifolds. By minimizing this loss function, the stability of states can be
dramatically improved, without compromising the capacity.

Introduction
In the brain, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) involved in working memory tasks are thought to
be organized such that their dynamics exhibit multiple attractor states, enabling the maintenance of
persistent neural activity even in the absence of external stimuli. In tasks that require tracking of a
continuous external variable, these attractors are thought to form a continuous manifold of neural
activity patterns. In some well studied brain circuits in flies and mammals, neural activity patterns
have been shown to robustly and persistently reside along a single, low-dimensional manifold, even
when the neural activity is dissociated from external inputs to the network [2, 39, 21, 35, 9, 15]. In
other brain regions, however, the same neural circuitry is thought to support multiple low-dimensional
manifolds such that activity lies on one of these manifolds at any given time, depending on the context
or task. The prefrontal cortex, for example, is crucial for multiple working memory and evidence
accumulation tasks [14, 34, 46, 47], and it is thus thought that the synaptic connectivity in this
brain region supports multiple attractor manifolds. Naively, however, embedding multiple attractor
manifolds in a single RNN inevitably causes interference that degrades the network performance.
To be specific, we focus here on attractor models of spatial representation by hippocampal place
cells [28]. The synaptic connectivity in area CA3 is thought to support auto-associative dynamics,
and place cells in this area are often modeled as participating in a continuous attractor network
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

