Emergent Communication in Interactive Sketch
Question Answering

Zixing Lei1 , Yiming Zhang2 , Yuxin Xiong1 , Siheng Chen1,3∗
chezacarss@sjtu.edu.cn; yz2926@cornell.edu;
xyx1323@sjtu.edu.cn; sihengc@sjtu.edu.cn
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
2
Cornell University, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
Please draw this
kangaroo

Question: which
direction does the
kangaroo’s head go?

Hands
maybe crucial

Please
draw head!

Ok, Head
is crucial

It goes left!

Figure 1: In the proposed interactive sketch question answering (ISQA) task, two collaborative players are
interacting to answer a question about an image. This task emphasizes multi-round interaction, which is essential
in daily human communication.

Abstract
Vision-based emergent communication (EC) aims to learn to communicate through
sketches and demystify the evolution of human communication. Ironically, previous works neglect multi-round interaction, which is indispensable in human
communication. To fill this gap, we first introduce a novel Interactive Sketch
Question Answering (ISQA) task, where two collaborative players are interacting
through sketches to answer a question about an image in a multi-round manner.
To accomplish this task, we design a new and efficient interactive EC system,
which can achieve an effective balance among three evaluation factors, including
the question answering accuracy, drawing complexity and human interpretability.
Our experimental results including human evaluation demonstrate that multi-round
interactive mechanism facilitates targeted and efficient communication between
intelligent agents with decent human interpretability. The code is available at here.

1

Introduction

Emergent communication aims for a better understanding of human language evolution and is a
promising direction for achieving human-like communication between intelligent agents [1, 2, 3, 4].
An ultimate EC system allows intelligent agents to interact and exchange information with one
another, facilitating collaboration in the completion of downstream tasks. EC is expected to play an
important role in a wide range of applications, including multi-robot navigation [5], collaborative
perception [6] and human-centric AI applications [7].
Previous methods on EC can be divided into language-based EC and vision-based EC. Languagebased EC aims to encode information into message vectors or nature language for transmission
between intelligent agents [1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. Vision-based EC systems have been developed
with the aim of imitating the pictographic systems that were used in early human communication,
and have shown promising results in achieving human interpretability [13, 14]. A representative
vision-based EC approach [13] is inspired by the popular game “Draw & Guess," where the sender
acts as a sketcher while the receiver is responsible for making guesses. Sketch is a visible and
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

