Hardware Resilience Properties
of Text-Guided Image Classifiers

Syed Talal Wasim
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI
Salman Khan
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI

Kabila Haile Soboka
Independent
David Brooks
Harvard University

Abdulrahman Mahmoud
Harvard University
Gu-Yeon Wei
Harvard University

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method to enhance the reliability of image classification
models during deployment in the face of transient hardware errors. By utilizing
enriched text embeddings derived from GPT-3 with question prompts per class
and CLIP pretrained text encoder, we investigate their impact as an initialization
for the classification layer. Our approach achieves a remarkable 5.5× average
increase in hardware reliability (and up to 14×) across various architectures in the
most critical layer, with minimal accuracy drop (0.3% on average) compared to
baseline PyTorch models. Furthermore, our method seamlessly integrates with
any image classification backbone, showcases results across various network
architectures, decreases parameter and FLOPs overhead, and follows a consistent
training recipe. This research offers a practical and efficient solution to bolster the
robustness of image classification models against hardware failures, with potential
implications for future studies in this domain. Our code and models are released
at https://github.com/TalalWasim/TextGuidedResilience.

1

Introduction

As transistors in hardware shrink in size, they become more susceptible to random bit-flips from
environmental factors such as cosmic particle strikes [44], voltage droops [53], manufacturing
defects [55], and/or aging effects [36]. This is particularly noticeable at scale, where even small error
rates in hardware components can cause data corruptions that affect large-scale corporations such
as Google [23] or Meta [13], prompting these corporations to deploy major resources to address the
issue [56]. The problem of silent data corruptions, or SDCs, is further exacerbated in safety-critical
domains (such as in autonomous vehicles, medical devices, or robotics), where even a few errors can
lead to fatal and undesirable consequences.
At the same time, the rise of ML algorithms proliferating data centers and safety-critical domains
means that hardware robustness to this particular domain is extremely important. Recent work
has shown that as little as a single (non-adversarial) bit flip during a DNN’s inference can cause
wrong predictions by the model [34]. In the context of a self-driving car, this can potentially lead to
consequential downstream decision making which can be fatal, such as accelerating instead of braking
(e.g., by classifying a truck as a bird for instance) [34]. Thus, it is imperative to understand and mitigate
the effect of hardware bit flips on an executing software application, where our focus here is on vision
classification for its broad applicability and importance.
The current state-of-the-art technique to mitigate hardware errors is full modular hardware redundancy.
This is the approach taken recently by Tesla in their Full Self-Driving (FSD) chip, where they employ a
fully redundant co-processor with additional wiring, logic, and packaging to run two parallel inferences
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

