GraspGF: Learning Score-based Grasping Primitive
for Human-assisting Dexterous Grasping

Tianhao Wu 1,2,3* , Mingdong Wu 1,3* , Jiyao Zhang1,2,3 , Yunchong Gan1 , Hao Dong1,3 †
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{thwu,jiyaozhang}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {wmingd,yunchong,hao.dong}@pku.edu.cn
1

Abstract
The use of anthropomorphic robotic hands for assisting individuals in situations
where human hands may be unavailable or unsuitable has gained significant importance. In this paper, we propose a novel task called human-assisting dexterous
grasping that aims to train a policy for controlling a robotic hand’s fingers to
assist users in grasping objects. Unlike conventional dexterous grasping, this task
presents a more complex challenge as the policy needs to adapt to diverse user
intentions, in addition to the object’s geometry. We address this challenge by
proposing an approach consisting of two sub-modules: a hand-object-conditional
grasping primitive called Grasping Gradient Field (GraspGF), and a historyconditional residual policy. GraspGF learns ‘how’ to grasp by estimating the
gradient from a success grasping example set, while the residual policy determines ‘when’ and at what speed the grasping action should be executed based
on the trajectory history. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of our
proposed method compared to baselines, highlighting user awareness and practicality in real-world applications. The codes and demonstrations can be viewed at
https://sites.google.com/view/graspgf.

1

Introduction

step i
step n
The significance of human hands in everyday step 1
life cannot be overstated. However, there are situations where they may not always be available,
especially in scenarios where an individual may
have upper limb loss or need to interact with
hazardous objects. In such instances, utilising step 1
step n
step i
an anthropomorphic dexterous robotic hand for
…
…
assistance can be a viable option [1]. Such a dexterous hand possesses a high degree of freedom, a)
allowing it to handle diverse daily tasks [2, 3, 4], b)
Objects
How to grasp?
When to grasp?
given that many everyday objects are designed
trajectory 2
to match the structure of the human hand. This trajectory 1
pose 2
…
inspired us to propose a novel task called human✓
pose 1
assisting dexterous grasping, in which a policy
is trained to assist users with upper limb loss
in grasping objects by controlling the robotic Figure 1: a) Demonstration of human-assisting dexterous grasping. b) Challenges of our setting.
hand’s fingers, as illustrated in Figure 1a.

Traditional teleoperation methods [5, 6] are unsuitable for assisting upper limb amputees in grasping
because no information about the human fingers can be accessed. Compared to conventional dexterous
*: equal contribution, †: corresponding author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

