ASL Citizen: A Community-Sourced Dataset for
Advancing Isolated Sign Language Recognition

Aashaka Desaiβ Lauren Bergerγ Fyodor O. Minakovα Vanessa Milanα
Chinmay Singhα Kriston Pumphreyγ Richard E. Ladnerβ
Hal Daumé IIIα,δ Alex X. Luα Naomi Caselliγ Danielle Braggα
α

University of Washington γ Boston University δ University of Maryland
{hal3,lualex,dabragg}@microsoft.com
{aashakad,ladner}@cs.washington.edu, nkc@bu.edu

Microsoft Research

β

Abstract
Sign languages are used as a primary language by approximately 70 million D/deaf
people world-wide. However, most communication technologies operate in spoken
and written languages, creating inequities in access. To help tackle this problem, we
release ASL Citizen, the first crowdsourced Isolated Sign Language Recognition
(ISLR) dataset, collected with consent and containing 83,399 videos for 2,731
distinct signs filmed by 52 signers in a variety of environments. We propose
that this dataset be used for sign language dictionary retrieval for American Sign
Language (ASL), where a user demonstrates a sign to their webcam to retrieve
matching signs from a dictionary. Through our generalizable baselines, we show
that training supervised machine learning classifiers with our dataset achieves
competitive performance on metrics relevant for dictionary retrieval, with 63%
accuracy and a recall-at-10 of 91%, evaluated entirely on videos of users who are
not present in the training or validation sets.

1

Introduction

Communication in sign language is an essential part of many people’s lives. As 70 million deaf
people world-wide primarily use a sign language [57], the meaningful inclusion of signing deaf
people requires widespread access to sign languages both in individual communities and society-wide
(§2.1). Towards this, over 100,000 students per year enroll in American Sign Language (ASL) classes
[42], and the number of UN countries mandating provision of services in sign language has grown
from 4 in 1995 to 71 in 2021 [56].
Despite increasing support for equal access to sign language, most existing information resources (like
search engines, news sites, or social media) are written, and do not offer equitable access. Requiring
signing deaf people to navigate information in a written language like English necessarily means
forcing them to operate in a different, and potentially non-native language. Adapting resources for
sign language input and output introduces significant technical challenges, which have motivated the
development of computational methods for sign language recognition, generation, and translation [36].
In this work, we focus on ASL dictionary retrieval. Many existing ASL dictionaries catalog signs
with English glosses: an out-of-context translation of a sign into one or more English words (e.g.,
LOBSTER , CLIMB _ LADDER or HAD _ ENOUGH ). However, English lookup relies on knowing the
English translation, and on a 1:1 relationship with English words, which often does not exist.
Demonstrating a sign to look it up may be more natural, but is computationally more challenging
due to the rich visual format and linguistic complexities. We seek to help address this problem of
video-based dictionary retrieval, where a person demonstrates a single sign by video, and the system
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

