Tree Variational Autoencoders
Laura Manduchi∗, Moritz Vandenhirtz∗, Alain Ryser, Julia E. Vogt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zurich
Switzerland

Abstract
We propose Tree Variational Autoencoder (TreeVAE), a new generative hierarchical clustering model that learns a flexible tree-based posterior distribution over
latent variables. TreeVAE hierarchically divides samples according to their intrinsic characteristics, shedding light on hidden structures in the data. It adapts its
architecture to discover the optimal tree for encoding dependencies between latent
variables. The proposed tree-based generative architecture enables lightweight
conditional inference and improves generative performance by utilizing specialized
leaf decoders. We show that TreeVAE uncovers underlying clusters in the data and
finds meaningful hierarchical relations between the different groups on a variety
of datasets, including real-world imaging data. We present empirically that TreeVAE provides a more competitive log-likelihood lower bound than the sequential
counterparts. Finally, due to its generative nature, TreeVAE is able to generate new
samples from the discovered clusters via conditional sampling.

1

Introduction

Discovering structure and hierarchies in the data has been a long-standing goal in machine learning
(Bishop, 2006; Bengio et al., 2012; Jordan & Mitchell, 2015). Interpretable supervised methods, such
as decision trees (Zhou & Feng, 2017; Tanno et al., 2019), have proven to be successful in unveiling
hierarchical relationships within data. However, the expense of annotating large quantities of data has
resulted in a surge of interest in unsupervised approaches (LeCun et al., 2015). Hierarchical clustering
(Ward, 1963) offers an unsupervised path to find hidden groups in the data and their hierarchical
relationship (R. J. G. B. Campello et al., 2015). Due to its versatility, interpretability, and ability to
uncover meaningful patterns in complex data, hierarchical clustering has been widely used in a variety
of applications, including phylogenetics (Sneath & Sokal, 1962), astrophysics (McConnachie et al.,
2018), and federated learning (Briggs et al., 2020). Similar to how the human brain automatically
categorizes and connects objects based on shared attributes, hierarchical clustering algorithms
construct a dendrogram - a tree-like structure of clusters - that organizes data into nested groups
based on their similarity. Despite its potential, hierarchical clustering has taken a step back in light of
recent advances in self-supervised deep learning (Chen et al., 2020), and only a few deep learning
based methods have been proposed in recent years (Goyal et al., 2017; Mautz et al., 2020).
Deep latent variable models (Kingma & Welling, 2019), a class of generative models, have emerged
as powerful frameworks for unsupervised learning and they have been extensively used to uncover
hidden structures in the data (Dilokthanakul et al., 2016; Manduchi et al., 2021). They leverage the
flexibility of neural networks to capture complex patterns and generate meaningful representations of
high-dimensional data. By incorporating latent variables, these models can uncover the underlying
factors of variation of the data, making them a valuable tool for understanding and modeling complex
data distributions. In recent years, a variety of deep generative methods have been proposed to
incorporate more complex posterior distributions by modeling structural sequential dependencies
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence to {laura.manduchi,moritz.vandenhirtz}@inf.ethz.ch

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

