DiViNeT: 3D Reconstruction from Disparate Views via
Neural Template Regularization

Aditya Vora1
1

Akshay Gadi Patil1

Simon Fraser University

Hao Zhang1,2
2

Amazon

Abstract
We present a volume rendering-based neural surface reconstruction method that
takes as few as three disparate RGB images as input. Our key idea is to regularize
the reconstruction, which is severely ill-posed and leaving significant gaps between
the sparse views, by learning a set of neural templates to act as surface priors. Our
method, coined DiViNet, operates in two stages. It first learns the templates, in the
form of 3D Gaussian functions, across different scenes, without 3D supervision. In
the reconstruction stage, our predicted templates serve as anchors to help “stitch”
the surfaces over sparse regions. We demonstrate that our approach is not only
able to complete the surface geometry but also reconstructs surface details to a
reasonable extent from a few disparate input views. On the DTU and BlendedMVS
datasets, our approach achieves the best reconstruction quality among existing
methods in the presence of such sparse views and performs on par, if not better,
with competing methods when dense views are employed as inputs.

1

Introduction

3D reconstruction from multi-view images is a fundamental task in computer vision. Recently, with
the rapid advances in neural fields [51, 31] and differentiable rendering [18], many methods have
been developed for neural 3D reconstruction [34, 55, 23, 28, 48, 22, 54, 36, 62, 50]. Among them,
volume rendering-based methods have achieved impressive results. Exemplified by neural radiance
fields (NeRF) [31], these approaches typically employ compact MLPs to encode scene geometry and
appearance, with network training subjected to volume rendering losses in RGB space.
The main drawback of most of these methods is the requirement of dense views with considerable
image overlap, which may be impractical in real-world settings. When the input views are sparse,
these methods often fail to reconstruct accurate geometries due to radiance ambiguity [61, 49]. Despite
employing smoothness priors during SDF/occupancy prediction as an inductive bias [34, 55, 48, 54],
the limited overlap between regions in the input images causes little-to-no correlation to the actual
3D surface, resulting in holes and distortions, among other artifacts, in the reconstruction.
Several recent attempts have been made on neural reconstruction from sparse views. SparseNeuS [25]
learns generalizable priors across scenes by constructing geometry encoding volumes at two resolutions in a coarse-to-fine and cascading manner. While the method can handle as few as 2 or 3
input images, the corresponding views must be sufficiently close to ensure significant image overlap
and quality reconstruction. MonoSDF [58] relaxes on the image overlap requirement and relies on
geometric monocular priors such as depth and normal cues to boost sparse-view reconstruction. However, such cues are not always easy to obtain, e.g., MonoSDF relied on a pre-trained depth estimation
model requiring 3D ground-truth (GT) data. Moreover, depth prediction networks often rely on cost
volumes [52, 14] which are memory expensive and thus restricted to predicting low-resolution depth
maps. Because of this, the results obtained typically lack fine geometric details [58].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

