Private (Stochastic) Non-Convex Optimization
Revisited: Second-Order Stationary Points and
Excess Risks
Arun Ganesh
Google Research
arunganesh@google.com

Daogao Liu
University of Washington∗
dgliu@uw.edu

Sewoong Oh
University of Washington and Google Research
sewoong@cs.washington.edu

Abhradeep Thakurta
Google DeepMind
athakurta@google.com

Abstract
We reconsider the challenge of non-convex optimization under differential privacy
constraint. Building upon the previous variance-reduced algorithm SpiderBoost,
we propose a novel framework that employs two types of gradient oracles: one
that estimates the gradient at a single point and a more cost-effective option
that calculates the gradient difference between two points. Our framework can
ensure continuous accuracy of gradient estimations and subsequently enhances
the rates of identifying second-order stationary points. Additionally, we consider
a more challenging task by attempting to locate the global minima of a nonconvex objective via the exponential mechanism without almost any assumptions.
Our preliminary results suggest that the regularized exponential mechanism can
effectively emulate previous empirical and population risk bounds, negating the
need for smoothness assumptions for algorithms with polynomial running time.
Furthermore, with running time factors excluded, the exponential mechanism
demonstrates promising population risk bound performance, and we provide a
nearly matching lower bound.

1

Introduction

Differential privacy [19] is a standard privacy guarantee for training machine learning models. Given
a randomized algorithm A : P ∗ → R, where P is a data domain and R is a range of outputs, we say
A is (ε, δ)-differentially private (DP) for some ε ≥ 0 and δ ∈ [0, 1] if for any neighboring datasets
D, D0 ∈ P ∗ that differ in at most one element and any R ⊆ R, the distribution of the outcome of the
algorithm, e.g., pair of models trained on the respective datasets, are similar:
Pr [x ∈ R] ≤ eε Pr 0 [x ∈ R] + δ.
x∼A(D)

x∼A(D )

Smaller ε and δ imply the distributions are closer; hence, an adversary accessing the trained model
cannot tell with high confidence whether an example x was in the training dateset. Given this measure
of privacy, we consider the problem of optimizing a non-convex loss while ensuring a desired level of
privacy. In particular, suppose we are given a dataset D = {z1 , . . . , zn } drawn i.i.d. from underlying
distribution P. Each loss function f (·; z) : K → R is G-Lipschitz over the convex set K ⊂ Rd of
diameter D. Let the population
risk function be FP (x) := Ez∼P [f (x;
P
Pz)] and the empirical risk
1
function be FD (x) := n1 z∈D f (x; z). We also denote FS (x) := |S|
z∈S f (x; z) for S ⊆ D.
∗

Most of this work was done while the author was an intern at Google.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

