A Holistic Approach to Unifying Automatic Concept
Extraction and Concept Importance Estimation
Thomas Fel?,1,2 , Victor Boutin?1,2 ,
Mazda Moayeri , Rémi Cadène1 , Louis Bethune2 Léo Andéol2 , Mathieu Chalvidal1,2 ,
Thomas Serre1,2
1
Carney Institute for Brain Science, Brown University
2
Artificial and Natural Intelligence Toulouse Institute
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
{thomas_fel,victor_boutin}@brown.edu
3

Abstract
In recent years, concept-based approaches have emerged as some of the most
promising explainability methods to help us interpret the decisions of Artificial
Neural Networks (ANNs). These methods seek to discover intelligible visual
“concepts” buried within the complex patterns of ANN activations in two key steps:
(1) concept extraction followed by (2) importance estimation. While these two
steps are shared across methods, they all differ in their specific implementations.
Here, we introduce a unifying theoretical framework that recast the first step –
concept extraction problem – as a special case of dictionary learning, and we
formalize the second step – concept importance estimation – as a more general
form of attribution method. This framework offers several advantages as it allows
us: (i) to propose new evaluation metrics for comparing different concept extraction
approaches; (ii) to leverage modern attribution methods and evaluation metrics to
extend and systematically evaluate state-of-the-art concept-based approaches and
importance estimation techniques; (iii) to derive theoretical guarantees regarding
the optimality of such methods.
We further leverage our framework to try to tackle a crucial question in explainability: how to efficiently identify clusters of data points that are classified based
on a similar shared strategy. To illustrate these findings and to highlight the main
strategies of a model, we introduce a visual representation called the strategic cluster graph. Finally, we present
Lens, a dedicated website that offers a complete
compilation of these visualizations for all classes of the ImageNet dataset.

1

Introduction

The black-box nature of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) poses a significant hurdle to their
deployment in industries that must comply with stringent ethical and regulatory standards [1]. In
response to this challenge, eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) focuses on developing new tools
to help humans better understand how ANNs arrive at their decisions [2, 3]. Among the large array of
methods available, attribution methods have become the go-to approach [4–14]. They yield heatmaps
in order to highlight the importance of each input feature (or group of features [15]) for driving a
model’s decision. However, there is growing consensus that these attribution methods fall short of
providing meaningful explanations [16–19] as revealed by multiple user studies [20–25, 20]. It has
been suggested that for explainability methods to become usable by human users, they need to be able
to highlight not just the location of important features within an image (i.e., the where information)
but also their semantic content (i.e., the what information).
? The authors contributed equally.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

