A Framework for Fast and Stable Representations of
Multiparameter Persistent Homology Decompositions

David Loiseaux
DataShape
Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur
Biot, France

Mathieu Carrière
DataShape
Centre Inria d’Université Côte d’Azur
Biot, France

Andrew J. Blumberg
Irving Institute for Cancer Dynamics
Columbia University
New-York, NY, USA

Abstract
Topological data analysis (TDA) is an area of data science that focuses on using
invariants from algebraic topology to provide multiscale shape descriptors for
geometric data sets, such as graphs and point clouds. One of the most important
such descriptors is persistent homology, which encodes the change in shape as a
filtration parameter changes; a typical parameter is the feature scale. For many data
sets, it is useful to simultaneously vary multiple filtration parameters, for example
feature scale and density. While the theoretical properties of single parameter
persistent homology are well understood, less is known about the multiparameter
case. In particular, a central question is the problem of representing multiparameter
persistent homology by elements of a vector space for integration with standard
machine learning algorithms. Existing approaches to this problem either ignore
most of the multiparameter information to reduce to the one-parameter case or
are heuristic and potentially unstable in the face of noise. In this article, we
introduce a new general representation framework that leverages recent results on
decompositions of multiparameter persistent homology. This framework is rich in
information, fast to compute, and encompasses previous approaches. Moreover, we
establish theoretical stability guarantees under this framework as well as efficient
algorithms for practical computation, making this framework an applicable and
versatile tool for analyzing geometric data. We validate our stability results and
algorithms with numerical experiments that demonstrate statistical convergence,
prediction accuracy, and fast running times on several real data sets.

1

Introduction

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) [8] is a methodology for analyzing data sets using multiscale shape
descriptors coming from algebraic topology. There has been intense interest in the field in the last
decade, since topological features promise to allow practitioners to compute and encode information
that classical approaches do not capture. Moreover, TDA rests on solid theoretical grounds, with
guarantees accompanying many of its methods and descriptors. TDA has proved useful in a wide
variety of application areas, including computer graphics [13, 33], computational biology [34], and
material science [6, 35], among many others.
The main tool of TDA is persistent homology. In its most standard form, one is given a finite
metric space X (e.g., a finite set of points and their pairwise distances) and a continuous function
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

