Joint processing of linguistic properties in brains and
language models

1

Subba Reddy Oota1,2 , Manish Gupta3 , Mariya Toneva2
Inria Bordeaux, France, 2 MPI for Software Systems, Saarbrücken, Germany, 3 Microsoft, India
subba-reddy.oota@inria.fr, gmanish@microsoft.com, mtoneva@mpi-sws.org

Abstract
Language models have been shown to be very effective in predicting brain recordings of subjects experiencing complex language stimuli. For a deeper understanding
of this alignment, it is important to understand the correspondence between the
detailed processing of linguistic information by the human brain versus language
models. We investigate this correspondence via a direct approach, in which we
eliminate information related to specific linguistic properties in the language model
representations and observe how this intervention affects the alignment with fMRI
brain recordings obtained while participants listened to a story. We investigate
a range of linguistic properties (surface, syntactic, and semantic) and find that
the elimination of each one results in a significant decrease in brain alignment.
Specifically, we find that syntactic properties (i.e. Top Constituents and Tree Depth)
have the largest effect on the trend of brain alignment across model layers. These
findings provide clear evidence for the role of specific linguistic information in the
alignment between brain and language models, and open new avenues for mapping
the joint information processing in both systems. We make the code publicly
available1 .

1

Introduction

Language models that have been pretrained for the next word prediction task using millions of text
documents can significantly predict brain recordings of people comprehending language (Wehbe
et al., 2014; Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux & King, 2020; Schrimpf et al.,
2021; Goldstein et al., 2022). Understanding the reasons behind the observed similarities between
language comprehension in machines and brains can lead to more insight into both systems.
While such similarities have been observed at a coarse level, it is not yet clear whether and how the
two systems align in their information processing pipeline. This pipeline has been studied separately
in both systems. In natural language processing (NLP), researchers use probing tasks to uncover
the parts of the model that encode specific linguistic properties (e.g. sentence length, tree depth,
top constituents, tense, bigram shift, subject number, object number) (Adi et al., 2016; Hupkes
et al., 2018; Conneau et al., 2018; Jawahar et al., 2019; Rogers et al., 2020). These techniques have
revealed a hierarchy of information processing in multi-layered language models that progresses from
simple to complex with increased depth. In cognitive neuroscience, traditional experiments study the
processing of specific linguistic properties by carefully controlling the experimental stimulus and
observing the locations or time points of processing in the brain that are affected the most by the
controlled stimulus (Hauk & Pulvermüller, 2004; Pallier et al., 2011).
More recently, researchers have begun to study the alignment of these brain language regions with
the layers of language models, and found that the best alignment was achieved in the middle layers of
these models (Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux & King, 2020). This has been
1

https://github.com/subbareddy248/lingprop-brain-alignment

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

