Long-Term Fairness with Unknown Dynamics

Tongxin Yin∗
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
tyin@umich.edu

Reilly Raab∗
Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
reilly@ucsc.edu

Mingyan Liu
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
mingyan@umich.edu

Yang Liu
University of California, Santa Cruz
ByteDance Research
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
yangliu@ucsc.edu

Abstract
While machine learning can myopically reinforce social inequalities, it may also be
used to dynamically seek equitable outcomes. In this paper, we formalize long-term
fairness as an online reinforcement learning problem for a policy affecting human
populations. This formulation accommodates dynamical control objectives, such
as achieving equitable population states, that cannot be incorporated into static
formulations of fairness. We demonstrate that algorithmic solutions to the proposed
fairness problem can adapt to unknown dynamics and, by sacrificing short-term
incentives, drive the policy-population system towards more desirable equilibria.
For the proposed setting, we develop an algorithm that adapts recent work in online
learning and prove that this algorithm achieves simultaneous probabilistic bounds
on cumulative loss and cumulative violations of fairness. In the classification setting
subject to group fairness, we compare our proposed algorithm to several baselines,
including the repeated retraining of myopic or distributionally robust classifiers,
and to a deep reinforcement learning algorithm that lacks fairness guarantees. Our
experiments model human populations according to evolutionary game theory and
integrate real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

As machine learning (ML) algorithms are deployed for tasks with real-world social consequences
(e.g., school admissions, loan approval, medical interventions, etc.), the possibility exists for runaway
social inequalities (Crawford and Calo, 2016; Chaney et al., 2018; Fuster et al., 2018; Ensign
et al., 2018). While “fairness” has become a salient ethical concern in contemporary research, the
closed-loop dynamics of real-world systems with feedback, i.e., comprising ML-driven decisions
and populations that mutually adapt to each other (Fig. 5 in the supplementary material) remain
poorly understood. We assert that realistic scenarios are often described by fundamentally unknown
dynamics: Even with models of human behavior based on rational behavior or evolutionary game
theory, utilities and risk-preferences are generally unknown or uncertain. For this reason, we advocate
for dynamics-agnostic formulations of fairness, for which reinforcement learning is a natural fit.
In this paper, our primary contribution is to consider the problem of long-term fairness, or algorithmic fairness in the context of a dynamically responsive population, as a reinforcement learning (RL)
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

