Towards a Unified Analysis of Kernel-based Methods
Under Covariate Shift

1

Xingdong Feng1 , Xin He1 , Caixing Wang1∗, Chao Wang1 , Jingnan Zhang2
School of Statistics and Management, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
2
International Institute of Finance, School of Management,
University of Science and Technology of China
{feng.xingdong, he.xin17}@mail.shufe.edu.cn
{wang.caixing, wang.chao}@stu.shufe.edu.cn
jnzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Covariate shift occurs prevalently in practice, where the input distributions of the
source and target data are substantially different. Despite its practical importance in
various learning problems, most of the existing methods only focus on some specific
learning tasks and are not well validated theoretically and numerically. To tackle
this problem, we propose a unified analysis of general nonparametric methods in a
reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) under covariate shift. Our theoretical
results are established for a general loss belonging to a rich loss function family,
which includes many commonly used methods as special cases, such as mean
regression, quantile regression, likelihood-based classification, and margin-based
classification. Two types of covariate shift problems are the focus of this paper and
the sharp convergence rates are established for a general loss function to provide
a unified theoretical analysis, which concurs with the optimal results in literature
where the squared loss is used. Extensive numerical studies on synthetic and real
examples confirm our theoretical findings and further illustrate the effectiveness of
our proposed method.

1

Introduction

Covariate shift is a phenomenon that commonly occurs in machine learning, where the distribution of
input features (covariates) changes between the source (or training) and target (or test) data, while
the conditional distribution of output values given covariates remains unchanged (Shimodaira, 2000;
Pan & Yang, 2010). Such a phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 1 where the learned predictive
function from the source data may significantly differ from the true function. Thus, the prediction
performance can be largely degraded since the predictive function has not been trained on data
that accurately represents the target environment. Covariate shift can arise in a variety of domains,
including medicine and healthcare (Wei et al., 2015; Hajiramezanali et al., 2018), remote sensing
(Tuia et al., 2011), and natural language and speech processing (Yamada et al., 2009; Fei & Liu, 2015).
Various factors contribute to covariate shift, such as data sampling bias (e.g., patient demographics
in healthcare applications), changes in the studied population (e.g., vocabulary evolution in natural
language processing), or measurement and observational errors (e.g., sensor noise or calibration errors
in the sensor domain). Compared to the well-studied supervised learning without such a distribution
mismatch (Györfi et al., 2002), there still exists some gap in both theoretically and numerically
understanding the influence of the covariate shift under various kernel-based learning problems.
∗
Caixing Wang is the corresponding author and all the authors contributed equally to this paper and their
names are listed in alphabetical ordering.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

