Dual Mean-Teacher: An Unbiased Semi-Supervised
Framework for Audio-Visual Source Localization
Yuxin Guo1,2,3 , Shijie Ma1,2 , Hu Su1,2 , Zhiqing Wang1,2 , Yuhao Zhao1,2 , Wei Zou1,2∗
Siyang Sun3 , Yun Zheng3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS),
Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{guoyuxin2021, wei.zou}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Audio-Visual Source Localization (AVSL) aims to locate sounding objects within
video frames given the paired audio clips. Existing methods predominantly rely on
self-supervised contrastive learning of audio-visual correspondence. Without any
bounding-box annotations, they struggle to achieve precise localization, especially
for small objects, and suffer from blurry boundaries and false positives. Moreover,
the naive semi-supervised method is poor in fully leveraging the information of
abundant unlabeled data. In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised learning framework for AVSL, namely Dual Mean-Teacher (DMT), comprising two
teacher-student structures to circumvent the confirmation bias issue. Specifically,
two teachers, pre-trained on limited labeled data, are employed to filter out noisy
samples via the consensus between their predictions, and then generate high-quality
pseudo-labels by intersecting their confidence maps. The sufficient utilization of
both labeled and unlabeled data and the proposed unbiased framework enable DMT
to outperform current state-of-the-art methods by a large margin, with CIoU of
90.4% and 48.8% on Flickr-SoundNet and VGG-Sound Source, obtaining 8.9%,
9.6% and 4.6%, 6.4% improvements over self- and semi-supervised methods respectively, given only < 3% positional-annotations. We also extend our framework
to some existing AVSL methods and consistently boost their performance. Our
code is available at https://github.com/gyx-gloria/DMT.

1

Introduction

Visual and auditory perception is crucial for observing the world. When we hear a sound, our
brain will extract semantic information and locate the sounding source. In this work, we focus on
Audio-Visual Source Localization (AVSL) [1, 2], with the purpose of accurately locating sounding
objects in frames based on their paired audio clips. Beyond this scope, AVSL also plays a crucial
role in many downstream tasks including environmental perception [3], navigation [4, 5], sound
separation [6, 7] and event localization [8]. Therefore, accurate localization is of utmost importance.
In the literature of AVSL [9, 10, 11], the conventional paradigm is to employ self-supervised
contrastive learning based on audio-visual correspondence. However, most of them suffer from some
serious challenges. From the performance perspective, there are issues such as blurry boundaries,
inability to converge to specific objects, and the predicted sounding regions that are too large to
accurately locate objects, especially small objects. In terms of the learning stage, a single model
alone is unable to recognize and filter out false positives, i.e., noisy samples with no visible sounding
sources, which could affect the entire learning process of the model.
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

