Transient Neural Radiance Fields
for Lidar View Synthesis and 3D Reconstruction

Anagh Malik1,2
anagh@cs.toronto.edu

Parsa Mirdehghan1,2
parsa@cs.toronto.edu

Kiriakos N. Kutulakos1,2
kyros@cs.toronto.edu
1

Sotiris Nousias1
sotiris@cs.toronto.edu

David B. Lindell1,2
lindell@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto

2

Vector Institute

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have become a ubiquitous tool for modeling scene
appearance and geometry from multiview imagery. Recent work has also begun to
explore how to use additional supervision from lidar or depth sensor measurements
in the NeRF framework. However, previous lidar-supervised NeRFs focus on
rendering conventional camera imagery and use lidar-derived point cloud data as
auxiliary supervision; thus, they fail to incorporate the underlying image formation
model of the lidar. Here, we propose a novel method for rendering transient NeRFs
that take as input the raw, time-resolved photon count histograms measured by a
single-photon lidar system, and we seek to render such histograms from novel views.
Different from conventional NeRFs, the approach relies on a time-resolved version
of the volume rendering equation to render the lidar measurements and capture
transient light transport phenomena at picosecond timescales. We evaluate our
method on a first-of-its-kind dataset of simulated and captured transient multiview
scans from a prototype single-photon lidar. Overall, our work brings NeRFs to
a new dimension of imaging at transient timescales, newly enabling rendering
of transient imagery from novel views. Additionally, we show that our approach
recovers improved geometry and conventional appearance compared to point cloudbased supervision when training on few input viewpoints. Transient NeRFs may be
especially useful for applications which seek to simulate raw lidar measurements
for downstream tasks in autonomous driving, robotics, and remote sensing.

1

Introduction

The ability to sense and reconstruct 3D appearance and geometry is critical to applications in
vision, graphics, and beyond. Lidar sensors [1] are of particular interest for this task due to their
high sensitivity to arriving photons and their extremely high temporal resolution; as such, they
are being deployed in systems for 3D imaging in smart phone cameras [2], autonomous driving,
and remote sensing [3]. Recent work has also begun to explore how additional supervision from
lidar [4] or depth sensor measurements [5] can be incorporated into the NeRF framework to improve
novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. Existing NeRF-based methods that use lidar [4] are
limited to rendering conventional RGB images, and use lidar point clouds (i.e., pre-processed lidar
measurements) as auxiliary supervision rather than rendering the raw data that lidar systems actually
collect. Specifically, lidars capture transient images—time-resolved picosecond- or nanosecond-scale
measurements of a pulse of light travelling to a scene point and back. We consider the problem
of how to synthesize such transients from novel viewpoints. In particular, we seek a method that
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

