Three Iterations of (d − 1)-WL Test Distinguish Non
Isometric Clouds of d-dimensional Points
Valentino Delle Rose1,2 , Alexander Kozachinskiy1,3 , Cristóbal Rojas1,2
Mircea Petrache1,2,4 , Pablo Barceló1,2,3

2

1
Centro Nacional de Inteligencia Artificial, Chile
Instituto de Ingeniería Matemática y Computacional, Universidad Católica de Chile
3
Instituto Milenio Fundamentos de los Datos, Chile
4
Departamento de Matemática, Universidad Católica de Chile

valentino.dellerose@cenia.cl, alexander.kozachinskyi@cenia.cl
cristobal.rojas@mat.uc.cl, mpetrache@mat.uc.cl, pbarcelo@uc.cl

Abstract
The Weisfeiler–Lehman (WL) test is a fundamental iterative algorithm for checking
the isomorphism of graphs. It has also been observed that it underlies the design of
several graph neural network architectures, whose capabilities and performance
can be understood in terms of the expressive power of this test. Motivated by
recent developments in machine learning applications to datasets involving threedimensional objects, we study when the WL test is complete for clouds of Euclidean
points represented by complete distance graphs, i.e., when it can distinguish, up
to isometry, any arbitrary such cloud. Our main result states that the (d − 1)dimensional WL test is complete for point clouds in d-dimensional Euclidean
space, for any d ≥ 2, and only three iterations of the test suffice. Our result is tight
for d = 2, 3. We also observe that the d-dimensional WL test only requires one
iteration to achieve completeness.

1

Introduction

Context. Recent work in machine learning has raised the need to develop effective and efficient
tests for checking if two three-dimensional point clouds, i.e., finite sets of points in R3 , are isometric
[15, 9, 2, 12]. Recall that, given two such point clouds P and Q, an isometry is a distance-preserving
bijection between the points in P and Q. The importance of these tests is that they provide the
foundations for designing neural network architectures on point clouds that are capable of fully
exploiting the structure of the data [18, 14]. It has been observed that the incompleteness of any such
an architecture, i.e., the inability to recognize a point cloud up to isometry, can affect its learning
performance [16]. Understanding which is the simplest test that allows detecting isometries in this
scenario is thus essential not only for developing “complete" architectures but also to make them as
efficient as possible in terms of the computational resources they need to use.
Point clouds can be represented as complete graphs in which each edge is labeled with the distance
between the corresponding points. Under this representation, detecting the isometry of two point
clouds is reduced to detecting an isomorphism between their graph representation. Not surprisingly,
then, much of the work on developing so-called geometric tests for detecting isometries over point
clouds is inspired by the literature on isomorphism tests from graph theory. Of particular importance
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

