PLASTIC: Improving Input and Label Plasticity
for Sample Efficient Reinforcement Learning

Hojoon Lee∗ Hanseul Cho∗ Hyunseung Kim∗ Daehoon Gwak Joonkee Kim
Jaegul Choo Se-Young Yun Chulhee Yun
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST
{joonleesky, jhs4015, mynsng, daehoon.gwak, joonkeekim,
jchoo, yunseyoung, chulhee.yun}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In Reinforcement Learning (RL), enhancing sample efficiency is crucial, particularly in scenarios when data acquisition is costly and risky. In principle, off-policy
RL algorithms can improve sample efficiency by allowing multiple updates per
environment interaction. However, these multiple updates often lead the model to
overfit to earlier interactions, which is referred to as the loss of plasticity. Our study
investigates the underlying causes of this phenomenon by dividing plasticity into
two aspects. Input plasticity, which denotes the model’s adaptability to changing
input data, and label plasticity, which denotes the model’s adaptability to evolving input-output relationships. Synthetic experiments on the CIFAR-10 dataset
reveal that finding smoother minima of loss landscape enhances input plasticity,
whereas refined gradient propagation improves label plasticity. Leveraging these
findings, we introduce the PLASTIC algorithm, which harmoniously combines
techniques to address both concerns. With minimal architectural modifications,
PLASTIC achieves competitive performance on benchmarks including Atari-100k
and Deepmind Control Suite. This result emphasizes the importance of preserving
the model’s plasticity to elevate the sample efficiency in RL. The code is available
at https://github.com/dojeon-ai/plastic.

1

Introduction

In Reinforcement Learning (RL), achieving sample efficiency is crucial in various domains including robotics, autonomous driving, and healthcare, where data acquisition
is constrained and expensive [42, 36]. In theory, off-policy
RL algorithms promise increased sample efficiency by allowing multiple updates of policy or value functions from
a single data instance [26, 24, 43]. However, they tend to
suffer from the loss of plasticity, a phenomenon where the
models overfit to earlier interactions and fail to adapt to
new experiences [52, 19, 43].

†

PLASTIC (RR8)
PLASTIC (RR8)
SR-SPR(RR8)
(RR4)

(RR4)

DreamerV3

(RR4)

(RR2)
(RR2)

MLR

PlayVirtual

The origins of the loss of plasticity are a focus of contemporary research. One avenue of study points is the role
of the smoothness of the loss surface. Models seeking Figure 1: Scaling of our proposed
smoother minima of loss landscape tend to exhibit more method, PLASTIC, on the Atari-100k
stable learning patterns and enhanced plasticity [46, 47]. benchmark compared to state-of-the-art
methods (Section 4.3).
∗

Equal contributions.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

