Nonparametric Teaching for Multiple Learners

Chen Zhang1 Xiaofeng Cao1, Weiyang Liu2,3 Ivor W. Tsang4 James T. Kwok5
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany, 3 University of Cambridge, UK
4
CFAR and IHPC, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
u3567831@connect.hku.hk,xiaofengcao@jlu.edu.cn,wl396@cam.ac.uk
ivor_tsang@cfar.a-star.edu.sg,jamesk@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
We study the problem of teaching multiple learners simultaneously in the nonparametric iterative teaching setting, where the teacher iteratively provides examples
to the learner for accelerating the acquisition of a target concept. This problem
is motivated by the gap between current single-learner teaching setting and the
real-world scenario of human instruction where a teacher typically imparts knowledge to multiple students. Under the new problem formulation, we introduce a
novel framework – Multi-learner Nonparametric Teaching (MINT). In MINT, the
teacher aims to instruct multiple learners, with each learner focusing on learning a
scalar-valued target model. To achieve this, we frame the problem as teaching a
vector-valued target model and extend the target model space from a scalar-valued
reproducing kernel Hilbert space used in single-learner scenarios to a vector-valued
space. Furthermore, we demonstrate that MINT offers significant teaching speedup over repeated single-learner teaching, particularly when the multiple learners
can communicate with each other. Lastly, we conduct extensive experiments to
validate the practicality and efficiency of MINT.

1

Introduction

Machine teaching [81, 83] considers the problem of how to design the most effective teaching set,
typically with the smallest amount of (teaching) examples possible, to facilitate rapid learning of the
target models by learners based on these examples. It can be thought of as an inverse problem of
machine learning, in the sense that the student aims to learn a target model on a given dataset, while
the teacher constructs such a (minimal) dataset. Machine teaching has many applications in computer
vision [67, 68], crowd sourcing [59, 60, 78, 79] and cyber security [2, 3, 39, 53].
Roughly speaking, machine teaching can be carried out in a batch [80, 81, 33] or iterative [36, 37,
38, 52] fashion, depending on how teachers and learners interact with each other. Batch teaching
focuses on single-round interaction, that is, the most representative and effective teaching dataset are
designed to be fed to the learner in one shot. After that, the leaner solely and assiduously learns a
target model from this dataset without further interaction. With practical considerations, iterative
teaching extends such a single-round mode to a multi-round one. It studies the case where the teacher
feeds examples based on learners’ status (current learnt models) round by round, such that the learner
can converge to a target model within fewer rounds. The minimal count of such rounds (or iterations)
is referred to as iterative teaching dimension [36, 37].
Considering that previous works on iterative machine teaching usually limit target models in a
parameterized family, that is, assuming the target model can be represented by some parameters,
nonparametric iterative machine teaching [73] extends such single family to a general nonparametric
one. This allows multiple possibility of the target model family. Specifically, by formulating
nonparametric teaching in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), [73] introduce various
families of target models associated with kernels, e.g., Gaussian and Laplacian kernels in RKHS.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

