ALIM: Adjusting Label Importance Mechanism for
Noisy Partial Label Learning

Mingyu Xu1,2∗ , Zheng Lian1∗, Lei Feng3 , Bin Liu1,2 , Jianhua Tao4,5
The State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
5
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{xumingyu2021, lianzheng2016}@ia.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Noisy partial label learning (noisy PLL) is an important branch of weakly supervised learning. Unlike PLL where the ground-truth label must conceal in the
candidate label set, noisy PLL relaxes this constraint and allows the ground-truth
label may not be in the candidate label set. To address this challenging problem,
most of the existing works attempt to detect noisy samples and estimate the groundtruth label for each noisy sample. However, detection errors are unavoidable. These
errors can accumulate during training and continuously affect model optimization.
To this end, we propose a novel framework for noisy PLL with theoretical interpretations, called “Adjusting Label Importance Mechanism (ALIM)”. It aims to reduce
the negative impact of detection errors by trading off the initial candidate set and
model outputs. ALIM is a plug-in strategy that can be integrated with existing PLL
approaches. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance on noisy PLL. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/zeroQiaoba/ALIM.

1

Introduction

Partial label learning (PLL) [1, 2] (also called ambiguous label learning [3, 4] and superset label
learning [5, 6]) is a typical type of weakly supervised learning. Unlike supervised learning where
each sample is associated with a ground-truth label, PLL needs to identify the ground-truth label
from a set of candidate labels. Due to the low annotation cost of partially labeled samples, PLL has
attracted increasing attention from researchers and has been applied to many areas, such as object
recognition [4], web mining [7], and ecological informatics [8].
The basic assumption of PLL is that the ground-truth label must be in the candidate label set [9].
However, this assumption may not be satisfied due to the unprofessional judgment of annotators [10].
Recently, some researchers have relaxed this assumption and focused on a more practical setup called
noisy PLL [11]. In noisy PLL, the ground-truth label may not be in the candidate label set. To deal
with this task, Lv et al. [11] utilized noise-tolerant loss functions to avoid overemphasizing noisy
samples. However, they cannot fully exploit the useful information in noisy data. To this end, Lian et
al. [12] and Wang et al. [13] proposed to detect noisy samples and estimate pseudo labels for these
samples. However, detection errors are unavoidable. These errors will accumulate and continuously
affect model optimization, thereby limiting their performance on noisy PLL.
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

