Which Models have Perceptually-Aligned Gradients?
An Explanation via Off-Manifold Robustness

Suraj Srinivas∗
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
ssrinivas@seas.harvard.edu

Sebastian Bordt∗
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center
Tübingen, Germany
sebastian.bordt@uni-tuebingen.de

Himabindu Lakkaraju
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
hlakkaraju@hbs.edu

Abstract
One of the remarkable properties of robust computer vision models is that their
input-gradients are often aligned with human perception, referred to in the literature
as perceptually-aligned gradients (PAGs). Despite only being trained for classification, PAGs cause robust models to have rudimentary generative capabilities,
including image generation, denoising, and in-painting. However, the underlying
mechanisms behind these phenomena remain unknown. In this work, we provide
a first explanation of PAGs via off-manifold robustness, which states that models
must be more robust off- the data manifold than they are on-manifold. We first
demonstrate theoretically that off-manifold robustness leads input gradients to
lie approximately on the data manifold, explaining their perceptual alignment.
We then show that Bayes optimal models satisfy off-manifold robustness, and
confirm the same empirically for robust models trained via gradient norm regularization, randomized smoothing, and adversarial training with projected gradient descent. Quantifying the perceptual alignment of model gradients via their
similarity with the gradients of generative models, we show that off-manifold
robustness correlates well with perceptual alignment. Finally, based on the levels of on- and off-manifold robustness, we identify three different regimes of
robustness that affect both perceptual alignment and model accuracy: weak robustness, bayes-aligned robustness, and excessive robustness. Code is available at
https://github.com/tml-tuebingen/pags.

1

Introduction

An important desideratum for machine learning models is robustness, which requires that models be
insensitive to small amounts of noise added to the input. In particular, adversarial robustness requires
models to be insensitive to adversarially chosen perturbations of the input. Tsipras et al. [1] first
observed an unexpected benefit of such models, namely that their input-gradients were “significantly
more human-aligned” (see Figure 1 for examples of perceptually-aligned gradients). Santurkar et al.
[2] built on this observation to show that robust models could be used to perform rudimentary image
synthesis - an unexpected capability of models trained in a purely discriminative manner. Subsequent
works have made use of the perceptual alignment of robust model gradients to improve zero-shot
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

