Robust Learning for Smoothed Online Convex
Optimization with Feedback Delay

Pengfei Li
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
pli081@ucr.edu

Jianyi Yang
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
jyang239@ucr.edu

Adam Wierman
California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA
adamw@caltech.edu

Shaolei Ren
University of California Riverside
Riverside, CA, USA
shaolei@ucr.edu

Abstract
We study a challenging form of Smoothed Online Convex Optimization, a.k.a.
SOCO, including multi-step nonlinear switching costs and feedback delay. We
propose a novel machine learning (ML) augmented online algorithm, RobustnessConstrained Learning (RCL), which combines untrusted ML predictions with a
trusted expert online algorithm via constrained projection to robustify the ML prediction. Specifically, we prove that RCL is able to guarantee (1+λ)-competitiveness
against any given expert for any λ > 0, while also explicitly training the ML model
in a robustification-aware manner to improve the average-case performance. Importantly, RCL is the first ML-augmented algorithm with a provable robustness
guarantee in the case of multi-step switching cost and feedback delay. We demonstrate the improvement of RCL in both robustness and average performance using
battery management for electrifying transportation as a case study.

1

Introduction

This paper studies Smoothed Online Convex Optimization (SOCO), a model that has seen application
in a wide variety of settings. The goal of SOCO is to minimize the sum of a per-round hitting cost and
a switching cost that penalizes temporal changes in actions. The added (even single-step) switching
cost creates substantial algorithmic challenges, and has received more than a decade of attention
(see [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12] and the references therein). While there have been various
competitive online algorithms, e.g., ROBD, to guarantee the worst-case performance robustness
for SOCO [13, 5, 2, 6, 8, 13], their average performance is typically far from optimal due to the
conservativeness needed to address potentially adversarial instances. In contrast, machine learning
(ML) based optimizers can improve the average performance by exploiting rich historical data and
statistical information [14, 1, 12, 7, 15], but they sacrifice the strong robustness in terms of provable
competitive bounds needed by safety-critical applications, especially when there is a distributional
shift [16, 17], the ML model capacity is limited, and/or inputs are adversarial [18, 19].
More recently, ML-augmented online algorithms have emerged as potential game changers in classic
online problems such as ski rental and caching systems [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. The goal is to obtain
the best of both worlds by utilizing good ML predictions to improve the average performance while
ensuring bounded competitive ratios even when ML predictions are arbitrarily bad. In the context of
SOCO, there has been initial progress on ML-augmented algorithms in the past year [1, 14, 7, 25].
However, these studies target the simplest case of SOCO where there is no feedback delay and the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

