Bayesian target optimisation for high-precision
holographic optogenetics

Marcus A. Triplett1,2,†

Marta Gajowa3

Hillel Adesnik3

Liam Paninski1,2

1

2

Department of Statistics, Columbia University
Zuckerman Mind Brain Behavior Institute, Columbia University
3
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, UC Berkeley
†
marcus.triplett@columbia.edu

Abstract
Two-photon optogenetics has transformed our ability to probe the structure and
function of neural circuits. However, achieving precise optogenetic control of
neural ensemble activity has remained fundamentally constrained by the problem
of off-target stimulation (OTS): the inadvertent activation of nearby non-target
neurons due to imperfect confinement of light onto target neurons. Here we propose
a novel computational approach to this problem called Bayesian target optimisation.
Our approach uses nonparametric Bayesian inference to model neural responses
to optogenetic stimulation, and then optimises the laser powers and optical target
locations needed to achieve a desired activity pattern with minimal OTS. We
validate our approach in simulations and using data from in vitro experiments,
showing that Bayesian target optimisation considerably reduces OTS across all
conditions we test. Together, these results establish our ability to overcome OTS,
enabling optogenetic stimulation with substantially improved precision.

1

Introduction

A key technological goal in neuroscience is to gain precise control over the activity of neurons. Currently, one of the most promising approaches for achieving such control is two-photon optogenetics
[1–4]. This technique relies on the use of two-photon excitation to activate opsin molecules expressed
in the somatic membrane, allowing individual neurons to be targeted for stimulation. Holographic
optogenetics further extends this technique by focusing two-photon excitation into ∼10 µm disks
of light that illuminate all of a neuron’s opsin molecules in parallel [5–9]. Replicating this illumination pattern across many neurons at once then grants simultaneous optogenetic control of entire
neural ensembles [10–12]. However, the spatial precision of holographic optogenetics has remained
fundamentally limited by the problem of off-target stimulation (OTS): if multiple opsin-expressing
neurons lie in close proximity (in the most extreme case, if their membranes are in physical contact),
two-photon excitation will frequently activate opsin molecules in each neuron when attempting to
stimulate only one. This can inadvertently elicit spikes in non-target neurons, compromising the
precision and specificity of the optogenetic manipulation [13].
Previous attempts at overcoming OTS have been either optical or molecular in nature (e.g. by using
temporal focusing [2, 6, 7, 14] or improving the soma-targeting of the opsin [15, 16, 10]), but
have not yet achieved "true" single-cell precision under many experimental conditions. Frequently,
experimenters will simply express opsin sparsely in a population to avoid OTS, as this reduces
the number of nearby opsin-expressing neurons that could be mistakenly activated [17]. However,
sparse opsin expression reduces the number of neurons that can potentially be probed during an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

