Motion-X: A Large-scale 3D Expressive
Whole-body Human Motion Dataset

Jing Lin1,2∗ ‡ , Ailing Zeng1∗† , Shunlin Lu1,3∗‡ ,
Yuanhao Cai2 , Ruimao Zhang3 , Haoqian Wang2 , Lei Zhang1
1
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
2
Tsinghua University, 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
https://motion-x-dataset.github.io

Abstract
In this paper, we present Motion-X, a large-scale 3D expressive whole-body motion
dataset. Existing motion datasets predominantly contain body-only poses, lacking
facial expressions, hand gestures, and fine-grained pose descriptions. Moreover,
they are primarily collected from limited laboratory scenes with textual descriptions manually labeled, which greatly limits their scalability. To overcome these
limitations, we develop a whole-body motion and text annotation pipeline, which
can automatically annotate motion from either single- or multi-view videos and
provide comprehensive semantic labels for each video and fine-grained whole-body
pose descriptions for each frame. This pipeline is of high precision, cost-effective,
and scalable for further research. Based on it, we construct Motion-X, which comprises 15.6M precise 3D whole-body pose annotations (i.e., SMPL-X) covering
81.1K motion sequences from massive scenes. Besides, Motion-X provides 15.6M
frame-level whole-body pose descriptions and 81.1K sequence-level semantic
labels. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the accuracy of the annotation
pipeline and the significant benefit of Motion-X in enhancing expressive, diverse,
and natural motion generation, as well as 3D whole-body human mesh recovery.

1

Introduction

Human motion generation aims to automatically synthesize natural human movements. It has wide
applications in robotics, animation, games, and generative creation. Given a text description or audio
command, motion generation can be controllable to obtain the desired human motion sequence.
Text-conditioned motion generation has garnered increasing attention in recent years since it behaves
in a more natural interactive way [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
Although existing text-motion datasets [4, 11, 6, 8] have greatly facilitated the development of motion
generation [2, 12, 13, 14, 9], their scale, diversity, and expressive capability remain unsatisfactory.
Imagine generating “a man is playing the piano happily", as depicted in Fig. 1(a), the motion
from existing dataset [4] only includes the body movements, without finger movements or facial
expressions. The missing hand gestures and facial expressions severely hinder the high level of
expressiveness and realism of the motion. Additionally, certain specialized motions, such as highlevel skiing, aerial work, and riding are challenging to be captured in indoor scenes. To sum up,
existing datasets suffer from four main limitations: 1) body-only motions without facial expressions
and hand poses; 2) insufficient diversity and quantity, only covering indoor scenes; 3) lacking diverse
and long-term motion sequences; and 4) manual text labels that are unscalable, unprofessional
and labor-intensive. These limitations hinder existing generation methods to synthesize expressive
whole-body motion with diverse action types. Therefore, how to collect large-scale whole-body
motion and text annotations from multi-scenarios are critical in addressing the data scarcity issue.
∗
†

Equal Contribution, ‡ Work done during an internship at IDEA
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

