Neural Image Compression:
Generalization, Robustness, and Spectral Biases

Kelsey Lieberman
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC USA
kelsey.lieberman@duke.edu

James Diffenderfer
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA USA
diffenderfer2@llnl.gov

Charles Godfrey†
Thomson Reuters Labs
Eagan, MN USA
charles.godfrey@thomsonreuters.com

Bhavya Kailkhura
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA USA
kailkhura1@llnl.gov

Abstract
Recent advances in neural image compression (NIC) have produced models that
are starting to outperform classic codecs. While this has led to growing excitement
about using NIC in real-world applications, the successful adoption of any machine
learning system in the wild requires it to generalize (and be robust) to unseen distribution shifts at deployment. Unfortunately, current research lacks comprehensive
datasets and informative tools to evaluate and understand NIC performance in
real-world settings. To bridge this crucial gap, first, this paper presents a comprehensive benchmark suite to evaluate the out-of-distribution (OOD) performance
of image compression methods. Specifically, we provide CLIC-C and Kodak-C
by introducing 15 corruptions to the popular CLIC and Kodak benchmarks. Next,
we propose spectrally-inspired inspection tools to gain deeper insight into errors
introduced by image compression methods as well as their OOD performance. We
then carry out a detailed performance comparison of several classic codecs and NIC
variants, revealing intriguing findings that challenge our current understanding of
the strengths and limitations of NIC. Finally, we corroborate our empirical findings
with theoretical analysis, providing an in-depth view of the OOD performance of
NIC and its dependence on the spectral properties of the data. Our benchmarks,
spectral inspection tools, and findings provide a crucial bridge to the real-world
adoption of NIC. We hope that our work will propel future efforts in designing
robust and generalizable NIC methods. Code and data will be made available at
https://github.com/klieberman/ood_nic.

1

Introduction

Consider the Mars Exploration Rover, whose scientific objective is to search for clues to past activity
of water (and perhaps life) on Mars. To achieve this, the rover collects images of interesting rocks
and soils to be analyzed by the scientists on Earth. Sending these images down the Earth-bound data
stream in their original form is too slow and expensive due to limited bandwidth. Thus, it is well
accepted that image compression could play a key role in producing scientific breakthroughs [44].
†

Work done at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

