CAt-Walk: Inductive Hypergraph Learning via Set
Walks
Ali Behrouz
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
alibez@cs.ubc.ca

Farnoosh Hashemi†
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
farsh@cs.ubc.ca

Sadaf Sadeghian†
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
sadafsdn@cs.ubc.ca

Margo Seltzer
Department of Computer Science
University of British Columbia
mseltzer@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Temporal hypergraphs provide a powerful paradigm for modeling time-dependent,
higher-order interactions in complex systems. Representation learning for hypergraphs is essential for extracting patterns of the higher-order interactions that
are critically important in real-world problems in social network analysis, neuroscience, finance, etc. However, existing methods are typically designed only for
specific tasks or static hypergraphs. We present CAt-Walk, an inductive method
that learns the underlying dynamic laws that govern the temporal and structural
processes underlying a temporal hypergraph. CAt-Walk introduces a temporal,
higher-order walk on hypergraphs, SetWalk, that extracts higher-order causal patterns. CAt-Walk uses a novel adaptive and permutation invariant pooling strategy,
SetMixer, along with a set-based anonymization process that hides the identity
of hyperedges. Finally, we present a simple yet effective neural network model to
encode hyperedges. Our evaluation on 10 hypergraph benchmark datasets shows
that CAt-Walk attains outstanding performance on temporal hyperedge prediction
benchmarks in both inductive and transductive settings. It also shows competitive
performance with state-of-the-art methods for node classification. (Code)

1

Introduction

Temporal networks have become increasingly popular for modeling interactions among entities
in dynamic systems [1–5]. While most existing work focuses on pairwise interactions between
entities, many real-world complex systems exhibit natural relationships among multiple entities [6–8].
Hypergraphs provide a natural extension to graphs by allowing an edge to connect any number of
vertices, making them capable of representing higher-order structures in data. Representation learning
on (temporal) hypergraphs has been recognized as an important machine learning problem and has
become the cornerstone behind a wealth of high-impact applications in computer vision [9, 10],
biology [11, 12], social networks [13, 14], and neuroscience [15, 16].
Many recent attempts to design representation learning methods for hypergraphs are equivalent to
applying Graph Neural Networks (Gnns) to the clique-expansion (CE) of a hypergraph [17–21]. CE
is a straightforward way to generalize graph algorithms to hypergraphs by replacing hyperedges
with (weighted) cliques [18–20]. However, this decomposition of hyperedges limits expressiveness,
†

These two authors contributed equally (ordered alphabetically) and reserve the right to swap their order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

