Alternation makes the adversary weaker in two-player
games

Volkan Cevher
LIONS, EPFL
volkan.cevher@epfl.ch

Ashok Cutkosky
Boston University
ashok@cutkosky.com

Ali Kavis
LIONS, EPFL
ali.kavis@epfl.ch

Stratis Skoulakis
LIONS, EPFL
efstratios.skoulakis@epfl.ch

Georgios Piliouras
SUTD
georgios@sutd.edu.sg

Luca Viano
LIONS, EPFL
luca.viano@epfl.ch

Abstract
Motivated by alternating game-play in two-player games, we study an altenating
variant of the Online Linear Optimization (OLO). In alternating OLO, a learner at
each round t ∈ [n] selects a vector xt and then an adversary selects a cost-vector
ct ∈ [−1, 1]n . The learner then experiences cost (ct + ct−1 )⊤ xt instead√
of (ct )⊤ xt
as in standard OLO. We establish that under this small twist, the Ω( T ) lower
bound on the regret is no longer valid. More precisely, we present two online
learning algorithms for alternating OLO that respectively admit O((log n)4/3 T 1/3 )
regret for the n-dimensional simplex and O(ρ log T ) regret for the ball of radius
ρ > 0. Our results imply that in alternating game-play, an agent can always
guarantee Õ((log n)4/3 T 1/3 ) regardless the strategies of the other agent while the
regret bound improves to O(log T ) in case the agent admits only two actions.

1

Introduction

Game-dynamics study settings at which a set of selfish agents engaged in a repeated game update
their strategies over time in their attempt to minimize their overall individual cost. In simultaneous
play all agents simultaneously update their strategies, while in alternating play only one agent updates
its strategy at each round while all the other agents stand still. Intuitively, each agent only updates its
strategy in response to an observed change in another agent.
Alternating game-play captures interactions arising in various context such as animal behavior, social
behavior, traffic networks etc. (see [33] for various interesting examples) and thus has received
considerable attention from a game-theoretic point of view [11, 3, 33, 41, 40]. At the same time,
alternation has been proven a valuable tool in tackling min-max problems arising in modern machine
learning applications (e.g. training GANs, adversarial examples etc.) and thus has also been studied
from an offline optimization perspective [37, 35, 21, 42, 9, 8, 10].
In the context of two-players, alternating game-play admits the following form: Alice (odd player)
and Bob (even player) respectively update their strategies on odd and even rounds. Alice (resp. Bob)
should select her strategy at an odd round so as to exploit Bob’s strategy of the previous (even) round
while at the same time protecting herself from Bob’s response in the next (even) round. As a result,
the following question arises:
Q1: How should Alice (resp. Bob) update her actions in the odd rounds so that, regardless of Bob’s
strategies, her overall cost (over the T rounds of play) is minimized?
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

