Near-optimal learning with average Hölder smoothness

Steve Hanneke
Department of Computer Science
Purdue University
steve.hanneke@gmail.com

Aryeh Kontorovich
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
karyeh@cs.bgu.ac.il

Guy Kornowski
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science
guy.kornowski@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We generalize the notion of average Lipschitz smoothness proposed by Ashlagi
et al. [2021] by extending it to Hölder smoothness. This measure of the “effective
smoothness” of a function is sensitive to the underlying distribution and can be
dramatically smaller than its classic “worst-case” Hölder constant. We consider
both the realizable and the agnostic (noisy) regression settings, proving upper and
lower risk bounds in terms of the average Hölder smoothness; these rates improve
upon both previously known rates even in the special case of average Lipschitz
smoothness. Moreover, our lower bound is tight in the realizable setting up to
log factors, thus we establish the minimax rate. From an algorithmic perspective,
since our notion of average smoothness is defined with respect to the unknown
underlying distribution, the learner does not have an explicit representation of
the function class, hence is unable to execute ERM. Nevertheless, we provide
distinct learning algorithms that achieve both (nearly) optimal learning rates. Our
results hold in any totally bounded metric space, and are stated in terms of its
intrinsic geometry. Overall, our results show that the classic worst-case notion of
Hölder smoothness can be essentially replaced by its average, yielding considerably
sharper guarantees.

1

Introduction

A fundamental theme throughout learning theory and statistics is that “smooth” functions ought to be
easier to learn than “rough” ones — an intuition that has been formalized and rigorously established
in various frameworks [Györfi et al., 2002, Tsybakov, 2008, Giné and Nickl, 2021]. Hölder continuity
is a natural and well-studied notion of smoothness that measures the extent to which nearby points
can differ in function value and includes Lipschitz continuity as an important special case.
These global moduli of smoothness, while convenient for theoretical analysis, suffer from the shortcoming of being overly pessimistic. Indeed, being distribution-independent, they fail to distinguish
a function that is highly oscillatory everywhere from one that is smooth over most of the probability mass; see Figure 1 for a simple illustration. Moreover, classically studied classes of average
smoothness (e.g. Besov space) typically fix some distribution in advance (predominantly uniform),
and then turn to consider smooth functions with respect to that single distribution. Thus, from a
distribution-free statistical learning perspective — where the underlying distribution is assumed to be
unknown — such classes fall short.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

