Towards robust and generalizable representations of
extracellular data using contrastive learning

Ankit Vishnubhotla∗
Columbia University
New York
av3016@columbia.edu

Charlotte Loh∗
MIT
Massachusetts
cloh@mit.edu

Akash Srivastava
MIT-IBM
Massachusetts
Akash.Srivastava@ibm.com

Liam Paninski
Columbia University
New York
liam@stat.columbia.edu
Cole Hurwitz
Columbia University
New York
ch3676@columbia.edu

Abstract
Contrastive learning is quickly becoming an essential tool in neuroscience for extracting robust and meaningful representations of neural activity. Despite numerous
applications to neuronal population data, there has been little exploration of how
these methods can be adapted to key primary data analysis tasks such as spike sorting or cell-type classification. In this work, we propose a novel contrastive learning
framework, CEED (Contrastive Embeddings for Extracellular Data), for highdensity extracellular recordings. We demonstrate that through careful design of the
network architecture and data augmentations, it is possible to generically extract
representations that far outperform current specialized approaches. We validate our
method across multiple high-density extracellular recordings. All code used to run
CEED can be found at https://github.com/ankitvishnu23/CEED.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12

13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

1

Introduction

High-density extracellular recordings now allow for simultaneous recordings of large populations
of neurons across multiple brain regions with high temporal and spatial resolution. [1–4]. These
large-scale recordings are essential for gaining insights into key biological processes such as vision,
decision-making, and behavior which are distributed across brain regions [5]. Along with gaining
insights into brain function, these technologies also promise to improve the scalability and accuracy
of brain-computer interfaces which can restore motor function to paralyzed individuals [6].
A major bottleneck for interpreting neural population activity is processing the raw extracellular
signal [7]. Although extracellular recordings contain a precise record of the coordinated neural
activity, it must be extracted algorithmically through a processing step called spike sorting. A crucial
assumption in spike sorting is that each recorded neuron has a unique spatiotemporal extracellular
waveform based on its morphology and position relative to the recording device [8]. Using this
unique identifier, it is possible to assign a detected extracellular action potential (spike) back to its
putative neuron (unit). Along with spike sorting, another important task in extracellular analysis is
cell-type classification. As neural circuits are diverse and heterogeneous, it is becoming increasingly
important to profile detected units using their morphoelectrical features [9]. At a coarse level, it is
*

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

