S TEVE -1: A Generative Model for
Text-to-Behavior in Minecraft
Shalev Lifshitz1,2∗
shalev.lifshitz@mail.utoronto.ca
Harris Chan1,2†
hchan@cs.toronto.edu
1

Jimmy Ba1,2
jba@cs.toronto.edu

Keiran Paster1,2∗
keirp@cs.toronto.edu
Sheila McIlraith1,2
sheila@cs.toronto.edu

Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
2
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Toronto, Canada.

Abstract
Constructing AI models that respond to text instructions is challenging, especially
for sequential decision-making tasks. This work introduces a methodology, inspired
by unCLIP, for instruction-tuning generative models of behavior without relying
on a large dataset of instruction-labeled trajectories. Using this methodology, we
create an instruction-tuned Video Pretraining (VPT) model called S TEVE -1, which
can follow short-horizon open-ended text and visual instructions in Minecraft™.
S TEVE -1 is trained in two steps: adapting the pretrained VPT model to follow commands in MineCLIP’s latent space, then training a prior to predict latent codes from
text. This allows us to finetune VPT through self-supervised behavioral cloning and
hindsight relabeling, reducing the need for costly human text annotations, and all
for only $60 of compute. By leveraging pretrained models like VPT and MineCLIP
and employing best practices from text-conditioned image generation, S TEVE -1
sets a new bar for open-ended instruction following in Minecraft with low-level
controls (mouse and keyboard) and raw pixel inputs, far outperforming previous
baselines and robustly completing 12 of 13 tasks in our early-game evaluation
suite. We provide experimental evidence highlighting key factors for downstream
performance, including pretraining, classifier-free guidance, and data scaling. All
resources, including our model weights, training scripts, and evaluation tools are
made available for further research.

1

Introduction

The ability to use text instructions to control and interact with powerful AI models has made these
models accessible and customizable for the masses. Such models include ChatGPT [41], which
can respond to messages written in natural language and perform a wide array of tasks, and Stable
Diffusion [50], which turns natural language into an image. While those models cost anywhere from
hundreds of thousands to hundreds of millions of dollars to train, there has been an equally exciting
trend whereby powerful open-source foundation models like LLaMA [59] can be finetuned with
surprisingly little compute and data to become instruction-following (e.g., [58, 13]).
In this paper, we study whether such an approach could be applicable to sequential decision-making
domains. Unlike in text and image domains, diverse data for sequential decision-making is very
expensive and often does not come with a convenient “instruction” label like captions for images. We
propose to instruction-tune pretrained generative models of behavior, mirroring the advancements
seen in recent instruction-tuned LLMs like Alpaca [58], without relying on a large dataset of
instruction-labeled trajectories.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Core contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

