Intra-Modal Proxy Learning for
Zero-Shot Visual Categorization with CLIP

Qi Qian1∗ Yuanhong Xu2 Juhua Hu3
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
{qi.qian, yuanhong.xuyh}@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu
1

Abstract
Vision-language pre-training methods, e.g., CLIP, demonstrate an impressive zeroshot performance on visual categorizations with the class proxy from the text
embedding of the class name. However, the modality gap between the text and
vision space can result in a sub-optimal performance. We theoretically show that the
gap cannot be reduced sufficiently by minimizing the contrastive loss in CLIP and
the optimal proxy for vision tasks may reside only in the vision space. Therefore,
given unlabeled target vision data, we propose to learn the vision proxy directly
with the help from the text proxy for zero-shot transfer. Moreover, according to
our theoretical analysis, strategies are developed to further refine the pseudo label
obtained by the text proxy to facilitate the intra-modal proxy learning (InMaP) for
vision. Experiments on extensive downstream tasks confirm the effectiveness and
efficiency of our proposal. Concretely, InMaP can obtain the vision proxy within
one minute on a single GPU while improving the zero-shot accuracy from 77.02%
to 80.21% on ImageNet with ViT-L/14@336 pre-trained by CLIP.

1

Introduction

Vision-language pre-training in CLIP aims to align image-text pairs to facilitate multi-modal understanding for downstream tasks [26]. By optimizing the contrastive loss consisting of images
and their corresponding text descriptions, CLIP demonstrates an impressive zero-shot transfer of
the pre-trained model to generic tasks. Concretely, given a downstream data set, each class has a
proxy obtained from the text embedding about the corresponding class name, and then images can
be categorized by finding the nearest class proxy. With class names only, zero-shot accuracy on
ImageNet [28] can achieve 77.02% with ViT-L/14@336 [9] pre-trained by CLIP.
After the success of CLIP, many research efforts have been devoted to improving the transfer
performance on downstream tasks. Most of developed methods can be cast into two categories, that
is, few-shot refinement and zero-shot enhancement. Few-shot methods require a small amount of
labeled data from the target task to refine the prediction [12, 41, 42]. While these methods show a
better performance than zero-shot learning, labeled examples from the target domain may not be
available in real-world applications. Therefore, many methods focus on improving the zero-shot
learning itself by exploring side information. On one hand, many pre-trained large language models
(LLMs), e.g., GPT-3 [4], can be leveraged to obtain better text proxy for classification [20]. On the
other hand, unlabeled data from the target domain can be adopted to fine-tune an adapter network or
input prompts [23, 30] for alignment. In this work, we focus on understanding the behavior of CLIP
by exploiting the unlabeled data without external LLMs or additional architectures for zero-shot
categorization.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

