Dynamic Non-monotone Submodular Maximization

Kiarash Banihashem∗
kiarash@umd.edu
University of Maryland

†

‡

†

Leyla Biabani∗
l.biabani@tue.nl
TU Eindhoven
†

MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi∗
hajiagha@cs.umd.edu
University of Maryland

Samira Goudarzi∗
samirag@umd.edu
University of Maryland
†

Peyman Jabbarzade∗
peymanj@umd.edu
University of Maryland

‡

Morteza Monemizadeh∗
m.monemizadeh@tue.nl
TU Eindhoven

Abstract
Maximizing submodular functions has been increasingly used in many applications
of machine learning, such as data summarization, recommendation systems, and
feature selection. Moreover, there has been a growing interest in both submodular
maximization and dynamic algorithms. In 2020, Monemizadeh [46] and Lattanzi,
Mitrovic, Norouzi-Fard, Tarnawski, and Zadimoghaddam [40] initiated developing
dynamic algorithms for the monotone submodular maximization problem under the
cardinality constraint k. In 2022, Chen and Peng [15] studied the complexity of this
problem and raised an important open question: "Can we extend [fully dynamic]
results (algorithm or hardness) to non-monotone submodular maximization?". We
affirmatively answer their question by demonstrating a reduction from maximizing
a non-monotone submodular function under the cardinality constraint k to maximizing a monotone submodular function under the same constraint. Through this
reduction, we obtain the first dynamic algorithms solving the non-monotone submodular maximization problem under the cardinality constraint k. We’ve derived
two algorithms, both maintaining an (8 + ϵ)-approximate of the solution. The first
algorithm requires O(ϵ−3 k 3 log3 (n) log(k)) oracle queries per update, while the
second one requires O(ϵ−1 k 2 log3 (k)). Furthermore, we showcase the benefits of
our dynamic algorithm for video summarization and max-cut problems on several
real-world data sets.

1

Introduction

Submodular functions are powerful tools for solving real-world problems as they provide a theoretical
framework for modeling the famous “diminishing returns” [30] phenomenon arising in a variety
of practical settings. Many theoretical problems such as those involving graph cuts, entropy-based
clustering, coverage functions, and mutual information can be cast in the submodular maximization
framework. As a result, submodular functions have been increasingly used in many applications of
machine learning such as data summarization [52, 51, 50], feature selection [17, 19, 18, 38], and
recommendation systems [24]. These applications include both the monotone and non-monotone
versions of the maximization of submodular functions.
Applications of non-monotone submodular maximization. The general problem of nonmonotone submodular maximization has been studied extensively in [27, 12, 11, 43, 5, 47]. This
∗

equal contribution
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
‡
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

