Make the U in UDA Matter: Invariant Consistency
Learning for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

Zhongqi Yue1 ,

Hanwang Zhang1 ,

Qianru Sun2

1

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Singapore Management University
yuez0003@ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
Domain Adaptation (DA) is always challenged by the spurious correlation between domain-invariant features (e.g., class identity) and domain-specific features
(e.g., environment) that does not generalize to the target domain. Unfortunately,
even enriched with additional unsupervised target domains, existing Unsupervised
DA (UDA) methods still suffer from it. This is because the source domain supervision only considers the target domain samples as auxiliary data (e.g., by
pseudo-labeling), yet the inherent distribution in the target domain—where the
valuable de-correlation clues hide—is disregarded. We propose to make the U in
UDA matter by giving equal status to the two domains. Specifically, we learn an
invariant classifier whose prediction is simultaneously consistent with the labels in
the source domain and clusters in the target domain, hence the spurious correlation
inconsistent in the target domain is removed. We dub our approach “Invariant CONsistency learning” (ICON). Extensive experiments show that ICON achieves the
state-of-the-art performance on the classic UDA benchmarks: O FFICE -H OME and
V IS DA-2017, and outperforms all the conventional methods on the challenging
WILDS 2.0 benchmark. Codes are in Appendix.

1

Introduction

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

Test Accuracy: 90.2%

Train Accuracy: 90.6%

t-SNE features

Samples

Domain Adaptation (DA) is all about trainTarget domain 𝑇𝑇
Source domain 𝑆𝑆
ing a model in a labelled source domain S
(e.g., an autopilot trained in daytime), and
the model is expected to generalize in a target domain T (e.g., the autopilot deployed
in nighttime), where T and S has a significant domain shift (e.g., day vs. night) [41].
To illustrate the shift and generalization, we
introduce the classic notion of causal representation learning [20, 49]: any sample is
generated by x = Φ(c, e), where Φ is the
generator, c is the causal feature determining the domain-invariant class identity (e.g., Figure 1: A digit classification model trained on red
road lane), and e is the environmental fea- digits in S generalizes to colorful digits in T by disenture (e.g., lighting conditions). As the en- tangling digit shape (i.e., the causal feature c), as color
vironment is domain-specific, the domain in S (i.e., eS ) is not discriminative. : “0”, : “1”. The
shift eS ̸= eT results in xS ̸= xT , chal- classification boundary is rendered blue and red.
lenging the pursuit of a domain-invariant
class model. However, if a model disentangles the causal feature by transforming each x = c, it
can generalize under arbitrary shift in e. In Figure 1, even though eT = “colorful” is significantly

