UniT: A Unified Look at Certified Robust Training
against Text Adversarial Perturbation

Muchao Ye1 Ziyi Yin1 Tianrong Zhang1 Tianyu Du2
Jinghui Chen1 Ting Wang3 Fenglong Ma1∗
1
The Pennsylvania State University, 2 Zhejiang University, 3 Stony Brook University
{muchao, zmy5171, tbz5156, jzc5917, fenglong}@psu.edu,
zjradty@zju.edu.cn, twang@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a surge of certified robust training pipelines against
text adversarial perturbation constructed by synonym substitutions. Given a base
model, existing pipelines provide prediction certificates either in the discrete word
space or the continuous latent space. However, they are isolated from each other
with a structural gap. We observe that existing training frameworks need unification to provide stronger certified robustness. Additionally, they mainly focus on
building the certification process but neglect to improve the robustness of the base
model. To mitigate the aforementioned limitations, we propose a unified framework
named UniT that enables us to train flexibly in either fashion by working in the
word embedding space. It can provide a stronger robustness guarantee obtained
directly from the word embedding space without extra modules. In addition, we
introduce the decoupled regularization (DR) loss to improve the robustness of the
base model, which includes two separate robustness regularization terms for the
feature extraction and classifier modules. Experimental results on widely used text
classification datasets further demonstrate the effectiveness of the designed unified
framework and the proposed DR loss for improving the certified robust accuracy.†

1

Introduction

Despite the tremendous performance of deep neural networks (DNNs) in natural language processing (NLP) tasks, their robustness has been doubted due to their vulnerability against adversarial
attacks [15]. Particularly, a type of word-level adversarial perturbation named synonym substitution
can generate adversarial examples with high semantic similarity even in the hard-label setting with
limited information [14, 26]. Accordingly, recent years have seen an urge for robust NLP models
that can provide certified robust predictions [23, 25, 31] for this type of attack. A prediction for a
text sample is certified if the hard-label prediction is correct and remains unchanged when the input
is changed to any text sample constructed from the synonym substitution. The key to producing
certified predictions is certified robust training, which introduces perturbation during training to ask
the model to adapt to it and enables it to still perform well in the inference stage under perturbation.
Due to the large scale of NLP models nowadays, certification methods adopted for text data are
usually probabilistic ones. In this context, given a base model that outputs a single prediction, a
smoothed model is built on it in the inference stage with randomized mechanisms, whose outputs
are used to decide whether predictions are certified. Thus, two aspects are essential for generating
certified predictions: the robustness of the base model and the certification of the smoothed model.
∗

Corresponding author.
The implementation code is available at https://github.com/machinelearning4health/
UniT.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

