Partial Counterfactual Identification of Continuous
Outcomes with a Curvature Sensitivity Model

Valentyn Melnychuk, Dennis Frauen & Stefan Feuerriegel
LMU Munich & Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
Munich, Germany
melnychuk@lmu.de

Abstract
Counterfactual inference aims to answer retrospective “what if” questions and
thus belongs to the most fine-grained type of inference in Pearl’s causality ladder.
Existing methods for counterfactual inference with continuous outcomes aim at
point identification and thus make strong and unnatural assumptions about the
underlying structural causal model. In this paper, we relax these assumptions
and aim at partial counterfactual identification of continuous outcomes, i.e., when
the counterfactual query resides in an ignorance interval with informative bounds.
We prove that, in general, the ignorance interval of the counterfactual queries
has non-informative bounds, already when functions of structural causal models
are continuously differentiable. As a remedy, we propose a novel sensitivity
model called Curvature Sensitivity Model. This allows us to obtain informative
bounds by bounding the curvature of level sets of the functions. We further
show that existing point counterfactual identification methods are special cases
of our Curvature Sensitivity Model when the bound of the curvature is set to
zero. We then propose an implementation of our Curvature Sensitivity Model in
the form of a novel deep generative model, which we call Augmented PseudoInvertible Decoder. Our implementation employs (i) residual normalizing flows
with (ii) variational augmentations. We empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of our Augmented Pseudo-Invertible Decoder. To the best of our knowledge, ours
is the first partial identification model for Markovian structural causal models with
continuous outcomes.

1

Introduction

Counterfactual inference aims to answer retrospective “what if” questions. Examples are: Would a
patient’s recovery have been faster, had a doctor applied a different treatment? Would my salary
be higher, had I studied at a different college? Counterfactual inference is widely used in datadriven decision-making, such as root cause analysis [18, 139], recommender systems [16, 36, 83],
responsibility attribution [50, 73, 77], and personalized medicine [84, 138]. Counterfactual inference
is also relevant for various machine learning tasks such as safe policy search [108], reinforcement
learning [19, 38, 63, 86, 91], algorithmic fairness [76, 104, 146], and explainability [42, 44, 64, 65,
75].
Counterfactual queries are located at the top of Pearl’s ladder of causation [8, 51, 101], i. e., at the
third layer L3 of causation [8] (see Fig. 1, right). Counterfactual queries are challenging as they do
reasoning in both the actual world and a hypothetical one where variables are set to different values
than they have in reality.
State-of-the-art methods for counterfactual inference typically aim at point identification. These
works fall into two streams. (1) The first stream [21, 29, 31, 70, 84, 100, 113, 114, 117, 118,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

