What Can We Learn from Unlearnable Datasets?
Pedro Sandoval-Segura1 Vasu Singla1 Jonas Geiping1
Micah Goldblum2 Tom Goldstein1
1
University of Maryland 2 New York University
{psando, vsingla, jgeiping, tomg}@umd.edu

goldblum@nyu.edu

Abstract
In an era of widespread web scraping, unlearnable dataset methods have the potential to protect data privacy by preventing deep neural networks from generalizing.
But in addition to a number of practical limitations that make their use unlikely,
we make a number of findings that call into question their ability to safeguard data.
First, it is widely believed that neural networks trained on unlearnable datasets only
learn shortcuts, simpler rules that are not useful for generalization. In contrast, we
find that networks actually can learn useful features that can be reweighed for high
test performance, suggesting that image protection is not assured. Unlearnable
datasets are also believed to induce learning shortcuts through linear separability
of added perturbations. We provide a counterexample, demonstrating that linear
separability of perturbations is not a necessary condition. To emphasize why linearly separable perturbations should not be relied upon, we propose an orthogonal
projection attack which allows learning from unlearnable datasets published in
ICML 2021 and ICLR 2023. Our proposed attack is significantly less complex
than recently proposed techniques.1

1

Introduction

Deep learning is fueled by an abundance of data, the collection of which is largely unregulated
[17, 20, 14, 32]. Images of human faces [9], artwork [1], and text [22, 24] are increasingly scraped
at scale without consent. In an attempt to prevent the unauthorized use of data, unlearnable dataset
methods make small perturbations to data so that deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on the
modified data result in poor test accuracy [10, 7, 6, 36, 27]. The idea is that if generalization
performance is harmed by incorporating the modified, “unlearnable” data, third parties will be
disincentivized from scraping it. Unlearnable dataset methods answer the following question: How
should one imperceptibly modify the clean training set to cause the largest generalization gap?
In this paper, we analyze properties of unlearnable dataset methods in order to assess their future
viability and security promises. Currently, unlearnable dataset methods are unlikely to be used for
safeguarding public data because they require perturbing a large portion (e.g. more than 50%) of
the training set [10, 27] and adversarial training is a principled attack [31]. Additionally, published
data is immutable and must withstand current and future attacks [23]. While there are a number of
reasons why these unlearnable dataset methods are unlikely to be employed, our results shed light
on privacy implications and challenge common hypotheses about how they work. We make several
findings by analyzing a number of unlearnable datasets developed from diverse objectives and theory.
In particular,
• We demonstrate that, in many cases, neural networks can learn generalizable features from
unlearnable datasets. Our results imply that while resulting test accuracy may be low, DNNs
may still learn useful features from protected data.
1

Code is available at https://github.com/psandovalsegura/learn-from-unlearnable.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

