Entropy-dissipation Informed Neural Network
for McKean-Vlasov Type PDEs
Zebang Shen∗
ETH Zürich
zebang.shen@inf.ethz.ch

Zhenfu Wang∗
Peking University
zwang@bicmr.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The McKean-Vlasov equation (MVE) describes the collective behavior of particles subject to drift, diffusion, and mean-field interaction. In physical systems, the
interaction term can be singular, i.e. it diverges when two particles collide. Notable examples of such interactions include the Coulomb interaction, fundamental
in plasma physics, and the Biot-Savart interaction, present in the vorticity formulation of the 2D Navier-Stokes equation (NSE) in fluid dynamics. Solving MVEs
that involve singular interaction kernels presents a significant challenge, especially
when aiming to provide rigorous theoretical guarantees. In this work, we propose
a novel approach based on the concept of entropy dissipation in the underlying
system. We derive a potential function that effectively controls the KL divergence
between a hypothesis solution and the ground truth. Building upon this theoretical foundation, we introduce the Entropy-dissipation Informed Neural Network
(EINN) framework for solving MVEs. In EINN, we utilize neural networks (NN)
to approximate the underlying velocity field and minimize the proposed potential function. By leveraging the expressive power of NNs, our approach offers a
promising avenue for tackling the complexities associated with singular interactions. To assess the empirical performance of our method, we compare EINN with
SOTA NN-based MVE solvers. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in solving MVEs across various example problems.

1

Introduction

Scientists use Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) to describe natural laws and predict the dynamics of real-world systems. As PDEs are of fundamental importance, a growing area in machine
learning is the use of neural networks (NN) to solve these equations [Han et al., 2018, Zhang et al.,
2018, Raissi et al., 2020, Cai et al., 2021, Karniadakis et al., 2021, Cuomo et al., 2022]. An important category of PDEs is the McKean-Vlasov equation (MVE), which models the dynamics of a
stochastic particle system with mean-field interactions
√
dXt = −∇V (Xt )dt + K ∗ ⇢¯t (Xt )dt + 2⌫dBt , ⇢¯t = Law(Xt ).
(1)
Here Xt ∈ X denotes a random particle’ position, X is either Rd or the torus ⇧d (a cube [−L, L]d
with periodic boundary condition), V ∶ Rd → R denotes a known potential, K ∶ Rd → Rd denotes
some interaction kernel and the convolution operation is defined as h ∗ = ∫X h(x − y) (y)dy,
{Bt }t≥0 is the standard d-dimensional Wiener process with ⌫ ≥ 0 being the diffusion coefficient,
and ⇢¯t ∶ X → R is the law or the probability density function of the random variable Xt and the
initial data ⇢¯0 is given. Under mild regularity conditions, the density function ⇢¯t satisfies the MVE
(MVE)

∗

@t ⇢¯t (x) + div (¯
⇢t (−∇V (x) + K ∗ ⇢¯t (x))) = ⌫ ⇢¯t (x),

Authors are listed in alphabetic order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(2)

