ForkMerge: Mitigating Negative Transfer in
Auxiliary-Task Learning

Junguang Jiang∗, Baixu Chen∗, Junwei Pan§ , Ximei Wang§ , Dapeng Liu§ , Jie Jiang§ ,
Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
§
Tencent Inc, China
{jjg20,cbx22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jonaspan,messixmwang,rocliu,zeus}@tencent.com,
mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Auxiliary-Task Learning (ATL) aims to improve the performance of the target task
by leveraging the knowledge obtained from related tasks. Occasionally, learning
multiple tasks simultaneously results in lower accuracy than learning only the target
task, which is known as negative transfer. This problem is often attributed to the
gradient conflicts among tasks, and is frequently tackled by coordinating the task
gradients in previous works. However, these optimization-based methods largely
overlook the auxiliary-target generalization capability. To better understand the root
cause of negative transfer, we experimentally investigate it from both optimization
and generalization perspectives. Based on our findings, we introduce ForkMerge, a
novel approach that periodically forks the model into multiple branches, automatically searches the varying task weights by minimizing target validation errors, and
dynamically merges all branches to filter out detrimental task-parameter updates.
On a series of auxiliary-task learning benchmarks, ForkMerge outperforms existing
methods and effectively mitigates negative transfer.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success in various machine learning applications,
such as computer vision [23, 22], natural language processing [62, 11, 57], and recommendation
systems [46]. However, one major challenge in training deep neural networks is the scarcity of
labeled data. In recent years, Auxiliary-Task Learning (ATL) has emerged as a promising technique
to address this challenge [67, 39, 43]. ATL improves the generalization of target tasks by leveraging
the useful signals provided by some related auxiliary tasks. For instance, larger-scale tasks, such as
user click prediction, can be utilized as auxiliary tasks to improve the performance of smaller-scale
target tasks, such as user conversion prediction in recommendation [47, 36]. Self-supervised tasks on
unlabeled data can serve as auxiliary tasks to improve the performance of the target task in computer
vision and natural language processing, without requiring additional labeled data [34, 69, 11, 3].
However, in practice, learning multiple tasks simultaneously sometimes leads to performance degradation compared to learning only the target task, a phenomenon known as negative transfer [84, 75].
Even in large language models, negative transfer problems may still exist. For example, RLHF [7],
a key component of ChatGPT [57], achieves negative effects on nearly half of the multiple-choice
question tasks when post-training GPT-4 [58]. There has been a significant amount of methods
proposed to mitigate negative transfer in ATL [71, 79, 15, 39]. Notable previous studies attribute
negative transfer to the optimization difficulty, especially the gradient conflicts between different
tasks, and propose to mitigate negative transfer by reducing interference between task gradients
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

