Discrete-Smoothness in
Online Algorithms with Predictions

Yossi Azar
Tel Aviv University
azar@tau.ac.il

Debmalya Panigrahi
Duke University
debmalya@cs.duke.edu

Noam Touitou∗
Amazon
noamtwx@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, there has been an increasing focus on designing online algorithms
with (machine-learned) predictions. The ideal learning-augmented algorithm is
comparable to the optimum when given perfect predictions (consistency), to the best
online approximation for arbitrary predictions (robustness), and should interpolate
between these extremes as a smooth function of the prediction error. In this paper,
we quantify these guarantees in terms of a general property that we call discretesmoothness and achieve discrete-smooth algorithms for online covering, specifically
the facility location and set cover problems. For set cover, our work improves the
results of Bamas, Maggiori, and Svensson (2020) by augmenting consistency and
robustness with smoothness guarantees. For facility location, our work improves
on prior work by Almanza et al. (2021) by generalizing to nonuniform costs and
also providing smoothness guarantees by augmenting consistency and robustness.

1

Introduction

The field of learning-augmented online algorithms has gained rapid prominence in recent years.
The basic premise is to provide an online algorithm with additional (machine-learned) predictions
about the future to help bypass worst-case lower bounds. Since machine-learned predictions can
be noisy in general, a key desideratum of the model is that the competitive ratio of the online
algorithm should degrade gracefully with prediction error. In particular, the cost of the algorithm
should be bounded against that of the predicted solution (called consistency) or that of an online
algorithm without predictions (called robustness) and should smoothly interpolate between the two
with increase in prediction error (called smoothness). (The terms consistency and robustness were
originally coined by Purohit, Svitkina, and Kumar [38].) While robustness and consistency are
problem-independent notions, smoothness depends on prediction error which has been defined in
a problem-specific manner. In this paper, we introduce a novel, problem-independent notion of
smoothness called discrete-smoothness that applies to any combinatorial problem. As illustrative
applications of this new framework, we design discrete-smooth (learning-augmented) algorithms for
two classic problems, facility location and set cover, which improve and generalize previous results
for these problems due to Almanza et al. (NeurIPS ’21 [1]) and Bamas et al. (NeurIPS ’20 [11]).
First, we introduce discrete-smoothness. Suppose we are given a problem instance of size 𝑛. Let OPT
be a solution for this instance. (The reader may think of OPT as an optimal solution, although our
guarantees will hold for any feasible solution.) Let the predicted solution be 𝑆. Ideally, 𝑆 = OPT;
therefore, in general, OPT comprises two parts: the predicted part OPT| 𝑆 := OPT ∩ 𝑆 and the
unpredicted part OPT| 𝑆 := OPT \ 𝑆. On the predicted part OPT| 𝑆 , the algorithm has a meaningful
signal from the prediction but the noise in the signal is given by the overprediction 𝑠Δ := |𝑆 \ OPT|.
Naturally, the competitive ratio of the algorithm on this part will degrade with increase in this noise.
On the unpredicted part OPT| 𝑆 , the algorithm does not have any signal from the prediction and
∗ This paper does not relate to the author’s work at Amazon.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

