Robust Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning via
Adversarial Regularization: Theoretical Foundation
and Stable Algorithms
Alexander Bukharin† Yan Li† Yue Yu† Qingru Zhang† Zhehui Chen‡ Simiao Zuo§
Chao Zhang†

Songan Zhang¶

Tuo Zhao†

Abstract
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has shown promising results across
several domains. Despite this promise, MARL policies often lack robustness and
are therefore sensitive to small changes in their environment. This presents a serious
concern for the real world deployment of MARL algorithms, where the testing
environment may slightly differ from the training environment. In this work we
show that we can gain robustness by controlling a policy’s Lipschitz constant, and
under mild conditions, establish the existence of a Lipschitz and close-to-optimal
policy. Based on these insights, we propose a new robust MARL framework,
ERNIE, that promotes the Lipschitz continuity of the policies with respect to the
state observations and actions by adversarial regularization. The ERNIE framework
provides robustness against noisy observations, changing transition dynamics, and
malicious actions of agents. However, ERNIE’s adversarial regularization may
introduce some training instability. To reduce this instability, we reformulate
adversarial regularization as a Stackelberg game. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed framework with extensive experiments in traffic light control and
particle environments. In addition, we extend ERNIE to mean-field MARL with
a formulation based on distributionally robust optimization that outperforms its
non-robust counterpart and is of independent interest. Our code is available at
https://github.com/abukharin3/ERNIE.

1

Introduction

In the past decade advances in deep neural networks and greater computational power have led to
great successes for Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL), which has achieved success on a
wide variety of multi-agent decision-making tasks ranging from traffic light control [1] to StarCraft
[2]. However, while much effort has been devoted to applying MARL to new problems, there has
been limited work regarding the robustness of MARL policies.
Despite the limited attention paid to robustness, it is essential for MARL policies to be robust. Most
MARL policies are trained in a fixed environment. Since these policies are trained solely to perform
well in that environment, they may perform poorly in an environment with slightly different transition
dynamics than the training environment. In addition, while agents are fed with exact state information
in training, MARL policies deployed in the real world can receive inaccurate state information (e.g.,
due to sensor error). Finally, even a single agent acting maliciously or differently than expected
can cause a chain reaction that destabilizes the whole system. These phenomena cause significant
concern for the real-world deployment of MARL algorithms, where the environment dynamics and
observation noise can change over time. We observe that even when the change in the environment’s
dynamics is small, the performance of MARL algorithms can deteriorate severely (See an example
†

Georgia Institute of Technology

‡

Google

§

Microsoft

¶

Ford Motor Company

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

