Harnessing Hard Mixed Samples with Decoupled
Regularizer

Zicheng Liu1,2,∗

Siyuan Li1,2,∗
Ge Wang1,2
Chen Tan1,2
1,2
2,†
Lirong Wu
Stan Z. Li
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Hangzhou, China;
1
Zhejiang University; 2 Westlake University;
{liuzicheng; lisiyuan; wangge; tanchen; lirongwu; stan.zq.li}
@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Mixup is an efficient data augmentation approach that improves the generalization
of neural networks by smoothing the decision boundary with mixed data. Recently, dynamic mixup methods have improved previous static policies effectively
(e.g., linear interpolation) by maximizing target-related salient regions in mixed
samples, but excessive additional time costs are not acceptable. These additional
computational overheads mainly come from optimizing the mixed samples according to the mixed labels. However, we found that the extra optimizing step
may be redundant because label-mismatched mixed samples are informative hard
mixed samples for deep models to localize discriminative features. In this paper,
we thus are not trying to propose a more complicated dynamic mixup policy but
rather an efficient mixup objective function with a decoupled regularizer named
Decoupled Mixup (DM). The primary effect is that DM can adaptively utilize those
hard mixed samples to mine discriminative features without losing the original
smoothness of mixup. As a result, DM enables static mixup methods to achieve
comparable or even exceed the performance of dynamic methods without any
extra computation. This also leads to an interesting objective design problem for
mixup training that we need to focus on both smoothing the decision boundaries
and identifying discriminative features. Extensive experiments on supervised and
semi-supervised learning benchmarks across seven datasets validate the effectiveness of DM as a plug-and-play module. Source code and models are available at
https://github.com/Westlake-AI/openmixup.
CAM of Squirrel

Deep Learning has become the bedrock of modern AI for many tasks in machine learning [3]
such as computer vision [19, 18], natural language processing [12]. Using a large number
of learnable parameters, deep neural networks
(DNNs) can recognize subtle dependencies in
large training datasets to be later leveraged to
perform accurate predictions on unseen data.
However, models might overfit the training set
without constraints or enough data [53]. To this
∗

Equal contribution.

CAM of Panda

CAM of Squirrel

CAM of Panda

MixUp

Introduction

†

CutMix

1

Mixed Cross-entropy

Decoupled Mixup Loss

Figure 1: visualization of hard mixed sample
mining by class activation mapping (CAM) [49]
of ResNet-50 on ImageNet. From left to right,
CAM of top-2 predicted classes using mixup crossentropy (MCE) and decoupled mixup (DM) loss.

Stan Z. Li (Stan.ZQ.Li@westlake.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

