Locality-Aware
Generalizable Implicit Neural Representation

Doyup Lee∗
Kakao Brain
doyup.lee@kakaobrain.com
Minsu Cho †
POSTECH
mscho@postech.ac.kr

Chiheon Kim∗
Kakao Brain
chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com
Wook-Shin Han †
POSTECH
wshan@dblab.postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Generalizable implicit neural representation (INR) enables a single continuous function, i.e., a coordinate-based neural network, to represent multiple data instances
by modulating its weights or intermediate features using latent codes. However,
the expressive power of the state-of-the-art modulation is limited due to its inability
to localize and capture fine-grained details of data entities such as specific pixels
and rays. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework for generalizable
INR that combines a transformer encoder with a locality-aware INR decoder. The
transformer encoder predicts a set of latent tokens from a data instance to encode
local information into each latent token. The locality-aware INR decoder extracts a
modulation vector by selectively aggregating the latent tokens via cross-attention
for a coordinate input and then predicts the output by progressively decoding with
coarse-to-fine modulation through multiple frequency bandwidths. The selective
token aggregation and the multi-band feature modulation enable us to learn localityaware representation in spatial and spectral aspects, respectively. Our framework
significantly outperforms previous generalizable INRs and validates the usefulness
of the locality-aware latents for downstream tasks such as image generation.

Introduction

Recent advances in generalizable implicit neural representation (INR) enable a single coordinate-based multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) to represent multiple data instances as a
continuous function. Instead of per-sample training of individual coordinate-based MLPs, generalizable INR extracts
latent codes of data instances [13, 14, 40] to modulate
the weights or intermediate features of the shared MLP
model [8, 11, 19, 35]. However, despite the advances in
previous approaches, their performance is still insufficient
compared with individual training of INRs per sample.

45

Test PSNR (dB)

1

40
35
30

TransINR
IPC
Ours

25
20
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

Epochs
We postulate that the expressive power of generalizable
Figure
1:
Learning
curves
of PSNRs durINRs is limited by the ability of locality-awareness to
ing
training
on
ImageNette
178×178.
localize relevant entities from a data instance and control
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

