Computational Guarantees for Doubly Entropic
Wasserstein Barycenters via Damped Sinkhorn
Iterations
Tomas Vaškevičius and Lénaïc Chizat
Institute of Mathematics
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Station Z
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland

Abstract
We study the computation of doubly regularized Wasserstein barycenters, a recently
introduced family of entropic barycenters governed by inner and outer regularization strengths. Previous research has demonstrated that various regularization
parameter choices unify several notions of entropy-penalized barycenters while
also revealing new ones, including a special case of debiased barycenters. In this
paper, we propose and analyze an algorithm for computing doubly regularized
Wasserstein barycenters. Our procedure builds on damped Sinkhorn iterations
followed by exact maximization/minimization steps and guarantees convergence
for any choice of regularization parameters. An inexact variant of our algorithm,
implementable using approximate Monte Carlo sampling, offers the first nonasymptotic convergence guarantees for approximating Wasserstein barycenters
between discrete point clouds in the free-support/grid-free setting.

1

Introduction

The Wasserstein distance between two probability distributions measures the least amount of effort
needed to reconfigure one measure into the other. Unlike other notions of distances based solely on
the numerical values taken by the distribution functions (e.g., the Kullback-Leibler divergence), the
Wasserstein distance incorporates an additional layer of complexity by considering pairwise distances
between distinct points, measured by some predetermined cost function. As a result, the Wasserstein
distances can be seen to lift the geometry of the underlying space where the probability measures
are defined to the space of the probability measures itself. This allows for a more thorough and
geometrically nuanced understanding of the relationships between different probability measures,
which proved to be a versatile tool of increasing importance in a broad spectrum of areas.
Given a collection of probability measures and an associated set of positive weights that sum to one,
the corresponding Wasserstein barycenter minimizes the weighted sum of Wasserstein distances to
the given measures. In the special case of two measures and the squared Euclidean cost function,
Wasserstein barycenters concide with the notion of McCann’s displacement interpolation introduced
in the seminal paper [42]. The general case, encompassing an arbitrary number of measures, was first
studied by Agueh and Carlier [1], where they also demonstrated a close link between Wasserstein
barycenters and the multi-marginal optimal transport problem [29]. Recent years have witnessed an
increasing number of applications of Wasserstein barycenters across various scientific disciplines. See,
for instance, the following sample of works in economics [16, 11], statistics [8], image processing
[50], and machine learning [19], among other areas. For further background and references we point
the interested reader to the introductory surveys [47, 45] and the textbooks [58, 59, 54, 46, 28].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

