DynGFN: Towards Bayesian Inference of Gene
Regulatory Networks with GFlowNets

Lazar Atanackovic1,2∗

Alexander Tong3,4∗

Yoshua Bengio3,4,6

Bo Wang1,2,5

Leo J. Lee1,2

Jason Hartford3,4,7

1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 4 Université de Montréal
5
University Health Network, 6 CIFAR Fellow, 7 Valence Labs
3

Abstract
One of the grand challenges of cell biology is inferring the gene regulatory network
(GRN) which describes interactions between genes and their products that control
gene expression and cellular function. We can treat this as a causal discovery
problem but with two non-standard challenges: (1) regulatory networks are inherently cyclic so we should not model a GRN as a directed acyclic graph (DAG),
and (2) observations have significant measurement noise, so for typical sample
sizes there will always be a large equivalence class of graphs that are likely given
the data, and we want methods that capture this uncertainty. Existing methods
either focus on challenge (1), identifying cyclic structure from dynamics, or on
challenge (2) learning complex Bayesian posteriors over DAGs, but not both. In
this paper we leverage the fact that it is possible to estimate the “velocity” of gene
expression with RNA velocity techniques to develop an approach that addresses
both challenges. Because we have access to velocity information, we can treat
the Bayesian structure learning problem as a problem of sparse identification of a
dynamical system, capturing cyclic feedback loops through time. Since our objective is to model uncertainty over discrete structures, we leverage Generative Flow
Networks (GFlowNets) to estimate the posterior distribution over the combinatorial
space of possible sparse dependencies. Our results indicate that our method learns
posteriors that better encapsulate the distributions of cyclic structures compared to
counterpart state-of-the-art Bayesian structure learning approaches.

1

Introduction

Inferring gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is a long standing problem in cell biology [25, 44]. If
we knew the GRN, it would dramatically simplify the design of biological experiments and the
development of drugs because it would serve as a map of which genes to perturb to manipulate
protein and gene expression. GRNs concisely represent the complex system of directed interactions
between genes and their regulatory products that govern cellular function through control of RNA
(gene) expression and protein concentration. We can treat GRN inference as a causal discovery
problem by treating the regulatory structure between genes (variables) as causal dependencies (edges)
that we infer / rule out by using gene expression data. Structure learning methods aim to automate
this task by inferring a set of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) that are consistent with the conditional
independencies that we can measure among the variables [14, 41, 42]. While there may be multiple
∗

Equal Contribution
Correspondence to: (l.atanackovic@mail.utoronto.ca)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

