Mask Propagation for Efficient Video Semantic
Segmentation

Yuetian Weng1,2∗ Mingfei Han3,4 Haoyu He1 Mingjie Li3
Lina Yao4 Xiaojun Chang3,5 Bohan Zhuang1†
1
ZIP Lab, Monash University 2 Baidu Inc. 3 ReLER, AAII, UTS
4
Data61, CSIRO 5 Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI

Abstract
Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS) involves assigning a semantic label to each
pixel in a video sequence. Prior work in this field has demonstrated promising
results by extending image semantic segmentation models to exploit temporal
relationships across video frames; however, these approaches often incur significant
computational costs. In this paper, we propose an efficient mask propagation
framework for VSS, called MPVSS. Our approach first employs a strong querybased image segmentor on sparse key frames to generate accurate binary masks and
class predictions. We then design a flow estimation module utilizing the learned
queries to generate a set of segment-aware flow maps, each associated with a
mask prediction from the key frame. Finally, the mask-flow pairs are warped to
serve as the mask predictions for the non-key frames. By reusing predictions from
key frames, we circumvent the need to process a large volume of video frames
individually with resource-intensive segmentors, alleviating temporal redundancy
and significantly reducing computational costs. Extensive experiments on VSPW
and Cityscapes demonstrate that our mask propagation framework achieves SOTA
accuracy and efficiency trade-offs. For instance, our best model with Swin-L
backbone outperforms the SOTA MRCFA using MiT-B5 by 4.0% mIoU, requiring
only 26% FLOPs on the VSPW dataset. Moreover, our framework reduces up
to 4× FLOPs compared to the per-frame Mask2Former baseline with only up
to 2% mIoU degradation on the Cityscapes validation set. Code is available at
https://github.com/ziplab/MPVSS.

1

Introduction

Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS), a fundamental task in computer vision, seeks to assign a
semantic category label to each pixel in a video sequence. Previous research on VSS has leveraged
developments in image semantic segmentation models, e.g., FCN [40] and Deeplab [82, 4], which
made tremendous progress in the field. However, adapting image semantic segmentation models
to VSS remains challenging. On one hand, sophisticated temporal modeling is required to capture
the intricate dynamics among video frames. On the other hand, videos contain a significantly larger
volume of data compared to images. Processing every frame with a strong image segmentor can incur
significant computational costs.
Prior work in VSS mainly focuses on leveraging both temporal and spatial information to enhance
the accuracy of pixel-wise labeling on each video frame, building upon the pixel-wise classification
paradigm of traditional image semantic segmentors. Specifically, these methods exploit temporal
∗
†

Work done during an internship at Baidu Inc.
Corresponding author. Email: bohan.zhuang@gmail.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

