On Optimal Caching and Model Multiplexing for
Large Model Inference

Banghua Zhu
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
banghua@berkeley.edu

Ying Sheng
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Ying.Sheng@stanford.edu

Clark Barrett
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
barrett@cs.stanford.edu

Michael I. Jordan
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
jordan@berkeley.edu

Lianmin Zheng
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
lmzheng@berkeley.edu
Jiantao Jiao
Department of EECS
UC Berkeley
jiantao@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) and other large foundation models have achieved
noteworthy success, but their size exacerbates existing resource consumption and
latency challenges. In particular, the large-scale deployment of these models is
hindered by the significant resource requirements during inference. In this paper,
we study two approaches for mitigating these challenges: employing a cache to
store previous queries and learning a model multiplexer to choose from an ensemble
of models for query processing.
Theoretically, we provide an optimal algorithm for jointly optimizing both
approaches to reduce the inference cost in both offline and online tabular settings.
By combining a caching algorithm, namely Greedy Dual Size with Frequency
(GDSF) or Least Expected Cost (LEC), with a model multiplexer, we achieve
optimal rates in both offline and online settings. Empirically, simulations show
that the combination of our caching and model multiplexing algorithms greatly
improves over the baselines, with up to 50× improvement over the baseline when
the ratio between the maximum cost and minimum cost is 100. Experiments on
real datasets show a 4.3× improvement in FLOPs over the baseline when the ratio
for FLOPs is 10, and a 1.8× improvement in latency when the ratio for average
latency is 1.85.

1

Introduction

The recent emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) and foundation models has significantly
increased the capabilities of AI systems (Bubeck et al., 2023; Nori et al., 2023; Ziegler et al., 2019;
Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Beeching et al., 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a;
Google, 2023). This progress comes at a cost, however, of increased resource consumption and
latency during both training and inference, presenting challenges not only in real-world deployment
but also in terms of environmental impact and energy usage (Sharir et al., 2020; Patterson et al., 2021;
Bommasani et al., 2022). For instance, LLM-based chatbots typically consist of large transformerbased networks with parameter counts ranging from one to several hundred billion (Zhou et al.,
2023). Moreover, the auto-regressive nature of LLMs exacerbates the issue of latency and resource
consumption because the model can only generate one token at a time. Thus, compared to traditional
AI-powered services, language model inference costs are much higher and the latency is significantly
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

