Point-Cloud Completion with Pretrained
Text-to-image Diffusion Models

Yoni Kasten1
1

Ohad Rahamim2
2
NVIDIA Research
Bar-Ilan University

Gal Chechik1,2

Abstract
Point-cloud data collected in real-world applications are often incomplete, because objects are being observed from specific viewpoints, which only capture
one perspective. Data can also be incomplete due to occlusion and low-resolution
sampling. Existing approaches to completion rely on training models with datasets
of predefined objects to guide the completion of point clouds. Unfortunately, these
approaches fail to generalize when tested on objects or real-world setups that
are poorly represented in their training set. Here, we leverage recent advances
in text-guided 3D shape generation, showing how to use image priors for generating 3D objects. We describe an approach called SDS-Complete that uses a
pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model and leverages the text semantics of a
given incomplete point cloud of an object, to obtain a complete surface representation. SDS-Complete can complete a variety of objects using test-time optimization
without expensive collection of 3D data. We evaluate SDS-Complete on a collection of incomplete scanned objects, captured by real-world depth sensors and
LiDAR scanners. We find that it effectively reconstructs objects that are absent
from common datasets, reducing Chamfer loss by about 50% on average compared
with current methods. Project page: https://sds-complete.github.io/

SDS
Complete

Partial
pointcloud

SDS
Complete
Partial
pointcloud

+ “A Chair”

+ “A teapot”

Figure 1: We present SDS-Complete: A test-time optimization method for completing point clouds
captured by depth sensors, leveraging pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. The inputs to our
method are an incomplete point cloud (blue) along with a textual description of the object. The output
is a complete surface (gray) that is consistent with the input points (blue). The method works well on
a variety of objects captured by real-world point-cloud sensors.

1

Introduction

Modeling 3D objects and scenes is becoming a central part of machine perception. Most 3D data is
collected using sensors that capture the 3D structure of various objects, like LIDAR or depth scanners.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

