Leveraging Early-Stage Robustness in Diffusion
Models for Efficient and High-Quality Image Synthesis

Yulhwa Kim1 , Dongwon Jo1 , Hyesung Jeon1 , Taesu Kim2 , Daehyun Ahn2 ,
Hyungjun Kim2 , Jae-Joon Kim1
1
Seoul National University, 2 SqueezeBits Inc.
{yulhwakim, dongwonjo, hjeon2k, kimjaejoon}@snu.ac.kr,
{taesu.kim, daehyun.ahn, hyungjun.kim}@squeezebits.com

Abstract
While diffusion models have demonstrated exceptional image generation capabilities, the iterative noise estimation process required for these models is computeintensive and their practical implementation is limited by slow sampling speeds. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach to speed up the noise estimation network
by leveraging the robustness of early-stage diffusion models. Our findings indicate
that inaccurate computation during the early-stage of the reverse diffusion process
has minimal impact on the quality of generated images, as this stage primarily
outlines the image while later stages handle the finer details that require more sensitive information. To improve computational efficiency, we combine our findings
with post-training quantization (PTQ) and introduce a method that utilizes low-bit
activations for the early reverse diffusion process while maintaining high-bit activations for the later stages. Experimental results show that the proposed method
can accelerate the early-stage computation without sacrificing the quality of the
generated images.

1

Introduction

Diffusion models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] for image synthesis have gained significant attention in recent
years due to their exceptional proficiency in generating high quality and diverse images. A key feature
of the diffusion models is that they gradually dissipate noise from latent variables across a sequence of
diffusion steps [1]. However, despite their remarkable image synthesis capabilities, diffusion models
suffer from slow image synthesis process. This is primarily caused by the compute-intensive nature of
the denoising network [3, 9], which is an integral part of the diffusion model. The iterative process of
applying the denoising network across multiple diffusion steps consumes substantial computational
resources, resulting in very long synthesis time [6]. As a result, this limitation poses a challenge for
real-time applications or scenarios that require quick image synthesis.
Quantization [10, 11, 12] is a widely used technique for improving the computational efficiency of
neural networks. Quantization reduces memory usage by converting high-precision floating-point
weight/activation values into low-precision integer values [13]. It also enables more efficient processing by leveraging efficient integer operations instead of computationally expensive floating-point
operations [14]. As a result, there is a growing research trend focusing on applying quantization
techniques to denoising networks. Two notable studies, PTQ4DM [15] and Q-diffusion [16], explored
the applications of LAPQ [17] and BRECQ [18], which are commonly used Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) frameworks, to the diffusion models. Denoising networks differ from conventional
neural networks as they are iteratively used during the reverse diffusion process, and their output
distributions vary with diffusion step. Considering this characteristic, the aforementioned studies
primarily explored methods for constructing a calibration dataset to effectively apply PTQ to diffusion
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

