On the Identifiability of Sparse ICA without
Assuming Non-Gaussianity

Ignavier Ng∗1 , Yujia Zheng∗1 , Xinshuai Dong1 , Kun Zhang1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
{ignavierng, yujiazh, dongxinshuai, kunz1}@cmu.edu

Abstract
Independent component analysis (ICA) is a fundamental statistical tool used to reveal hidden generative processes from observed data. However, traditional ICA approaches struggle with the rotational invariance inherent in Gaussian distributions,
often necessitating the assumption of non-Gaussianity in the underlying sources.
This may limit their applicability in broader contexts. To accommodate Gaussian
sources, we develop an identifiability theory that relies on second-order statistics
without imposing further preconditions on the distribution of sources, by introducing novel assumptions on the connective structure from sources to observed variables. Different from recent work that focuses on potentially restrictive connective
structures, our proposed assumption of structural variability is both considerably
less restrictive and provably necessary. Furthermore, we propose two estimation
methods based on second-order statistics and sparsity constraint. Experimental
results are provided to validate our identifiability theory and estimation methods.

1

Introduction

Independent component analysis (ICA) [12] has emerged as an essential statistical tool in the scientific
community, with application in various disciplines including neuroscience [27], biology [41, 9], and
Earth science [32]. It aims to uncover the hidden generative processes that govern the observed data
and separate mixed signals into independent sources. However, it is known that the traditional approaches of ICA struggle with Gaussian sources, which may limit their applicability in a wide variety
of contexts. For instance, several biological traits and measurements such as height, blood pressure,
and measurement errors in genetics, as well as the thermal noises in electronic circuits, may often
be normally distributed [29, 34]. Classical identifiability results in ICA rely on higher-order statistics
(e.g., Kurtois) [24], and cannot provide desired theoretical guarantees when there is more than one
Gaussian source. Identifiability based on second-order statistic is thus essential in these scenarios.
The primary hurdle in applying ICA to Gaussian sources lies in the rotational invariance of Gaussian
distribution [25]. To address this issue, earlier studies [30, 5, 35] incorporated additional information
by assuming that the sources are nonstationary. However, this extra information may not always
be readily available, limiting the generalizability of these approaches. Thus, recent research [49, 1]
has started to delve into the connective structure between the sources and the observed variables, as
opposed to solely focusing on distributional assumptions (e.g., non-Gaussianity and nonstationarity).
This shift of focus is motivated by a key observation: despite the rotational invariance in the distribution of Gaussian sources, the sparsity of mixing matrix undergoes noticeable changes, i.e., it may be
denser after rotation [49]. Building on this insight, Zheng et al. [49] introduced two assumptions on the
support of the mixing matrix to achieve identifiability of Gaussian sources, leading to a novel perspective for tackling this long-standing challenge in the field of ICA. On the other hand, Abrahamsen and
Rigollet [1] assumed that the mixing matrix is generated from a sparse Bernoulli-Gaussian ensemble.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

