A Single 2D Pose with Context is Worth Hundreds
for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Qitao Zhao1∗
Ce Zheng2
Mengyuan Liu3
Chen Chen2
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Peking University, Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract
The dominant paradigm in 3D human pose estimation that lifts a 2D pose sequence
to 3D heavily relies on long-term temporal clues (i.e., using a daunting number
of video frames) for improved accuracy, which incurs performance saturation,
intractable computation and the non-causal problem. This can be attributed to their
inherent inability to perceive spatial context as plain 2D joint coordinates carry
no visual cues. To address this issue, we propose a straightforward yet powerful
solution: leveraging the readily available intermediate visual representations produced by off-the-shelf (pre-trained) 2D pose detectors – no finetuning on the 3D
task is even needed. The key observation is that, while the pose detector learns to
localize 2D joints, such representations (e.g., feature maps) implicitly encode the
joint-centric spatial context thanks to the regional operations in backbone networks.
We design a simple baseline named Context-Aware PoseFormer to showcase its
effectiveness. Without access to any temporal information, the proposed method significantly outperforms its context-agnostic counterpart, PoseFormer [74], and other
state-of-the-art methods using up to hundreds of video frames regarding both speed
and precision. Project page: qitaozhao.github.io/ContextAware-PoseFormer

1

Introduction

3D human pose estimation (HPE) aims to localize human joints in 3D, which has a wide range of
applications, including motion prediction [37], action recognition [9], and tracking [47]. Recently,
with the large availability of 2D human pose detectors [8, 52], lifting 2D pose sequences to 3D
(referred to as lifting-based methods) has been the de facto paradigm in the literature. Compared to
raw RGB images, 2D human poses (as an intermediate representation) have two essential advantages.
On the one hand, domain gaps exist between images (input) and 3D joint locations (output), whereas
this is not the case for 2D and 3D joints. Primarily, 2D joint coordinates provide highly task-relevant
positional information for localizing joints in 3D. On the other, 2D coordinate representation is
exceptionally lightweight in terms of memory cost. For example, in a typical COCO [31] setting, a
2D human pose requires only 17 × 2 floating points, whereas an RGB image requires 256 × 192 × 3
(or even more with higher resolution). This property enables state-of-the-art lifting-based methods
to leverage extremely long-term temporal clues for advanced accuracy, e.g., 243 video frames for
VideoPose3D [45], MixSTE [67], and P-STMO [50]; large as 351 frames for MHFormer [29].
Scaling up the input has brought consistent improvements so far, yet some concerns naturally arise.
First, the performance gains seem to level off when excessively long sequences are used as input
(e.g., improvements are marginal when the frame number increases from 243 to 351 [29]). Second,
long input sequences bring non-trivial computational costs. For instance, temporal processing using
transformers (a popular choice) is expensive, especially with large frame numbers. Third, the use of
∗

Work was done while Qitao was an intern mentored by Chen Chen.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

