Bayes beats Cross Validation: Fast and Accurate
Ridge Regression via Expectation Maximization

Shu Yu Tew
Monash University
shu.tew@monash.edu

Mario Boley
Monash University
mario.boley@monash.edu

Daniel F. Schmidt
Monash University
daniel.schmidt@monash.edu

Abstract
We present a novel method for tuning the regularization hyper-parameter, λ, of
a ridge regression that is faster to compute than leave-one-out cross-validation
(LOOCV) while yielding estimates of the regression parameters of equal, or particularly in the setting of sparse covariates, superior quality to those obtained by
minimising the LOOCV risk. The LOOCV risk can suffer from multiple and bad
local minima for finite n and thus requires the specification of a set of candidate λ,
which can fail to provide good solutions. In contrast, we show that the proposed
method is guaranteed to find a unique optimal solution for large enough n, under
relatively mild conditions, without requiring the specification of any difficult to
determine hyper-parameters. This is based on a Bayesian formulation of ridge
regression that we prove to have a unimodal posterior for large enough n, allowing
for both the optimal λ and the regression coefficients to be jointly learned within
an iterative expectation maximization (EM) procedure. Importantly, we show that
by utilizing an appropriate preprocessing step, a single iteration of the main EM
loop can be implemented in O(min(n, p)) operations, for input data with n rows
and p columns. In contrast, evaluating a single value of λ using fast LOOCV costs
O(n min(n, p)) operations when using the same preprocessing. This advantage
amounts to an asymptotic√improvement of a factor of l for l candidate values for λ
(in the regime q, p ∈ O( n) where q is the number of regression targets).

1

Introduction

Ridge regression [25] is one of the most widely used statistical learning algorithms. Given training
data X ∈ Rn×p and y ∈ Rn , ridge regression finds the linear regression coefficients β̂λ that minimize
the ℓ2 -regularized sum of squared errors, i.e.,

β̂λ = arg min ||y − Xβ||2 + λ||β||2 .
(1)
β

In practice, using ridge regression additionally involves estimating the value for the tuning parameter
λ that minimizes the expected squared error E(xTβ̂λ − y)2 for new data x and y sampled from the
same distribution as the training data. This problem is usually approached via the leave-one-out
cross-validation (LOOCV) estimator, which can be computed efficiently by exploiting a closed-form
solution for the leave-one-out test errors for a given λ. The wide and long-lasting use of the LOOCV
approach suggests that it solves the ridge regression problem more or less optimally, both in terms of
its statistical performance, as well as its computational complexity.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

