Evaluating Neuron Interpretation Methods
of NLP Models
Yimin Fan♡ Fahim Dalvi♢ Nadir Durrani♢ Hassan Sajjad♣
♡
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
♢
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU, Qatar
♣
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Canada

Abstract
Neuron interpretation offers valuable insights into how knowledge is structured
within a deep neural network model. While a number of neuron interpretation
methods have been proposed in the literature, the field lacks a comprehensive
comparison among these methods. This gap hampers progress due to the absence
of standardized metrics and benchmarks. The commonly used evaluation metric
has limitations, and creating ground truth annotations for neurons is impractical.
Addressing these challenges, we propose an evaluation framework1 based on voting
theory. Our hypothesis posits that neurons consistently identified by different
methods carry more significant information. We rigorously assess our framework
across a diverse array of neuron interpretation methods. Notable findings include:
i) despite the theoretical differences among the methods, neuron ranking methods
share over 60% of their rankings when identifying salient neurons, ii) the neuron
interpretation methods are most sensitive to the last layer representations, iii)
Probeless neuron ranking emerges as the most consistent method.

1

Introduction

The advent of deep neural network (DNN) models and their success in Natural Language Processing
(NLP) has opened a new research frontier to interpret the representations learned within these models.
Representation analysis provides a holistic view of the knowledge learned within the representation.
Whereas neuron analysis gives insight into how knowledge is structured within the representation.
To this end, an ample amount of work has been done to understand the knowledge captured within
the learned representations (Belinkov et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2019a; Tenney et al., 2019; Dalvi et al.,
2022) and individual neurons (Karpathy et al., 2015; Kádár et al., 2017a; Dalvi et al., 2019).
Neuron analysis provides a fine-grained interpretation of the representation. It discovers salient neurons of the network w.r.t to a concept such as morphological or syntactic concepts (Lakretz et al., 2019;
Durrani et al., 2020), and provides insight into how they may be used during inference (Lundberg &
Lee, 2017; Dhamdhere et al., 2018). Beyond understanding the inner dynamics of the DNN models,
neuron analysis has various potential applications such as network manipulation (Bau et al., 2019),
domain adaptation (Antverg et al., 2022), model distillation (Dalvi et al., 2020) and architectural
search (Prasanna et al., 2020).
A number of neuron analysis methods have been proposed in the literature to interpret deep NLP
models. While these methods have shown promising results, there is a notable absence of systematic
comparisons among them in existing studies. Conducting a fair comparison of neuron interpretation
methods is crucial for comprehending the merits and limitations of each technique. Such comparisons
1

https://github.com/fdalvi/neuron-comparative-analysis

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

