Best Arm Identification with Fixed Budget:
A Large Deviation Perspective

Po-An Wang
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
wang9@kth.se

Ruo-Chun Tzeng
EECS
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
rctzeng@kth.se

Alexandre Proutiere
EECS and Digital Futures
KTH, Stockholm, Sweden
alepro@kth.se

Abstract
We consider the problem of identifying the best arm in stochastic Multi-Armed
Bandits (MABs) using a fixed sampling budget. Characterizing the minimal
instance-specific error probability for this problem constitutes one of the important
remaining open problems in MABs. When arms are selected using a static sampling
strategy, the error probability decays exponentially with the number of samples
at a rate that can be explicitly derived via Large Deviation techniques. Analyzing
the performance of algorithms with adaptive sampling strategies is however much
more challenging. In this paper, we establish a connection between the Large
Deviation Principle (LDP) satisfied by the empirical proportions of arm draws and
that satisfied by the empirical arm rewards. This connection holds for any adaptive
algorithm, and is leveraged (i) to improve error probability upper bounds of some
existing algorithms, such as the celebrated SR (Successive Rejects) algorithm
(Audibert et al., 2010), and (ii) to devise and analyze new algorithms. In particular,
we present CR (Continuous Rejects), a truly adaptive algorithm that can reject
arms in any round based on the observed empirical gaps between the rewards of
various arms. Applying our Large Deviation results, we prove that CR enjoys
better performance guarantees than existing algorithms, including SR. Extensive
numerical experiments confirm this observation.

1

Introduction

We study the problem of best-arm identification in stochastic bandits in the fixed budget setting. In this
problem, abbreviated by BAI-FB, a learner faces K distributions or arms ν1 , . . . , νK characterized
by their unknown means µ = (µ1 , . . . , µK ) (we restrict our attention to distributions taken from
a one-parameter exponential family). She sequentially pulls arms and observes samples of the
corresponding distributions. More precisely, in round t ≥ 1, she pulls an arm At = k selected
depending on previous observations and observes Xk (t) a sample of a νk -distributed random variable.
(Xk (t), t ≥ 1, k ∈ [K]) are assumed to be independent over rounds and arms. After T arm draws,
the learner returns ı̂, an estimate of the best arm 1(µ) := arg maxk µk . We assume that the best
arm is unique, and denote by Λ the set of parameters µ such that this assumption holds. The
objective is to devise an adaptive sampling algorithm minimizing the error probability Pµ [ı̂ ̸= 1(µ)].
This learning task is one of the most important problems in stochastic bandits, and despite recent
research efforts, it remains largely open (Qin, 2022). In particular, researchers have so far failed
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

