Self-Supervised Visual Acoustic Matching

Arjun Somayazulu1 Changan Chen1 Kristen Grauman1,2
1
UT Austin 2 FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Acoustic matching aims to re-synthesize an audio clip to sound as if it were
recorded in a target acoustic environment. Existing methods assume access to
paired training data, where the audio is observed in both the source and target
environments, but this limits the diversity of training data or requires the use of
simulated data or heuristics to create paired samples. We propose a self-supervised
approach to visual acoustic matching where training samples include only the
target scene image and audio—without acoustically mismatched source audio
for reference. Our approach jointly learns to disentangle room acoustics and resynthesize audio into the target environment, via a conditional GAN framework
and a novel metric that quantifies the level of residual acoustic information in the
de-biased audio. Training with either in-the-wild web data or simulated data, we
demonstrate it outperforms the state-of-the-art on multiple challenging datasets
and a wide variety of real-world audio and environments. Project page: https:
//vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/ss_vam

1

Introduction

The acoustic properties of the audio we hear are strongly influenced by the geometry of the room
and the materials that make up its surfaces—large, empty rooms with hard surfaces like concrete
and glass lead to longer reverberation times, while smaller, more cluttered rooms with soft materials
like curtains and carpets will absorb sound waves quickly and produce audio that sounds dull and
anechoic. Human perception exploits this acoustic-visual correspondence, and we rely on perceiving
natural-sounding audio that is consistent with our environment as we navigate daily life.
Likewise, this phenomenon is important in virtual environments, such as in AR/VR applications.
When one hears audio that is acoustically consistent with the virtual environment they are seeing,
their brain can better integrate audio and visual information, leading to a more immersive experience.
Conversely, when one hears audio that does not match the expected acoustics of the virtual environment, the perceptual mismatch can be jarring. The problem of audio-visual acoustic correspondence
extends well beyond AR/VR applications. Film and media production involve recording audio in
diverse spaces, which can be expensive and logistically challenging. Similarly, interior designers and
architects face the problem of previewing how a space will sound before it is built.
Today’s approaches for modeling acoustic-visual coherence typically assume physical access to the
target space [40, 25, 5, 43], which can be impractical or impossible in some cases. In particular, in
acoustic matching, the audio captured in one environment is re-synthesized to sound as if it were
recorded in another target environment, by matching the statistics (e.g. reverberation time) of audio
samples recorded in that target environment [9, 15, 21, 24, 26, 47]. Visual acoustic matching (VAM)
instead takes an image of the target space as input, learning to transform the audio to match the likely
acoustics in the depicted visual scene [3] (see Figure 1(a)). In both cases, however, learned models
ideally have access to paired training data, where each training audio clip is recorded in two different
environments. This permits a straightforward supervised learning strategy, since a model can learn to
transform one clip (source) to the other (target). See Figure 1(b), left. Unfortunately, this approach
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

