Realistic Synthetic Financial Transactions for
Anti-Money Laundering Models

Erik Altman1 Jovan Blanuša2 Luc von Niederhäusern2
Béni Egressy3∗ Andreea Anghel2 Kubilay Atasu2
2

1
IBM Watson Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
IBM Research Europe, Zurich, Switzerland 3 ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ealtman@us.ibm.com {jov, lvn}@zurich.ibm.com
begressy@ethz.ch {aan, kat}@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
With the widespread digitization of finance and the increasing popularity of cryptocurrencies, the sophistication of fraud schemes devised by cybercriminals is
growing. Money laundering – the movement of illicit funds to conceal their origins
– can cross bank and national boundaries, producing complex transaction patterns.
The UN estimates 2-5% of global GDP or $0.8 - $2.0 trillion dollars are laundered
globally each year. Unfortunately, real data to train machine learning models to
detect laundering is generally not available, and previous synthetic data generators
have had significant shortcomings. A realistic, standardized, publicly-available
benchmark is needed for comparing models and for the advancement of the area.
To this end, this paper contributes a synthetic financial transaction dataset generator
and a set of synthetically generated AML (Anti-Money Laundering) datasets. We
have calibrated this agent-based generator to match real transactions as closely
as possible and made the datasets public. We describe the generator in detail
and demonstrate how the datasets generated can help compare different machine
learning models in terms of their AML abilities. In a key way, using synthetic data
in these comparisons can be even better than using real data: the ground truth labels
are complete, whilst many laundering transactions in real data are never detected.

1

Introduction

Money laundering refers to the movement of illicit funds to conceal their origin and make them appear
to come from legitimate sources. Laundering schemes often cross bank and national boundaries,
producing complex transaction patterns. Even though the amount of laundering is difficult to estimate
precisely, the UN puts the global figure at up to $2 trillion per year [6] as noted in the abstract.
Other, narrower, figures help illustrate the amount of laundering. The CEO of Danske Bank resigned
in 2019 after it was revealed that the Estonian branch alone may have laundered $230 billion [1].
Finextra estimates that in 2017 there may have been $200 billion in laundering solely in U.S. online
sales [4]. Bank fines can be in the billions of dollars for failing to follow stringent standards on
laundering [2]. As such, it is valuable to have high-quality data to help build models to detect
laundering. Alas, for legal and privacy reasons, real data is not generally available. Even if real data
were available, its labeling is inherently poor, as most laundering often goes undetected [7, 5].
Synthetic financial data is an emerging area to help address a multitude of challenges with real
data and the algorithms used for analysis. These challenges include privacy and differential privacy,
competitive advantage, small sample sizes, what-if scenarios, poorly labeled real data, bias, consistent
∗

This work was performed when Béni Egressy was with IBM Research Europe.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

