On the Exploration of Local Significant Differences
For Two-Sample Test

Zhi-Jian Zhou, Jie Ni, Jia-He Yao, Wei Gao
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{zhouzj, nij, yaojh, gaow}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed increasing attentions on two-sample test with diverse
real applications, while this work takes one more step on the exploration of local
significant differences for two-sample test. We propose the MEMaBiD , an effective
test for two-sample testing, and the basic idea is to exploit local information by
multiple Mahalanobis kernels and introduce bi-directional hypothesis for testing.
On the exploration of local significant differences, we first partition the embedding
space into several rectangle regions via a new splitting criterion, which is relevant to
test power and data correlation. We then explore local significant differences based
on our bi-directional masked p-value together with the MEMaBiD test. Theoretically,
we present the asymptotic distribution and lower bounds of test power for our
MEMaBiD test, and control the familywise error rate on the exploration of local
significant differences. We finally conduct extensive experiments to validate the
effectiveness of our proposed methods on two-sample test and the exploration of
local significant differences.

1

Introduction

Two-sample test has attracted much attention with diverse applications such as cancer detection [1],
distribution-shift detection [2], generative modeling [3, 4], etc. The basic problem is to assess
whether two i.i.d. samples are drawn from the same distribution. Various kernel-based methods have
been developed for two-sample test such as Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [5–8] and Mean
Embedding (ME) [9–11]. Another relevant approach is to construct a binary classifier and assess two
samples according to classification performance [12–20]. For an overview of two-sample test, we
refer to a survey [21, and references therein].
In many real applications, however, it is necessary to take one more step to explore and understand
local significant differences, rather than only two-sample test. For example, a scientific problem in
galaxy morphology is to identify some local regions of significant differences between two kinds of
galaxies, which is important to discover galaxy formation and evolution history [22]. On the analysis
of mass cytometry data in cell biology, researchers are always interested in finding local regions of
significantly different abundance between disease and healthy samples [23].
Several attempts have been made to explore local significant differences in the past years. A feasible
solution is to partition space into several regions, and identify significantly different regions according
to their cardinalities of samples [24–27]. Another relevant work is to identify local significant
differences by estimating kernel densities [28, 29] and conditional probabilities [30]. Generally, it
is not easy to deal with complex data by simply counting cardinalities of samples, regardless of
data intrinsic correlations, and it is also difficult to make accurate estimation of kernel densities and
conditional probabilities without sufficient data, especially for many regions with finite samples.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

