Functional Equivalence and Path Connectivity
of Reducible Hyperbolic Tangent Networks

Matthew Farrugia-Roberts
School of Computing and Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
matthew@far.in.net

Abstract
Understanding the learning process of artiﬁcial neural networks requires clarifying the structure of the parameter space within which learning takes place. A
neural network parameter’s functional equivalence class is the set of parameters
implementing the same input–output function. For many architectures, almost
all parameters have a simple and well-documented functional equivalence class.
However, there is also a vanishing minority of reducible parameters, with richer
functional equivalence classes caused by redundancies among the network’s units.
In this paper, we give an algorithmic characterisation of unit redundancies and
reducible functional equivalence classes for a single-hidden-layer hyperbolic tangent architecture. We show that such functional equivalence classes are piecewiselinear path-connected sets, and that for parameters with a majority of redundant
units, the sets have a diameter of at most 7 linear segments.

1 Introduction
Deep learning algorithms construct neural networks through a local search in a high-dimensional
parameter space. This search is guided by the shape of some loss landscape, which is in turn determined by the link between neural network parameters and their input–output functions. Thus,
understanding the link between parameters and functions is key to understanding deep learning.
It is well known that neural network parameters often fail to uniquely determine an input–output
function. For example, exchanging weights between two adjacent hidden units generally preserves
functional equivalence (Hecht-Nielsen, 1990). For many architectures, almost all parameters have a
simple class of functionally equivalent parameters. These classes have been characterised for multilayer feed-forward architectures with various nonlinearities (e.g., Sussmann, 1992; Albertini et al.,
1993; Kůrková and Kainen, 1994; Phuong and Lampert, 2020; Vlačić and Bölcskei, 2021).
However, all existing work on functional equivalence excludes from consideration certain measure
zero sets of parameters, for which the functional equivalence classes may be richer. One such family
of parameters is the so-called reducible parameters. These parameters display certain structural
redundancies, such that the same function could be implemented with fewer hidden units (Sussmann,
1992; Vlačić and Bölcskei, 2021), leading to a richer functional equivalence class.
Despite their atypicality, reducible parameters may play an important role in deep learning. Learning
exerts non-random selection pressure, so measure zero sets of parameters may still arise in practice,
and indeed reducible parameters are appealing solutions due to parsimony (cf. Farrugia-Roberts,
2023). These parameters are also a source of information singularities (cf. Fukumizu, 1996), relevant
to statistical theories of deep learning (Watanabe, 2009; Wei et al., 2022). Moreover, the structure of
functional equivalence classes has implications for the local and global shape of the loss landscape,
in ways that may inﬂuence learning dynamics near reducible parameters.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

