Efficient Beam Tree Recursion
Jishnu Ray Chowdhury
Cornelia Caragea
Computer Science
University of Illinois Chicago
jraych2@uic.edu
cornelia@uic.edu

Abstract
Beam Tree Recursive Neural Network (BT-RvNN) was recently proposed as an
extension of Gumbel Tree RvNN and it was shown to achieve state-of-the-art length
generalization performance in ListOps while maintaining comparable performance
on other tasks. However, although better than previous approaches in terms of
memory usage, BT-RvNN can be still exorbitantly expensive. In this paper, we
identify the main bottleneck in BT-RvNN’s memory usage to be the entanglement of
the scorer function and the recursive cell function. We propose strategies to remove
this bottleneck and further simplify its memory usage. Overall, our strategies not
only reduce the memory usage of BT-RvNN by 10 − 16 times but also create a
new state-of-the-art in ListOps while maintaining similar performance in other
tasks. In addition, we also propose a strategy to utilize the induced latent-tree node
representations produced by BT-RvNN to turn BT-RvNN from a sentence encoder
of the form f : IRn×d → IRd into a token contextualizer of the form f : IRn×d →
IRn×d . Thus, our proposals not only open up a path for further scalability of
RvNNs but also standardize a way to use BT-RvNNs as another building block in
the deep learning toolkit that can be easily stacked or interfaced with other popular
models such as Transformers and Structured State Space models. Our code is
available at the link: https://github.com/JRC1995/BeamRecursionFamily.

1

Introduction

Recursive Neural Networks (RvNNs) [63] in their most general form can be thought of as a repeated
application of some arbitrary neural function (the recursive cell) combined with some arbitrary
halting criterion. The halting criterion can be dynamic (dependent on input) or static (independent
of the input). From this viewpoint, nearly any neural network encoder in the deep learning family
can be seen as a special instance of an RvNN. For example, Universal Transformers [13] repeat a
Transformer [85] layer block as a recursive cell and adaptively halt by tracking the halting probability
in each layer using some neural function [25, 3]. Deep Equilibrium Models (DEQ) [2] implicitly
“repeat” a recursive cell function using some root-finding method which is equivalent to using the
convergence of hidden states dynamics as the halting criterion. As Bai et al. [2] also showed, any
traditional Transformer - i.e. stacked layer blocks of Transformers with non-shared weights can be
also equivalently reformulated as a recursive repetition of a big sparse Transformer block with the
halting criterion being some preset static upperbound (some layer depth set as a hyperparameter).
A broad class of RvNNs can also be viewed as a repeated application of a Graph Neural Network
(GNN) [68, 91] - allowing iterative message passing for some arbitrary depth (determined by the
halting criterion). Transformer layers can be seen as implementing a fully connected (all-to-all) graph
with sequence tokens as nodes and attention-based edge weights. In natural language processing,
we often encounter the use of stacks of GNNs (weight shared or not) to encourage message-passing
through underlying linguistic structures such as dependency parses, constituency parses, discourse
structures, abstract meaning representations, and the like [80, 39, 47, 59, 11, 90, 94].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

