Logarithmic-Regret Quantum Learning Algorithms
for Zero-Sum Games
Minbo Gao
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science,
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
gmb17@tsinghua.org.cn
Tongyang Li
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies,
and School of Computer Science,
Peking University,
Beijing, China
tongyangli@pku.edu.cn

Zhengfeng Ji
Department of Computer Science
and Technology,
Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China
jizhengfeng@tsinghua.edu.cn

Qisheng Wang
Graduate School of Mathematics,
Nagoya University,
Nagoya, Japan
QishengWang1994@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose the first online quantum algorithm for solving zero-sum games with
e (1) regret under the game setting.1 Moreover, our quantum algorithm computes
O
an ε-approximate
Nash equilibrium of an m × n matrix zero-sum game in quantum
√
e ( m + n/ε2.5 ). Our algorithm uses standard quantum inputs and generates
time O
classical outputs with succinct descriptions, facilitating end-to-end applications.
Technically, our online quantum algorithm “quantizes” classical algorithms based
on the optimistic multiplicative weight update method. At the heart of our algorithm
is a fast quantum multi-sampling procedure for the Gibbs sampling problem, which
may be of independent interest.

1

Introduction

Nash equilibrium is one of the most important concepts in game theory. It characterizes and predicts
rational agents’ behaviors in non-cooperative games, finding a vast host of applications ranging from
analyzing wars [45] and designing auctions [35], to optimizing networks [43].
It was shown in Daskalakis et al. [16], Chen and Deng [12] that finding a Nash equilibrium is
PPAD-hard for general games. Nevertheless, computing the Nash equilibrium for specific types of
games, such as zero-sum games, is particularly interesting. A zero-sum game requires that the utility
of one player is the opposite of the other’s, a condition that often appears in, for example, chess
games. Von Neumann’s minimax theorem [51] promises that every finite two-player zero-sum game
has optimal mixed strategies.
1 Throughout this paper, O
e (·) suppresses polylogarithmic factors such as log(n) and log(1/ε), and O∗ (·)

hides quasi-polylogarithmic factors such as no(1) and (1/ε)o(1) .

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

