Label Correction of Crowdsourced Noisy Annotations
with an Instance-Dependent Noise Transition Model

Boyu Wang ∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Hui Guo
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
hguo288@uwo.ca

Grace Y. Yi ∗
Department of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
gyi5@uwo.ca

Abstract
The predictive ability of supervised learning algorithms hinges on the quality of
annotated examples, whose labels often come from multiple crowdsourced annotators with diverse expertise. To aggregate noisy crowdsourced annotations,
many existing methods employ an annotator-specific instance-independent noise
transition matrix to characterize the labeling skills of each annotator. Learning an
instance-dependent noise transition model, however, is challenging and remains
relatively less explored. To address this problem, in this paper, we formulate the
noise transition model in a Bayesian framework and subsequently design a new
label correction algorithm. Specifically, we approximate the instance-dependent
noise transition matrices using a Bayesian network with a hierarchical spike and
slab prior. To theoretically characterize the distance between the noise transition model and the true instance-dependent noise transition matrix, we provide
a posterior-concentration theorem that ensures the posterior consistency in terms
of the Hellinger distance. We further formulate the label correction process as a
hypothesis testing problem and propose a novel algorithm to infer the true label
from the noisy annotations based on the pairwise likelihood ratio test. Moreover,
we establish an information-theoretic bound on the Bayes error for the proposed
method. We validate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments on
benchmark and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable performance in various tasks [1, 2], and
they have proven to be useful in handling sizable labeled data. Acquiring large accurately annotated
datasets, however, is usually expensive and time consuming. To enhance the efficiency of annotation,
in many applications, crowdsourcing [3] is employed as an alternative way for data labeling, where
the labels are provided by multiple annotators with varying and imperfect labeling skills, and thus, the
collected labels suffer from unavoidable noise. As deep models have a strong memorization power,
using these noisy labels as the ground truth deteriorates the performance of DNNs [4, 5], and most
importantly, yields erroneous learning results. Further, potentially substantial disagreement among
∗

Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

