Online POMDP Planning with Anytime Deterministic
Guarantees
Moran Barenboim
Technion Autonomous Systems Program (TASP)
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
NVIDIA
moranbar@campus.technion.ac.il

Vadim Indelman
Department of Aerospace Engineering
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
vadim.indelman@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Autonomous agents operating in real-world scenarios frequently encounter uncertainty and make decisions based on incomplete information. Planning under
uncertainty can be mathematically formalized using partially observable Markov
decision processes (POMDPs). However, finding an optimal plan for POMDPs can
be computationally expensive and is feasible only for small tasks. In recent years,
approximate algorithms, such as tree search and sample-based methodologies,
have emerged as state-of-the-art POMDP solvers for larger problems. Despite
their effectiveness, these algorithms offer only probabilistic and often asymptotic
guarantees toward the optimal solution due to their dependence on sampling. To address these limitations, we derive a deterministic relationship between a simplified
solution that is easier to obtain and the theoretically optimal one. First, we derive
bounds for selecting a subset of the observations to branch from while computing
a complete belief at each posterior node. Then, since a complete belief update
may be computationally demanding, we extend the bounds to support reduction of
both the state and the observation spaces. We demonstrate how our guarantees can
be integrated with existing state-of-the-art solvers that sample a subset of states
and observations. As a result, the returned solution holds deterministic bounds
relative to the optimal policy. Lastly, we substantiate our findings with supporting
experimental results.

1

Introduction

Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) serve as a comprehensive mathematical
framework for addressing uncertain sequential decision-making problems. Despite their applicability,
most problems framed as POMDPs struggle to achieve optimal solutions, largely due to factors such
as large state spaces and an extensive range of potential future scenarios. The latter tends to grow
exponentially with the horizon, rendering the solution process computationally prohibitive. The
advent of approximate online, tree-based solvers has expanded the capacity of POMDPs, enabling
them to tackle larger problems by providing a more scalable approach to problem-solving.
A prominent search algorithm addressing the challenges posed by large state and observation spaces
in POMDPs is POMCP [Silver and Veness, 2010]. POMCP is a forward search algorithm which
handles the large state and observation spaces by aggregating Monte-Carlo rollouts of future scenarios
in a tree structure. During each rollout, a single state particle is recursively propagated from the root
node to the leaves of the tree. It adaptively trades off between actions that lead to unexplored areas
of the tree and actions that lead to rewarding areas of the tree search by utilizing UCT [Auer et al.,
2002]. The guarantees on the provided solution by POMCP are asymptotic, implying that the quality
of the solution remains unknown within any finite time frame.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

