On Sample-Efficient Offline Reinforcement Learning:
Data Diversity, Posterior Sampling, and Beyond

Thanh Nguyen-Tang
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
nguyent@cs.jhu.edu

Raman Arora
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
arora@cs.jhu.edu

Abstract
We seek to understand what facilitates sample-efficient learning from historical
datasets for sequential decision-making, a problem that is popularly known as
offline reinforcement learning (RL). Further, we are interested in algorithms that
enjoy sample efficiency while leveraging (value) function approximation. In this
paper, we address these fundamental questions by (i) proposing a notion of data
diversity that subsumes the previous notions of coverage measures in offline RL and
(ii) using this notion to unify three distinct classes of offline RL algorithms based
on version spaces (VS), regularized optimization (RO), and posterior sampling
(PS). We establish that VS-based, RO-based, and PS-based algorithms, under
standard assumptions, achieve comparable sample efficiency, which recovers the
state-of-the-art sub-optimality bounds for finite and linear model classes with the
standard assumptions. This result is surprising, given that the prior work suggested
an unfavorable sample complexity of the RO-based algorithm compared to the
VS-based algorithm, whereas posterior sampling is rarely considered in offline
RL due to its explorative nature. Notably, our proposed model-free PS-based
algorithm for offline RL is novel, with sub-optimality bounds that are frequentist
(i.e., worst-case) in nature.

1

Introduction

Learning from previously collected experiences is a vital capability for reinforcement learning (RL)
agents, offering a broader scope of applications compared to online RL. This is particularly significant
in domains where interacting with the environment poses risks or high costs. However, effectively
extracting valuable policies from historical datasets remains a considerable challenge, especially in
high-dimensional spaces where the ability to generalize across various scenarios is crucial. In this
paper, our objective is to comprehensively examine the efficiency of offline RL in the context of
(value) function approximation. We aim to analyze this within the broader framework of general data
collection settings.
The problem of learning from historical datasets for sequential decision-making, commonly known as
offline RL or batch RL, originated in the early 2000s [Ernst et al., 2005, Antos et al., 2006, Lange et al.,
2012] and has recently regained significant attention [Levine et al., 2020, Uehara et al., 2022a]. In
offline RL, where direct interaction with environments is not possible, our goal is to learn an effective
policy by leveraging pre-collected datasets, typically obtained from different policies known as
behavior policies. The sample efficiency of an offline RL algorithm is measured by the sub-optimality
of the policies it executes compared to a “good” comparator policy, which may or may not be an
optimal policy. Due to the lack of exploration inherent in offline RL, designing an algorithm with
low sub-optimality requires employing the fundamental principle of pessimistic extrapolation. This
means that the agent extrapolates from the offline data while considering the worst-case scenarios
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

