Hierarchical Integration Diffusion Model for
Realistic Image Deblurring

Zheng Chen1 , Yulun Zhang2∗ , Ding Liu3 , Bin Xia4 , Jinjin Gu5,6 , Linghe Kong1∗, Xin Yuan7
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ETH Zürich, 3 Bytedance Inc, 4 Tsinghua University,
5
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 6 The University of Sydney, 7 Westlake University

Abstract
Diffusion models (DMs) have recently been introduced in image deblurring and
exhibited promising performance, particularly in terms of details reconstruction.
However, the diffusion model requires a large number of inference iterations
to recover the clean image from pure Gaussian noise, which consumes massive
computational resources. Moreover, the distribution synthesized by the diffusion
model is often misaligned with the target results, leading to restrictions in distortionbased metrics. To address the above issues, we propose the Hierarchical Integration
Diffusion Model (HI-Diff), for realistic image deblurring. Specifically, we perform
the DM in a highly compacted latent space to generate the prior feature for the
deblurring process. The deblurring process is implemented by a regression-based
method to obtain better distortion accuracy. Meanwhile, the highly compact latent
space ensures the efficiency of the DM. Furthermore, we design the hierarchical
integration module to fuse the prior into the regression-based model from multiple
scales, enabling better generalization in complex blurry scenarios. Comprehensive
experiments on synthetic and real-world blur datasets demonstrate that our HIDiff outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Code and trained models are available
at https://github.com/zhengchen1999/HI-Diff.

1

Introduction

Image deblurring is a long-standing computer vision task, aiming to recover a sharp image from a
blurred observation. Blurred artifacts can arise from various factors, e.g., camera shake and fastmoving objects. To address this challenge, traditional methods typically formulate the task as an
optimization problem and incorporate natural priors [12, 38, 24, 29] to regularize the solution space.
However, since blur in real scenarios is complex and non-uniform, which is hard to be modeled by
the specific priors, these algorithms suffer from poor generalization in complex situations.
With the development of deep learning, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been applied
in image deblurring [37, 43, 13, 55, 1, 11]. Among them, the regression-based methods have
shown remarkable success, especially in terms of distortion-based metrics (e.g., PSNR). Moreover,
Transformer-based approaches [48, 53, 44, 21], which can capture long-distance dependencies, are
introduced as an alternative to CNNs. These methods further boost the deblurring performance.
However, regression-based methods are prone to recovering images with fewer details, since the
regression losses are conservative with high-frequency details [36].
Apart from regression-based methods, deep generative models, like generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [14] and normalizing flows [8], provide other solutions for generating complex details.
Recently, Diffusion Models (DMs) [40, 15] have exhibited impressive performance in image synthesis [41, 35] and restoration tasks (including image deblurring) [50, 33, 36, 51]. DMs generate
high-fidelity images through a stochastic iterative denoising process from a pure white Gaussian
noise. Compared to other generative models, such as GANs, DMs generate a more accurate target
distribution without encountering optimization instability or mode collapse.
∗

Corresponding authors: Yulun Zhang, yulun100@gmail.com; Linghe Kong, linghe.kong@sjtu.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

