Fixing the NTK: From Neural Network Linearizations
to Exact Convex Programs

Rajat Vadiraj Dwaraknath
Stanford University
rajatvd@stanford.edu

Tolga Ergen
LG AI Research
tergen@lgresearch.ai

Mert Pilanci
Stanford University
pilanci@stanford.edu

Abstract
Recently, theoretical analyses of deep neural networks have broadly focused on two
directions: 1) Providing insight into neural network training by SGD in the limit of
infinite hidden-layer width and infinitesimally small learning rate (also known as
gradient flow) via the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), and 2) Globally optimizing the
regularized training objective via cone-constrained convex reformulations of ReLU
networks. The latter research direction also yielded an alternative formulation of
the ReLU network, called a gated ReLU network, that is globally optimizable via
efficient unconstrained convex programs. In this work, we interpret the convex
program for this gated ReLU network as a Multiple Kernel Learning (MKL) model
with a weighted data masking feature map and establish a connection to the NTK.
Specifically, we show that for a particular choice of mask weights that do not
depend on the learning targets, this kernel is equivalent to the NTK of the gated
ReLU network on the training data. A consequence of this lack of dependence on
the targets is that the NTK cannot perform better than the optimal MKL kernel on
the training set. By using iterative reweighting, we improve the weights induced
by the NTK to obtain the optimal MKL kernel which is equivalent to the solution
of the exact convex reformulation of the gated ReLU network. We also provide
several numerical simulations corroborating our theory. Additionally, we provide
an analysis of the prediction error of the resulting optimal kernel via consistency
results for the group lasso.

1

Introduction

Neural Networks (NNs) have become popular in various machine learning applications due to their
remarkable modeling capabilities and generalization performance. However, their highly nonlinear
and non-convex structure precludes an effective theoretical analysis. Therefore, developing theoretical
tools to understand the fundamental mechanisms behind neural networks is still an active research
topic. To tackle this problem, [1] studied the training dynamics of neural networks trained with
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) in a regime where each layer has infinitely many neurons and
SGD uses an infinitesimally small learning rate, i.e., gradient flow. Thus, they related the training
dynamics of neural networks to the training dynamics of a fixed kernel called the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK). However, [2] showed that neurons barely move from their initial values in this regime
so that neural networks fail to learn useful features from the training data. This is in contrast to their
finite width counterparts, which are able to learn predictive features in practice [3]. Moreover, [4, 5]
provided further theoretical and empirical evidence to show that existing kernel approaches are not
able to explain the remarkable performance of finite width networks. Therefore, although NTK and
similar kernel based approaches enable theoretical analysis unlike standard finite width networks,
they fail to explain the effectiveness of finite width neural networks that are employed in practice.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

