Trust Region-Based Safe Distributional
Reinforcement Learning for Multiple Constraints

1

Dohyeong Kim1 , Kyungjae Lee2 , and Songhwai Oh1
Dep. of Electrical and Computer Engineering and ASRI, Seoul National University
2
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, Chung-Ang University
dohyeong.kim@rllab.snu.ac.kr, kyungjae.lee@ai.cau.ac.kr,
songhwai@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In safety-critical robotic tasks, potential failures must be reduced, and multiple
constraints must be met, such as avoiding collisions, limiting energy consumption,
and maintaining balance. Thus, applying safe reinforcement learning (RL) in such
robotic tasks requires to handle multiple constraints and use risk-averse constraints
rather than risk-neutral constraints. To this end, we propose a trust region-based
safe RL algorithm for multiple constraints called a safe distributional actor-critic
(SDAC). Our main contributions are as follows: 1) introducing a gradient
integration method to manage infeasibility issues in multi-constrained problems,
ensuring theoretical convergence, and 2) developing a TD(λ) target distribution
to estimate risk-averse constraints with low biases. We evaluate SDAC through
extensive experiments involving multi- and single-constrained robotic tasks.
While maintaining high scores, SDAC shows 1.93 times fewer steps to satisfy all
constraints in multi-constrained tasks and 1.78 times fewer constraint violations
in single-constrained tasks compared to safe RL baselines. Code is available at:
https://github.com/rllab-snu/Safe-Distributional-Actor-Critic.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) enables reliable control of complex robots [Merel et al., 2020, Peng
et al., 2021, Rudin et al., 2022]. In order to successfully apply RL to real-world systems, it is essential
to design a proper reward function which reflects safety guidelines, such as collision avoidance and
limited energy consumption, as well as the goal of the given task. However, finding the reward
function that considers all such factors involves a cumbersome and time-consuming process since
RL algorithms must be repeatedly performed to verify the results of the designed reward function.
Instead, safe RL, which handles safety guidelines as constraints, is an appropriate solution. A safe
RL problem can be formulated using a constrained Markov decision process [Altman, 1999], where
not only the reward but also cost functions are defined to provide the safety guideline signals. By
defining constraints using expectation or risk measures of the sum of costs, safe RL aims to maximize
returns while satisfying the constraints. Under the safe RL framework, the training process becomes
straightforward since there is no need to search for a reward that reflects the safety guidelines.
While various safe RL algorithms have been proposed to deal with the safety guidelines, their
applicability to general robotic applications remains limited due to the insufficiency in 1) handling
multiple constraints and 2) minimizing failures, such as robot breakdowns after collisions. First, many
safety-critical applications require multiple constraints, such as maintaining distance from obstacles,
limiting operational space, and preventing falls. Lagrange-based safe RL methods [Yang et al., 2021,
Zhang and Weng, 2022, Bai et al., 2022], which convert a safe RL problem into a dual problem and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

