CAST: Cross-Attention in Space and Time
for Video Action Recognition
Dongho Lee∗

Jongseo Lee∗

Jinwoo Choi†

Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
{kide004, jong980812, jinwoochoi}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recognizing human actions in videos requires spatial and temporal understanding. Most existing action recognition models lack a balanced spatio-temporal
understanding of videos. In this work, we propose a novel two-stream architecture, called Cross-Attention in Space and Time (CAST), that achieves a balanced
spatio-temporal understanding of videos using only RGB input. Our proposed
bottleneck cross-attention mechanism enables the spatial and temporal expert
models to exchange information and make synergistic predictions, leading to
improved performance. We validate the proposed method with extensive experiments on public benchmarks with different characteristics: EPIC-KITCHENS-100,
Something-Something-V2, and Kinetics-400. Our method consistently shows
favorable performance across these datasets, while the performance of existing
methods fluctuates depending on the dataset characteristics. The code is available
at https://github.com/KHU-VLL/CAST.

1

Introduction

To accurately recognize human actions in videos, a model must understand both the spatial and
temporal contexts. A model that lacks fine-grained spatial understanding is likely to fail in predicting
the correct action. For example, as shown in Figure 1 (a), a model that understands temporal context
such as hand motion across frames but not the fine-grained spatial context may confuse whether an
object in the hand a ketchup, or a cheese, or a milk carton. Consequently, the model fails to predict
the correct action, Put down a cheese. Similarly, a model that lacks temporal context understanding
may also fail to predict the correct action. In Figure 1 (b), let us suppose a model understands spatial
context but does not understand temporal context, e.g., the model is confused about whether the
hand is moving from outside the fridge to the inside or vice versa. Then the model fails to predict
the correct action of Take out a sauce. Therefore, for accurate action recognition, models need to
comprehend both the spatial and temporal contexts of videos.
Despite the recent progress in action recognition through the use of Transformers [60, 11, 3],
achieving a balanced spatio-temporal understanding remains a challenging problem. Compared to
images, the additional temporal dimension in videos makes spatio-temporal representation learning
computationally intensive and requires a significant amount of training data [3]. Consequently, most
action recognition models lack a balanced spatio-temporal understanding of videos. Notably, models
that perform well on static-biased [32, 8, 50] datasets, such as Kinetics-400, may not perform as well
on temporal-biased [3, 28] datasets, such as Something-Something-V2, and vice versa. For instance,
as shown in Figure 4 (a), on the EPIC-KITCHENS-100 dataset, VideoMAE [56] outperforms STAdapter [42] on the verb prediction task, while ST-Adapter outperforms VideoMAE on the noun
prediction task. Similarly, BEVT [62] outperforms AIM [72] on the Something-Something-V2
∗ Equally contributed first authors.
† Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

