EPIC Fields
Marrying 3D Geometry and Video Understanding
★♥♦

Vadim Tschernezki
♠
♥
David Fouhey
Iro Laina

★♣

♥

♠

★♣

Ahmad Darkhalil
Zhifan Zhu
♦
♣
♥
Diane Larlus
Dima Damen
Andrea Vedaldi
♣

VGG, University of Oxford
University of Bristol
♦
★
New York University
NAVER LABS Europe
: Equal Contribution

Abstract

EPIC-FIELDS dataset

Neural rendering is fuelling a unification of learning, 3D geometry and video
understanding that has been waiting for more than two decades. Progress, however,
is still hampered by a lack of suitable datasets and benchmarks. To address this gap,
we introduce EPIC Fields, an augmentation of EPIC-KITCHENS with 3D camera
information. Like other datasets for neural rendering, EPIC Fields removes the
complex and expensive step of reconstructing cameras using photogrammetry, and
allows researchers to focus on modelling problems. We illustrate the challenge of
photogrammetry in egocentric videos of dynamic actions and propose innovations
to address them. Compared to other neural rendering datasets, EPIC Fields is better
tailored to video understanding because it is paired with labelled action segments
and the recent VISOR segment annotations. To further motivate the community, we
also evaluate three benchmark tasks in neural rendering and segmenting dynamic
objects, with strong baselines that showcase what is not possible today. We also
highlight the advantage of geometry in semi-supervised video object segmentations
on the VISOR annotations. EPIC Fields reconstructs 96% of videos in EPICKITCHENS, registering 19M frames in 99 hours recorded in 45 kitchens, and is
available from: http://epic-kitchens.github.io/epic-fields

Reference

Input
Static

Input

Dynamic

Static

Semi-Static

Seen View

Video Object Segmentation

Dynamic

Novel View

Dynamic Object Segmentation
Semi-Static

Benchmarks

Dynamic View Synthesis

Figure 1: We propose EPIC Fields that extends EPIC-KITCHENS with 3D information, including
full frame-rate camera pose trajectories (top). These are directly obtained from dynamic sequences
of object interactions (sampled frames) without additional modalities or pre-scans. We showcase
EPIC Fields through several benchmarks (bottom) that use the fusion of geometric and semantic cues.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

