GEX: A flexible method for approximating influence
via Geometric Ensemble
Sung-Yub Kim
Graduate School of AI, KAIST
sungyub.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Kyungsu Kim†
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School
kskim.doc@gmail.com

Eunho Yang†
Graduate School of AI, KAIST and AITRICS
eunhoy@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Through a deeper understanding of predictions of neural networks, Influence Function (IF) has been applied to various tasks such as detecting and relabeling mislabeled samples, dataset pruning, and separation of data sources in practice. However,
we found standard approximations of IF suffer from performance degradation due
to oversimplified influence distributions caused by their bilinear approximation,
suppressing the expressive power of samples with a relatively strong influence. To
address this issue, we propose a new interpretation of existing IF approximations
as an average relationship between two linearized losses over parameters sampled
from the Laplace approximation (LA). In doing so, we highlight two significant
limitations of current IF approximations: the linearity of gradients and the singularity of Hessian. Accordingly, by improving each point, we introduce a new IF
approximation method with the following features: i) the removal of linearization to
alleviate the bilinear constraint and ii) the utilization of Geometric Ensemble (GE)
tailored for non-linear losses. Empirically, our approach outperforms existing IF
approximations for downstream tasks with lighter computation, thereby providing
new feasibility of low-complexity/nonlinear-based IF design.

1

Introduction

In the last decade, neural networks (NNs) have made tremendous advances in various application
areas [49, 24, 47]. To make reasonable predictions with NN-based systems, models must be able to
explain their predictions. For example, those who doubt the model’s prediction can gain insight and
foresight by referencing the explanation of the model. Moreover, mission-critical areas like finance
and medicine require a high degree of explainability to ensure that the predictions are not biased
[30]. Understanding the mechanism of predictions also allows researchers and engineers to improve
prediction quality, ensuring that NNs are performing as intended [32].
To this end, Influence Function (IF) was proposed to explain predictions of pre-trained NNs through
training data [25]. Intuitively, IF measures how the leave-one-out (LOO) retraining of a training
sample changes the loss of each sample. Therefore, the sign of influence determines whether the
training sample is beneficial to others, and the scale of influence measures its impact. Specifically,
self-influence, the increase in loss when a sample is excluded, was used to measure how much the
sample is memorized [48, 15]: When LOO training is performed on a memorized training sample,
its loss will increase substantially since matching its (corrupted) label will be difficult. Therefore,
self-influence is used to detect mislabeled samples [48, 52] where memorization occurs. Furthermore,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
†
Correspondence to

