Ess-InfoGAIL: Semi-supervised Imitation Learning
from Imbalanced Demonstrations
Huiqiao Fu1 , Kaiqiang Tang1 , Yuanyang Lu1 , Yiming Qi1 , Guizhou Deng1 ,
Flood Sung2 , Chunlin Chen1∗
1
Nanjing University, China, 2 Moonshot AI, China
{hqfu, kqtang, yylu, ymqi}@smail.nju.edu.cn,
{guizhoudeng, floodsung}@gmail.com, clchen@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Imitation learning aims to reproduce expert behaviors without relying on an explicit
reward signal. However, real-world demonstrations often present challenges, such
as multi-modal, data imbalance, and expensive labeling processes. In this work,
we propose a novel semi-supervised imitation learning architecture that learns disentangled behavior representations from imbalanced demonstrations using limited
labeled data. Specifically, our method consists of three key components. First,
we adapt the concept of semi-supervised generative adversarial networks to the
imitation learning context. Second, we employ a learnable latent distribution to
align the generated and expert data distributions. Finally, we utilize a regularized
information maximization approach in conjunction with an approximate label prior
to further improve the semi-supervised learning performance. Experimental results
demonstrate the efficiency of our method in learning multi-modal behaviors from
imbalanced demonstrations compared to baseline methods.

1

Introduction

The recent success of Reinforcement Learning (RL) has shown great potential in solving complex
decision-making tasks [1, 2, 3]. A key prerequisite for RL is to design a reward function, which can
be challenging in many real-world applications [4, 5]. By contrast, Imitation Learning (IL) methods,
such as Behavior Cloning (BC) [6], Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL) [7] and Generative
Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) [8], can reproduce expert behaviors without relying on an
explicit reward signal. Among them, GAIL performs a more effective learning process by learning a
policy directly from demonstrations, and has been widely applied in various fields [9, 10, 11, 12].
Real-world demonstrations are typically coupled by multi-modal behaviors. To disentangle interpretable and meaningful behavior representations, InfoGAIL [13] utilizes the concept of maximizing
mutual information between discrete or continuous latent variables to generate corresponding samples
in an unsupervised manner. However, unsupervised learning of desired decodable factors from
unstructured data can be challenging, particularly in the case of behavior imitation, where commonly
used methods such as contrastive learning often underperform. Recent researches have uncovered
that unsupervised learning of disentangled representations is inherently difficult without the presence
of inductive biases on both the models and data [14]. Additionally, real-world demonstrations often
consist of imbalanced behavior modes. For example, walking constitutes the majority of human
behavior, whereas jumping only represents a small fraction. It is difficult for InfoGAIL to learn
disentangled behavior representations from imbalanced demonstrations, as shown in Fig. 1. One
intuitive solution is to introduce supervised learning with fully labeled data [15]. However, manually
segmenting and labeling from the raw demonstrations can be a costly endeavor.
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

