Successor-Predecessor Intrinsic Exploration

Changmin Yu1,2 Neil Burgess1,∗ Maneesh Sahani2,∗ Samuel J. Gershman3,∗
1
Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; 2 Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit;
UCL, London, United Kingdom
3
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, United States
∗
Joint senior authors

Abstract
Exploration is essential in reinforcement learning, particularly in environments
where external rewards are sparse. Here we focus on exploration with intrinsic
rewards, where the agent transiently augments the external rewards with selfgenerated intrinsic rewards. Although the study of intrinsic rewards has a long history, existing methods focus on composing the intrinsic reward based on measures
of future prospects of states, ignoring the information contained in the retrospective
structure of transition sequences. Here we argue that the agent can utilise retrospective information to generate explorative behaviour with structure-awareness,
facilitating efficient exploration based on global instead of local information. We
propose Successor-Predecessor Intrinsic Exploration (SPIE), an exploration algorithm based on a novel intrinsic reward combining prospective and retrospective
information. We show that SPIE yields more efficient and ethologically plausible
exploratory behaviour in environments with sparse rewards and bottleneck states
than competing methods. We also implement SPIE in deep reinforcement learning
agents, and show that the resulting agent achieves stronger empirical performance
than existing methods on sparse-reward Atari games.

1

Introduction

The study of exploration in reinforcement learning (RL) has produced a broad range of methods [1, 2],
ranging from simple methods such as pure randomization [3, 1, 4], to more sophisticated methods
such as targeted exploration towards states with high uncertainty [5–7] and implicit exploration
with entropy maximization [8, 9]. Intrinsic exploration, a highly effective class of methods, uses
intrinsic rewards based on the agent’s current knowledge of the environment, hence informing
targeted exploration towards states with high predictive uncertainty or state occupancy diversity [10,
11, 6, 12]. However, existing approaches define the intrinsic reward based solely on prospective or
empirical marginal information about future states, ignoring retrospective information (e.g., does a
given state always precedes the goal state, hence should be more frequently traversed?). We argue
that the retrospective information contains useful signals about the connectivity structure of the
environment, hence could facilitate more efficient targeted exploration. For example, consider a
clustered environment with bottleneck states connecting the clusters (Figure 1a), exploration based
on local information (e.g., visitation counts) would discourage the agent from traversing bottleneck
states, despite the key roles these states play in connecting different clusters. Guiding the agents to
visit such “bottleneck” states in the face of minimal local information gain is essential in driving
efficient and biologically plausible exploration. Here we study the contribution of retrospective
information for global exploration with intrinsic motivation.
One of the most successful recent intrinsic exploration algorithms [12] uses the successor representation (SR; [13, 14]) to generate intrinsic rewards. The SR represents each state in terms of successor
states. The row norms of the SR can be used as an intrinsic reward that generalises count-based
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

