Reconstructing the Mind’s Eye: fMRI-to-Image with
Contrastive Learning and Diffusion Priors
Paul S. Scotti*,1,2 , Atmadeep Banerjee*,2 , Jimmie Goode†,2 , Stepan Shabalin2 , Alex Nguyen1 ,
Ethan Cohen3 , Aidan J. Dempster4 , Nathalie Verlinde1 , Elad Yundler5 , David Weisberg1,2 ,
Kenneth A. Norman‡,1 , and Tanishq Mathew Abraham‡,2,6,7
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Medical AI Research Center (MedARC)
3
Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University
4
University of Toronto
5
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
6
EleutherAI
7
Stability AI
Project Page: https://medarc.ai/mindeye/
2

Abstract
We present MindEye, a novel fMRI-to-image approach to retrieve and reconstruct
viewed images from brain activity. Our model comprises two parallel submodules
that are specialized for retrieval (using contrastive learning) and reconstruction
(using a diffusion prior). MindEye can map fMRI brain activity to any high
dimensional multimodal latent space, like CLIP image space, enabling image reconstruction using generative models that accept embeddings from this latent space.
We comprehensively compare our approach with other existing methods, using both
qualitative side-by-side comparisons and quantitative evaluations, and show that
MindEye achieves state-of-the-art performance in both reconstruction and retrieval
tasks. In particular, MindEye can retrieve the exact original image even among
highly similar candidates, indicating that its brain embeddings retain fine-grained
image-specific information. This allows us to accurately retrieve images even from
large-scale databases like LAION-5B. We demonstrate through ablations that MindEye’s performance improvements over previous methods result from specialized
submodules for retrieval and reconstruction, improved training techniques, and
training models with orders of magnitude more parameters. Furthermore, we show
that MindEye can better preserve low-level image features in the reconstructions
by using img2img, with outputs from a separate autoencoder. All code is available
on GitHub.

1

Introduction

The problem of decoding environmental inputs and cognitive states from brain activity is fundamental to the field of neuroscience, where improved computational approaches allow for further
understanding of brain mechanisms [1]. A neuroimaging methodology that has seen significant
success in this domain is functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), where neural activity
is measured by detecting changes in blood oxygenation. fMRI decoding is already being used in
∗

Equal contributions.
Core contribution.
‡
Joint senior authors.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

