Leveraging Vision-Centric Multi-Modal Expertise
for 3D Object Detection

Linyan Huang1 Zhiqi Li2 Chonghao Sima1 Wenhai Wang3
Jingdong Wang4 Yu Qiao1 Hongyang Li1
1

Shanghai AI Lab

2

Nanjing University

3

CUHK

4

Baidu

Abstract
Current research is primarily dedicated to advancing the accuracy of camera-only
3D object detectors (apprentice) through the knowledge transferred from LiDARor multi-modal-based counterparts (expert). However, the presence of the domain
gap between LiDAR and camera features, coupled with the inherent incompatibility in temporal fusion, significantly hinders the effectiveness of distillation-based
enhancements for apprentices. Motivated by the success of uni-modal distillation,
an apprentice-friendly expert model would predominantly rely on camera features,
while still achieving comparable performance to multi-modal models. To this end,
we introduce VCD, a framework to improve the camera-only apprentice model,
including an apprentice-friendly multi-modal expert and temporal-fusion-friendly
distillation supervision. The multi-modal expert VCD-E adopts an identical structure as that of the camera-only apprentice in order to alleviate the feature disparity,
and leverages LiDAR input as a depth prior to reconstruct the 3D scene, achieving
the performance on par with other heterogeneous multi-modal experts. Additionally, a fine-grained trajectory-based distillation module is introduced with the
purpose of individually rectifying the motion misalignment for each object in the
scene. With those improvements, our camera-only apprentice VCD-A sets new
state-of-the-art on nuScenes with a score of 63.1% NDS. The code will be released
at https://github.com/OpenDriveLab/Birds-eye-view-Perception.

1

Introduction

The camera-only 3D perception has garnered increasing attention in autonomous driving perception
tasks [31, 21, 47, 50]. Although camera-only models possess the advantages of low deployment cost
and ease of widespread application, they still fall behind state-of-the-art models that leverage LiDAR
sensors regarding perception accuracy. Researchers have recently employed distillation methods to
transfer knowledge from a powerful expert model into a camera-only apprentice model, with the
expectation of leveraging the expertise of these stronger expert models to enhance the capability of
the camera-only models. Existing 3D perception distillation methods often adopt expert models with
the best performance, such as LiDAR-based models [60] or multi-modal fusion models [2, 59, 33].
However, the presence of the domain gap between LiDAR and camera features hampers knowledge
transfer during distillation, resulting in limited improvements in practical applications. An alternative
expert model is the large-scale camera-only model [32, 61]. Despite eliminating the domain gap
between the camera-only expert model and the apprentice model, the expert model falls short in
terms of effectiveness due to the inherent lack of precise geometry information. Likewise, it fails to
yield a satisfactory improvement to the apprentice model. Hence, a desirable expert should meet two
essential requirements: attaining state-of-the-art performance and minimizing the domain gap.
Furthermore, current distillation methods fall short in compatibility with long-term temporal fusion,
which is an essential component in cutting-edge camera-only 3D detectors [18, 43]. Long-term
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

