Probabilistic Invariant Learning with
Randomized Linear Classifiers
Leonardo Cotta
Vector Institute
leonardo.cotta@vectorinstitute.ai
Assaf Schuster
Technion, Haifa, Israel
assaf@technion.ac.il

Gal Yehuda
Technion, Haifa, Israel
ygal@cs.technion.ac.il

Chris J. Maddison
University of Toronto and Vector Institute
cmaddis@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Designing models that are both expressive and preserve known invariances of tasks
is an increasingly hard problem. Existing solutions tradeoff invariance for computational or memory resources. In this work, we show how to leverage randomness
and design models that are both expressive and invariant but use less resources.
Inspired by randomized algorithms, our key insight is that accepting probabilistic notions of universal approximation and invariance can reduce our resource
requirements. More specifically, we propose a class of binary classification models
called Randomized Linear Classifiers (RLCs). We give parameter and sample size
conditions in which RLCs can, with high probability, approximate any (smooth)
function while preserving invariance to compact group transformations. Leveraging this result, we design three RLCs that are provably probabilistic invariant
for classification tasks over sets, graphs, and spherical data. We show how these
models can achieve probabilistic invariance and universality using less resources
than (deterministic) neural networks and their invariant counterparts. Finally, we
empirically demonstrate the benefits of this new class of models on invariant tasks
where deterministic invariant neural networks are known to struggle.

1

Introduction

A modern challenge in machine learning is designing model classes for invariant tasks that are
both universal and resource-efficient. Consider designing an architecture for graph problems that is
invariant under graph isomorphism. Ensuring that this class is universal is at least as hard as solving
the graph isomorphism problem [5]. Similarly, permutation invariance universality comes at the cost
of memory—the number of parameters scales with the sequence size [32].
Using randomness as a computational resource for algorithms is a fundamental idea in computer
science. In their essence, randomized algorithms often provide simple solutions that use less memory
or run in less time than their deterministic counterparts [30]. Since there is no free lunch, these gains
come at the cost of accepting a probabilistic notion of correctness, i.e., while deterministic algorithms
always output correct answers, their randomized versions will be right only with high probability.
Inspired by this, the key insight in our paper is using an external source of randomness to reduce
time and space resources when learning an invariant task. To benefit from that, just as in randomized
algorithms, we also need to introduce a probabilistic notion of invariance and expressive power. By
guaranteeing invariance and universal approximation only with high probability, we show when it is
possible to avoid the invariance-resource tradeoff.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

