Unbiased constrained sampling with
Self-Concordant Barrier Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Maxence Noble∗
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
91120 Palaiseau, France
Valentin De Bortoli
Computer Science Department,
ENS, CNRS, PSL University

Alain Oliviero Durmus
CMAP, CNRS, École polytechnique,
Institut Polytechnique de Paris,
91120 Palaiseau, France

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Barrier Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (BHMC), a version
of the HMC algorithm which aims at sampling from a Gibbs distribution π on
a manifold M, endowed with a Hessian metric g derived from a self-concordant
barrier. Our method relies on Hamiltonian dynamics which comprises g. Therefore,
it incorporates the constraints defining M and is able to exploit its underlying
geometry. However, the corresponding Hamiltonian dynamics is defined via non
separable Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) in contrast to the Euclidean case.
It implies unavoidable bias in existing generalization of HMC to Riemannian manifolds. In this paper, we propose a new filter step, called “involution checking step”,
to address this problem. This step is implemented in two versions of BHMC, coined
continuous BHMC (c-BHMC) and numerical BHMC (n-BHMC) respectively. Our
main results establish that these two new algorithms generate reversible Markov
chains with respect to π and do not suffer from any bias in comparison to previous
implementations. Our conclusions are supported by numerical experiments where
we consider target distributions defined on polytopes.

1

Introduction

Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods is one of the primary algorithmic approaches to obtain
approximate samples from a target distribution π. They have been successively applied over these
past decades in a large panel of practical settings, (Liu & Liu, 2001). In particular, gradient-based
MCMC methods have shown their efficiency and robustness in high-dimensional settings, and come
nowadays with strong theoretical guarantees, (Dalalyan, 2017; Durmus & Moulines, 2017). However,
they still struggle in facing the case where the target distribution is supported on a constrained subset
M of Rd , (Gelfand et al., 1992; Pakman & Paninski, 2014; Lan & Shahbaba, 2015). Yet, this problem
appears in various fields; see e.g., (Morris, 2002; Lewis et al., 2012; Thiele et al., 2013) with some
important applications in computational statistics and biology.
Drawing samples from such distributions is indeed a challenging problem that has been intensively
studied in the literature, (Dyer & Frieze, 1991; Lovász & Simonovits, 1993; Lovász & Kannan, 1999;
Lovász & Vempala, 2007; Brubaker et al., 2012; Cousins & Vempala, 2014; Pakman & Paninski,
2014; Lan & Shahbaba, 2015; Bubeck et al., 2015). In particular, some recent extensions of the
∗

Corresponding author. Contact at: maxence.noble-bourillot@polytechnique.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

