TabMT: Generating Tabular data with Masked
Transformers
Manbir S. Gulati
AI Accelerator
Leidos Inc
Manbir.S.Gulati@leidos.com

Paul F. Roysdon
AI Accelerator
Leidos Inc
Paul.Roysdon@leidos.com

Abstract
Autoregressive and Masked Transformers are incredibly effective as generative
models and classifiers. While these models are most prevalent in NLP, they also
exhibit strong performance in other domains, such as vision. This work contributes
to the exploration of transformer-based models in synthetic data generation for
diverse application domains. In this paper, we present TabMT, a novel Masked
Transformer design for generating synthetic tabular data. TabMT effectively addresses the unique challenges posed by heterogeneous data fields and is natively
able to handle missing data. Our design leverages improved masking techniques to
allow for generation and demonstrates state-of-the-art performance from extremely
small to extremely large tabular datasets. We evaluate TabMT for privacy-focused
applications and find that it is able to generate high quality data with superior
privacy tradeoffs.

1

Introduction

Generative models have attracted significant attention in the field of deep
learning due to their ability to synthesize high-quality data and learn
the underlying structure of complex datasets. Such models have been
successfully applied to various data types including images [18], text[8],
and tabular data [12]. This work concentrates on tabular data, which is
prevalent in numerous fields like healthcare, finance, and social sciences.
The heterogeneous nature of tabular data, characterized by its diverse
data types, distributions, and relationships, presents distinct challenges
not present in other domains.

Categorical
Fields

Numerical
Fields
Quantizer

Embedding

Ordered
Embedding

Masking
𝑃 𝐹!,# = 𝑚 = 𝑝! 𝑝! ~𝑈(0,1)

The development of effective synthetic tabular data generators is crucial
Transformer
for numerous reasons including: privacy preservation, data augmentation,
model interpretability, and anomaly detection. Prior work in this domain
has produced a myriad of generative models, including Generative AdverDynamic
sarial Networks (GANs)[28][25], Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)[25],
Linear
Autoregressive Transformer[22] [1], and Diffusion models[12]. Although
Predicted
these existing models strive to address the challenges associated with tabValues
ular data generation, there is still room for exploration and improvement.
Specifically, we demonstrate improvements in robustness, scalability, Figure 1: Diagram of
privacy preservation, and handling of missing data.
TabMT. m is the mask
Transformers [23], originally designed for natural language processing token, pi is the masking
th
(NLP) tasks, have lead to significant advancements in a variety of appli- probability of the i row
cations. Their powerful capacity for modeling complex dependencies and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

