Sub-optimality of the Naive Mean Field approximation
for proportional high-dimensional Linear Regression

Jiaze Qiu
Department of Statistics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
jiazeqiu@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
The Naïve Mean Field (NMF) approximation is widely employed in modern
Machine Learning due to the huge computational gains it bestows on the statistician.
Despite its popularity in practice, theoretical guarantees for high-dimensional
problems are only available under strong structural assumptions (e.g., sparsity).
Moreover, existing theory often does not explain empirical observations noted in
the existing literature.
In this paper, we take a step towards addressing these problems by deriving sharp
asymptotic characterizations for the NMF approximation in high-dimensional
linear regression. Our results apply to a wide class of natural priors and allow
for model mismatch (i.e., the underlying statistical model can be different from
the fitted model). We work under an iid Gaussian design and the proportional
asymptotic regime, where the number of features and the number of observations
grow at a proportional rate. As a consequence of our asymptotic characterization,
we establish two concrete corollaries: (a) we establish the inaccuracy of the NMF
approximation for the log-normalizing constant in this regime, and (b) we provide
theoretical results backing the empirical observation that the NMF approximation
can be overconfident in terms of uncertainty quantification.
Our results utilize recent advances in the theory of Gaussian comparison inequalities. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first application of these ideas to
the analysis of Bayesian variational inference problems. Our theoretical results
are corroborated by numerical experiments. Lastly, we believe our results can be
generalized to non-Gaussian designs and provide empirical evidence to support it.

1

Introduction

The Naive Mean Field (NMF) approximation is widely employed in modern Machine Learning as an
approximation to the actual intractable posterior distribution. The NMF approximation is attractive
as (a) it bestows huge computational gains, and (b) it is naturally interpretable and can provide access
to easily interpretable summaries of the posterior distribution e.g., credible intervals. However, these
two advantages may be overshadowed by the following limitations: (a) it is a priori unclear whether
this strategy of using a product distribution as a proxy for the true posterior will result in a “good”
approximation, and (b) it has been empirically observed that NMF often tends to be significantly
over-confident, especially when the feature dimension p is not negligible compared to the sample
size n. In the traditional asymptotic regime (p fixed and n → ∞), significant progress was made in
understanding these two problems for different statistical models, see for instance [8] and references
therein. On the other hand, in the complementary high-dimensional regime where both n and p are
growing, Ghorbani et al. [7] recently established an instability result for the topic model under the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

