MeGraph: Capturing Long-Range Interactions by
Alternating Local and Hierarchical Aggregation on
Multi-Scaled Graph Hierarchy

Honghua Dong1,2,3∗† Jiawei Xu1,4∗ Yu Yang1,4∗ Rui Zhao1 Shiwen Wu5
Chun Yuan4 Xiu Li4 Chris Maddison2,3 Lei Han1†
1
Tencent Robotics X 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
4
Tsinghua University 5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Graph neural networks, which typically exchange information between local neighbors, often struggle to capture long-range interactions (LRIs) within the graph.
Building a graph hierarchy via graph pooling methods is a promising approach
to address this challenge; however, hierarchical information propagation cannot
entirely take over the role of local information aggregation. To balance locality
and hierarchy, we integrate the local and hierarchical structures, represented by
intra- and inter-graphs respectively, of a multi-scale graph hierarchy into a single
mega graph. Our proposed MeGraph model consists of multiple layers alternating
between local and hierarchical information aggregation on the mega graph. Each
layer first performs local-aware message-passing on graphs of varied scales via
the intra-graph edges, then fuses information across the entire hierarchy along
the bidirectional pathways formed by inter-graph edges. By repeating this fusion
process, local and hierarchical information could intertwine and complement each
other. To evaluate our model, we establish a new Graph Theory Benchmark designed to assess LRI capture ability, in which MeGraph demonstrates dominant
performance. Furthermore, MeGraph exhibits superior or equivalent performance
to state-of-the-art models on the Long Range Graph Benchmark. The experimental
results on commonly adopted real-world datasets further demonstrate the broad
applicability of MeGraph. 1

1

Introduction

Graph-structured data, such as social networks, traffic networks, and biological data, are prevalent
across a plethora of real-world applications. Recently, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged
as a powerful tool for modeling and understanding the intricate relationships and patterns present in
such data. Most existing GNNs learn graph representations by iteratively aggregating information
from individual nodes’ local neighborhoods through the message-passing mechanism. Despite their
effectiveness, these GNNs struggle to capture long-range interactions (LRIs) between nodes in the
graph. For instance, when employing a 4-layer vanilla GNN on the 9-node (A to I) graph (as shown
in Fig. 1), the receptive field of node A is limited to 4-hop neighbors, making the aggregation of
information from nodes G, H, and I into node A quite challenging. While GNNs could theoretically
incorporate information from nodes n-hops away with n-layers of message passing, this often leads
to over-smoothing and over-squashing issues [17, 3] when n is large.
*

Equal Contribution. Work done while HD, JX and YY are interns at Tencent Robotics X.
Corresponding authors, contact honghuad@cs.toronto.edu and lxhan@tencent.com.
1
Project website and open-source code can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/megraph.

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

