PAXION: Patching Action Knowledge in
Video-Language Foundation Models

Zhenhailong Wang1 , Ansel Blume1 , Sha Li1 , Genglin Liu1 ,
Jaemin Cho2 , Zineng Tang2 , Mohit Bansal2 , Heng Ji1
1
UIUC 2 UNC
{wangz3,hengji}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Action knowledge involves the understanding of textual, visual, and temporal aspects of actions. We introduce the Action Dynamics Benchmark (ActionBench)
containing two carefully designed probing tasks: Action Antonym and Video Reversal, which targets multimodal alignment capabilities and temporal understanding
skills of the model, respectively. Despite recent video-language models’ (VidLM)
impressive performance on various benchmark tasks, our diagnostic tasks reveal
their surprising deficiency (near-random performance) in action knowledge, suggesting that current models rely on object recognition abilities as a shortcut for action understanding. To remedy this, we propose a novel framework, PAXION, along
with a new Discriminative Video Dynamics Modeling (DVDM) objective. The
PAXION framework utilizes a Knowledge Patcher network to encode new action
knowledge and a Knowledge Fuser component to integrate the Patcher into frozen
VidLMs without compromising their existing capabilities. Due to limitations of the
widely-used Video-Text Contrastive (VTC) loss for learning action knowledge, we
introduce the DVDM objective to train the Knowledge Patcher. DVDM forces the
model to encode the correlation between the action text and the correct ordering
of video frames. Our extensive analyses show that PAXION and DVDM together
effectively fill the gap in action knowledge understanding (~50% → 80%), while
maintaining or improving performance on a wide spectrum of both object- and
action-centric downstream tasks. The code and data will be made publicly available
for research purposes at https://github.com/MikeWangWZHL/Paxion.git.

1

Introduction

Recent video-language models (VidLMs) [30, 25, 55, 35, 57, 52] have shown impressive performance
on a wide range of video-language tasks. However, such multimodal models are not without
deficiencies: [24] points out that many popular video-language benchmarks [56, 3, 16] can be solved
by looking at a single frame, and [59] shows that vision-language models struggle to understand
compositional and order relations in images, treating images as bags of objects. Such limitations
suggest that models’ understanding of actions, which may require several frames and comprehension
of object relationships, may be lacking.
To test this hypothesis, we first define action knowledge as an understanding of the cause and effect
of actions in textual, visual, and temporal dimensions. To quantify a model’s action knowledge, we
introduce the Action Dynamics Benchmark (ActionBench). ActionBench contains two probing
tasks: distinguishing between (1) a video’s caption and the caption with its action verbs replaced by
their antonyms; (2) the original and reversed videos. The benchmark also includes a baseline task
for controlling the undesired impact from domain mismatch and investigating potential bias towards
objects. The baseline task requires the model to differentiate between the original video captions
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

