Continual Learning for Instruction Following from
Realtime Feedback
Alane Suhr
University of California, Berkeley∗
suhr@berkeley.edu

Yoav Artzi
Cornell University
yoav@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
We propose and deploy an approach to continually train an instruction-following
agent from feedback provided by users during collaborative interactions. During
interaction, human users instruct an agent using natural language, and provide
realtime binary feedback as they observe the agent following their instructions.
We design a contextual bandit learning approach, converting user feedback to
immediate reward. We evaluate through thousands of human-agent interactions,
demonstrating 15.4% absolute improvement in instruction execution accuracy
over time. We also show our approach is robust to several design variations, and
that the feedback signal is roughly equivalent to the learning signal of supervised
demonstration data.

1

Introduction

The dynamics that arise in situated language interactions between human users and automated agents
expose a plethora of language learning signals. A prime example of such a signal is explicit feedback:
when users convey their intent via natural language instructions for an agent to follow, they are well
positioned to provide feedback, for example, through a stream of binary signals as the agent acts.
Learning from this type of signal has significant potential. It shifts the burden of learning from
annotated data to learning through interaction with users, which not only reduces data costs, but
also enables continual2 improvement through interaction with users. This signal also fundamentally
differs from gold-standard annotated data: it directly targets the current agent behavior, rather than
reflecting optimal human behavior that may be of less relevance to the agent’s current policy. This
approach stands in contrast with most methods for learning to follow instructions, where the use of
demonstration data entails high data costs, and the clear separation between training and deployment
passes over opportunities for learning through interaction with users [e.g., 3, 1, 38].
In this paper, we study the problem of continually2 improving an automated instruction-following
agent3 by learning from user feedback in human-agent interactions. We situate the interaction in
a collaborative environment, which provides conditions necessary for this type of learning: users
are incentivized to improve the agent’s capabilities by providing feedback, and are continuously
present as the agent executes their instructions. We use the C EREAL BAR scenario [41], where two
participants collaborate towards a common goal in a shared world, using natural language instructions
to coordinate their actions. During interaction, human users write instructions for an agent, and
provide feedback to the agent as it executes them via a stream of binary signals. Figure 1 illustrates
∗

Work done while at Cornell University.
We use the term continual learning to refer to a learning setting where an agent continually improves its
task performance [14], in our case following instructions. The term is used at times to describe the domain
adaptation challenge of continually learning to handle new tasks. Our work does not address this problem.
3
Throughout the paper, we use agent to refer to an automated instruction-following system.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

