Online Performative Gradient Descent for Learning
Nash Equilibria in Decision-Dependent Games

Zihan Zhu∗
Duke University

Ethan X. Fang†
Duke University

Zhuoran Yang‡
Yale University

Abstract
We study multi-agent games within the innovative framework of decisiondependent games, which establishes a feedback mechanism that population data
reacts to agents’ actions and further characterizes the strategic interactions among
agents. We focus on finding the Nash equilibrium of decision-dependent games
in the bandit feedback setting. However, since agents are strategically coupled,
classical gradient-based methods are infeasible without the gradient oracle. To overcome this challenge, we model the strategic interactions by a general parametric
model and propose a novel online algorithm, Online Performative Gradient Descent
(OPGD), which leverages the ideas of online stochastic approximation and projected
gradient descent to learn the Nash equilibrium in the context of function approximation for the unknown gradient. In particular, under mild assumptions on the
function classes defined in the parametric model, we prove that the OPGD algorithm
finds the Nash equilibrium efficiently for strongly monotone decision-dependent
games. Synthetic numerical experiments validate our theory.

1

Introduction

The classical theory of learning and prediction fundamentally relies on the assumption that data
follows a static distribution. This assumption, however, does not account for many dynamic realworld scenarios where decisions can influence the data involved. Recent literature on performative
classification (Hardt et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2018; Miller et al., 2020) and performative prediction
(Perdomo et al., 2020) offers a variety of examples where agents are strategic, and data is performative.
For instance, in the ride-sharing market, both passengers and drivers engage with multiple platforms
using various strategies such as “price shopping". Consequently, these platforms observe performative
demands, and the pricing policy becomes strategically coupled.
In this paper, we explore the multi-agent performative prediction problem, specifically, the multiagent decision-dependent games, as proposed by Narang et al. (2022). We aim to develop algorithms
to find Nash equilibria with the first-order oracle. In this scenario, agents can only access their utility
functions instead of gradients through the oracle. Finding Nash equilibria in decision-dependent
games is a challenging task. Most existing works primarily focus on finding performative stable
equilibria within the single-agent setting, an approach that approximates the Nash equilibrium and is
relatively straightforward to compute (Mendler-Dünner et al., 2020; Wood et al., 2021; Drusvyatskiy
and Xiao, 2022; Brown et al., 2022; Li and Wai, 2022).
There are two major challenges associated with this problem: (i) the distribution shift induced by
performative data, and (ii) the lack of first-order information for the performative gradient. To address
these two challenges, we propose a novel online gradient-based algorithm, Online Performative
Gradient Descent (OPGD). In particular, our algorithm employs a general parametric framework to
∗

Department of Statistical Science, Duke University. zihan.zhu@duke.edu
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University. xingyuan.fang@duke.edu
‡
Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University. zhuoran.yang@yale.edu

†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

