QuIP: 2-Bit Quantization of
Large Language Models With Guarantees

Jerry Chee
Cornell University
jerrychee@cs.cornell.edu
Volodymyr Kuleshov
Cornell University
kuleshov@cornell.edu

Yaohui Cai
Cornell University
yc2632@cornell.edu
Christopher De Sa
Cornell University
cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
This work studies post-training parameter quantization in large language models
(LLMs). We introduce quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new
method based on the insight that quantization benefits from incoherent weight
and Hessian matrices, i.e., from the weights being even in magnitude and the
directions in which it is important to round them accurately being unaligned with
the coordinate axes. QuIP consists of two steps: (1) an adaptive rounding procedure
minimizing a quadratic proxy objective; (2) efficient pre- and post-processing that
ensures weight and Hessian incoherence via multiplication by random orthogonal
matrices. We complement QuIP with the first theoretical analysis for an LLM-scale
quantization algorithm, and show that our theory also applies to an existing method,
OPTQ. Empirically, we find that our incoherence preprocessing improves several
existing quantization algorithms and yields the first LLM quantization methods
that produce viable results using only two bits per weight. Our code can be found
at https://github.com/Cornell-RelaxML/QuIP.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) have enabled advances in text generation, few-shot learning, reasoning, protein sequence modeling, and other tasks [2, 30, 35]. The massive size of these models—often
reaching into hundreds of billions of parameters—requires sophisticated deployment methods and
motivates research into efficient inference algorithms.
This work studies the post-training quantization of LLM parameters as a way to improve their runtime
efficiency [4, 8, 22, 31, 33, 34]. Our key insight is that quantization can be most effective when weight
and proxy Hessian matrices are incoherent—that the weights themselves are even in magnitude,
and the directions in which it is important to have good rounding accuracy are not too large in any
one coordinate. Intuitively, incoherence can be thought of as a principled form of outlier reduction,
which makes it easier to adaptively round the weights to a finite set of compressed values. We use
this intuition to develop theoretically sound two-bit quantization algorithms that scale to LLM-sized
models.
Specifically, we introduce quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new method motivated
by the above insight. QuIP consists of two steps: (1) an adaptive rounding [20] procedure, which
minimizes a quadratic proxy objective ℓ(Ŵ ) = tr((Ŵ − W )H(Ŵ − W )T ) of the error between the
original weights W and the quantized weights Ŵ using an estimate of the Hessian H; (2) efficient preand post- processing that ensures that the weight and Hessian matrices are incoherent by multiplying
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

