Contrastive Moments: Unsupervised Halfspace
Learning in Polynomial Time

Xinyuan Cao
Georgia Tech
xcao78@gatech.edu

Santosh S. Vempala
Georgia Tech
vempala@gatech.edu

Abstract
We give a polynomial-time algorithm for learning high-dimensional halfspaces
with margins in d-dimensional space to within desired Total Variation (TV) distance
when the ambient distribution is an unknown affine transformation of the d-fold
product of an (unknown) symmetric one-dimensional logconcave distribution, and
the halfspace is introduced by deleting at least an ϵ fraction of the data in one
of the component distributions. Notably, our algorithm does not need labels and
establishes the unique (and efficient) identifiability of the hidden halfspace under
this distributional assumption. The sample and time complexity of the algorithm
are polynomial in the dimension and 1/ϵ. The algorithm uses only the first two
moments of suitable re-weightings of the empirical distribution, which we call
contrastive moments; its analysis uses classical facts about generalized Dirichlet
polynomials and relies crucially on a new monotonicity property of the moment
ratio of truncations of logconcave distributions. Such algorithms, based only on
first and second moments were suggested in earlier work, but hitherto eluded
rigorous guarantees.
Prior work addressed the special case when the underlying distribution is Gaussian
via Non-Gaussian Component Analysis. We improve on this by providing polytime
guarantees based on TV distance, in place of existing moment-bound guarantees
that can be super-polynomial. Our work is also the first to go beyond Gaussians in
this setting.

1

Introduction

Suppose points in Rd are labeled according to a linear threshold function (a halfspace). Learning a
threshold function from labeled examples is the archetypal well-solved problem in learning theory, in
both the PAC and mistake-bound models; its study has led to efficient algorithms, a range of powerful
techniques and many interesting learning paradigms. While the sample complexity in general grows
with the dimension, when the halfspace has a margin, the complexity can instead be bounded in
terms of the reciprocal of the squared margin width [PCST99, SBS+ 00, AV06, LS11]. The problem
is also very interesting for special classes of distributions, e.g., when the underlying distribution
is logconcave, agnostic learning is possible [KKMS08], and active learning needs fewer samples
compared to the general case [BBL06].
The main motivation for our work is learning a halfspace with a margin with no labels, i.e.,
unsupervised learning of halfspaces. This is, of course, impossible in general — there could be
multiple halfspaces with margins consistent with the data — raising the question: Can there be
natural distributional assumptions that allow the unsupervised learning of halfspaces? For example,
suppose data is drawn from a Gaussian in Rd with points in an unknown band removed, i.e., we
assume there exists a unit vector u ∈ Rd and an interval [a, b] so that the input distribution is the
Gaussian restricted to the set {x ∈ Rd |⟨u, x⟩ ≤ a or ⟨u, x⟩ ≥ b}. Can the vector u be efficiently
learned? Such a distributional assumption ensures that the band normal to u is essentially unique,
leaving open the question of whether it can be efficiently learned.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

