A Dynamical System View of
Langevin-Based Non-Convex Sampling

Mohammad Reza Karimi∗
ETH Zürich
mkarimi@inf.ethz.ch

Ya-Ping Hsieh∗
ETH Zürich
yaping.hsieh@inf.ethz.ch

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
Non-convex sampling is a key challenge in machine learning, central to non-convex
optimization in deep learning as well as to approximate probabilistic inference.
Despite its significance, theoretically there remain some important challenges:
Existing guarantees suffer from the drawback of lacking guarantees for the lastiterates, and little is known beyond the elementary schemes of stochastic gradient
Langevin dynamics. To address these issues, we develop a novel framework that
lifts the above issues by harnessing several tools from the theory of dynamical
systems. Our key result is that, for a large class of state-of-the-art sampling schemes,
their last-iterate convergence in Wasserstein distances can be reduced to the study
of their continuous-time counterparts, which is much better understood. Coupled
with standard assumptions of MCMC sampling, our theory immediately yields the
last-iterate Wasserstein convergence of many advanced sampling schemes such as
mirror Langevin, proximal, randomized mid-point, and Runge-Kutta methods.

1

Introduction

Many modern learning tasks involve sampling from a high-dimensional density 𝜋 ∝ 𝑒 − 𝑓 , where 𝑓 is
a non-convex potential representing, for instance, the loss function of a deep neural network. To this
end, an approach that has found wide success is to discretize the continuous-time Langevin diffusion
√
d𝐿 𝑡 = −∇ 𝑓 (𝐿 𝑡 ) d𝑡 + 2 d𝐵𝑡
(LD)
where 𝐵𝑡 is a Brownian motion [57]. The idea behind this approach is that, since 𝜋 is the stationary
distribution of (LD), one can expect a similar behavior for discretizations of (LD). Such a framework
has inspired numerous sampling schemes with per-iteration costs as cheap as stochastic gradient
descent, which are particularly suitable for large-scale approximate probabilistic inference and
Bayesian learning [2, 54, 57]. Moreover, several works have noticed that these Langevin-based
schemes provide deep insights about minimizing 𝑓 using stochastic oracles [22, 48], which serves as
an important step toward explaining the empirical success of training deep neural networks.
The convergence of Langevin-based non-convex sampling has therefore attracted significant interest
from both practitioners and theoreticians, whose intense study has led to a plethora of new guarantees;
see related work for details. Despite such impressive progress, several challenges remain for the fully
non-convex setup:
• The convergence is typically given on the averaged iterates instead of the more natural last iterates
[4, 54]. This is especially problematic from the perspective of understanding the minimization
of 𝑓 , as in practice, the last iterates of an optimization algorithm play the most pivotal role for
downstream tasks.
∗ Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

