Efficient Training of Energy-Based Models
Using Jarzynski Equality

Davide Carbone
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Politecnico di Torino
Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Torino
davide.carbone@polito.it
Mengjian Hua
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
mh5113@nyu.edu
Simon Coste
LPSM, Université Paris-Cité
simon.coste@u-paris.fr
Eric Vanden-Eijnden
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University
eve2@nyu.edu

Abstract
Energy-based models (EBMs) are generative models inspired by statistical physics
with a wide range of applications in unsupervised learning. Their performance
is well measured by the cross-entropy (CE) of the model distribution relative
to the data distribution. Using the CE as the objective for training is however
challenging because the computation of its gradient with respect to the model
parameters requires sampling the model distribution. Here we show how results for
nonequilibrium thermodynamics based on Jarzynski equality together with tools
from sequential Monte-Carlo sampling can be used to perform this computation
efficiently and avoid the uncontrolled approximations made using the standard
contrastive divergence algorithm. Specifically, we introduce a modification of the
unadjusted Langevin algorithm (ULA) in which each walker acquires a weight that
enables the estimation of the gradient of the cross-entropy at any step during GD,
thereby bypassing sampling biases induced by slow mixing of ULA. We illustrate
these results with numerical experiments on Gaussian mixture distributions as
well as the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets. We show that the proposed approach
outperforms methods based on the contrastive divergence algorithm in all the
considered situations.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic models have become a key tool in generative artificial intelligence (AI) and unsupervised
learning. Their goal is twofold: explain the training data, and allow the synthesis of new samples.
Many flavors have been introduced in the last decades, including variational auto-encoders [1, 2, 3]
generative adversarial networks [4, 5], normalizing flows [6, 7, 8, 9, 10], diffusion-based models [11,
12, 13], restricted Boltzmann machines [14, 15, 16], and energy-based models (EBMs) [17, 18, 19].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

