Streaming Algorithms and Lower Bounds for
Estimating Correlation Clustering Cost

Sepehr Assadi1 Vihan Shah1 Chen Wang2
1
University of Waterloo 2 Rutgers University
sepehr@assadi.info
vihan.shah@uwaterloo.ca
wc497@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Correlation clustering is a fundamental optimization problem at the intersection of
machine learning and theoretical computer science. Motivated by applications to
big data processing, recent years have witnessed a flurry of results on this problem
in the streaming model. In this model, the algorithm needs to process the input
n-vertex graph by making one or few passes over the stream of its edges and using
a limited memory, much smaller than the input size.
All previous work on streaming correlation clustering has focused on semistreaming algorithms with Ω(n) memory, whereas in this work, we study streaming
algorithms with much smaller memory requirements of only polylog(n) bits. This
stringent memory requirement is in the same spirit of classical streaming algorithms that instead of recovering a full solution to the problem—which can be
prohibitively large with such small memory as is the case in our problem—, aimed
to learn certain statistical properties of their inputs. In our case, this translates to
determining the “(correlation) clusterability” of input graphs, or more precisely,
estimating the cost of the optimal correlation clustering solution.
As our main result, we present two novel algorithms that in only polylog(n) space
are able to estimate the optimal correlation clustering cost up to some constant
multiplicative factor plus some extra additive error. One of the algorithms outputs
a 3-multiplicative approximation plus o(n2 ) additive approximation, and the other
one further reduces the additive error at the cost of increasing the multiplicative
factor to some large constant. We then present new lower bounds that justify the
mix of both multiplicative and additive error approximations in our algorithms.

1

Introduction

Correlation clustering is a fundamental optimization problem at the intersection of machine learning
and theoretical computer science. This problem was introduced by the work of [BBC04]1 , with
motivation to document clustering, as follows: we have a complete graph G = (V, E) whose edges
are labeled by either (+) or (−), and the objective, known as disagreement minimization, is to
cluster the vertices so that the number of (+) edges across clusters and (−) edges inside the same
clusters are minimized. Correlation clustering has since found broad applications in areas such as
document categorization [BBC04], webpage segmentation [CKP08], microscopy imaging [ZYH14],
and community detection [VGW18, SDE+ 21], to name a few.
There is an abundant body of literature studying polynomial time algorithms for correlation clustering.
[BBC04, CMSY15] showed that there exists a 2.06-approximation algorithm in polynomial time and
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
1

Historically, some forms of the problem were mentioned in earlier works like [GW89].

