VTaC: A Benchmark Dataset of Ventricular
Tachycardia Alarms from ICU Monitors

Li-wei H. Lehman ∗
MIT
Hasan Saeed
MIT
Qiao Li
Emory University

Benjamin Moody
MIT
Lucas McCullum
MIT

Harsh Deep
MIT
Diane Perry
MIT

Gari Clifford
Emory University, Georgia Tech

Feng Wu
MIT
Tristan Struja
MIT
Roger G. Mark
MIT

Abstract
False arrhythmia alarms in intensive care units (ICUs) are a continuing problem
despite considerable effort from industrial and academic algorithm developers. Of
all life-threatening arrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia (VT) stands out as the
most challenging arrhythmia to detect reliably. We introduce a new annotated
VT alarm database, VTaC (Ventricular Tachycardia annotated alarms from ICUs)
consisting of over 5,000 waveform recordings with VT alarms triggered by bedside
monitors in the ICUs. Each VT alarm in the dataset has been labeled by at least
two independent human expert annotators. The dataset encompasses data collected
from ICUs in three major US hospitals and includes data from three leading bedside
monitor manufacturers, providing a diverse and representative collection of alarm
waveform data. Each waveform recording comprises at least two electrocardiogram
(ECG) leads and one or more pulsatile waveforms, such as photoplethysmogram
(PPG or PLETH) and arterial blood pressure (ABP) waveforms. We demonstrate
the utility of this new benchmark dataset for the task of false arrhythmia alarm
reduction, and present performance of multiple machine learning approaches,
including conventional supervised machine learning, deep learning, contrastive
learning and generative approaches for the task of VT false alarm reduction.

1

Introduction

Within intensive care units (ICUs), bedside monitors generate a substantial number of alarms, a
considerable proportion of which are false [Drew et al., 2014]. These false alarms not only burden
clinicians with heightened cognitive strain but also have the potential to obscure genuine alarms,
thereby endangering patient safety. Arrhythmia alarms, accounting for 45% of overall ICU alarms,
in particular, pose a significant challenge, contributing to alarm fatigue that increases the risk of
healthcare providers potentially overlooking true life-threatening events [Drew et al., 2014, Cvach,
2012].
Accurate and reliable algorithms that can distinguish between true vs. false arrhythmia alarms can
improve the overall effectiveness of monitoring systems in ICUs. However, the development and
evaluation of such algorithms rely on the availability of high-quality and representative datasets with
ground-truth labels from human experts.
∗

Corresponding author: lilehman@mit.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

