Multi-Player Zero-Sum Markov Games with
Networked Separable Interactions

Chanwoo Park♮
MIT
cpark97@mit.edu

Kaiqing Zhang♮
University of Maryland, College Park
kaiqing@umd.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar
MIT
asuman@mit.edu

Abstract
We study a new class of Markov games, (multi-player) zero-sum Markov Games
with Networked separable interactions (zero-sum NMGs), to model the local
interaction structure in non-cooperative multi-agent sequential decision-making.
We define a zero-sum NMG as a model where the payoffs of the auxiliary games
associated with each state are zero-sum and have some separable (i.e., polymatrix)
structure across the neighbors over some interaction network. We first identify
the necessary and sufficient conditions under which an MG can be presented as
a zero-sum NMG, and show that the set of Markov coarse correlated equilibrium
(CCE) collapses to the set of Markov Nash equilibrium (NE) in these games, in
that the product of per-state marginalization of the former for all players yields the
latter. Furthermore, we show that finding approximate Markov stationary CCE in
infinite-horizon discounted zero-sum NMGs is PPAD-hard, unless the underlying
network has a “star topology”. Then, we propose fictitious-play-type dynamics,
the classical learning dynamics in normal-form games, for zero-sum NMGs, and
establish convergence guarantees to Markov stationary NE under a star-shaped
network structure. Finally, in light of the hardness result, we focus on computing
a Markov non-stationary NE and provide finite-iteration guarantees for a series
of value-iteration-based algorithms. We also provide numerical experiments to
corroborate our theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Nash Equilibrium (NE) has been broadly used as a solution concept in game theory, since the seminal
works of [1, 2]. Perhaps equally important, NE is also deeply rooted in the prediction and analysis
of learning dynamics in multi-agent strategic environments: it may appear as a natural outcome of
many non-equilibrating learning processes of multiple agents interacting with each other [3, 4]. A
prominent example of such learning processes is fictitious play (FP) [5, 6], in which myopic agents
estimate the opponents’ play using history, and then choose a best-response action (based on their
payoff matrix) against this estimate, as if the opponents use it as their stationary strategy. The focus
of these studies has initially been on the convergence to NE in zero-sum games (see [5, 6], and also
[7, 4]), and in games with aligned objective (identical-interest and potential games, see [8]). Since
then, FP has been shown to converge to NE in more important classes of games, including 2xn games
[9, 10], “one-against-all” games [11], and zero-sum polymatrix games [12], justifying the prediction
power of NE in learning in normal-form/matrix games.
Some of these results have recently been extended to the stochastic game (also known as the
Markov game (MG)) setting, a model for multi-agent sequential decision-making with state transition
dynamics, first introduced in [13]. In particular, [14, 15, 16, 17, 18] have studied best-response-type
learning dynamics in two-player zero-sum MGs, and [19, 17] have studied that in multi-player
♮

Alphabetical order.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

