Score-based Generative Models with Lévy Processes
Eunbi Yoon1⇤, Keehun Park2 , Sungwoong Kim3† , Sungbin Lim1, 4, 5†
1
Department of Statistics, Korea University
2
Artificial Intelligence Graduate School, UNIST
3
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University
4
LG AI Research
5
SNU-LG AI Research Center
yon6286@gmail.com; sungbin@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Investigating the optimal stochastic process beyond Gaussian for noise injection
in a score-based generative model remains an open question. Brownian motion is
a light-tailed process with continuous paths, which leads to a slow convergence
rate for the Number of Function Evaluation (NFE). Recent studies have shown
that diffusion models suffer from mode-collapse issues on imbalanced data. In
order to overcome the limitations of Brownian motion, we introduce a novel scorebased generative model referred to as Lévy-Itô Model (LIM). This model utilizes
isotropic ↵-stable Lévy processes. We first derive an exact reverse-time stochastic
differential equation driven by the Lévy process, then develop the corresponding
fractional denoising score matching. LIM takes advantage of the heavy-tailed
properties of the Lévy process. Our experimental results show LIM allows for
faster and more diverse sampling while maintaining high fidelity compared to
existing diffusion models across various image datasets such as CIFAR10, CelebA,
and imbalanced dataset CIFAR10LT. Comparing our results to those of DDPM with
3.21 Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) and 0.6437 Recall on the CelebA dataset,
we achieve 1.58 FID and 0.7006 Recall using the same architecture. LIM shows
the best performance in NFE 500 with 2⇥ faster total wall-clock time than the
baseline.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models train time-dependent score models given a diffusion process and
generate samples from the corresponding reverse process [39]. The feasibility of score-based diffusion
models is based on the time-reversal formula of the Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) driven
by the Brownian motion [2]. The exact form of the density function of the Brownian motion enables
efficient sampling and easy theoretical handling compared to other types of noise. The score-based
diffusion model is easy to train because the score function is approximated through Denoising ScoreMatching (DSM). Additionally, the solution of reverse SDE can be simulated through the numerical
SDE solver. This enables effective training and utilization of the model in various applications. One
limitation of score-based diffusion models is that the paths produced by the SDEs need numerous
iterations to achieve a data distribution, leading to slower sampling. To solve these problems, various
methods have been proposed to reduce the convergence rate while maintaining to generate high
fidelity samples [22]. Another effort has also been made to use distillation to reduce the number of
steps [33]. In addition, it has been pointed out that Diffusion models show significant degradation
in terms of fidelity and diversity when dealing with imbalanced datasets [30]. Thus, there is a need
⇤
†

This work is done at UNIST.
Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

