Evaluating the Moral Beliefs Encoded in LLMs

Nino Scherrer 1∗, Claudia Shi 1,2∗ , Amir Feder 2 and David M. Blei 2
1
FAR AI, 2 Columbia University

Abstract
This paper presents a case study on the design, administration, post-processing,
and evaluation of surveys on large language models (LLMs). It comprises two
components: (1) A statistical method for eliciting beliefs encoded in LLMs. We
introduce statistical measures and evaluation metrics that quantify the probability
of an LLM "making a choice", the associated uncertainty, and the consistency of
that choice. (2) We apply this method to study what moral beliefs are encoded
in different LLMs, especially in ambiguous cases where the right choice is not
obvious. We design a large-scale survey comprising 680 high-ambiguity moral
scenarios (e.g., "Should I tell a white lie?") and 687 low-ambiguity moral scenarios
(e.g., "Should I stop for a pedestrian on the road?"). Each scenario includes a
description, two possible actions, and auxiliary labels indicating violated rules (e.g.,
"do not kill"). We administer the survey to 28 open- and closed-source LLMs. We
find that (a) in unambiguous scenarios, most models “choose" actions that align
with commonsense. In ambiguous cases, most models express uncertainty. (b)
Some models are uncertain about choosing the commonsense action because their
responses are sensitive to the question-wording. (c) Some models reflect clear
preferences in ambiguous scenarios. Specifically, closed-source models tend to
agree with each other. Code and data are publicly available1 .

1

Introduction

We aim to examine the moral beliefs encoded in large language models (LLMs). Building on existing
work on moral psychology [7, 36, 34, 19, 26], we approach this question through a large-scale
empirical survey, where LLMs serve as “survey respondents”. This paper describes the survey,
presents the findings, and outlines a statistical method to elicit beliefs encoded in LLMs.
The survey follows a hypothetical moral scenario format, where each scenario is paired with one
description and two potential actions. We design two question settings: low-ambiguity and highambiguity. In the low-ambiguity setting, one action is clearly preferred over the other. In the highambiguity setting, neither action is clearly preferred. Figure 1 presents a randomly selected scenario
from each setting. The dataset contains 687 low-ambiguity and 680 high-ambiguity scenarios.
Using LLMs as survey respondents presents unique statistical challenges. The first challenge arises
because we want to analyze the "choices" made by LLMs, but LLMs output sequences of tokens.
The second challenge is that LLM responses are sensitive to the syntactic form of survey questions
[24, 71, 73, 43, 16]. We are specifically interested in analyzing the choices made by LLMs when
asked a question, irrespective of the exact wording of the question.
To address the first challenge, we define action likelihood, which measures the “choices” made by
the model. We use a deterministic function to map the probability of token sequences, produced
by the LLM, into a distribution over actions. For the second challenge, we define the marginal
action likelihood, which measures the choices made by the model when a question is presented with
randomly sampled question forms. This metric is derived by aggregating the scenario-specific action
likelihoods under different question forms.
∗
1

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to {nino.scherrer,claudia.j.shi}@gmail.com
Code: https://github.com/ninodimontalcino/moralchoice

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

