Weitzman’s Rule for Pandora’s Box with Correlations
Evangelia Gergatsouli
University of Wisconsin-Madison
evagerg@cs.wisc.edu

Christos Tzamos
University of Wisconsin-Madison
& University of Athens
tzamos@wisc.edu

Abstract
PANDORA’ S B OX is a central problem in decision making under uncertainty that
can model various real life scenarios. In this problem we are given n boxes, each
with a fixed opening cost, and an unknown value drawn from a known distribution,
only revealed if we pay the opening cost. Our goal is to find a strategy for opening
boxes to minimize the sum of the value selected and the opening cost paid.
In this work we revisit PANDORA’ S B OX when the value distributions are correlated,
first studied in Chawla et al. [2020]. We show that the optimal algorithm for the
independent case, given by Weitzman’s rule, directly works for the correlated case.
In fact, our algorithm results in significantly improved approximation guarantees
compared to the previous work, while also being substantially simpler. We also
show how to implement the rule given only sample access to the correlated distribution of values. Specifically, we find that a number of samples that is polynomial
in the number of boxes is sufficient for the algorithm to work.

1

Introduction

In various minimization problems where uncertainty exists in the input, we are allowed to obtain
information to remove this uncertainty by paying an extra price. Our goal is to sequentially decide
which piece of information to acquire next, in order to minimize the sum of the search cost and the
value of the option we chose.
This family of problems is naturally modeled by PANDORA’ S B OX, first formulated by Weitzman
[1979] in an economics setting, with multiple application in consumer search, housing markets and
job search (see [McCall and McCall, 2007] for more applications). In this problem where we are
given n boxes, each containing a value drawn from a known distribution and each having a fixed
known opening cost. We can only see the exact value realized in a box if we open it and pay the
opening cost. Our goal is to minimize the sum of the value we select and the opening costs of the
boxes we opened.
In the original work of Weitzman, an optimal solution was proposed when the distributions on the
values of the boxes were independent [Weitzman, 1979]. This algorithm was based on calculating
a reservation value (σ) for each box, and then choosing the box with the lowest reservation value
to open at every step. Independence, however, is an unrealistic assumption in real life; in a housing
market neighboring houses’ price are affected the same way, or in a job search setting, candidates
might share qualifications that affect them similarly. Wanting to tackle a more realistic setting,
Chawla et al. [2020] first studied the problem where the distributions are correlated, and designed an
algorithm giving a constant approximation guarantee. This algorithm is quite involved, it requires
solving an LP to convert the PANDORA’ S B OX instance to a M IN S UM S ET C OVER one, and then
solving this instance to obtain an ordering of opening the boxes. Finally, it reduces the problem of
deciding when to stop to an online algorithm question corresponding to S KI -R ENTAL.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

