Mutual Information Regularized Offline
Reinforcement Learning

Xiao Ma∗ Bingyi Kang∗†

Zhongwen Xu Min Lin Shuicheng Yan
Sea AI Lab
{yusufma555, bingykang}@gmail.com

Abstract
The major challenge of offline RL is the distribution shift that appears when outof-distribution actions are queried, which makes the policy improvement direction
biased by extrapolation errors. Most existing methods address this problem by
penalizing the policy or value for deviating from the behavior policy during policy
improvement or evaluation. In this work, we propose a novel MISA framework to
approach offline RL from the perspective of Mutual Information between States
and Actions in the dataset by directly constraining the policy improvement direction. MISA constructs lower bounds of mutual information parameterized by the
policy and Q-values. We show that optimizing this lower bound is equivalent to
maximizing the likelihood of a one-step improved policy on the offline dataset.
Hence, we constrain the policy improvement direction to lie in the data manifold. The resulting algorithm simultaneously augments the policy evaluation and
improvement by adding mutual information regularizations. MISA is a general
framework that unifies conservative Q-learning (CQL) and behavior regularization
methods (e.g., TD3+BC) as special cases. We introduce 3 different variants of
MISA, and empirically demonstrate that tighter mutual information lower bound
gives better offline RL performance. In addition, our extensive experiments show
MISA significantly outperforms a wide range of baselines on various tasks of the
D4RL benchmark, e.g., achieving 742.9 total points on gym-locomotion tasks. Our
code is attached and will be released upon publication.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has made remarkable achievements in solving sequential decisionmaking problems, ranging from game playing [28, 39, 5] to robot control [26, 20, 36]. However,
its success heavily relies on 1) an environment to interact with for data collection and 2) an online
algorithm to improve the agent based only on its own trial-and-error experiences. These make RL
algorithms incapable in real-world safety-sensitive scenarios where interactions with the environment
are dangerous or prohibitively expensive, such as in autonomous driving and robot manipulation
with human autonomy [27, 25]. Therefore, offline RL is proposed to study the problem of learning
decision-making agents from experiences that are previously collected from other agents when
interacting with the environment is costly or not allowed.
Though much demanded, extending RL algorithms to offline datasets is challenged by the distributional shift between the data-collecting policy and the learning policy. Specifically, a typical
RL algorithm alternates between evaluating the Q values of a policy and improving the policy to
have better cumulative returns under the current value estimation. When it comes to the offline
setting, policy improvement often involves querying out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action pairs that
∗

equal contribution, † corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

