Unleashing the Power of Graph Data Augmentation
on Covariate Distribution Shift
Yongduo Sui1† , Qitian Wu2 , Jiancan Wu1 , Qing Cui3 , Longfei Li3 , Jun Zhou3* ,
Xiang Wang1* , Xiangnan He1*
1
University of Science and Technology of China,
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Ant Group
syd2019@mail.ustc.edu.cn, echo740@sjtu.edu.cn,
{wujcan,xiangwang1223,xiangnanhe}@gmail.com,
{cuiqing.cq,longyao.llf,jun.zhoujun}@antgroup.com

Abstract
The issue of distribution shifts is emerging as a critical concern in graph representation learning. From the perspective of invariant learning and stable learning, a
recently well-established paradigm for out-of-distribution generalization, stable
features of the graph are assumed to causally determine labels, while environmental
features tend to be unstable and can lead to the two primary types of distribution
shifts. The correlation shift is often caused by the spurious correlation between
environmental features and labels that differs between the training and test data; the
covariate shift often stems from the presence of new environmental features in test
data. However, most strategies, such as invariant learning or graph augmentation,
typically struggle with limited training environments or perturbed stable features,
thus exposing limitations in handling the problem of covariate shift. To address
this challenge, we propose a simple-yet-effective data augmentation strategy, Adversarial Invariant Augmentation (AIA), to handle the covariate shift on graphs.
Specifically, given the training data, AIA aims to extrapolate and generate new
environments, while concurrently preserving the original stable features during the
augmentation process. Such a design equips the graph classification model with
an enhanced capability to identify stable features in new environments, thereby
effectively tackling the covariate shift in data. Extensive experiments with in-depth
empirical analysis demonstrate the superiority of our approach. The implementation codes are publicly available at https://github.com/yongduosui/AIA.

1

Introduction

While recent advances have made solid progress in learning effective representations for graphstructured data, most of the existing approaches operate under the assumption that training and
test graphs are independently drawn from an identical distribution [1, 2]. However, this assumption often falls short in real-world scenarios due to the out-of-distribution (OOD) data
that potentially exists during the testing phase [3], which results in distribution shifts between
training and test graphs. As a result, there is increasing research interest in OOD generalization on graphs or learning with distribution shifts on graphs [4]. Some of the typical recent
works attempt to build effective methods for handling general distribution shifts on graphs, from
(causal) invariant learning [5, 3], model architecture designs [6], and data augmentation [7].
†

This work was done during author’s internship at Ant Group.
Xiang Wang and Xiangnan He are also affiliated with Institute of Artificial
Intelligence, Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.
* Corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

