GeoCLIP: Clip-Inspired Alignment between Locations
and Images for Effective Worldwide Geo-localization

Vicente Vivanco Cepeda, Gaurav Kumar Nayak, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
{vicente.vivancocepeda, gauravkumar.nayak}@ucf.edu; shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Worldwide Geo-localization aims to pinpoint the precise location of images taken
anywhere on Earth. This task has considerable challenges due to the immense
variation in geographic landscapes. The image-to-image retrieval-based approaches
fail to solve this problem on a global scale as it is not feasible to construct a large
gallery of images covering the entire world. Instead, existing approaches divide the
globe into discrete geographic cells, transforming the problem into a classification
task. However, their performance is limited by the predefined classes and often
results in inaccurate localizations when an image’s location significantly deviates
from its class center. To overcome these limitations, we propose GeoCLIP, a novel
CLIP-inspired Image-to-GPS retrieval approach that enforces alignment between
the image and its corresponding GPS locations. GeoCLIP’s location encoder
models the Earth as a continuous function by employing positional encoding
through random Fourier features and constructing a hierarchical representation
that captures information at varying resolutions to yield a semantically rich highdimensional feature suitable to use even beyond geo-localization. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work employing GPS encoding for geo-localization. We
demonstrate the efficacy of our method via extensive experiments and ablations on
benchmark datasets. We achieve competitive performance with just 20% of training
data, highlighting its effectiveness even in limited-data settings. Furthermore,
we qualitatively demonstrate geo-localization using a text query by leveraging
the CLIP backbone of our image encoder. The project webpage is available at:
https://vicentevivan.github.io/GeoCLIP

1

Introduction

Image geo-localization refers to determining the geographical location where a photograph is taken
from. This problem is of great significance in a wide variety of applications, such as navigation,
tourism, and security. However, this task poses several challenges, especially for locations that lack
distinctive landmarks or are outside tourist hotspots. Typically, image-based geo-localization mainly
focuses on identifying the GPS locations of images within a specified region of interest (e.g., within a
city). However, worldwide geo-localization [12, 14, 5] is not limited to any specific area but to the
entire globe, thus making it significantly more challenging, and hasn’t been explored extensively.
Geo-localization at the global level requires finding the locations (i.e., latitude and longitude) of
images from different parts of the world. Many retrieval-based methods [28, 11, 34, 29, 32, 24, 20, 33]
which perform image-to-image retrieval limit their search space to specific cities. Extending such
approaches for worldwide geo-localization demands maintaining a gallery of all possible images of
the entire globe to perform a match with the query image. However, creating such a large image
gallery is infeasible; thus, these methods are inappropriate for retrieval at the global scale. Existing
works instead use classification-based approaches [14, 26, 12, 5, 27, 8, 18] using scenes, hierarchy,
queries, and segmentation. These methods divide the Earth into geographic classes (covering a
particular area) and apply a linear classifier for prediction. If an image belonging to a class is far from
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

