TopP&R: Robust Support Estimation Approach for
Evaluating Fidelity and Diversity in Generative Models

Pum Jun Kim1 Yoojin Jang1 Jisu Kim2,3,4 Jaejun Yoo1
1
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
2
Seoul National University 3 Inria 4 Paris-Saclay University
{pumjun.kim,softjin,jaejun.yoo}@unist.ac.kr
jkim82133@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a robust and reliable evaluation metric for generative models
called Topological Precision and Recall (TopP&R, pronounced “topper”), which
systematically estimates supports by retaining only topologically and statistically
significant features with a certain level of confidence. Existing metrics, such as
Inception Score (IS), Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), and various Precision
and Recall (P&R) variants, rely heavily on support estimates derived from sample
features. However, the reliability of these estimates has been overlooked, even
though the quality of the evaluation hinges entirely on their accuracy. In this
paper, we demonstrate that current methods not only fail to accurately assess
sample quality when support estimation is unreliable, but also yield inconsistent
results. In contrast, TopP&R reliably evaluates the sample quality and ensures
statistical consistency in its results. Our theoretical and experimental findings
reveal that TopP&R provides a robust evaluation, accurately capturing the true
trend of change in samples, even in the presence of outliers and non-independent
and identically distributed (Non-IID) perturbations where other methods result in
inaccurate support estimations. To our knowledge, TopP&R is the first evaluation
metric specifically focused on the robust estimation of supports, offering statistical
consistency under noise conditions.

1

Introduction

In keeping with the remarkable improvements of deep generative models [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
evaluation metrics that can well measure the performance of generative models have also been
continuously developed [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. For instance, Inception Score (IS) [10] measures the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the real and fake sample distributions. Fréchet Inception Score
(FID) [11] calculates the distance between the real and fake supports using the estimated mean
and variance under the multi-Gaussian assumption. The original Precision and Recall [12] and its
variants [13, 14] measure fidelity and diversity separately, where fidelity is about how closely the
generated samples resemble real samples, while diversity is about whether a generative model can
generate samples that are as diverse as real samples.
Considering the eminent progress of deep generative models based on these existing metrics, some
may question why we need another evaluation study. In this paper, we argue that we need more
reliable evaluation metrics now precisely, because deep generative models have reached sufficient
maturity and evaluation metrics are saturated (Table 8 in [15]). Even more, it has been recently
reported that even the most widely used evaluation metric, FID, sometimes doesn’t match with the
expected perceptual quality, fidelity, and diversity, which means the metrics are not always working
properly [16].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

