Cross-links Matter for Link Prediction: Rethinking
the Debiased GNN from a Data Perspective

Zihan Luo1 , Hong Huang1∗, Jianxun Lian2 , Xiran Song1 , Xing Xie2 , Hai Jin1
1
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System,
Service Computing Technology and Systems Laboratory,
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab,
School of Computer Science and Technology,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
{zihanluo,honghuang,xiransong,hjin}@hust.edu.cn,
{jianxun.lian,xingx}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recently, the bias-related issues in GNN-based link prediction have raised widely
spread concerns. In this paper, we emphasize the bias on links across different
node clusters, which we call cross-links, after considering its significance in both
easing information cocoons and preserving graph connectivity. Instead of following
the objective-oriented mechanism in prior works with compromised utility, we
empirically find that existing GNN models face severe data bias between internallinks (links within the same cluster) and cross-links, and this inspires us to rethink
the bias issue on cross-links from a data perspective. Specifically, we design a
simple yet effective twin-structure framework, which can be easily applied to most
GNNs to mitigate the bias as well as boost their utility in an end-to-end manner.
The basic idea is to generate debiased node embeddings as demonstrations and fuse
them into the embeddings of original GNNs. In particular, we learn debiased node
embeddings with the help of augmented supervision signals, and a novel dynamic
training strategy is designed to effectively fuse debiased node embeddings with
the original node embeddings. Experiments on three datasets with six common
GNNs show that our framework can not only alleviate the bias between internallinks and cross-links but also boost the overall accuracy. Comparisons with other
state-of-the-art methods also verify the superiority of our method.

1

Introduction

Epinions
Recently, due to the strong capability in learning
the latent representation of graph structure data,
DBLP
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)-based link prediction methods have received increasing research
interests and show excellent performance in recomLastFM
Cross-links
mendation systems [33, 34], bioinformatics [7, 16],
Internal-links
and knowledge graph [24, 40]. However, these link
prediction methods often prioritize performance
without considering potential bias on the sensitive Figure 1: A toy graph for illustrating the concept
attributes of nodes, such as genders or regions, thus of topological communities. The proportions of
leading to social risks or the creation of informa- two kinds of links also are provided on the right.
Internal-links
Cross-links

Internal-links
Cross-links

Internal-links
Cross-links

∗

Hong Huang is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

