Weakly-Supervised Concealed Object Segmentation
with SAM-based Pseudo Labeling and Multi-scale
Feature Grouping

Chunming He1,∗ , Kai Li2,∗, Yachao Zhang1 , Guoxia Xu3 ,
Longxiang Tang1 , Yulun Zhang4 , Zhenhua Guo5 , and Xiu Li1,†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 2 NEC Laboratories America,
3
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 4 ETH Zürich, 5 Tianyi Traffic Technology

Abstract
Weakly-Supervised Concealed Object Segmentation (WSCOS) aims to segment
objects well blended with surrounding environments using sparsely-annotated data
for model training. It remains a challenging task since (1) it is hard to distinguish
concealed objects from the background due to the intrinsic similarity and (2)
the sparsely-annotated training data only provide weak supervision for model
learning. In this paper, we propose a new WSCOS method to address these two
challenges. To tackle the intrinsic similarity challenge, we design a multi-scale
feature grouping module that first groups features at different granularities and
then aggregates these grouping results. By grouping similar features together, it
encourages segmentation coherence, helping obtain complete segmentation results
for both single and multiple-object images. For the weak supervision challenge,
we utilize the recently-proposed vision foundation model, “Segment Anything
Model (SAM)”, and use the provided sparse annotations as prompts to generate
segmentation masks, which are used to train the model. To alleviate the impact of
low-quality segmentation masks, we further propose a series of strategies, including
multi-augmentation result ensemble, entropy-based pixel-level weighting, and
entropy-based image-level selection. These strategies help provide more reliable
supervision to train the segmentation model. We verify the effectiveness of our
method on various WSCOS tasks, and experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on these tasks. The code will be available at
https://github.com/ChunmingHe/WS-SAM.

1

Introduction

Concealed object segmentation (COS) aims to segment objects visually blended with surrounding
environments [1]. COS is a general term with different applications, e.g., camouflaged object
detection [2, 3], polyp image segmentation [4, 5], transparent object detection [6, 7], etc. COS is a
challenging task due to the intrinsic between foreground objects and background, which makes it
extremely difficult to identify discriminative clues for accurate foreground-background separation. To
address this challenge, existing methods have employed approaches that mimic human vision [8–10],
introduce frequency information [11, 12], or adopt joint modeling in multiple tasks [13–18].
Weakly-Supervised COS (WSCOS) studies an even more challenging yet more practical problem,
involving learning a COS model without relying on pixel-wise fully-annotated training data. WSCOS
greatly reduces annotation costs by only requiring a few annotated points or scribbles in the foreground
∗

Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

