Lung250M-4B: A Combined 3D Dataset for CT- and
Point Cloud-Based Intra-Patient Lung Registration

Fenja Falta
Institute of Medical Informatics
University of Lübeck
fenja.falta@student.uni-luebeck.de
Alessa Hering
Departments of Imaging
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen

Christoph Großbröhmer
Institute of Medical Informatics
University of Lübeck
c.grossbroehmer@uni-luebeck.de
Alexander Bigalke
Institute of Medical Informatics
University of Lübeck

Mattias P. Heinrich
Institute of Medical Informatics
University of Lübeck

Abstract
A popular benchmark for intra-patient lung registration is provided by the DIRLAB COPDgene dataset consisting of large-motion in- and expiratory breathhold CT pairs. This dataset alone, however, does not provide enough samples to
properly train state-of-the-art deep learning methods. Other public datasets often
also provide only small sample sizes or include primarily small motions between
scans that do not translate well to larger deformations. For point-based geometric
registration, the PVT1010 dataset provides a large number of vessel point clouds
without any correspondences and a labeled test set corresponding to the COPDgene
cases. However, the absence of correspondences for supervision complicates
training, and a fair comparison with image-based algorithms is infeasible, since CT
scans for the training data are not publicly available. We here provide a combined
benchmark for image- and point-based registration approaches. We curated a total
of 248 public multi-centric in- and expiratory lung CT scans from 124 patients,
which show large motion between scans, processed them to ensure sufficient
homogeneity between the data and generated vessel point clouds that are well
distributed even deeper inside the lungs. For supervised training, we provide vein
and artery segmentations of the vessels and thousands of image-derived keypoint
correspondences for each pair. For validation, we provide multiple scan pairs with
manual landmark annotations. Finally, as baselines on our new benchmark, we
evaluate several image and point cloud registration methods on the dataset.

1

Introduction

Image registration continues to be an important and challenging task in medical computer vision.
A large part of recently developed methods for registration incorporates deep learning [13]. With
advances in geometric deep learning, point cloud-based registration approaches have become increasingly more prevalent and compete well with image-based approaches, especially in terms of
efficiency and robustness [39]. However, as deep learning is data-driven, its development is highly
dependent on the existence of appropriate datasets and benchmarks.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

