S ALSA V ERDE: a machine learning attack on Learning With
Errors with sparse small secrets

Cathy Yuanchen Li
Emily Wenger
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
FAIR, Meta
The University of Chicago
FAIR, Meta
Francois Charton∗
Kristin Lauter∗
FAIR, Meta
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Learning with Errors (LWE) is a hard math problem used in post-quantum cryptography. Homomorphic Encryption (HE) schemes rely on the hardness of the
LWE problem for their security, and two LWE -based cryptosystems were recently
standardized by NIST for digital signatures and key exchange (KEM). Thus, it is
critical to continue assessing the security of LWE and specific parameter choices.
For example, HE uses secrets with small entries, and the HE community has considered standardizing small sparse secrets to improve efficiency and functionality.
However, prior work, S ALSA and P ICANTE, showed that ML attacks can recover
sparse binary secrets. Building on these, we propose V ERDE, an improved ML
attack that can recover sparse binary, ternary, and narrow Gaussian secrets. Using
improved preprocessing and secret recovery techniques, V ERDE can attack LWE
with larger dimensions (n = 512) and smaller moduli (log2 q = 12 for n = 256),
using less time and power. We propose novel architectures for scaling. Finally, we
develop a theory that explains the success of ML LWE attacks.

1

Introduction

Language models have been successfully applied to numerous practical science problems in recent
years. For example, transformers [57] have been used to solve problems in mathematics [40, 24],
theoretical physics [26], chemistry [50], and biology [46]. In this paper, we present an application
of transformers to computer security: the cryptanalysis of Learning With Errors (LWE) [45], a hard
math problem underpinning leading proposals for post-quantum public key cryptography.
Public-key cryptosystems are the main solution for secure communication over the Internet. Public
keys can be used to encode messages or verify digital signatures to or from a user with the corresponding private key. Security relies on the fact that recovering the private key from the public data requires
solving a computationally hard math problem. Most currently deployed public-key systems are
based on RSA [47], which relies on the hardness of factoring large numbers into products of primes.
Unfortunately, large-scale quantum computers will enable implementation of Shor’s algorithm [52],
which can factor integers in quantum polynomial time and break such systems. As a result, new hard
problems are sought to serve as the basis of post-quantum public key cryptography (PQC). The US
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) ran a 5 year competition to define future PQC
standards [2], and standardized 4 PQC systems in July 2022 [17]. Two of these rely on special cases
of the same hard (and Shor-free) problem: Learning with Errors (LWE).
The Learning With Errors problem (LWE) assumes that it is hard to recover a secret vector s,
given many LWE samples (a, b). In a LWE sample, each a is a random vector of n integers modulo
q (n is the dimension and q is the modulus), and b is a noisy modular inner product of a and the
secret key s—that is, b = a · s + e mod q, with the error e drawn from a Gaussian distribution of
∗

Co-senior authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

