Should Under-parameterized Student Networks
Copy or Average Teacher Weights?

Berfin Şimşek
NYU∗
bs3736@nyu.edu

Amire Bendjeddou
EPFL
amire.bendjeddou@epfl.ch

Wulfram Gerstner
EPFL
wulfram.gerstner@epfl.ch

Johanni Brea
EPFL
johanni.brea@epfl.ch

Abstract
Any continuous function f ∗ can be approximated arbitrarily well by a neural network with sufficiently many neurons k. We consider the case when f ∗ itself is a
neural network with one hidden layer and k neurons. Approximating f ∗ with a neural network with n < k neurons can thus be seen as fitting an under-parameterized
“student” network with n neurons to a “teacher” network with k neurons. As the
student has fewer neurons than the teacher, it is unclear, whether each of the n
student neurons should copy one of the teacher neurons or rather average a group
of teacher neurons. For shallow neural networks with erf activation function and
for the standard Gaussian input distribution, we prove that “copy-average” configurations are critical points if the teacher’s incoming vectors are orthonormal and its
outgoing weights are unitary. Moreover, the optimum among such configurations
is reached when n − 1 student neurons each copy one teacher neuron and the n-th
student neuron averages the remaining k − n + 1 teacher neurons. For the student
network with n = 1 neuron, we provide additionally a closed-form solution of the
non-trivial critical point(s) for commonly used activation functions through solving
an equivalent constrained optimization problem. Empirically, we find for the erf
activation function that gradient flow converges either to the optimal copy-average
critical point or to another point where each student neuron approximately copies a
different teacher neuron. Finally, we find similar results for the ReLU activation
function, suggesting that the optimal solution of underparameterized networks has
a universal structure.

1

Introduction

A shallow neural network with a single hidden layer of a large number k of neurons can approximate
any continuous function f ∗ arbitrarily well on a compact subset of the input space [1]. We consider a
related problem, where the function f ∗ itself is a neural network with a large number k of neurons,
and its approximation is a smaller network with n < k neurons. In other words, we fit an underparameterized “student” network with n neurons to a “teacher” network with k neurons. As the
student has fewer neurons than the teacher, it cannot perfectly match the teacher. In the configuration
with the lowest loss, where the approximation error is smallest, one may expect that the incoming
and outgoing weights of a student neuron are either identical to those of a teacher neuron or that
they are aligned with the weights of a group of teacher neurons, but it is unclear what the optimal
configuration is.
∗

Previous address: EPFL.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

