A Spectral Theory of Neural Prediction and Alignment

Abdulkadir Canatar1,2∗ Jenelle Feather1,2∗ Albert J. Wakhloo1,3 SueYeon Chung1,2
1
Center for Computational Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute
2
Center for Neural Science, New York University
3
Zuckerman Institute, Columbia Univeristy
∗
Equal contribution
{acanatar,jfeather,awakhloo,schung}@flatironinstitute.org

Abstract
The representations of neural networks are often compared to those of biological
systems by performing regression between the neural network responses and
those measured from biological systems. Many different state-of-the-art deep
neural networks yield similar neural predictions, but it remains unclear how to
differentiate among models that perform equally well at predicting neural responses.
To gain insight into this, we use a recent theoretical framework that relates the
generalization error from regression to the spectral properties of the model and the
target. We apply this theory to the case of regression between model activations
and neural responses and decompose the neural prediction error in terms of the
model eigenspectra, alignment of model eigenvectors and neural responses, and
the training set size. Using this decomposition, we introduce geometrical measures
to interpret the neural prediction error. We test a large number of deep neural
networks that predict visual cortical activity and show that there are multiple types
of geometries that result in low neural prediction error as measured via regression.
The work demonstrates that carefully decomposing representational metrics can
provide interpretability of how models are capturing neural activity and points the
way towards improved models of neural activity.

1

Introduction

Neuroscience has a rich history of using encoding models to understand sensory systems [1, 2, 3].
These models describe a mapping for arbitrary stimuli onto the neural responses measured from the
brain and yield predictions for unseen stimuli. Initial encoding models were built from hand-designed
parameters to model receptive fields in early sensory areas [4, 5], but it was difficult to extend
these hand-engineered models to capture responses in higher-order sensory regions. As deep neural
networks (DNNs) showed human-level accuracy on complex tasks, they also emerged as the best
models for predicting brain responses, particularly in these later regions [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
Although early work showed that better task performance resulted in better brain predictions [6], in
modern DNNs, many different architectures and training procedures lead to similar predictions of
neural responses [11, 12, 13]. This is often true even when model representations are notably different
from each other using other metrics of comparison [14, 15]. For instance, previous lines of work have
shown clear differences between models from their behavioral responses to corrupted or texturized
images [16, 17, 18], from their alignment to human similarity judgments [19], from generating stimuli
that are "controversial" between two models [20], and from stimuli that are metameric to models [15]
or to human observers [21]. Other work has focused on directly comparing representations [22, 23]
or behavioral patterns [24] of one neural network to another, finding that changing the training dataset
or objective results in changes to the underlying representations. Given the increasing number of
findings that demonstrate large variability among candidate computational models, it is an open
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

