Hybrid Policy Optimization from
Imperfect Demonstrations

Hanlin Yang
Sun Yat-sen University

Chao Yu∗
Sun Yat-sen University

Peng Sun
ByteDance

Siji Chen
Sun Yat-sen University

yuchao3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Exploration is one of the main challenges in Reinforcement Learning (RL), especially in environments with sparse rewards. Learning from Demonstrations
(LfD) is a promising approach to solving this problem by leveraging expert demonstrations. However, expert demonstrations of high quality are usually costly or
even impossible to collect in real-world applications. In this work, we propose
a novel RL algorithm called HYbrid Policy Optimization (HYPO), which uses a
small number of imperfect demonstrations to accelerate an agent’s online learning
process. The key idea is to train an offline guider policy using imitation learning
in order to instruct an online agent policy to explore efficiently. Through mutual
update of the guider policy and the agent policy, the agent can leverage suboptimal
demonstrations for efficient exploration while avoiding the conservative policy
caused by imperfect demonstrations. Empirical results show that HYPO significantly outperforms several baselines in various challenging tasks, such as MuJoCo
with sparse rewards, Google Research Football, and the AirSim drone simulation.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Sutton & Barto, 2018) plays an important role in solving real-world
control problems with large state-action spaces. In RL, an agent learns a decision-making policy
through interaction with the environment, based on a reward function that indicates the agent’s
learning goal. However, pre-defining a reward function relies heavily on human knowledge that varies
from one to another, and sometimes carefully hand-tuned reward function could lead to undesired or
even hazardous policies (Devidze et al., 2021). Therefore, a more intuitive way of reward definition
is to utilize the completeness of the task, e.g., the distance that a robot walks or scoring a goal in
football games. While being unbiased towards the learning goal, learning with such sparse rewards
could be challenging due to the inefficient exploration in the large problem space.
In recent years, there has been intensive research interest in Learning from Demonstrations (LfD)
as a promising approach to addressing sparse reward tasks by leveraging the expert demonstrations.
Methods like DDPGfD (Vecerík et al., 2017), DQfD (Hester et al., 2018) and AWAC (Nair et al.,
2020) normally require that the demonstrations consist of complete trajectories including state,
actions and rewards, and thus are not applicable in real-world applications when it is only possible to
observe the state and action information in the demonstrations. Other methods based on Imitation
Learning (IL), such as Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016)
and Adversarial Inverse Reinforcement Learning (AIRL) (Fu et al., 2017), usually require that the
demonstrations be generated by an optimal expert, which are difficult to achieve in complex tasks.
More recent approaches such as Policy Optimization with Demonstrations (POfD) (Kang et al.,
∗

Corresponding author. Code is available at https://github.com/joenghl/HYPO.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

