Species196: A One-Million Semi-supervised Dataset
for Fine-grained Species Recognition

Wei He, Kai Han∗ , Ying Nie, Chengcheng Wang, Yunhe Wang∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{hewei142,kai.han,yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
The development of foundation vision models has pushed the general visual recognition to a high level, but cannot well address the fine-grained recognition in specialized domain such as invasive species classification. Identifying and managing invasive species has strong social and ecological value. Currently, most invasive species
datasets are limited in scale and cover a narrow range of species, which restricts
the development of deep-learning based invasion biometrics systems. To fill the
gap of this area, we introduced Species196, a large-scale semi-supervised dataset
of 196-category invasive species. It collects over 19K images with expert-level accurate annotations (Species196-L), and 1.2M unlabeled images of invasive species
(Species196-U). The dataset provides four experimental settings for benchmarking
the existing models and algorithms, namely, supervised learning, semi-supervised
learning, self-supervised pretraining and zero-shot inference ability of large multimodal models. To facilitate future research on these four learning paradigms, we
conduct an empirical study of the representative methods on the introduced dataset.
The dataset is publicly available at https://species-dataset.github.io/.

1

Introduction

Invasion biometrics play a critical role in the identification and management of invasive species,
which are non-native organisms capable of causing detrimental impacts on the environment, economy,
and human health [18]. Traditionally, invasive species recognition systems have relied on trained
experts who analyze an animal or plant’s physical characteristics, or use DNA testing [11]. However,
these conventional methods require specialized equipment, expert knowledge, and are often timeconsuming and costly, while also posing potential risks to creature well-being [22]. Recent methods
[53, 91, 2], utilizing computer vision techniques and deep learning algorithms, provide a cost-effective
and efficient alternative solution for invasive species identification.
As computer vision-based methods continue to gain traction, the need for high-quality biometrics
data becomes increasingly crucial for effective invasive species recognition. In contrast to traditional
visual tasks such as image classification or object detection, which benefit from large-scale datasets
like ImageNet [12], Open Images Dataset[48], COCO[55], and Objects365 [72], acquiring diverse,
high-quality datasets for training and evaluating invasive species recognition algorithms remains a
challenge.
In response to this challenge, we introduce Species196-L, a new fine-grained hierarchical dataset
focusing on regional invasive species. The "L" donates that the dataset is fine labeled. Species196-L
collects 19236 images for 196 invasive species listed in the Catalogue of Quarantine Pests for
Import Plants to China [65]. In addition, We also provide bounding box annotation and detailed
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

