Joint Bayesian Inference of Graphical Structure and
Parameters with a Single Generative Flow Network

Tristan Deleu1 Mizu Nishikawa-Toomey1 Jithendaraa Subramanian2
Nikolay Malkin1 Laurent Charlin3 Yoshua Bengio1,4
Mila – Quebec AI Institute

Abstract
Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets), a class of generative models over discrete
and structured sample spaces, have been previously applied to the problem of
inferring the marginal posterior distribution over the directed acyclic graph (DAG)
of a Bayesian Network, given a dataset of observations. Based on recent advances
extending this framework to non-discrete sample spaces, we propose in this paper
to approximate the joint posterior over not only the structure of a Bayesian Network,
but also the parameters of its conditional probability distributions. We use a single
GFlowNet whose sampling policy follows a two-phase process: the DAG is first
generated sequentially one edge at a time, and then the corresponding parameters
are picked once the full structure is known. Since the parameters are included in the
posterior distribution, this leaves more flexibility for the local probability models of
the Bayesian Network, making our approach applicable even to non-linear models
parametrized by neural networks. We show that our method, called JSP-GFN,
offers an accurate approximation of the joint posterior, while comparing favorably
against existing methods on both simulated and real data.

1

Introduction

As a compact representation for complex probabilistic models, Bayesian Networks are a framework
of choice in many fields, such as computational biology (Friedman et al., 2000; Sachs et al., 2005)
and medical diagnosis (Lauritzen and Spiegelhalter, 1988). When the directed acyclic graph (DAG)
structure of the Bayesian Network—which specifies the possible conditional dependences among
the observed variables—is known, it can be used to perform probabilistic inference for queries of
interest with a variety of exact or approximate methods (Koller and Friedman, 2009). However, if
this graphical structure is unknown, one may want to infer it based on a dataset of observations D.
In addition to being a challenging problem due to the super-exponentially large search space, learning
a single DAG structure from data may also lead to confident but incorrect predictions (Madigan et al.,
1994), especially in cases where the evidence is limited. In order to avoid misspecifying the model,
it is therefore essential to quantify the epistemic uncertainty about the structure of the Bayesian
Network. This can be addressed by taking a Bayesian perspective on structure learning and inferring
the posterior distribution P (G | D) over graphs given our observations. This (marginal) posterior
can be approximated using methods based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC; Madigan et al.,
1995) or variational inference (Cundy et al., 2021; Lorch et al., 2021). However, all of these methods
rely on the computation of the marginal likelihood P (D | G), which can only be done efficiently in
closed form for limited classes of models, such as linear Gaussian (Geiger and Heckerman, 1994),
1

Université de Montréal, 2 McGill University, 3 HEC Montréal, 4 CIFAR Senior Fellow.
Correspondence: Tristan Deleu (deleutri@mila.quebec)
Code available at: https://github.com/tristandeleu/jax-jsp-gfn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

