Knowledge-based in silico models and dataset for the
comparative evaluation of mammography AI for a
range of breast characteristics, lesion conspicuities and
doses
E. Sizikova, N. Saharkhiz, D. Sharma, M. Lago, B. Sahiner, J. G. Delfino, A. Badano
Office of Science and Engineering Laboratories
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Silver Spring, MD 20993 USA

Abstract
To generate evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of artificial intelligence (AI)
enabled medical devices, AI models need to be evaluated on a diverse population of
patient cases, some of which may not be readily available. We propose an evaluation
approach for testing medical imaging AI models that relies on in silico imaging
pipelines in which stochastic digital models of human anatomy (in object space)
with and without pathology are imaged using a digital replica imaging acquisition
system to generate realistic synthetic image datasets. Here, we release M-SYNTH* ,
a dataset of cohorts with four breast fibroglandular density distributions imaged at
different exposure levels using Monte Carlo x-ray simulations with the publicly
available Virtual Imaging Clinical Trial for Regulatory Evaluation (VICTRE)
toolkit. We utilize the synthetic dataset to analyze AI model performance and find
that model performance decreases with increasing breast density and increases
with higher mass density, as expected. As exposure levels decrease, AI model
performance drops with the highest performance achieved at exposure levels lower
than the nominal recommended dose for the breast type.
3

2

1

KB BREAST MODEL
GENERATION

BREAST MODEL
COMPRESSION

4

MASS
GENERATION

5

MASS
INSERTION

DM

X-RAY
PROJECTION

6

Mass Present?

AI ANALYSIS

Figure 1: Overview of the computational pipeline components for generating the M-SYNTH in silico dataset
for medical imaging AI evaluation.

1

Introduction

The goal of this work is to demonstrate that AI models for medical imaging can be evaluated using
simulations, specifically, using an in silico (also known as synthetic) imaging pipeline equipped with
a stochastic model for human anatomy and disease [1]. We show that in silico methods can constitute
rich sources of data with realistic physical variability for performing comparative analysis of AI
device performance.
* Code and data links available at: https://github.com/DIDSR/msynth-release/

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

