On the Minimax Regret for Online Learning
with Feedback Graphs

Khaled Eldowa∗
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
khaled.eldowa@unimi.it

Tommaso Cesari
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
tcesari@uottawa.ca

Emmanuel Esposito∗
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
& Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genoa, Italy
emmanuel@emmanuelesposito.it
Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
& Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
nicolo.cesa-bianchi@unimi.it

Abstract
In this work, we improve on the upper and lower bounds for the regret of online
learning with strongly observable √
undirectedfeedback graphs. The best known
upper bound for this problem is O αT ln K , where K is the number of actions,
√
α is the independence number of the graph, and T is the time horizon. The ln K
factor is known to be necessary when α = 1 (the experts case). On the
√ other

hand, when α = K (the bandits case), the minimax rate is known to be Θ KT ,
√ 
and a lower bound Ω αT is known to hold for any α. Our improved upper
p

bound O αT (1 + ln(K/α)) holds for any α and matches the lower bounds for
bandits and experts, while interpolating intermediate cases. To prove this result,
we use FTRL with q-Tsallis entropy for a carefully chosen value of q ∈ [1/2, 1)
that varies with α. The analysis of this algorithm requires a new bound on the
variance term in the regret. We also show how to extend our techniques to timevarying graphs, without requiring prior knowledge of their
p independence numbers.

Our upper bound is complemented by an improved Ω αT (ln K)/(ln α) lower
bound for all α > 1, whose analysis relies on a novel reduction to multitask
learning. This shows that a logarithmic factor is necessary as soon as α < K.

1

Introduction

Feedback graphs [29] provide an elegant interpolation between two popular online learning models:
multiarmed bandits and prediction with expert advice. When learning with an undirected feedback
graph G over K actions, the online algorithm observes not only the loss of the action chosen in each
round, but also the loss of the actions that are adjacent to it in the graph. Two important special cases
of this setting are: prediction with expert advice (when G is a clique) and K-armed bandits (when
G has no edges). When losses are generated adversarially, the regret in the feedback graph setting
with strong observability has been shown to scale with the independence number α of G. Intuitively,
denser graphs, which correspond to smaller independence numbers, provide more feedback to the
learner, thus enabling a better control on regret.
√the best

 known upper and lower
√ More specifically,
bounds on the regret after T rounds are O αT log K and Ω αT [3, 4]. It has been known
for three decades that this upper bound is tight for α = 1 (the experts case, [9, 10]). When α = K
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

