Reining Generalization in Offline Reinforcement
Learning via Representation Distinction

Hongyao Tang∗
Université de Montréal
Mila
tang.hongyao@mila.quebec

Yi Ma
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
mayi@tju.edu.cn
Dong Li
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technology
dongleecsu@gmail.com

Zhaopeng Meng
College of Intelligence and Computing
Tianjin University
mengzp@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) aims to address the challenge of distribution shift between the dataset and the learned policy, where the value of out-ofdistribution (OOD) data may be erroneously estimated due to overgeneralization.
It has been observed that a considerable portion of the benefits derived from the
conservative terms designed by existing offline RL approaches originates from their
impact on the learned representation. This observation prompts us to scrutinize the
learning dynamics of offline RL, formalize the process of generalization, and delve
into the prevalent overgeneralization issue in offline RL. We then investigate the
potential to rein the generalization from the representation perspective to enhance
offline RL. Finally, we present Representation Distinction (RD), an innovative
plug-in method for improving offline RL algorithm performance by explicitly
differentiating between the representations of in-sample and OOD state-action
pairs generated by the learning policy. Considering scenarios in which the learning policy mirrors the behavioral policy and similar samples may be erroneously
distinguished, we suggest a dynamic adjustment mechanism for RD based on an
OOD data generator to prevent data representation collapse and further enhance
policy performance. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by applying
RD to designed backbone algorithms and widely-used offline RL algorithms. The
proposed RD method significantly improves their performance across various continuous control tasks on D4RL datasets, surpassing several state-of-the-art offline
RL algorithms.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) is a machine learning paradigm centered on training intelligent agents
to make decisions through interactions with an environment. In this learning process, an agent
develops a policy—a mapping from states to actions—via trial and error, with the goal of maximizing
cumulative rewards over time. However, acquiring interaction data in many real-world applications
can be expensive, time-consuming, or even hazardous. This spurred the advancement of offline
Reinforcement Learning, which has garnered considerable interest in the research community due to
its ability to learn effective policies from pre-existing data collected by unknown behavioral policy
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

