Maximum State Entropy Exploration using
Predecessor and Successor Representations

Arnav Kumar Jain∗
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Lucas Lehnert†
Fundamental AI Research at Meta

Irina Rish
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Glen Berseth
Mila–Quebec AI Institute
Université de Montréal

Abstract
Animals have a developed ability to explore that aids them in important tasks
such as locating food, exploring for shelter, and finding misplaced items. These
exploration skills necessarily track where they have been so that they can plan for
finding items with relative efficiency. Contemporary exploration algorithms often
learn a less efficient exploration strategy because they either condition only on
the current state or simply rely on making random open-loop exploratory moves.
In this work, we propose ηψ-Learning, a method to learn efficient exploratory
policies by conditioning on past episodic experience to make the next exploratory
move. Specifically, ηψ-Learning learns an exploration policy that maximizes the
entropy of the state visitation distribution of a single trajectory. Furthermore, we
demonstrate how variants of the predecessor representation and successor representations can be combined to predict the state visitation entropy. Our experiments
demonstrate the efficacy of ηψ-Learning to strategically explore the environment
and maximize the state coverage with limited samples.

1

Introduction

Animals and humans are very efficient at exploration compared to their data-hungry algorithms
counterparts [36, 28, 50, 51, 12, 14, 65, 52]. For instance, when misplacing an item, a person will
methodically search through the environment to locate the lost item. To efficiently explore, an
intelligent agent must consider past interactions to decide what to explore next and avoid re-visiting
previously encountered locations to find rewarding states as fast as possible. Consequently, the agent
needs to reason over potentially long interaction sequences, a space that grows exponentially with the
sequence length. Here, assuming that all the information the agent needs to act is contained in the
current state is impossible [43].
In this paper, we present ηψ-Learning, an algorithm to learn an exploration policy that methodically
searches through a task. This is accomplished by maximizing the entropy of the state visitation
distribution of a single finite-length trajectory. This focus on optimizing the state visitation distribution
of a single trajectory distinguishes our approach from prior work on exploration methods that
maximize the entropy of the state visitation distribution [23, 61, 31, 41, 18]. For example Hazan
et al. [23] focus on learning a Markovian policy—a decision-making strategy that is only conditioned
∗

Correspondence to <arnav-kumar.jain@mila.quebec>
A part of this work was developed while Lucas Lehnert was at the Mila–Quebec AI Institute and the
Université de Montréal.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

