Efficient Equivariant Transfer Learning from
Pretrained Models
Sourya Basu ∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Prasanna Sattigeri
IBM Research

Vijil Chenthamarakshan
IBM Research

Payel Das
IBM Research

Pulkit Katdare ∗
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Katherine Driggs-Campbell
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Lav R. Varshney
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
Efficient transfer learning algorithms are key to the success of foundation models
on diverse downstream tasks even with limited data. Recent works of Basu et al.
(2023) and Kaba et al. (2022) propose group averaging (equitune) and optimizationbased methods, respectively, over features from group-transformed inputs to obtain
equivariant outputs from non-equivariant neural networks. While Kaba et al. (2022)
are only concerned with training from scratch, we find that equitune performs poorly
on equivariant zero-shot tasks despite good finetuning results. We hypothesize
that this is because pretrained models provide better quality features for certain
transformations than others and simply averaging them is deleterious. Hence, we
propose λ-equitune that averages the features using importance weights, λs. These
weights are learned directly from the data using a small neural network, leading
to excellent zero-shot and finetuned results that outperform equitune. Further, we
prove that λ-equitune is equivariant and a universal approximator of equivariant
functions. Additionally, we show that the method of Kaba et al. (2022) used with
appropriate loss functions, which we call equizero, also gives excellent zero-shot
and finetuned performance. Both equitune and equizero are special cases of λequitune. To show the simplicity and generality of our method, we validate on
a wide range of diverse applications and models such as 1) image classification
using CLIP, 2) deep Q-learning, 3) fairness in natural language generation (NLG),
4) compositional generalization in languages, and 5) image classification using
pretrained CNNs such as Resnet and Alexnet.

1

Introduction

Group-equivariant deep learning leverages group equivariance as an inductive bias to design efficient
and reliable neural networks. Popular examples include convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
equivariant to translations (LeCun et al., 1989), group convolutional neural networks (GCNNs)
equivariant to general discrete groups (Cohen & Welling, 2016), and recently Alphafold2 equivariant
to 3D rotations (Jumper et al., 2021). But these methods cannot leverage pretrained models.
With the increase in open sourced large pretrained models, it is now crucial to develop efficient transfer
learning algorithms that can leverage group equivariance. Basu et al. (2023) proposed equitune,
an equivariant finetuning method that uses group averaging over features extracted from pretrained
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

