Reducing Shape-Radiance Ambiguity in Radiance
Fields with a Closed-Form Color Estimation Method

1

Qihang Fang1,2,*
Yafei Song3,*
Keqiang Li1,2
Liefeng Bo3
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Alibaba Group
1,2
{fangqihang2020,likeqiang2020}@ia.ac.cn
3
{huaizhang.syf,liefeng.bo}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
A neural radiance field (NeRF) enables the synthesis of cutting-edge realistic
novel view images of a 3D scene. It includes density and color fields to model
the shape and radiance of a scene, respectively. Supervised by the photometric
loss in an end-to-end training manner, NeRF inherently suffers from the shaperadiance ambiguity problem, i.e., it can perfectly fit training views but does not
guarantee decoupling the two fields correctly. To deal with this issue, existing
works have incorporated prior knowledge to provide an independent supervision
signal for the density field, including total variation loss, sparsity loss, distortion
loss, etc. These losses are based on general assumptions about the density field,
e.g., it should be smooth, sparse, or compact, which are not adaptive to a specific
scene. In this paper, we propose a more adaptive method to reduce the shaperadiance ambiguity. The key is a rendering method that is only based on the density
field. Specifically, we first estimate the color field based on the density field and
posed images in a closed form. Then NeRF’s rendering process can proceed. We
address the problems in estimating the color field, including occlusion and nonuniformly distributed views. Afterwards, it is applied to regularize NeRF’s density
field. As our regularization is guided by photometric loss, it is more adaptive
compared to existing ones. Experimental results show that our method improves
the density field of NeRF both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our code is available
at https://github.com/qihangGH/Closed-form-color-field.

1

Introduction

A neural radiance field (NeRF) [20, 4, 23, 8, 32] is a cutting-edge technique in computer graphics
and computer vision that enables the synthesis of realistic novel view images of a 3D scene from
a collection of posed 2D images. It represents a 3D scene with a density and a color field, which
describe the scene’s shape and radiance, respectively. Despite its impressive novel-view synthesis
capability, the NeRF suffers from an inherent shape-radiance ambiguity problem [33]. To be more
specific, a family of degradation solutions exist, which can perfectly recover training views but
produce incorrect shape. As a consequence, poor novel views would be rendered.
The shape-radiance ambiguity exists because a NeRF-based method usually renders an image using
the Max volume rendering algorithm [17]. It integrates the density and color fields closely. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), a pixel is rendered as the sum of products of density and color values. In general, such a
rendering process is supervised by the photometric loss in an end-to-end training manner, where the
* Both authors contributed equally to this work.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

