A Toolkit for Reliable Benchmarking and Research in
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning

Florian Felten∗,1,7 Lucas N. Alegre∗,2,3,7 Ann Nowé3 Ana L. C. Bazzan2
El-Ghazali Talbi1,4 Grégoire Danoy1,5 Bruno C. da Silva6
1
SnT, University of Luxembourg 2 Institute of Informatics, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul
3
Artificial Intelligence Lab, Vrije Universiteit Brussel 4 CNRS/CRIStAL, University of Lille
5
FSTM/DCS, University of Luxembourg 6 University of Massachusetts 7 Farama Foundation
{florian.felten,gregoire.danoy}@uni.lu {lnalegre,bazzan}@inf.ufrgs.br
ann.nowe@vub.be el-ghazali.talbi@univ-lille.fr bsilva@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
Multi-objective reinforcement learning algorithms (MORL) extend standard reinforcement learning (RL) to scenarios where agents must optimize multiple—
potentially conflicting—objectives, each represented by a distinct reward function.
To facilitate and accelerate research and benchmarking in multi-objective RL problems, we introduce a comprehensive collection of software libraries that includes:
(i) MO-Gymnasium, an easy-to-use and flexible API enabling the rapid construction of novel MORL environments. It also includes more than 20 environments
under this API. This allows researchers to effortlessly evaluate any algorithms on
any existing domains; (ii) MORL-Baselines, a collection of reliable and efficient
implementations of state-of-the-art MORL algorithms, designed to provide a solid
foundation for advancing research. Notably, all algorithms are inherently compatible with MO-Gymnasium; and (iii) a thorough and robust set of benchmark results
and comparisons of MORL-Baselines algorithms, tested across various challenging
MO-Gymnasium environments. These benchmarks were constructed to serve as
guidelines for the research community, underscoring the properties, advantages,
and limitations of each particular state-of-the-art method.2

1

Introduction

Research in reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms (Sutton and Barto, 2018) has gained significant
attention in recent years, in great part due to its remarkable success in a range of challenging
problems (Mnih et al., 2015b; Silver et al., 2017; Bellemare et al., 2020). This led to a substantial
increase in the number of papers published in the field every year. The rapid growth of RL research,
however, has not necessarily been accompanied by the design of well-thought and reliable tools
allowing for appropriate evaluation practices, resulting in a reproducibility crisis within the field. This
resulted, e.g., in researchers often questioning the validity and reproducibility of results presented in
influential papers (Agarwal et al., 2021; Patterson et al., 2023).
There are several reasons why reproducibility is often a challenge in RL. A key factor is the significant
amount of time required to train RL agents, which makes it difficult for researchers to gather
sufficient data to perform rigorous statistical analyses of empirical results. As a consequence, some
authors may claim superior performance over state-of-the-art techniques without adequate evidence.
∗

Authors contributed equally to this work.
MO-Gymnasium and MORL-Baselines are available at https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/
mo-gymnasium and https://github.com/LucasAlegre/morl-baselines, respectively. The benchmark
results are available on openrlbenchmark: https://wandb.ai/openrlbenchmark/MORL-Baselines.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

