E MMA -X: An EM-like Multilingual Pre-training
Algorithm for Cross-lingual Representation Learning

Ping Guo‡,§
Xiangpeng Wei†,∗
Yue Hu‡,§,*
†
†
Baosong Yang
Dayiheng Liu
Fei Huang†
Jun Xie†
‡

§

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
†
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba DAMO Academy, Hangzhou, China
{guoping, huyue}@iie.ac.cn, pemywei@gmail.com

Abstract
Expressing universal semantics common to all languages is helpful in understanding the meanings of complex and culture-specific sentences. The research theme
underlying this scenario focuses on learning universal representations across languages with the usage of massive parallel corpora. However, due to the sparsity
and scarcity of parallel data, there is still a big challenge in learning authentic “universals” for any two languages. In this paper, we propose E MMA -X: an EM-like
Multilingual pre-training Algorithm, to learn (X)Cross-lingual universals with the
aid of excessive multilingual non-parallel data. E MMA-X unifies the cross-lingual
representation learning task and an extra semantic relation prediction task within
an EM framework. Both the extra semantic classifier and the cross-lingual sentence
encoder approximate the semantic relation of two sentences, and supervise each
other until convergence. To evaluate E MMA-X, we conduct experiments on XRETE,
a newly introduced benchmark containing 12 widely studied cross-lingual tasks
that fully depend on sentence-level representations. Results reveal that E MMA-X
achieves state-of-the-art performance. Further geometric analysis of the built representation space with three requirements demonstrates the superiority of E MMA-X
over advanced models 2 .

1

Introduction

Research on how to express universal semantics for natural languages (metaphorically as “alphabet
of human thoughts” by Leibniz and von Leibniz [1996]) has lasted a long time. Usually, these
universal meanings underlying all human natural languages are referred to as irreducible semantic
cores [Wierzbicka, 1999]. These common cores across languages can serve as a bridge, to help better
understand the exact meanings of complex sentences in different languages.
In the context of computational linguistics, various works [Huang et al., 2019, Conneau et al.,
2020, Chi et al., 2021, Wei et al., 2021, Lee et al., 2022, Li et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023] have
led to great improvements on learning cross-lingual universal representations with the usage of
parallel corpora, and verify that multilingual universality contributes a major performance on crosslingual understanding. However, due to the sparsity and scarcity of parallel data, these advanced
techniques face a big challenge in learning real universality among all languages. For instance,
among the widely-available top 100 languages that theoretically can build 4950 language pairs,
only about 200 language pairs have considerable parallel data [Aharoni et al., 2019, Bapna et al.,
∗
2

Corresponding Author.
Codes and datasets of the XRETE benchmark: https://github.com/guopingiie/EMMA-X

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

