Geometric Analysis of Matrix Sensing over Graphs

Ying Chen
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
ying-chen@berkeley.edu

Haixiang Zhang
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
haixiang_zhang@berkeley.edu

Javad Lavaei
Department of IEOR
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
lavaei@berkeley.edu

Abstract
In this work, we consider the problem of matrix sensing over graphs (MSoG).
As a general case of matrix completion and matrix sensing problems, the MSoG
problem has not been analyzed in the literature and the existing results cannot be
directly applied to the MSoG problem. This work provides the first theoretical
results on the optimization landscape of the MSoG problem. More specifically,
we propose a new condition, named the Ω-RIP condition, to characterize the
optimization complexity of the problem. In addition, with an improved regularizer
of the incoherence, we prove that the strict saddle property holds for the MSoG
problem with high probability under the incoherence condition and the Ω-RIP
condition, which guarantees the polynomial-time global convergence of saddleavoiding methods. Compared with state-of-the-art results, the bounds in this work
are tight up to a constant. Besides the theoretical guarantees, we numerically
illustrate the close relation between the Ω-RIP condition and the optimization
complexity.

1

Introduction

In a wide range of problems in the fields of machine learning, signal processing and power systems,
an unknown low-rank matrix parameter should be estimated from a few measurements of the matrix.
To be more specific, given some measurements of the unknown symmetric and positive semi-definite
(PSD) matrix M ∗ ∈ Rn×n of rank r ≪ n, the low-rank matrix optimization problem can be
formulated as
(1)

min

M ∈Rn×n

f (M ; M ∗ )

s. t.

M ⪰ 0,

rank(M ) ≤ r,

where f (·; M ∗ ) is a loss function that penalizes the mismatch between M and M ∗ . The goal is to
recover the matrix M ∗ via finding a global minimizer of problem (1). Applications of this problem
include matrix sensing [31, 40, 38], matrix completion [10, 11, 17], phase retrieval [8, 33, 14], and
power systems [39, 24]; see the review papers [13, 15] for more applications. Early attempts to
deal with the nonconvex rank constraint of the problem focused on solving a convex relaxation
of (1); see [10, 31, 11, 7]. However, the convex relaxation approach usually updates the matrix
variable via the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) in each iteration. This will lead to an O(n3 )
computational complexity in each iteration and an O(n2 ) space complexity, which are prohibitively
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

