Resilient Constrained Learning

Ignacio Hounie
University of Pennsylvania

Alejandro Ribeiro
University of Pennsylvania

Luiz F. O. Chamon
University of Stuttgart

Abstract
When deploying machine learning solutions, they must satisfy multiple requirements beyond accuracy, such as fairness, robustness, or safety. These requirements
are imposed during training either implicitly, using penalties, or explicitly, using
constrained optimization methods based on Lagrangian duality. Either way, specifying requirements is hindered by the presence of compromises and limited prior
knowledge about the data. Furthermore, their impact on performance can often
only be evaluated by actually solving the learning problem. This paper presents a
constrained learning approach that adapts the requirements while simultaneously
solving the learning task. To do so, it relaxes the learning constraints in a way that
contemplates how much they affect the task at hand by balancing the performance
gains obtained from the relaxation against a user-defined cost of that relaxation.
We call this approach resilient constrained learning after the term used to describe
ecological systems that adapt to disruptions by modifying their operation. We
show conditions under which this balance can be achieved and introduce a practical
algorithm to compute it, for which we derive approximation and generalization
guarantees. We showcase the advantages of this resilient learning method in image
classification tasks involving multiple potential invariances and in heterogeneous
federated learning.

1

Introduction

Requirements are integral to engineering and of growing interest in machine learning (ML) [1].
This growing interest is evident in, e.g., the advancement towards designing ML systems that are
fair [2], robust [3], and safe [4], as well as numerous applications in which we want to attain good
performance with respect to more than one metric [5–24]. Two concrete applications that we will
use as examples (Section 5) are heterogeneous federated learning, where each client realizes a
different loss due to distribution shifts (as in, e.g., [18–20]) and invariant learning, where we seek to
achieve good performance even after the data has undergone a variety of transformations (as in, e.g.,
[15, 21–23]).
The goal in these settings is to strike a compromise between some top-line objective metric and
the requirements. To this end, an established approach is to combine the top-line and requirement
violation metrics in a single training loss. This leads to penalty methods that are ubiquitous in ML, as
attested by, e.g., fairness [25–28] and robustness [29, 30] applications. Another approach to balance
objective and requirements is formulating and solving constrained learning problems. Though less
typical in ML practice, they are not uncommon [5–18, 21, 24]. In particular, they have also been used
in fair [31–34] and robust [12, 35] learning, to proceed with a common set of applications. It is worth
noting that penalty and constrained methods are not unrelated. They are in fact equivalent in convex
optimization, in the sense that every constrained problem has an equivalent penalty-based formulation.
A similar result holds in non-convex ML settings for sufficiently expressive parametrizations [7, 8].
In either case, the compromise between objective and different requirements are specified by (hyper)parameters, be they penalty coefficients or constraint levels (Section 2). Finding penalties or
constraints specifications that yield reasonable trade-offs is particularly difficult in ML, which often
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

