Benchmark of Machine Learning Force Fields for
Semiconductor Simulations: Datasets, Metrics, and
Comparative Analysis

Geonu Kim1∗ Byunggook Na1∗ Gunhee Kim1† Hyuntae Cho1 Seung-Jin Kang1
Hee Sun Lee1 Saerom Choi1 Heejae Kim1 Seungwon Lee1 Yongdeok Kim1†
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT)
{geonu.kim, byunggook.na, ghij.kim, robert.cho, sj1222.kang}@samsung.com
{heesun88.lee, sincere.choi, heejaeee.kim, seungw.lee, yd.mlg.kim}@samsung.com

Abstract
As semiconductor devices become miniaturized and their structures become more
complex, there is a growing need for large-scale atomic-level simulations as a
less costly alternative to the trial-and-error approach during development. Although machine learning force fields (MLFFs) can meet the accuracy and scale
requirements for such simulations, there are no open-access benchmarks for semiconductor materials. Hence, this study presents a comprehensive benchmark suite
that consists of two semiconductor material datasets and ten MLFF models with
six evaluation metrics. We select two important semiconductor thin-film materials
silicon nitride and hafnium oxide, and generate their datasets using computationally
expensive density functional theory simulations under various scenarios at a cost
of 2.6k GPU days. Additionally, we provide a variety of architectures as baselines: descriptor-based fully connected neural networks and graph neural networks
with rotational invariant or equivariant features. We assess not only the accuracy
of energy and force predictions but also five additional simulation indicators to
determine the practical applicability of MLFF models in molecular dynamics
simulations. To facilitate further research, our benchmark suite is available at
https://github.com/SAITPublic/MLFF-Framework.

1

Introduction

The evolution of semiconductor devices has been guided by two main factors: miniaturization and
sophisticated design implementation [1, 2, 3]. Understanding complex device structures and fabrication processes requires high-resolution metrology methods, such as scanning electron microscopy
and transmission electron microscopy [3, 4]. However, these instruments have limitations in terms
of providing a restricted view, requiring substantial time and cost for analysis. In this context,
large-scale atomic simulations are becoming increasingly important as a viable alternative approach
that is capable of accurately capturing device-level dynamics. Although ab initio simulations based
on the density functional theory (DFT) can provide accurate atomic simulations, substantial computational demands make them unsuitable for large-scale simulations [5, 6, 7]. As a practical substitute,
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations combined with machine learning force fields (MLFFs) have
gained significant attention. MLFFs aim to achieve a precision comparable to that of DFT-based
simulations and relieve their computational costs.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Co-corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

