Bullying10K: A Large-Scale Neuromorphic Dataset
towards Privacy-Preserving Bullying Recognition

Yiting Dong1,3,4∗, Yang Li2,3,4∗ , Dongcheng Zhao3,4∗ , Guobin Shen1,3,4 , Yi Zeng1,2,3,4†
1
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Brain-inspired Cognitive Intelligence Lab,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Center for Long-term Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
The prevalence of violence in daily life poses significant threats to individuals’
physical and mental well-being. Using surveillance cameras in public spaces has
proven effective in proactively deterring and preventing such incidents. However,
concerns regarding privacy invasion have emerged due to their widespread deployment. To address the problem, we leverage Dynamic Vision Sensors (DVS) camera
to detect violent incidents and preserve privacy since it captures pixel brightness
variations instead of static imagery. We introduce the Bullying10K dataset, encompassing various actions, complex movements, and occlusions from real-life
scenarios. It provides three benchmarks for evaluating different tasks: action
recognition, temporal action localization, and pose estimation. With 10,000 event
segments, totaling 12 billion events and 255 GB of data, Bullying10K contributes
significantly by balancing violence detection and personal privacy persevering.
And it also poses a challenge to the neuromorphic dataset. It will serve as a valuable resource for training and developing privacy-protecting video systems. The
Bullying10K opens new possibilities for innovative approaches in these domains.

1

Introduction

The issue of violence in daily life poses a significant threat to individuals’ physical and mental
well-being. In addition to merely punishing for violent actions, it is crucial to deter and prevent their
occurrence proactively. Implementing surveillance cameras in public spaces has effectively facilitated
the prompt detection of emerging violent behavior. While this strategy has curbed violent incidents
[1, 2], the widespread deployment of these cameras stirs up concerns over potential invasions of
individuals’ privacy, leading to significant apprehensions.
The proliferation of cameras has dramatically enhanced the ease of data collection. Cameras are commonly employed for indoor and outdoor surveillance, capturing instances of violence or emergencies
[3, 4, 5]. Nonetheless, this data-gathering method frequently requires obtaining explicit consent from
recorded participants for public data collection. Obtaining comprehensive consent from individuals
captured on camera poses significant challenges [3, 6]. In addition to capturing movement data,
personal information related to privacy, such as facial features and attire, is recorded and potentially
stored on untrusted third-party servers with high-performance capabilities, thereby intensifying the
potential for privacy breaches. Privacy refers to personal information that an individual does not wish
∗
†

These authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author: yi.zeng@ia.ac.cn
Project website: https://www.brain-cog.network/dataset/Bullying10k/
Dataset website: https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Bullying10k/19160663

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

