SMPLer-X: Scaling Up Expressive
Human Pose and Shape Estimation

Zhongang Cai∗,1,2,3 , Wanqi Yin∗,2,4 , Ailing Zeng5 , Chen Wei2 , Qingping Sun2 ,
Yanjun Wang2 , Hui En Pang1,2 , Haiyi Mei2 , Mingyuan Zhang1 ,
Lei Zhang5 , Chen Change Loy1 , Lei Yang†,2,3 , Ziwei Liu†,1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
4
The University of Tokyo, 5 International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)

Abstract
Expressive human pose and shape estimation (EHPS) unifies body, hands, and
face motion capture with numerous applications. Despite encouraging progress,
current state-of-the-art methods still depend largely on a confined set of training
datasets. In this work, we investigate scaling up EHPS towards the first generalist
foundation model (dubbed SMPLer-X), with up to ViT-Huge as the backbone
and training with up to 4.5M instances from diverse data sources. With big
data and the large model, SMPLer-X exhibits strong performance across diverse
test benchmarks and excellent transferability to even unseen environments. 1)
For the data scaling, we perform a systematic investigation on 32 EHPS datasets,
including a wide range of scenarios that a model trained on any single dataset cannot
handle. More importantly, capitalizing on insights obtained from the extensive
benchmarking process, we optimize our training scheme and select datasets that
lead to a significant leap in EHPS capabilities. 2) For the model scaling, we
take advantage of vision transformers to study the scaling law of model sizes in
EHPS. Moreover, our finetuning strategy turn SMPLer-X into specialist models,
allowing them to achieve further performance boosts. Notably, our foundation
model SMPLer-X consistently delivers state-of-the-art results on seven benchmarks
such as AGORA (107.2 mm NMVE), UBody (57.4 mm PVE), EgoBody (63.6 mm
PVE), and EHF (62.3 mm PVE without finetuning). 2

1

Introduction

The recent progress in expressive human pose and shape estimation (EHPS) from monocular images
or videos offers transformative applications for the animation, gaming, and fashion industries. This
task typically employs parametric human models (e.g., SMPL-X [49]) to adeptly represent the highly
complicated human body, face, and hands. In recent years, a large number of diverse datasets have
entered the field [4, 6, 6, 61, 66, 37, 3, 12, 14, 14, 62, 7], providing the community new opportunities
to study various aspects such as capture environment, pose distribution, body visibility, and camera
views. Yet, the state-of-the-art methods remain tethered to a limited selection of these datasets,
creating a bottleneck in performance across varied scenarios and hindering the ability to generalize to
unseen situations.
Our mission in this study is to explore existing data resources comprehensively, providing key insights
crucial for establishing robust, universally applicable models for EHPS. Accordingly, we establish
the first systematic benchmark for EHPS, utilizing 32 datasets and evaluating their performance
∗
2

Equal contributions. † Co-corresponding authors.
Homepage: https://caizhongang.github.io/projects/SMPLer-X/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

