Proximity-Informed Calibration for Deep Neural
Networks
Miao Xiong1∗ Ailin Deng1 Pang Wei Koh23 Jiaying Wu1
Shen Li1 Jianqing Xu Bryan Hooi1
1
National University of Singapore 2 University of Washington 3 Google

Abstract
Confidence calibration is central to providing accurate and interpretable uncertainty
estimates, especially under safety-critical scenarios. However, we find that existing
calibration algorithms often overlook the issue of proximity bias, a phenomenon
where models tend to be more overconfident in low proximity data (i.e., data lying
in the sparse region of the data distribution) compared to high proximity samples,
and thus suffer from inconsistent miscalibration across different proximity samples.
We examine the problem over 504 pretrained ImageNet models and observe that:
1) Proximity bias exists across a wide variety of model architectures and sizes;
2) Transformer-based models are relatively more susceptible to proximity bias
than CNN-based models; 3) Proximity bias persists even after performing popular
calibration algorithms like temperature scaling; 4) Models tend to overfit more
heavily on low proximity samples than on high proximity samples. Motivated by
the empirical findings, we propose P RO C AL, a plug-and-play algorithm with a
theoretical guarantee to adjust sample confidence based on proximity. To further
quantify the effectiveness of calibration algorithms in mitigating proximity bias, we
introduce proximity-informed expected calibration error (PIECE) with theoretical
analysis. We show that P RO C AL is effective in addressing proximity bias and
improving calibration on balanced, long-tail, and distribution-shift settings under
four metrics over various model architectures. We believe our findings on proximity
bias will guide the development of fairer and better-calibrated models, contributing
to the broader pursuit of trustworthy AI.

1

Introduction

Machine learning systems are increasingly deployed in high-stakes applications such as medical
diagnosis [30, 36, 9, 6], where incorrect decisions can have severe human health consequences. To
ensure safe and reliable deployment, confidence calibration approaches [10, 23, 28] are employed to
produce more accurate uncertainty estimates, which allow models to establish trust by communicating
their level of uncertainty, and to defer to human decision-making when the models are uncertain.
In this paper, we present a calibration-related phenomenon termed proximity bias, which refers to
the tendency of current deep classifiers to exhibit higher levels of overconfidence on samples of low
proximity, i.e., samples in sparse areas within the data distribution (see Figure 1 for an illustrative
example). In this study, we quantify the proximity of a sample (Eq. 1) using the average distance to
its K (e.g. K = 10) nearest neighbor samples in the data distribution, and we observe that proximity
bias holds for various choices of K. Importantly, the phenomenon persists even after applying
existing popular calibration methods, leading to different levels of miscalibration across proximities.
The proximity bias issue raises safety concerns in real-world applications, particularly for underrepresented populations (i.e. low proximity samples) [30, 35]. A recent skin cancer analysis highlights
∗

Miao Xiong (miao.xiong@u.nus.edu).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

