Joint Training of Deep Ensembles Fails Due to
Learner Collusion
Alan Jeffares
University of Cambridge
aj659@cam.ac.uk

Tennison Liu
University of Cambridge
tl522@cam.ac.uk

Jonathan Crabbé
University of Cambridge
jc2133@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Ensembles of machine learning models have been well established as a powerful
method of improving performance over a single model. Traditionally, ensembling
algorithms train their base learners independently or sequentially with the goal
of optimizing their joint performance. In the case of deep ensembles of neural
networks, we are provided with the opportunity to directly optimize the true objective: the joint performance of the ensemble as a whole. Surprisingly, however,
directly minimizing the loss of the ensemble appears to rarely be applied in practice. Instead, most previous research trains individual models independently with
ensembling performed post hoc. In this work, we show that this is for good reason
- joint optimization of ensemble loss results in degenerate behavior. We approach
this problem by decomposing the ensemble objective into the strength of the base
learners and the diversity between them. We discover that joint optimization results in a phenomenon in which base learners collude to artificially inflate their apparent diversity. This pseudo-diversity fails to generalize beyond the training data,
causing a larger generalization gap. We proceed to comprehensively demonstrate
the practical implications of this effect on a range of standard machine learning
tasks and architectures by smoothly interpolating between independent training
and joint optimization.1

1

Introduction

Deep ensembles [1] have proven to be a remarkably effective method for improving performance
over a single deep learning model. This success has been attributed to deep ensembles exploring
multiple modes in the loss landscape [2], in contrast to variational Bayesian methods, which generally attempt to better explore a single mode [e.g. 3]. Recent work has proposed an alternative view
suggesting that deep ensembles’ success can be explained as being an effective method of scaling
smaller models to match the performance of a single larger model [4]. Regardless of the specific
mechanism, deep ensembles’ empirical success has been at the heart of numerous state-of-the-art
deep learning solutions in recent years [e.g. 5, 6, 7].
Historically, non-neural network ensembles such as a bagging predictor [8] or a random forest [9]
were generally trained independently and aggregated at test time. Sequential training methods such
as boosting [10] were also developed to produce more collaborative ensembles. Training individually and evaluating jointly was sensible for these methods, in which the base learners were typically
1

Code is provided at https://github.com/alanjeffares/joint-ensembles.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

