DPOK: Reinforcement Learning for
Fine-tuning Text-to-Image Diffusion Models

Ying Fan˚,1,2 , Olivia Watkins3 , Yuqing Du3 , Hao Liu3 , Moonkyung Ryu1 , Craig Boutilier1 ,
Pieter Abbeel3 , Mohammad Ghavamzadeh:,4 , Kangwook Lee2 , Kimin Lee˚,:,5
˚
:
Equal technical contribution
Work was done at Google Research
1
Google Research 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 UC Berkeley 4 Amazon 5 KAIST

Abstract
Learning from human feedback has been shown to improve text-to-image models.
These techniques first learn a reward function that captures what humans care about
in the task and then improve the models based on the learned reward function.
Even though relatively simple approaches (e.g., rejection sampling based on reward
scores) have been investigated, fine-tuning text-to-image models with the reward
function remains challenging. In this work, we propose using online reinforcement
learning (RL) to fine-tune text-to-image models. We focus on diffusion models,
defining the fine-tuning task as an RL problem, and updating the pre-trained
text-to-image diffusion models using policy gradient to maximize the feedbacktrained reward. Our approach, coined DPOK, integrates policy optimization with
KL regularization. We conduct an analysis of KL regularization for both RL
fine-tuning and supervised fine-tuning. In our experiments, we show that DPOK
is generally superior to supervised fine-tuning with respect to both image-text
alignment and image quality. Our code is available at https://github.com/googleresearch/google-research/tree/master/dpok.

1

Introduction

Recent advances in diffusion models [10, 37, 38], together with pre-trained text encoders (e.g.,
CLIP [27], T5 [28]) have led to impressive results in text-to-image generation. Large-scale text-toimage models, such as Imagen [32], Dalle-2 [29], and Stable Diffusion [30], generate high-quality,
creative images given novel text prompts. However, despite these advances, current models have
systematic weaknesses. For example, current models have a limited ability to compose multiple
objects [6, 7, 25]. They also frequently encounter difficulties when generating objects with specified
colors and counts [12, 17].
Learning from human feedback (LHF) has proven to be an effective means to overcome these
limitations [13, 17, 42, 43]. Lee et al. [17] demonstrate that certain properties, such as generating
objects with specific colors, counts, and backgrounds, can be improved by learning a reward function
from human feedback, followed by fine-tuning the text-to-image model using supervised learning.
They show that simple supervised fine-tuning based on reward-weighted loss can improve the reward
scores, leading to better image-text alignment. However, supervised fine-tuning often induces a
deterioration in image quality (e.g., over-saturated or non-photorealistic images). This is likely due to
the model being fine-tuned on a fixed dataset that is generated by a pre-trained model (Figure 1(a)).
In this work, we explore using online reinforcement learning (RL) for fine-tuning text-to-image
diffusion models (Figure 1(b)). We show that optimizing the expected reward of a diffusion model’s
image output is equivalent to performing policy gradient on a multi-step diffusion model under certain
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

