From Discrete Tokens to High-Fidelity Audio Using
Multi-Band Diffusion
Robin San Roman},

Yossi Adi},|

Antoine Deleforge

Gabriel Synnaeve}

Romain Serizel

Alexandre Defossez}

}: FAIR Team, Meta
: Universite de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, Nancy, France
|: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Abstract
Deep generative models can generate high-fidelity audio conditioned on various
types of representations (e.g., mel-spectrograms, Mel-frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC)). Recently, such models have been used to synthesize audio
waveforms conditioned on highly compressed representations. Although such
methods produce impressive results, they are prone to generate audible artifacts
when the conditioning is flawed or imperfect. An alternative modeling approach is
to use diffusion models. However, these have mainly been used as speech vocoders
(i.e., conditioned on mel-spectrograms) or generating relatively low sampling
rate signals. In this work, we propose a high-fidelity multi-band diffusion-based
framework that generates any type of audio modality (e.g., speech, music, environmental sounds) from low-bitrate discrete representations. At equal bit rate,
the proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art generative techniques in terms
of perceptual quality. Training and evaluation code are available on the facebookresearch/audiocraft github project. Samples are available on the following
link.

1

Introduction

Neural-based vocoders have become the dominant approach for speech synthesis due to their ability to
produce high-quality samples [Tan et al., 2021]. These models are built upon recent advancements in
neural network architectures such as WaveNet [Oord et al., 2016] and MelGAN [Kumar et al., 2019],
and have shown impressive results in generating speech with natural-sounding intonation and timbre.
In parallel, Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) applied to speech and audio data [Hsu et al., 2021, van den
Oord et al., 2019] have led to rich contextual representations that contain more than lexical content,
e.g., emotion and prosody information [Kharitonov et al., 2022, Kreuk et al., 2022a]. Generating
waveform audio from such representations is hence a new topic of interest [Liu et al., 2019, Polyak
et al., 2021, Huang et al., 2022]. This is often performed in a two stage training pipeline. First, learn
audio representations using SSL objectives, then, decode the speech using Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) approach such as the HiFi GAN model [Kong et al., 2020a]. Even though these
methods perform well, they are known to be unstable, difficult to train and prone to add audible
artifacts to the output waveform.
Compression models [Zeghidour et al., 2021, Défossez et al., 2022] can also be considered as SSL
models that use the reconstruction loss as a way to learn meaningful representations of the data. Unlike
models described before, compression models are trained in an end-to-end fashion, while learning
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

