MathNAS: If Blocks Have a Role in Mathematical
Architecture Design
Qinsi Wang1∗
Jinghan Ke1∗
Zhi Liang2
Sihai Zhang3,4
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China
3
Key Laboratory of Wireless-Optical Communications, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Microelectronics, University of Science and Technology of China
{wqs,jinghan}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {liangzhi,shzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has emerged as a favoured method for unearthing
effective neural architectures. Recent development of large models has intensified
the demand for faster search speeds and more accurate search results. However,
designing large models by NAS is challenging due to the dramatical increase of
search space and the associated huge performance evaluation cost. Consider a
typical modular search space widely used in NAS, in which a neural architecture
consists of m block nodes and a block node has n alternative blocks. Facing the
space containing nm candidate networks, existing NAS methods attempt to find the
best one by searching and evaluating candidate networks directly. Different from
the general strategy that takes architecture search as a whole problem, we propose
a novel divide-and-conquer strategy by making use of the modular nature of the
search space. Here, we introduce MathNAS, a general NAS framework based on
mathematical programming. In MathNAS, the performances of the m ∗ n possible
building blocks in the search space are calculated first, and then the performance
of a network is directly predicted based on the performances of its building blocks.
Although estimating block performances involves network training, just as what
happens for network performance evaluation in existing NAS methods, predicting
network performance is completely training-free and thus extremely fast. In
contrast to the nm candidate networks to evaluate in existing NAS methods, which
require training and a formidable computational burden, there are only m ∗ n
possible blocks to handle in MathNAS. Therefore, our approach effectively reduces
the complexity of network performance evaluation. The superiority of MathNAS
is validated on multiple large-scale CV and NLP benchmark datasets. Notably on
ImageNet-1k, MathNAS achieves 82.5% top-1 accuracy, 1.2% and 0.96% higher
than Swin-T and LeViT-256, respectively. In addition, when deployed on mobile
devices, MathNAS achieves real-time search and dynamic network switching
within 1s (0.4s on TX2 GPU), surpassing baseline dynamic networks in on-device
performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/wangqinsi1/MathNAS.

1

Introduction

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has notably excelled in designing efficient models for Computer
Vision (CV) [1, 2, 3, 4] and Natural Language Processing (NLP) [5, 6, 7] tasks. With the growing
popularity of the Transformer architecture [8, 9], designers are increasingly drawn to using NAS to
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

