SPQR: Controlling Q-ensemble Independence with
Spiked Random Model for Reinforcement Learning

Dohyeok Lee1 , Seungyub Han1,2 , Taehyun Cho1 , Jungwoo Lee1,∗
1
Seoul National University, 2 Hodoo AI Labs
{dohyeoklee,seungyubhan,talium,junglee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Alleviating overestimation bias is a critical challenge for deep reinforcement learning to achieve successful performance on more complex tasks or offline datasets
containing out-of-distribution data. In order to overcome overestimation bias,
ensemble methods for Q-learning have been investigated to exploit the diversity
of multiple Q-functions. Since network initialization has been the predominant
approach to promote diversity in Q-functions, heuristically designed diversity
injection methods have been studied in the literature. However, previous studies have not attempted to approach guaranteed independence over an ensemble
from a theoretical perspective. By introducing a novel regularization loss for
Q-ensemble independence based on random matrix theory, we propose spiked
Wishart Q-ensemble independence regularization (SPQR) for reinforcement learning. Specifically, we modify the intractable hypothesis testing criterion for the
Q-ensemble independence into a tractable KL divergence between the spectral
distribution of the Q-ensemble and the target Wigner’s semicircle distribution. We
implement SPQR in several online and offline ensemble Q-learning algorithms.
In the experiments, SPQR outperforms the baseline algorithms in both online and
offline RL benchmarks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL), especially deep reinforcement learning (DRL) that contains high
capacity function approximators such as deep neural networks, has shown considerable success
in complex sequential decision making problems including robotics [1], video games [28], and
strategy games [12]. Despite these promising results, modern DRL algorithms consistently suffer
from sample-inefficiency and overestimation bias.
Vanilla off-policy Q-learning faces the overestimation issue in both online and offline reinforcement
learning. The overestimation problem is specifically worse for out-of-distribution (OOD) state-action
pairs. In order to address the overestimation problem, many existing methods utilize ensemble
Q-learning. Ensemble Q-learning introduces multiple Q-networks to compute a Bellman target value
to benefit from the diversity of their Q-values. Double Q-learning [15] proposes clipped Q-learning
as the first method to adopt an ensemble to DRL. Along with double Q-learning, Ensemble DQN
[3], Maxmin Q-learning [22], randomized ensembled double Q-learning (REDQ) [6], and SUNRISE
[24] are proposed as efficient ensemble Q-learning algorithms on online RL tasks. Clipped SAC
[2] is proposed for offline RL tasks to alleviate the overestimation bias of Q-values from OOD data.
Despite the objective of ensemble Q-learning, which enables RL agents to access diverse Q-values
for each state-action, existing ensemble Q-learning algorithms have only focused on the computing
Bellman target over an ensemble. MED-RL [31] and EDAC [2] propose a diversifying loss for online
and offline reinforcement learning, such as the Gini coefficient and the variance of the Q-value on
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

