Variance-Reduced Gradient Estimation via
Noise-Reuse in Online Evolution Strategies

Oscar Li§1 , James Harrison♢ , Jascha Sohl-Dickstein♢ , Virginia Smith§ , Luke Metz♢2
§

Machine Learning Department, School of Computer Science
♢
Google DeepMind

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Unrolled computation graphs are prevalent throughout machine learning but present
challenges to automatic differentiation (AD) gradient estimation methods when
their loss functions exhibit extreme local sensitivtiy, discontinuity, or blackbox
characteristics. In such scenarios, online evolution strategies methods are a more
capable alternative, while being more parallelizable than vanilla evolution strategies
(ES) by interleaving partial unrolls and gradient updates. In this work, we propose
a general class of unbiased online evolution strategies methods. We analytically
and empirically characterize the variance of this class of gradient estimators and
identify the one with the least variance, which we term Noise-Reuse Evolution
Strategies (NRES). Experimentally3 , we show NRES results in faster convergence
than existing AD and ES methods in terms of wall-clock time and number of
unroll steps across a variety of applications, including learning dynamical systems,
meta-training learned optimizers, and reinforcement learning.

1

Introduction

First-order optimization methods are a foundational tool in machine learning. With many such
methods (e.g., SGD, Adam) available in existing software, ML training often amounts to specifying
a computation graph of learnable parameters and computing some notion of gradients to pass into
an off-the-shelf optimizer. Here, unrolled computation graphs (UCGs), where the same learnable
parameters are repeatedly applied to transition a dynamical system’s inner state, have found their
use in various applications such as recurrent neural networks [1, 2], meta-training learned optimizers
[3, 4], hyperpameter tuning [5, 6], dataset distillation [7, 8], and reinforcement learning [9, 10].
While a large number of automatic differentiation (AD) methods exist to estimate gradients in
UCGs [11], they often perform poorly over loss landscapes with extreme local sensitivity and
cannot handle black-box computation dynamics or discontinuous losses [12, 3, 13]. To handle
these shortcomings, evolution strategies (ES) have become a popular alternative to produce gradient
estimates in UCGs [14]. ES methods convolve the (potentially pathological or discontinuous) loss
surface with a Gaussian distribution in the learnable parameter space, making it smoother and infinitely
differentiable. Unfortunately, vanilla ES methods cannot be applied online4 — the computation must
reach the end of the graph to produce a gradient update, thus incurring large update latency for long
UCGs. To address this, a recently proposed approach, Persistent Evolution Strategies [15] (PES),
samples a new Gaussian noise in every truncation unroll and accumulates the past sampled noises to
get rid of the estimation bias in its online application.
In this work, we investigate the coupling of the noise sampling frequency and the gradient estimation
frequency in PES. By decoupling these two values, we arrive at a more general class of unbiased,
Correspondence to: <oscarli@cmu.edu>. 2 Now at OpenAI.
Code available at https://github.com/OscarcarLi/Noise-Reuse-Evolution-Strategies.
4
Online here means a method can produce gradient estimates using only a truncation window of an unrolled
computation graph instead of the full graph, thus allowing the interleaving of partial unrolls and gradient updates.
1

3

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

