Accelerating Molecular Graph Neural Networks via
Knowledge Distillation

Filip Ekström Kelvinius∗
Linköping University
filip.ekstrom@liu.se

Dimitar Georgiev∗
Imperial College London
d.georgiev21@imperial.ac.uk

Artur Petrov Toshev∗
Technical University of Munich
artur.toshev@tum.de

Johannes Gasteiger
Google Research
johannesg@google.com

Abstract
Recent advances in graph neural networks (GNNs) have enabled more comprehensive modeling of molecules and molecular systems, thereby enhancing the
precision of molecular property prediction and molecular simulations. Nonetheless,
as the field has been progressing to bigger and more complex architectures, stateof-the-art GNNs have become largely prohibitive for many large-scale applications.
In this paper, we explore the utility of knowledge distillation (KD) for accelerating
molecular GNNs. To this end, we devise KD strategies that facilitate the distillation
of hidden representations in directional and equivariant GNNs, and evaluate their
performance on the regression task of energy and force prediction. We validate
our protocols across different teacher-student configurations and datasets, and
demonstrate that they can consistently boost the predictive accuracy of student
models without any modifications to their architecture. Moreover, we conduct comprehensive optimization of various components of our framework, and investigate
the potential of data augmentation to further enhance performance. All in all, we
manage to close the gap in predictive accuracy between teacher and student models
by as much as 96.7% and 62.5% for energy and force prediction respectively, while
fully preserving the inference throughput of the more lightweight models.

1

Introduction

In the last couple of years, the field of molecular simulations has undergone a rapid paradigm shift
with the advent of new, powerful computational tools based on machine learning (ML) [1]. At the
forefront of this transformation have been recent advances in graph neural networks (GNNs), which
have brought about architectures that more effectively capture geometric and structural information
critical for the accurate representation of molecules and molecular systems [2, 3]. Consequently,
a multitude of GNNs have been developed, which now offer predictive performance approaching
that of conventional gold-standard methods such as density functional theory (DFT) at a fraction of
the computational cost [4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. This has, in turn, significantly accelerated the modeling of
molecular properties and the simulation of molecular systems, bolstering new research developments
in many scientific disciplines, including material sciences, drug discovery and catalysis [10, 11, 12,
13, 14].
Nonetheless, this progress - largely coinciding with the development of bigger and more complex
models, has naturally come at the expense of increased complexity [15, 9, 7, 16]. This has gradually
∗

These authors contributed equally to this work. Order was determined by rolling a dice.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

