Enhancing CLIP with CLIP: Exploring
Pseudolabeling for Limited-Label Prompt Tuning

Cristina Menghini
Brown University
cristina_menghini@brown.edu

Andrew Delworth
Brown University
adelwort@cs.brown.edu

Stephen H. Bach
Brown University
sbach@cs.brown.edu

Abstract
Fine-tuning vision-language models (VLMs) like CLIP to downstream tasks is
often necessary to optimize their performance. However, a major obstacle is
the limited availability of labeled data. We study the use of pseudolabels, i.e.,
heuristic labels for unlabeled data, to enhance CLIP via prompt tuning. Conventional pseudolabeling trains a model on labeled data and then generates labels for
unlabeled data. VLMs’ zero-shot capabilities enable a “second generation” of
pseudolabeling approaches that do not require task-specific training on labeled
data. By using zero-shot pseudolabels as a source of supervision, we observe
that learning paradigms such as semi-supervised, transductive zero-shot, and unsupervised learning can all be seen as optimizing the same loss function. This
unified view enables the development of versatile training strategies that are applicable across learning paradigms. We investigate them on image classification
tasks where CLIP exhibits limitations, by varying prompt modalities, e.g., textual
or visual prompts, and learning paradigms. We find that (1) unexplored prompt
tuning strategies that iteratively refine pseudolabels consistently improve CLIP
accuracy, by 19.5 points in semi-supervised learning, by 28.4 points in transductive
zero-shot learning, and by 15.2 points in unsupervised learning, and (2) unlike
conventional semi-supervised pseudolabeling, which exacerbates model biases
toward classes with higher-quality pseudolabels, prompt tuning leads to a more
equitable distribution of per-class accuracy. The code to reproduce the experiments
is at BatsResearch/menghini-neurips23-code.

1

Introduction

Large pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) [31, 43, 17] achieve remarkable accuracy without
task-specific training but still require adaptation for optimal performance. Prompt-tuning [13, 18] is
an approach to efficiently enhance VLMs performance on downstream tasks by learning inputs to the
model. While learning prompts with a few labeled data can yield significant improvements [48, 2], a
broader range of learning settings such as semi-supervised, transductive zero-shot, and unsupervised
learning are still underexplored. All of these settings share access to unlabeled data, and the versatile
zero-shot classification abilities of VLMs make pseudolabeling a natural approach to leveraging it.
This paper investigates how the use of out-of-the-box pseudolabels assigned by CLIP can contribute
to improving CLIP’s own performance. To this end, we conduct an extensive exploration of learning
scenarios by varying prompt modalities, learning paradigms, and training strategies. We present
empirical evidence showcasing the effectiveness of iterative prompt-training strategies that leverage
CLIP-based pseudolabels, regardless of learning paradigms and prompt modalities, resulting in
significant improvements in CLIP’s image classification performance across different settings.
Pseudolabels are heuristic labels assigned by a model to unlabeled data, which are leveraged to
further train the model [20]. Successful training with pseudolabels relies on two factors: the quality
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

