Embedding Space Interpolation Beyond Mini-Batch,
Beyond Pairs and Beyond Examples
Shashanka Venkataramanan1
2

Ewa Kijak1

Laurent Amsaleg1

Yannis Avrithis2

1
Inria, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRISA
Institute of Advanced Research on Artificial Intelligence (IARAI)

Abstract
Mixup refers to interpolation-based data augmentation, originally motivated as a
way to go beyond empirical risk minimization (ERM). Its extensions mostly focus
on the definition of interpolation and the space (input or embedding) where it takes
place, while the augmentation process itself is less studied. In most methods, the
number of generated examples is limited to the mini-batch size and the number of
examples being interpolated is limited to two (pairs), in the input space.
We make progress in this direction by introducing MultiMix, which generates an
arbitrarily large number of interpolated examples beyond the mini-batch size, and
interpolates the entire mini-batch in the embedding space. Effectively, we sample on the entire convex hull of the mini-batch rather than along linear segments
between pairs of examples.
On sequence data we further extend to Dense MultiMix. We densely interpolate
features and target labels at each spatial location and also apply the loss densely.
To mitigate the lack of dense labels, we inherit labels from examples and weight
interpolation factors by attention as a measure of confidence.
Overall, we increase the number of loss terms per mini-batch by orders of magnitude at little additional cost. This is only possible because of interpolating in
the embedding space. We empirically show that our solutions yield significant
improvement over state-of-the-art mixup methods on four different benchmarks,
despite interpolation being only linear. By analyzing the embedding space, we
show that the classes are more tightly clustered and uniformly spread over the
embedding space, thereby explaining the improved behavior.

1

Introduction

Mixup [65] is a data augmentation method that interpolates between pairs of training examples, thus
regularizing a neural network to favor linear behavior in-between examples. Besides improving generalization, it has important properties such as reducing overconfident predictions and increasing the
robustness to adversarial examples. Several follow-up works have studied interpolation in the latent
or embedding space, which is equivalent to interpolating along a manifold in the input space [51],
and a number of nonlinear and attention-based interpolation mechanisms [62, 26, 25, 46, 7]. However, little progress has been made in the augmentation process itself, i.e., the number n of generated
examples and the number m of examples being interpolated.
Mixup was originally motivated as a way to go beyond empirical risk minimization (ERM) [47]
through a vicinal distribution expressed as an expectation over an interpolation factor , which is
equivalent to the set of linear segments between all pairs of training inputs and targets. In practice
however, in every training iteration, a single scalar is drawn and the number of interpolated pairs
is limited to the size b of the mini-batch (n = b), as illustrated in Figure 1(a). This is because if
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

