Hypernetwork-based Meta-Learning
for Low-Rank Physics-Informed Neural Networks
Woojin Cho†

Kookjin Lee‡⇤ Donsub Rim§ Noseong Park†⇤
†
Yonsei University
‡
Arizona State University
§
Washington University in St. Louis
snowmoon@yonsei.ac.kr, kookjin.lee@asu.edu,
rim@wustl.edu, noseong@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
In various engineering and applied science applications, repetitive numerical simulations of partial differential equations (PDEs) for varying input parameters are
often required (e.g., aircraft shape optimization over many design parameters) and
solvers are required to perform rapid execution. In this study, we suggest a path that
potentially opens up a possibility for physics-informed neural networks (PINNs),
emerging deep-learning-based solvers, to be considered as one such solver. Although PINNs have pioneered a proper integration of deep-learning and scientific
computing, they require repetitive time-consuming training of neural networks,
which is not suitable for many-query scenarios. To address this issue, we propose
lightweight low-rank PINNs containing only hundreds of model parameters and
an associated hypernetwork-based meta-learning algorithm, which allow efficient
solution approximations for varying PDE input parameters. Moreover, we show
that the proposed method is effective in overcoming a challenging issue, known as
“failure modes” of PINNs.

1

Introduction

Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) [1] are a particular class of coordinate-based multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs), also known as implicit neural representations (INRs), to numerically approximate solutions of partial differential equations (PDEs). That is, PINNs are taking spatiotemporal
coordinates (x , t) as an input and predict PDE solutions evaluated at the coordinates u⇥ (x , t) and
are trained by minimizing (implicit) PDE residual loss and data matching loss at initial and boundary conditions. PINNs have been successfully applied to many different important applications
in computational science and engineering domain: computational fluid dynamics [2, 3], cardiac
electrophysiology simulation [4], material science [5], and photonics [6], to name a few.
PINNs are, however, sharing the same weakness with coordinate-based MLPs (or INRs), which
hinders the application of PINNs/INRs to more diverse applications; for a new data instance (e.g.,
a new PDE for PINNs or a new image for INRs), training a new neural network (typically from
scratch) is required. Thus, using PINNs to solve PDEs (particularly, in parameterized PDE settings) is
usually computationally demanding, and this burden precludes the application of PINNs to important
scenarios that involve many queries in nature as these scenarios require the parameterized PDE
models to be simulated thousands of times (e.g., design optimization, uncertainty propagation), i.e.,
Nµ
requiring PDE solutions u(x , t; µ ) at many PDE parameter settings {µ (i) }i=1
with very large Nµ .
⇤

Co-corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

