Beyond Exponential Graph:
Communication-Efficient Topologies for Decentralized
Learning via Finite-time Convergence

Yuki Takezawa1,2∗, Ryoma Sato1,2∗ , Han Bao1,2 , Kenta Niwa3 , Makoto Yamada2
1
Kyoto University, 2 OIST, 3 NTT Communication Science Laboratories

Abstract
Decentralized learning has recently been attracting increasing attention for its
applications in parallel computation and privacy preservation. Many recent studies
stated that the underlying network topology with a faster consensus rate (a.k.a.
spectral gap) leads to a better convergence rate and accuracy for decentralized learning. However, a topology with a fast consensus rate, e.g., the exponential graph,
generally has a large maximum degree, which incurs significant communication
costs. Thus, seeking topologies with both a fast consensus rate and small maximum
degree is important. In this study, we propose a novel topology combining both a
fast consensus rate and small maximum degree called the BASE -(k + 1) G RAPH.
Unlike the existing topologies, the BASE -(k + 1) G RAPH enables all nodes to
reach the exact consensus after a finite number of iterations for any number of
nodes and maximum degree k. Thanks to this favorable property, the BASE -(k + 1)
G RAPH endows Decentralized SGD (DSGD) with both a faster convergence rate
and more communication efficiency than the exponential graph. We conducted
experiments with various topologies, demonstrating that the BASE -(k + 1) G RAPH
enables various decentralized learning methods to achieve higher accuracy with
better communication efficiency than the existing topologies. Our code is available
at https://github.com/yukiTakezawa/BaseGraph.

1

Introduction

Distributed learning, which allows training neural networks in parallel on multiple nodes, has
become an important paradigm owing to the increased utilization of privacy preservation and largescale machine learning. In a centralized fashion, such as All-Reduce and Federated Learning
[8, 9, 16, 26, 27], all or some selected nodes update their parameters by using their local dataset and
then compute the average parameter of these nodes, although computing the average of many nodes is
the major bottleneck in the training time [18, 19, 23]. To reduce communication costs, decentralized
learning gains significant attention [11, 18, 24]. Because decentralized learning allows nodes to
exchange parameters only with a few neighbors in the underlying network topology, decentralized
learning is more communication efficient than All-Reduce and Federated Learning.
While decentralized learning can improve communication efficiency, it may degrade the convergence
rate and accuracy due to its sparse communication characteristics [11, 48]. Specifically, the smaller
the maximum degree of an underlying network topology is, the fewer the communication cost
becomes [33, 39]; meanwhile, the faster the consensus rate (a.k.a. spectral gap) of a topology is, the
faster the convergence rate of decentralized learning becomes [11]. Thus, developing a topology with
both a fast consensus rate and small maximum degree is essential for decentralized learning. Table 1
summarizes the properties of various topologies. For instance, the ring and exponential graph are
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

