Causal Fairness for Outcome Control
Drago Plecko and Elias Bareinboim
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
dp3144@columbia.edu, eb@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
As society transitions towards an AI-based decision-making infrastructure, an everincreasing number of decisions once under control of humans are now delegated to
automated systems. Even though such developments make various parts of society
more efficient, a large body of evidence suggests that a great deal of care needs
to be taken to make such automated decision-making systems fair and equitable,
namely, taking into account sensitive attributes such as gender, race, and religion.
In this paper, we study a specific decision-making task called outcome control
in which an automated system aims to optimize an outcome variable Y while
being fair and equitable. The interest in such a setting ranges from interventions
related to criminal justice and welfare, all the way to clinical decision-making
and public health. In this paper, we first analyze through causal lenses the notion
of benefit, which captures how much a specific individual would benefit from a
positive decision, counterfactually speaking, when contrasted with an alternative,
negative one. We introduce the notion of benefit fairness, which can be seen as the
minimal fairness requirement in decision-making, and develop an algorithm for
satisfying it. We then note that the benefit itself may be influenced by the protected
attribute, and propose causal tools which can be used to analyze this. Finally, if
some of the variations of the protected attribute in the benefit are considered as
discriminatory, the notion of benefit fairness may need to be strengthened, which
leads us to articulating a notion of causal benefit fairness. Using this notion, we
develop a new optimization procedure capable of maximizing Y while ascertaining
causal fairness in the decision process.

1

Introduction

Decision-making systems based on artificial intelligence and machine learning are being increasingly
deployed in real-world settings where they have life-changing consequences on individuals and on
society more broadly, including hiring decisions, university admissions, law enforcement, credit
lending, health care access, and finance [19, 26, 6]. Issues of unfairness and discrimination are
pervasive in those settings when decisions are being made by humans, and remain (or are potentially
amplified) when decisions are made using machines with little transparency or accountability. Examples include reports on such biases in decision support systems for sentencing [1], face-detection [7],
online advertising [37, 10], and authentication [35]. A large part of the underlying issue is that AI
systems designed to make decisions are trained with data that contains various historical biases and
past discriminatory decisions against certain protected groups, and such systems may potentially lead
to an even more discriminatory process, unless they have a degree of fairness and transparency.
In this paper, we focus on the specific task of outcome control, characterized by a decision D which
precedes the outcome of interest Y . The setting of outcome control appears across a broad range
of applications, from clinical decision-making [13] and public health [15], to criminal justice [23]
and various welfare interventions [9]. In general, outcome control will cover settings in which an
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

