VOCE: Variational Optimization with Conservative
Estimation for Offline Safe Reinforcement Learning

Jiayi Guan
Tongji University
guanjiayi@tongji.edu.cn
Long Yang
Peking University
yanglong001@pku.edu.cn

Guang Chen∗
Tongji University
guangchen@tongji.edu.cn

Jiaming Ji
Peking University
jiamg.ji@gmail.com

Ao Zhou
Tongji University
2211107@tongji.edu.cn

Zhijun Li
Tongji University
zjli@ieee.org

Changjun Jiang
Tongji University
cjjiang@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Offline safe reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms promise to learn policies that
satisfy safety constraints directly in offline datasets without interacting with the
environment. This arrangement is particularly important in scenarios with high
sampling costs and potential dangers, such as autonomous driving and robotics.
However, the influence of safety constraints and out-of-distribution (OOD) actions
have made it challenging for previous methods to achieve high reward returns
while ensuring safety. In this work, we propose a Variational Optimization with
Conservative Estimation algorithm (VOCE) to solve the problem of optimizing
safety policies in the offline dataset. Concretely, we reframe the problem of offline
safe RL using probabilistic inference, which introduces variational distributions
to make the optimization of policies more flexible. Subsequently, we utilize pessimistic estimation methods to estimate the Q-value of cost and reward, which
mitigates the extrapolation errors induced by OOD actions. Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate that the VOCE algorithm achieves competitive performance
across multiple experimental tasks, particularly outperforming state-of-the-art
algorithms in terms of safety. Our code is available at github.VOCE.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms have made remarkable achievements in various fields such
as robot control [1–3] and strategy games [4–6]. However, limited by the online and trial-and-error
nature, standard RL is challenging to apply to dangerous and expensive scenarios [7–9]. Offline safe
RL is a promising and potential approach to tackle the above problem, which learns policy satisfying
safety constraints from pre-collected offline datasets without interacting with the environment [10, 11].
Since offline safe RL methods aim to learn policies that satisfy safety constraints from offline datasets,
which requires the agent to not only comply with safety constraints but also consider the influence
of out-of-distribution (OOD) actions [12–15]. This makes it difficult for the algorithm to learn
policies that achieve high reward returns while satisfying safety constraints [16]. There are two main
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

