Rethinking the Backward Propagation for
Adversarial Transferability

Xiaosen Wang1∗ , Kangheng Tong2∗ , Kun He2†
1
Huawei Singular Security Lab
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{xiaosen,tongkangheng,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Transfer-based attacks generate adversarial examples on the surrogate model, which
can mislead other black-box models without access, making it promising to attack
real-world applications. Recently, several works have been proposed to boost adversarial transferability, in which the surrogate model is usually overlooked. In this
work, we identify that non-linear layers (e.g. ReLU, max-pooling, etc.) truncate the
gradient during backward propagation, making the gradient w.r.t. input image imprecise to the loss function. We hypothesize and empirically validate that such truncation undermines the transferability of adversarial examples. Based on these findings,
we propose a novel method called Backward Propagation Attack (BPA) to increase
the relevance between the gradient w.r.t. input image and loss function so as to
generate adversarial examples with higher transferability. Specifically, BPA adopts
a non-monotonic function as the derivative of ReLU and incorporates softmax with
temperature to smooth the derivative of max-pooling, thereby mitigating the information loss during the backward propagation of gradients. Empirical results on the
ImageNet dataset demonstrate that not only does our method substantially boost the
adversarial transferability, but it is also general to existing transfer-based attacks.
Code is available at https://github.com/Trustworthy-AI-Group/RPA.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been widely applied in various domains, such as image recognition [37, 13, 16], object detection [34], face verification [52, 41], etc. However, their susceptibility to adversarial examples [39, 10], which are carefully crafted by adding imperceptible perturbations to natural examples, has raised significant concerns regarding their security. In recent
years, the generation of adversarial examples, aka adversarial attacks, has garnered increasing attention [31, 21, 6, 55, 44, 24] in the research community. Notably, there has been a significant
advancement in the efficiency and applicability of adversarial attacks [19, 1, 47, 6, 57, 59, 51],
making them increasingly viable in real-world scenarios.
By exploiting the transferability of adversarial examples across different models [29], transfer-based
attacks generate adversarial examples on the surrogate model to fool the target models [6, 57, 12, 43,
58]. Unlike other types of attacks [2, 19, 1, 47], transfer-based attacks do not require direct access to
the victim models, making them particularly applicable for attacking online interfaces. Consequently,
transfer-based attacks have emerged as a prominent branch of adversarial attacks. However, it is
worth noting that the early white-box attacks [10, 31, 21] often exhibit poor transferability despite
demonstrating superior performance within the white-box setting.
∗
†

The first two authors contribute equally.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

