Deep Insights into Noisy Pseudo Labeling
on Graph Data

Botao Wang1,2 , Jia Li1,2∗, Yang Liu1,2 , Jiashun Cheng1,2 ,
Yu Rong3 , Wenjia Wang1,2 , Fugee Tsung1,2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China
2
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, China
3
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
{bwangbk, yliukj, jchengak}@connect.ust.hk
{jialee, wenjiawang season}@ust.hk, yu.rong@hotmail.com

Abstract
Pseudo labeling (PL) is a wide-applied strategy to enlarge the labeled dataset by
self-annotating the potential samples during the training process. Several works
have shown that it can improve the graph learning model performance in general.
However, we notice that the incorrect labels can be fatal to the graph training
process. Inappropriate PL may result in the performance degrading, especially on
graph data where the noise can propagate. Surprisingly, the corresponding error is
seldom theoretically analyzed in the literature. In this paper, we aim to give deep
insights of PL on graph learning models. We first present the error analysis of PL
strategy by showing that the error is bounded by the confidence of PL threshold
and consistency of multi-view prediction. Then, we theoretically illustrate the
effect of PL on convergence property. Based on the analysis, we propose a cautious
pseudo labeling methodology in which we pseudo label the samples with highest
confidence and multi-view consistency. Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed strategy improves graph learning process and outperforms other
PL strategies on link prediction and node classification tasks.

1

Introduction

Pseudo Labeling (PL) [27, 13] is one of the most popular self-supervised learning approaches and
has been widely used to tackle the label sparsity problem. Its core idea is to enlarge the training set
by self-labeling. As most self-labeled samples should be consistent with ground truth, the enlarged
dataset has a larger sample capacity to improve the model generalization. Plenty of studies have
shown the effectiveness of PL [7, 26, 14, 5]. However, there is a trade-off between the benefit of PL
and the effect of mislabeled samples. When the benefit of PL outweighs the impact of introduced
noise, the performance of the base model (i.e., without PL) can be improved. But for non-i.i.d.
condition such as graph data, the introduced noisy labels may transfer among the samples and be
amplified, which may degrade the performance of base model. Although several methods have been
proposed to alleviate this noisy phenomenon [31, 32, 15], there is still neither a clear explanation nor
a quantification of how pseudo labeling affects the graph learning models.
In this study, we attempt to answer questions above. Specifically, we evaluate PL’s effect on the
prediction error of the base model and the convergence of the empirical loss function. For a graph
learning model, the message aggregation process would amplify the noises of incorrect labels
introduced by PL. These noises can even accumulate to damage the base model’s performance. For
∗

corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

