Stability-penalty-adaptive
follow-the-regularized-leader:
Sparsity, game-dependency, and best-of-both-worlds

Taira Tsuchiya∗
The University of Tokyo
tsuchiya@mist.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Shinji Ito
NEC Corporation / RIKEN
i-shinji@nec.com

Junya Honda
Kyoto University / RIKEN
honda@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Adaptivity to the difficulties of a problem is a key property in sequential
decision-making problems to broaden the applicability of algorithms. Followthe-regularized-leader (FTRL) has recently emerged as one of the most promising
approaches for obtaining various types of adaptivity in bandit problems. Aiming to
further generalize this adaptivity, we develop a generic adaptive learning rate, called
stability-penalty-adaptive (SPA) learning rate for FTRL. This learning rate yields
a regret bound jointly depending on stability and penalty of the algorithm, into
which the regret of FTRL is typically decomposed. With this result, we establish
several algorithms with three types of adaptivity: sparsity, game-dependency, and
best-of-both-worlds (BOBW). Despite the fact that sparsity appears frequently in
real problems, existing sparse multi-armed bandit algorithms with k-arms assume
that the sparsity level s ≤ k is known in advance, which is often not the case in
real-world scenarios. To address
this issue, we first establish s-agnostic algorithms
√
with regret bounds of e
O( sT ) in the adversarial regime for T rounds, which
matches the existing lower bound up to a logarithmic factor. Meanwhile, BOBW
algorithms aim to achieve a near-optimal regret in both the stochastic and adversarial regimes. Leveraging the SPA learning rate and the technique for s-agnostic
algorithms combined with a new analysis to bound the variation in FTRL output
in response to changes in a regularizer, we establish the first BOBW algorithm
with a sparsity-dependent bound. Additionally, we explore partial monitoring and
demonstrate that the proposed SPA learning rate framework allows us to achieve a
game-dependent bound and the BOBW simultaneously.

1

Introduction

This study considers the multi-armed bandits (MAB) and partial monitoring (PM). In the MAB
problem, the learner selects one of k arms, and the adversary simultaneously determines the loss of
each arm, ℓt = (ℓt1 , . . . , ℓtk )⊤ in [0, 1]k or [−1, 1]k . After that, the learner observes only the loss
for the chosen arm. The learner’s goal is to minimize the regret, which is the difference between the
learner’s total loss and the total loss of an optimal arm fixed in hindsight. PM is a generalization of
MAB, and the learner observes feedback symbols instead of the losses.
∗

This work was done when the author was with Kyoto University and RIKEN.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

