Diffusion Self-Guidance for
Controllable Image Generation

Dave Epstein1,2 Allan Jabri1 Ben Poole2 Alexei A. Efros1 Aleksander Holynski1,2
1
UC Berkeley 2 Google Research

Abstract
Large-scale generative models are capable of producing high-quality images from
detailed text descriptions. However, many aspects of an image are difficult or
impossible to convey through text. We introduce self-guidance, a method that
provides greater control over generated images by guiding the internal representations of diffusion models. We demonstrate that properties such as the shape,
location, and appearance of objects can be extracted from these representations and
used to steer the sampling process. Self-guidance operates similarly to standard
classifier guidance, but uses signals present in the pretrained model itself, requiring
no additional models or training. We show how a simple set of properties can be
composed to perform challenging image manipulations, such as modifying the
position or size of specific objects, merging the appearance of objects in one image
with the layout of another, composing objects from multiple images into one, and
more. We also show that self-guidance can be used for editing real images. See our
project page for results and an interactive demo: https://dave.ml/selfguidance

1

Introduction

Generative image models have improved rapidly in recent years with the adoption of large text-image
datasets and scalable architectures [7, 10, 12, 27, 28, 32, 34, 38]. These models are able to create
realistic images given a text prompt describing just about anything. However, despite the incredible
abilities of these systems, discovering the right prompt to generate the exact image a user has in
mind can be surprisingly challenging. A key issue is that all desired aspects of an image must be
communicated through text, even those that are difficult or even impossible to convey precisely.
To address this limitation, previous work has introduced methods [9, 14, 18, 30] that tune pretrained
models to better control details that a user has in mind. These details are often supplied in the
form of reference images along with a new textual prompt [2, 4] or other forms of conditioning
[1, 31, 39]. However, these approaches all either rely on fine-tuning with expensive paired data (thus
limiting the scope of possible edits) or must undergo a costly optimization process to perform the few
manipulations they are designed for. While some methods [11, 21, 22, 36] can perform zero-shot
editing of an input image using a target caption describing the output, these methods only allow
for limited control, often restricted to structure-preserving appearance manipulation or uncontrolled
image-to-image translation.
By consequence, many simple edits still remain out of reach. For example, how can we move or
resize one object in a scene without changing anything else? How can we take the appearance of
an object in one image and copy it over to another, or combine the layout of one scene with the
appearance of a second one? How can we generate images with certain items having precise shapes at
specific positions on the canvas? This degree of control has been explored in the past in smaller scale
settings [5, 8, 19, 24, 37, 40], but has not been convincingly demonstrated with modern large-scale
diffusion models [26, 32, 38].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

