Validated Image Caption Rating Dataset

Lothar D Narins1 Andrew Taylor Scott1 Aakash Gautam2 Anagha Kulkarni1
Mar Castanon1 Benjamin Kao1 Shasta Ihorn1 Yue-Ting Siu3
James Mason4 Alexander Mario Blum5 Ilmi Yoon1
1
San Francisco State University 2 University of Pittsburgh
3
Washington State School for the Blind 4 UC Berkeley 5 Stanford University
{lnarins,bkao}@mail.sfsu.edu
{ats,ak,shasta,ilmi}@sfsu.edu
{marcastan4,alexander.m.blum}@gmail.com
aakash@pitt.edu, ting.siu@wssb.wa.gov, jmason888@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present a new high-quality validated image caption rating (VICR) dataset.
How well a caption fits an image can be difficult to assess due to the subjective
nature of caption quality. How do we evaluate whether a caption is good? We
generated a new dataset to help answer this question by using our new image
caption rating system, which consists of a novel robust rating scale and gamified
approach to gathering human ratings. We show that our approach is consistent
and teachable. 113 participants were involved in generating the dataset, which is
composed of 68,217 ratings among 15,646 image-caption pairs. Our new dataset
has greater inter-rater agreement than the state of the art, and custom machine
learning rating predictors that were trained on our dataset outperform previous
metrics. We improve over Flickr8k-Expert in Kendall’s W by 12% and in Fleiss’ κ
by 19%, and thus provide a new benchmark dataset for image caption rating.

1

Introduction

Image caption rating (ICR) is the task of estimating the quality of a caption for a given image. It
is a growing area of research across various domains (e.g., [23, 31, 20, 32, 53]). ICR is becoming
especially relevant since computer generated captions are used extensively for descriptive annotations.
Identifying how good a caption is can be difficult because of the multiple aspects involved. At
minimum, a good caption should correctly identify all relevant objects, where things are in space,
the setting in which the objects are shown, and the interpretation of events depicted in the image
[2]. Elements of subjectivity and value are inherent in it. Moreover, with the exponential growth in
the use of images in the digital ecosystem, caption rating systems have to be scalable, requiring a
mechanism that ensures consistency across a large scale.
However, there is a significant gap in the existing caption rating systems. First, while prior work has
contributed multiple ICR datasets where human annotators were asked to assign quality ratings to
image-caption pairs, they rely on ad hoc rating scales [33, 22, 50, 35]. While these datasets have
been valuable in advancing the field and have been used extensively [55, 51, 4, 32, 44, 3], several
of them suffer from high skew in the ratings with predominantly poor quality captions. Second,
while some systems such as that by Cui et al. [9] and Levinboim et al. [33] provide a scale to
rate generated captions, the granularity employed by these approaches are restricted to a simple
binary scale (i.e., a caption is either good or bad). Indeed, the problem of image caption quality
estimation has received substantial attention in recent years, underscoring the increasing need for
reliable solutions [23, 31, 20, 32, 53].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

