Understanding, Predicting and Better Resolving
Q-Value Divergence in Offline-RL

1

Yang Yue∗ 1 Rui Lu∗ 1 Bingyi Kang∗ 2 Shiji Song1 Gao Huang† 1
2
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
ByteDance Inc.
{le-y22, r-lu21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
bingykang@gmail.com {shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The divergence of the Q-value estimation has been a prominent issue in offline
reinforcement learning (offline RL), where the agent has no access to real dynamics.
Traditional beliefs attribute this instability to querying out-of-distribution actions
when bootstrapping value targets. Though this issue can be alleviated with policy constraints or conservative Q estimation, a theoretical understanding of the
underlying mechanism causing the divergence has been absent. In this work, we
aim to thoroughly comprehend this mechanism and attain an improved solution.
We first identify a fundamental pattern, self-excitation, as the primary cause of
Q-value estimation divergence in offline RL. Then, we propose a novel Self-Excite
Eigenvalue Measure (SEEM) metric based on Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) to
measure the evolving property of Q-network at training, which provides an intriguing explanation on the emergence of divergence. For the first time, our theory
can reliably decide whether the training will diverge at an early stage, and even
predict the order of the growth for the estimated Q-value, the model’s norm, and
the crashing step when an SGD optimizer is used. The experiments demonstrate
perfect alignment with this theoretic analysis. Building on our insights, we propose
to resolve divergence from a novel perspective, namely regularizing the neural network’s generalization behavior. Through extensive empirical studies, we identify
LayerNorm as a good solution to effectively avoid divergence without introducing
detrimental bias, leading to superior performance. Experimental results prove that
it can still work in some most challenging settings, i.e. using only 1% transitions
of the dataset, where all previous methods fail. Moreover, it can be easily plugged
into modern offline RL methods and achieve SOTA results on many challenging
tasks. We also give unique insights into its effectiveness. Code can be found at
https://offrl-seem.github.io.

1

Introduction

Off-policy Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms are particularly compelling for robot control [39;
13; 17] due to their high sample efficiency and strong performance. However, these methods often
suffer divergence of value estimation, especially when value over-estimation becomes unmanageable.
Though various solutions (e.g., double q-network [19]) are proposed to alleviate this issue in the online
RL setting, this issue becomes more pronounced in offline RL, where the agent can only learn from
offline datasets with online interactions prohibited [32]. As a result, directly employing off-policy
algorithms in offline settings confronts substantial issues related to value divergence [14; 30].
This raises a natural yet crucial question: why is value estimation in offline RL prone to divergence,
and how can we effectively address this issue? Conventionally, deadly triad [46; 4; 47; 48] is
∗

Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

