How many samples are needed to leverage smoothness?

Vivien Cabannes
Meta AI

Stefano Vigogna
University of Rome Tor Vergata

Abstract
A core principle in statistical learning is that smoothness of target functions allows
to break the curse of dimensionality. However, learning a smooth function seems
to require enough samples close to one another to get meaningful estimate of
high-order derivatives, which would be hard in machine learning problems where
the ratio between number of data and input dimension is relatively small. By
deriving new lower bounds on the generalization error, this paper formalizes such
an intuition, before investigating the role of constants and transitory regimes which
are usually not depicted beyond classical learning theory statements while they
play a dominant role in practice.

1

Introduction

The current practice of machine learning consists in feeding a machine with many samples for it to
infer a useful rule. In supervised learning, the samples are input/output (I/O) pairs, and the rule is a
relationship to predict outputs from inputs. Once learned, the I/O mapping can be deployed in the wild
to infer useful information from new inputs. Because it was not engineered by hand, one can question
the existence of unwanted behaviors. Classical guarantees regarding the mapping’s correctness are
offered by statistics: assuming that the training samples are independent and identically distributed
according to the future use cases, it is possible to derive theorems akin to the central limit theorem.
While many statistical learning principles offer practical insights, theoretical results often appear
somewhat obscure, and forming intuition about them is often challenging, which limits their impact.
In this paper, we focus on one simple principle: “smoothness allows us to break the curse of
dimensionality”. The curse of dimensionality is a generic term referring to a set of high-dimensional
phenomena with significant practical consequences. In supervised learning, it manifests as follows:
without a good prior on the I/O mapping to be learned, one can only get good estimates of the
mapping close to the observed examples; as a consequence, to obtain a good global estimate, one
needs to collect enough data points to finely cover the input space, which implies that the number of
data points should scale exponentially with the dimension of the input space. Yet, when provided
with the information that the mapping has some structure, one might need significantly less examples
to learn from. This is notably the case when the mapping is assumed to be smooth. The goal of this
paper is to better understand how and when we can expect to get much better convergence guarantees
when the target function is known to be smooth.
Related work. Nonparametric local estimators were introduced as soon as the field of learning
began to form in the 50’s [11], and their consistency was studied extensively in the second half of the
twentieth century (see Stone [29], Devroye et al. [8] and references therein). Introduced for scatter
plots [7], local polynomials were the first estimators to leverage smoothness to improve regression
[12]. They were later replaced by kernel methods, which are a powerful way to adapt to smoothness
without much fine-tuning, and were widely regarded as state-of-the-art before the deep learning era
[25]. Convergence results for kernel methods can be understood through the size of their associated
functional spaces [13, 32], how those sizes relate to generalization guarantees [31], and how those
spaces adhere to L2 [22, 26]. For least-squares regression, relations between the size of those spaces
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

