On Measuring Fairness in Generative Models

Christopher T. H. Teo
christopher_teo@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Milad Abdollahzadeh
milad_abdollahzadeh@sutd.sg

Ngai-Man Cheung∗
ngaiman_cheung@sutd.edu.sg
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)

Abstract
Recently, there has been increased interest in fair generative models. In this work,
we conduct, for the first time, an in-depth study on fairness measurement, a
critical component in gauging progress on fair generative models. We make three
contributions. First, we conduct a study that reveals that the existing fairness
measurement framework has considerable measurement errors, even when highly
accurate sensitive attribute (SA) classifiers are used. These findings cast doubts
on previously reported fairness improvements. Second, to address this issue,
we propose CLassifier Error-Aware Measurement (CLEAM), a new framework
which uses a statistical model to account for inaccuracies in SA classifiers. Our
proposed CLEAM reduces measurement errors significantly, e.g., 4.98%→0.62%
for StyleGAN2 w.r.t. Gender. Additionally, CLEAM achieves this with minimal
additional overhead. Third, we utilize CLEAM to measure fairness in important
text-to-image generator and GANs, revealing considerable biases in these models
that raise concerns about their applications. Code and more resources: https:
//sutd-visual-computing-group.github.io/CLEAM/.

1

Introduction

Fair generative models have been attracting significant attention recently [1, 2, 7–13]. In generative
models [14–18], fairness is commonly defined as equal generative quality [11] or equal representation
[1, 2, 7, 9, 12, 19, 20] w.r.t. some Sensitive Attributes (SA). In this work, we focus on the more widely
utilized definition – equal representation. In this definition, as an example, a generative model is
regarded as fair w.r.t. Gender, if it generates Male and Female samples with equal probability. This
is an important research topic as such biases in generative models could impact their application
efficacy, e.g., by introducing racial bias in face generation of suspects [21] or reducing accuracy when
supplementing data for disease diagnosis [22].
Fairness measurement for generative models. Recognizing the importance of fair generative
models, several methods have been proposed to mitigate biases in generative models [1, 2, 7, 9, 12].
However, in our work, we focus mainly on the accurate fairness measurement of deep generative
models i.e. assessing and quantifying the bias of generative models. This is a critical topic, as accurate
measurements are essential to reliably gauge the progress of bias mitigation techniques. The general
fairness measurement framework is shown in Fig. 1 (See Sec. 2 for details). This framework is
utilized in existing works to assess their proposed fair generators. Central to the fairness measurement
framework is a SA classifier, which classifies the generated samples w.r.t. a SA, in order to estimate
the bias of the generator. For example, if eight out of ten generated face images are classified as Male
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

