ContiFormer: Continuous-Time Transformer for
Irregular Time Series Modeling

1

Yuqi Chen1,2∗, Kan Ren2†, Yansen Wang2 , Yuchen Fang2,3 , Weiwei Sun1 , Dongsheng Li2
School of Computer Science & Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, Fudan University
2
Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Modeling continuous-time dynamics on irregular time series is critical to account
for data evolution and correlations that occur continuously. Traditional methods
including recurrent neural networks or Transformer models leverage inductive bias
via powerful neural architectures to capture complex patterns. However, due to their
discrete characteristic, they have limitations in generalizing to continuous-time
data paradigms. Though neural ordinary differential equations (Neural ODEs) and
their variants have shown promising results in dealing with irregular time series,
they often fail to capture the intricate correlations within these sequences. It is
challenging yet demanding to concurrently model the relationship between input
data points and capture the dynamic changes of the continuous-time system. To
tackle this problem, we propose ContiFormer that extends the relation modeling of
vanilla Transformer to the continuous-time domain, which explicitly incorporates
the modeling abilities of continuous dynamics of Neural ODEs with the attention
mechanism of Transformers. We mathematically characterize the expressive power
of ContiFormer and illustrate that, by curated designs of function hypothesis, many
Transformer variants specialized in irregular time series modeling can be covered as
a special case of ContiFormer. A wide range of experiments on both synthetic and
real-world datasets have illustrated the superior modeling capacities and prediction
performance of ContiFormer on irregular time series data. The project link is
https://seqml.github.io/contiformer/.

1

Introduction

Irregular time series are prevalent in real-world applications like disease prevention, financial decisionmaking, and earthquake prediction [4, 27, 64]. Their distinctive properties set them apart from regular
time series data. First, irregular time series data are characterized by irregularly generated or
non-uniformly sampled observations with variable time intervals, as well as missing data due to
technical issues, or data quality problems, which pose challenges for traditional time series analysis
techniques [6, 55]. Second, even though the observations are irregularly sampled, the underlying
data-generating process is assumed to be continuous [30, 42, 43]. Third, the relationships among the
observations can be intricate and continuously evolving. All these characteristics require elaborate
modeling approaches for better understanding these data and making accurate predictions.
The continuity and intricate dependency of these data samples pose significant challenges for model
design. Simply dividing the timeline into equally sized intervals can severely damage the continuity
of the data [36]. Recent works have suggested that underlying continuous-time process is appreciated
for irregular time series modeling [6, 30, 39, 43], which requires the modeling procedure to capture
∗
†

The work was conducted during the internship of Yuqi Chen and Yuchen Fang at Microsoft Research.
Correspondence to Kan Ren, contact: rk.ren@outlook.com.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

