ATTA: Anomaly-aware Test-Time Adaptation for
Out-of-Distribution Detection in Segmentation

Zhitong Gao1 , Shipeng Yan1 , Xuming He1,2
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{gaozht,yanshp,hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Recent advancements in dense out-of-distribution (OOD) detection have primarily
focused on scenarios where the training and testing datasets share a similar domain,
with the assumption that no domain shift exists between them. However, in realworld situations, domain shift often exits and significantly affects the accuracy of
existing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection models. In this work, we propose a
dual-level OOD detection framework to handle domain shift and semantic shift
jointly. The first level distinguishes whether domain shift exists in the image by
leveraging global low-level features, while the second level identifies pixels with
semantic shift by utilizing dense high-level feature maps. In this way, we can
selectively adapt the model to unseen domains as well as enhance model’s capacity
in detecting novel classes. We validate the efficacy of our method on several OOD
segmentation benchmarks, including those with significant domain shifts and those
without, observing consistent performance improvements across various baseline
models. Code is available at https://github.com/gaozhitong/ATTA.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation, a fundamental computer vision task, has witnessed remarkable progress
thanks to the expressive representations learned by deep neural networks [33]. Despite the advances,
most deep models are trained under a close-world assumption, and hence do not possess knowledge
of what they do not know, leading to over-confident and inaccurate predictions for the unknown
objects [18]. To address this, the task of dense out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [1, 15], which
aims to generate pixel-wise identification of the unknown objects, has attracted much attention as it
plays a vital role in a variety of safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving.
Recent efforts in dense OOD detection have primarily focused on the scenarios where training
and testing data share a similar domain, assuming no domain shift (or covariant shift) between
them [50, 3, 1, 15, 38]. However, domain shift widely exists in real-world situations [39] and can
also be observed in common dense OOD detection benchmarks [29]. In view of this, we investigate
the performance of existing dense OOD detection methods under the test setting with domain-shift
and observe significant performance degradation in comparison with the setting without domain-shift
(cf. Figure 1). In particular, the state-of-the-art detection models typically fail to distinguish the
distribution shift in domain and the distribution shift in semantics, and thus tend to predict high
uncertainty scores for inlier-class pixels.
A promising strategy to tackle such domain shift is to adapt a model during test (known as test-time
adaptation (TTA) [46]), which utilizes unlabeled test data to finetune the model without requiring
prior information of test domain. However, applying the existing test-time domain adaption (TTA)
techniques [46, 7, 31, 47] to the task of general dense OOD detection faces two critical challenges.
First, traditional TTA methods often assume the scenarios where all test data are under domain shift
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

