PAD: A Dataset and Benchmark for Pose-agnostic
Anomaly Detection

Qiang Zhou1∗ Weize Li1∗† Lihan Jiang2 † Guoliang Wang1†
Guyue Zhou1 Shanghang Zhang3 Hao Zhao1
1
AIR, Tsinghua University 2 Wuhan University 3 National Key Laboratory for Multimedia
Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{bamboosdu, liweize0224}@gmail.com shanghang@pku.edu.cn
zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Object anomaly detection is an important problem in the field of machine vision
and has seen remarkable progress recently. However, two significant challenges
hinder its research and application. First, existing datasets lack comprehensive
visual information from various pose angles. They usually have an unrealistic
assumption that the anomaly-free training dataset is pose-aligned, and the testing
samples have the same pose as the training data. However, in practice, anomaly
may exist in any regions on a object, the training and query samples may have
different poses, calling for the study on pose-agnostic anomaly detection. Second,
the absence of a consensus on experimental protocols for pose-agnostic anomaly detection leads to unfair comparisons of different methods, hindering the research on
pose-agnostic anomaly detection. To address these issues, we develop Multi-pose
Anomaly Detection (MAD) dataset and Pose-agnostic Anomaly Detection (PAD)
benchmark, which takes the first step to address the pose-agnostic anomaly detection problem. Specifically, we build MAD using 20 complex-shaped LEGO toys
including 4K views with various poses, and high-quality and diverse 3D anomalies
in both simulated and real environments. Additionally, we propose a novel method
OmniposeAD, trained using MAD, specifically designed for pose-agnostic anomaly
detection. Through comprehensive evaluations, we demonstrate the relevance of
our dataset and method. Furthermore, we provide an open-source benchmark
library, including dataset and baseline methods that cover 8 anomaly detection
paradigms, to facilitate future research and application in this domain. Code, data,
and models are publicly available at https://github.com/EricLee0224/PAD.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised visual anomaly detection attempts to detect shape or texture anomalies using normal
samples and representations from pre-trained model. Due to the increasing demand for quality
control of manufactured products and the complicated shape of object and its texture information,
object-centric anomaly detection has attracted growing interest. However, existing object anomaly
detection datasets and methods are designed under the pose-aligned assumption, which limits the
ability to detect potentially occluded anomalies from arbitrary pose views. By overcoming
the inherent constraints of pose-aligned anomaly detection approaches, the pose-agnostic anomaly
detection setting offers enhanced flexibility and applicability in real-world scenarios where a object
may exhibit anomalies from diverse perspectives.
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during internship at AIR.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

