Provable Advantage of Curriculum Learning on Parity
Targets with Mixed Inputs

Emmanuel Abbe
EPFL
emmanuel.abbe@epfl.ch

Elisabetta Cornacchia
EPFL, MIT
ecornacc@mit.edu

Aryo Lotfi
EPFL
aryo.lotfi@epfl.ch

Abstract
Experimental results have shown that curriculum learning, i.e., presenting simpler
examples before more complex ones, can improve the efficiency of learning. Some
recent theoretical results also showed that changing the sampling distribution can
help neural networks learn parities, with formal results only for large learning rates
and one-step arguments. Here we show a separation result in the number of training
steps with standard (bounded) learning rates on a common sample distribution: if
the data distribution is a mixture of sparse and dense inputs, there exists a regime in
which a 2-layer ReLU neural network trained by a curriculum noisy-GD (or SGD)
algorithm that uses sparse examples first, can learn parities of sufficiently large
degree, while any fully connected neural network of possibly larger width or depth
trained by noisy-GD on the unordered samples cannot learn without additional
steps. We also provide experimental results supporting the qualitative separation
beyond the specific regime of the theoretical results.

1

Introduction

Starting with easy concepts is an effective way to facilitate learning for humans. When presented
with simpler ideas or tasks, individuals can develop a foundation of knowledge and skills upon which
more complex concepts can be built. This approach allows learners to gradually gain competence and
accelerate learning [EA84, RK90, AKB+ 97, SGG14].
For machine learning algorithms, this is typically referred to as Curriculum Learning (CL) [BLCW09].
Several empirical studies have shown that presenting samples in a meaningful order can improve
both the speed of training and the performance achieved at convergence, compared to the standard
approach of presenting samples in random order [WCZ21, SIRS22, GBM+ 17, HW19, PSL15].
The theoretical study of CL is mostly in its infancy. While some works have analytically shown
benefits of CL for certain targets [SMS22, WCA18, MKAS21, CM23] (see Section 1.1 for a discussion on these), it remained open to provide a separation result between curriculum training and
standard training on a common sampling distribution. Specifically, one seeks to demonstrate how a
standard neural network, trained using a gradient descent algorithm on a given dataset and horizon,
can successfully learn the target when certain samples are presented first during training, whereas
learning does not occur if samples are presented in a random order.
This paper provides such an instance. We focus on the case of parities, as a classical case of
challenging target for differentiable learning. In the experimental part of the paper, we report results
suggesting that a similar picture can hold for other large leap functions as defined in [ABAM23],
although more investigations are required to understand when and how curriculum learning should be
developed for more general functions.
d
We
Q assume that the network is presented with samples (x, χS (x)), with x ∈ {±1} and χS (x) :=
x
,
for
some
set
S
⊆
{1,
.
.
.
,
d}
of
fixed
size.
We
consider
datasets
where
a
small
fraction ρ of
i∈S i

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

