Statistical Analysis of Quantum State Learning
Process in Quantum Neural Networks

1

Hao-kai Zhang1,3 , Chenghong Zhu2,3 , Mingrui Jing2,3 , Xin Wang2,3∗
Institute for Advanced Study, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2
Thrust of Artificial Intelligence, Information Hub,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), China
3
Institute for Quantum Computing, Baidu Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
Quantum neural networks (QNNs) have been a promising framework in pursuing
near-term quantum advantage in various fields, where many applications can be
viewed as learning a quantum state that encodes useful data. As a quantum analog
of probability distribution learning, quantum state learning is theoretically and
practically essential in quantum machine learning. In this paper, we develop a
no-go theorem for learning an unknown quantum state with QNNs even starting
from a high-fidelity initial state. We prove that when the loss value is lower than a
critical threshold, the probability of avoiding local minima vanishes exponentially
with the qubit count, while only grows polynomially with the circuit depth. The
curvature of local minima is concentrated to the quantum Fisher information times
a loss-dependent constant, which characterizes the sensibility of the output state
with respect to parameters in QNNs. These results hold for any circuit structures,
initialization strategies, and work for both fixed ansatzes and adaptive methods.
Extensive numerical simulations are performed to validate our theoretical results.
Our findings place generic limits on good initial guesses and adaptive methods for
improving the learnability and scalability of QNNs, and deepen the understanding
of prior information’s role in QNNs.

1

Introduction

Recent experimental progress towards realizing quantum information processors [1–3] has fostered
the thriving development of the emerging field of quantum machine learning (QML) [4–18], pursuing
quantum advantages in artificial intelligence. Different QML algorithms have been proposed for
various topics, e.g., quantum simulations [19–23], chemistry [24–28], quantum data compression [29,
30], generative learning [31, 32] and reinforcement learning [33], where quantum neural networks
(QNNs) become a leading framework due to the hardware restriction from noisy intermediate scale
quantum (NISQ) [34] devices. As quantum analogs of artificial neural networks, QNNs typically
refer to parameterized quantum circuits which are trainable based on quantum measurement results.
However, QNNs face a severe scalability barrier which might prevent the realization of potential
quantum advantages. A notorious example is the barren plateau phenomenon [35] which shows that
the gradient of the loss function vanishes exponentially in the system size with a high probability
for randomly initialized deep QNNs, giving rise to an exponential training cost. To address this
issue, a variety of training strategies has been proposed, such as local loss functions [36], correlated
parameters [37], structured architectures [38–40], good initial guesses [41, 42], initialization heuristics
near the identity [43–46], adaptive methods [27] and layerwise training [47], etc. Nevertheless, there
∗

felixxinwang@hkust-gz.edu.cn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

