Quantizable Transformers: Removing Outliers by
Helping Attention Heads Do Nothing

Yelysei Bondarenko, Markus Nagel, Tijmen Blankevoort
Qualcomm AI Research∗
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{ybond, markusn, tijmen}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Transformer models have been widely adopted in various domains over the last
years, and especially large language models have advanced the field of AI significantly. Due to their size, the capability of these networks has increased tremendously, but this has come at the cost of a significant increase in necessary compute. Quantization is one of the most effective ways to reduce the computational
time and memory consumption of neural networks. Many studies have shown,
however, that modern transformer models tend to learn strong outliers in their
activations, making them difficult to quantize. To retain acceptable performance,
the existence of these outliers requires activations to be in higher bitwidth or the
use of different numeric formats, extra fine-tuning, or other workarounds. We
show that strong outliers are related to very specific behavior of attention heads
that try to learn a “no-op” or just a partial update of the residual. To achieve
the exact zeros needed in the attention matrix for a no-update, the input to the
softmax is pushed to be larger and larger during training, causing outliers in
other parts of the network. Based on these observations, we propose two simple (independent) modifications to the attention mechanism - clipped softmax
and gated attention. We empirically show that models pre-trained using our
methods learn significantly smaller outliers while maintaining and sometimes
even improving the floating-point task performance. This enables us to quantize
transformers to full INT8 quantization of the activations without any additional
effort. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods on both language models
(BERT, OPT) and vision transformers. Our source code is available at https:
//github.com/qualcomm-ai-research/outlier-free-transformers.

1

Introduction

Quantization has been one of the most impactful ways to reduce the computational complexity of
transformer networks. Previous work has shown that quantizing networks to 4-bit weights is possible
without losing too much accuracy [66, 69]. Some research even shows 4-bit weights might be optimal
when trading off model size and bit-width [12].
However, quantizing transformers is not always trivial. When quantizing the activations of a transformer, significant problems arise with outliers in specific layers. This has been noted by several
researchers that suggest fixes to transformers after training to ameliorate their effect [13, 67]. These
methods are frequently tedious and either require retraining the network, require implementing
specific hardware for input-channel quantization [13] or require parts of the activations to still be in
higher bit-widths, reducing the effectiveness of the activation quantization [67].
In this paper, we set out to solve the transformer outlier problem entirely by changing the architecture
of the network itself. We hope to make transformers easy to quantize from the get-go without needing
∗

Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

