Stability of Random Forests and Coverage of
Random-Forest Prediction Intervals
Yan Wang
Department of Mathematics
Wayne State University
Detroit, MI 48202
wangyan@wayne.edu

Huaiqing Wu, Dan Nettleton
Department of Statistics
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011
{isuhwu,dnett}@iastate.edu

Abstract
We establish stability of random forests under the mild condition that the squared
response (Y 2 ) does not have a heavy tail. In particular, our analysis holds for the
practical version of random forests that is implemented in popular packages like
randomForest in R. Empirical results show that stability may persist even beyond
our assumption and hold for heavy-tailed Y 2 . Using the stability property, we
prove a non-asymptotic lower bound for the coverage probability of prediction
intervals constructed from the out-of-bag error of random forests. With another
mild condition that is typically satisfied when Y is continuous, we also establish
a complementary upper bound, which can be similarly established for the jackknife prediction interval constructed from an arbitrary stable algorithm. We also
discuss the asymptotic coverage probability under assumptions weaker than those
considered in previous literature. Our work implies that random forests, with its
stability property, is an effective machine learning method that can provide not
only satisfactory point prediction but also justified interval prediction at almost no
extra computational cost.

1

Introduction

Random forests (RFs) is a successful machine learning method that serves as a standard approach
to tabular data analysis and has good predictive performance [10, 7]. However, there is a big
gap between the empirical effectiveness of RFs and the limited understanding of its properties.
Most known theoretical results are established for variants of RFs not necessarily used in practice
[5, 25, 22, 14, 30]. For the RF version implemented in packages like randomForest in R [21], little
is known without strong assumptions [6, 26, 35]; RFs is notoriously difficult to analyze as a greedy
algorithm. Here we show an important property for the RF used in practice (as well as for other
variants) under realistic conditions.
1.1

Stability of random forests

The first main contribution of this work establishes the stability condition for the RF.
Theorem 1 (Stability of random forests, informal). For independent and identically distributed (iid)
training data points pXi , Yi q, i P t1, . . . , nu ” rns and a test point pX, Y q, if the squared response
zi
Y 2 does not have a heavy tail, then the RF predictor RFB and any out-of-bag (OOB) predictor RFB
predict similar values, i.e.,
ˇ
´ˇ
¯
ˇ
ˇ
zi
P ˇRFB pXq ´ RFB pXqˇ ą εn,B ď νn,B ,
(1)
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

