Evolving Standardization for Continual Domain
Generalization over Temporal Drift

1

Mixue Xie1
Shuang Li1,∗ Longhui Yuan1
Chi Harold Liu1
Zehui Dai2
2
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
Lazada Search & Monetisation Tech, China
{mxxie,shuangli,longhuiyuan}@bit.edu.cn, liuchi02@gmail.com
zehui.dzh@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The capability of generalizing to out-of-distribution data is crucial for the deployment of machine learning models in the real world. Existing domain generalization
(DG) mainly embarks on offline and discrete scenarios, where multiple source
domains are simultaneously accessible and the distribution shift among domains is
abrupt and violent. Nevertheless, such setting may not be universally applicable to
all real-world applications, as there are cases where the data distribution gradually
changes over time due to various factors, e.g., the process of aging. Additionally, as
the domain constantly evolves, new domains will continually emerge. Re-training
and updating models with both new and previous domains using existing DG methods can be resource-intensive and inefficient. Therefore, in this paper, we present a
problem formulation for Continual Domain Generalization over Temporal Drift
(CDGTD). CDGTD addresses the challenge of gradually shifting data distributions
over time, where domains arrive sequentially and models can only access the
data of the current domain. The goal is to generalize to unseen domains that are
not too far into the future. To this end, we propose an Evolving Standardization
(EvoS) method, which characterizes the evolving pattern of feature distribution and
mitigates the distribution shift by standardizing features with generated statistics
of corresponding domain. Specifically, inspired by the powerful ability of transformers to model sequence relations, we design a multi-scale attention module
(MSAM) to learn the evolving pattern under sliding time windows of different
lengths. MSAM can generate statistics of current domain based on the statistics
of previous domains and the learned evolving pattern. Experiments on multiple
real-world datasets including images and texts validate the efficacy of our EvoS.

1

Introduction

In real-world applications, the assumption that training and testing data conform to the same distribution, a prerequisite for the success of contemporary deep learning methods, is seldom valid. A prime
example of this can be found in autonomous driving, where a vehicle may traverse environments
that switch from daylight to nightfall or from urban to rural. As environmental conditions change,
the issue of distribution shift [5, 4, 51, 62] arises. Moreover, directly utilizing a model trained on
in-distribution (ID) data in an out-of-distribution (OOD) context often results in catastrophic performance deterioration. Consequently, ensuring that models perform well on OOD data has emerged as
a crucial challenge for the widespread deployment of machine learning models in the real world.
To cope with the distribution shift, two dominant paradigms have been systematically explored
depending on the availability of target (test) domain. One is domain adaptation (DA), which aims to
assist the model learning on an unlabeled or label-scarce target domain by transferring the knowledge
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

