Diffusion with Forward Models: Solving Stochastic
Inverse Problems Without Direct Supervision
∗

∗

Ayush Tewari1
Tianwei Yin1
George Cazenavette1
Semon Rezchikov4
1,2,3
1
1
Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Frédo Durand
William T. Freeman
Vincent Sitzmann1
1

MIT CSAIL

2

MIT BCS

3

MIT CBMM

4

Princeton IAS

Abstract
Denoising diffusion models have emerged as a powerful class of generative models
capable of capturing the distributions of complex, real-world signals. However,
current approaches can only model distributions for which training samples are
directly accessible, which is not the case in many real-world tasks. In inverse
graphics, for instance, we seek to sample from a distribution over 3D scenes
consistent with an image but do not have access to ground-truth 3D scenes, only
2D images. We present a new class of conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic
models that learn to sample from distributions of signals that are never observed
directly, but instead are only measured through a known differentiable forward
model that generates partial observations of the unknown signal. To accomplish
this, we directly integrate the forward model into the denoising process. At test
time, our approach enables us to sample from the distribution over underlying
signals consistent with some partial observation. We demonstrate the efficacy of
our approach on three challenging computer vision tasks. For instance, in inverse
graphics, we demonstrate that our model in combination with a 3D-structured
conditioning method enables us to directly sample from the distribution of 3D
scenes consistent with a single 2D input image.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of reconstructing a 3D scene from a single picture. Since much of the 3D scene
is unobserved, there are an infinite number of 3D scenes that could have produced the image, due to
the 3D-to-2D projection, occlusion, and limited field-of-view that leaves a large part of the 3D scene
unobserved. Given the ill-posedness of this problem, it is desirable for a reconstruction algorithm to
be able to sample from the distribution over all plausible 3D scenes that are consistent with the 2D
image, generating unseen parts in plausible manners. Previous data-completion methods, such as
in-painting in 2D images, are trained on large sets of ground-truth output images along with their
incomplete (input) counterparts. Such techniques do not easily extend to 3D scene completion, since
curating a large dataset of ground-truth 3D scene representations is very challenging.
This 3D scene completion problem, known as inverse graphics, is just one instance of a broad
class of problems often referred to as Stochastic Inverse Problems, which arise across scientific
disciplines whenever we capture partial observations of the world through a sensor. In this paper, we
introduce a diffusion-based framework that can tackle this problem class, enabling us to sample from
a distribution of signals that are consistent with a set of partial observations that are generated from
the signal by a non-invertible, generally nonlinear, forward model. For instance, in inverse graphics,
we learn to sample 3D scenes given an image, yet never observe paired observations of images and
3D scenes at training time, nor observe 3D scenes directly.
∗

Equal Contribution. Project page: diffusion-with-forward-models.github.io

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

