Time-uniform confidence bands for the CDF under
nonstationarity

Paul Mineiro
Microsoft Research
pmineiro@microsoft.com

Steve Howard
The Voleon Group
steve@stevehoward.org

Abstract
Estimation of a complete univariate distribution from a sequence of observations is
a useful primitive for both manual and automated decision making. This problem
has received extensive attention in the i.i.d. setting, but the arbitrary data dependent
setting remains largely unaddressed. We present computationally felicitous timeuniform and value-uniform bounds on the CDF of the running averaged conditional
distribution of a sequence of real-valued random variables. Consistent with known
impossibility results, our CDF bounds are always valid but sometimes trivial when
the instance is too hard, and we give an instance-dependent convergence guarantee.
The importance-weighted extension is appropriate for estimating complete counterfactual distributions of rewards given data from a randomized experiment, e.g.,
from an A/B test or a contextual bandit.

1

Introduction

What would have happened if I had acted differently? Although as old as time itself, successful
companies have recently embraced this question via offline estimation of counterfactual outcomes
using data from existing randomized experiments or contextual bandits. The problem is important in
diverse domains such as software testing [Lindon et al., 2022, Wang and Chapman, 2022], portfolio
management [Liu, 2021], and medicine [Shen et al., 2022]. These experiments are run in the real
(digital) world, which is rich enough to demand non-asymptotic statistical techniques under nonparametric and non-stationary (i.e., not i.i.d.) models. Although existing methods apply for estimating
average outcomes in this general setting (either under the observed distribution or counterfactual
ones), estimating a complete distribution of outcomes is heretofore only possible with additional
assumptions: see Table 1 for a summary and Section 5 for complete discussion of related work.
To fix ideas, we briefly describe an application from Lindon et al. [2022] in the context of canary
testing: rolling out changes in an online service to a small, random subset of users in order to detect
accidental performance regressions while minimizing effect on overall user experience. The metric
of interest measures latency for fetching content from the service. It is common to look beyond the
mean of the latency distribution and especially to check for regressions in upper quantiles. As such,
the authors choose to estimate bounds on the entire CDF of this latency metric under both the control
and treatment arms and check for a statistically significant differences at any point in the CDF. The
hope is to detect regressions as soon as possible, often within seconds or minutes, so the authors
employ a sequential method which allows an automated system to continuously update the CDF
bounds as data accumulates and to stop as soon as a significant regression is detected. Statistically,
this translates into the requirement of confidence bands for the CDF which are both uniform over time
(valid after every update) and uniform over values (so we can check for regressions at any quantile).
We seek such bounds whose statistical validity is guaranteed under a minimum of assumptions.
Intriguingly, this problem is provably impossible in the general data dependent setting [Rakhlin et al.,
2015]. Consequently, our bounds always achieve non-asymptotic coverage, but may converge to zero
width slowly or not at all, depending on the hardness of the instance. We call this design principle
AVAST (Always Valid And Sometimes Trivial).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

