Aggregating Capacity in FL through Successive Layer
Training for Computationally-Constrained Devices

Kilian Pfeiffer
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
kilian.pfeiffer@kit.edu

Ramin Khalili
Huawei Research Center Munich
Munich, Germany
ramin.khalili@huawei.com

Jörg Henkel
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
henkel@kit.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is usually performed on resource-constrained edge devices,
e.g., with limited memory for the computation. If the required memory to train
a model exceeds this limit, the device will be excluded from the training. This
can lead to a lower accuracy as valuable data and computation resources are
excluded from training, also causing bias and unfairness. The FL training process
should be adjusted to such constraints. The state-of-the-art techniques propose
training subsets of the FL model at constrained devices, reducing their resource
requirements for training. However, these techniques largely limit the co-adaptation
among parameters of the model and are highly inefficient, as we show: it is actually
better to train a smaller (less accurate) model by the system where all the devices
can train the model end-to-end than applying such techniques. We propose a new
method that enables successive freezing and training of the parameters of the FL
model at devices, reducing the training’s resource requirements at the devices
while still allowing enough co-adaptation between parameters. We show through
extensive experimental evaluation that our technique greatly improves the accuracy
of the trained model (by 52.4 p.p.) compared with the state of the art, efficiently
aggregating the computation capacity available on distributed devices.

1

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) has achieved impressive results in many domains and is proposed for several
use cases, such as healthcare, transportation, and robotics [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. As data in FL is not
processed centrally but usually on resource-constrained edge devices, training machine learning
(ML) models impose a large computational burden on these devices [7]. Additionally, FL requires
communication, specifically exchanging ML model parameters from the devices to a centralized
entity for aggregation. Extensive research has been done to lower the communication overhead
required for FL, e.g., on the use of quantization in the communication [8, 9] or sketched updates [10].
Similarly, techniques such as partial updates [11], asynchronous aggregation [12, 13], and tier-based
aggregation [14, 15] have been proposed to lower and account for varying computational throughput.
While constrained computation throughput and communication capabilities can slow down FL
convergence, high memory requirements for training that are imposed on devices can exclude devices
completely from the FL system. This is, for example, the case in Google GBoard [16], where
devices that do not have 2GB of memory for training are removed. Excluding devices from training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

