Learning Cuts via Enumeration Oracles

Daniel Thuerck
Quantagonia
Bad Homburg, Germany
daniel.thuerck@quantagonia.com

Boro Sofranac
Quantagonia
Bad Homburg, Germany
boro.sofranac@quantagonia.com

Marc E. Pfetsch
Department of Mathematics, TU Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
pfetsch@mathematik.tu-darmstadt.de

Sebastian Pokutta
Zuse Institute Berlin and TU Berlin
Berlin, Germnany
pokutta@zib.de

Abstract
Cutting-planes are one of the most important building blocks for solving largescale integer programming (IP) problems to (near) optimality. The majority of
cutting plane approaches rely on explicit rules to derive valid inequalities that can
separate the target point from the feasible set. Local cuts, on the other hand, seek
to directly derive the facets of the underlying polyhedron and use them as cutting
planes. However, current approaches rely on solving Linear Programming (LP)
problems in order to derive such a hyperplane. In this paper, we present a novel
generic approach for learning the facets of the underlying polyhedron by accessing
it implicitly via an enumeration oracle in a reduced dimension. This is achieved by
embedding the oracle in a variant of the Frank-Wolfe algorithm which is capable
of generating strong cutting planes, effectively turning the enumeration oracle into
a separation oracle. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach with a case
study targeting the multidimensional knapsack problem (MKP).

1

Introduction

In this paper, we deal with integer programs (IP)
max {⟨c, x⟩ : Ax ≤ b, x ∈ Zn },
m×n

m

n

(IP)

n

where A ∈ Q
, b ∈ Q , and c ∈ Q . Let P := {x ∈ R : Ax ≤ b} be the underlying
polyhedron and its integer hull PI := conv(P ∩ Zn ). We restrict attention to the case in which all
variables are required to be integral, as the methods we will propose are more readily applicable to
this case, but the general idea works for mixed-integer programs (MIP) as well.
Solving IPs is N P-hard in general, however, surprisingly fast algorithms exist in practice [1, 50].
The most successful approach to solving IPs is based on the branch-and-bound algorithm and its
extensions. This algorithm involves breaking down the original problem into smaller subproblems that
are easier to solve through a process known as branching. By repeatedly branching on subproblems,
a search tree is obtained. The bounding step involves computing upper bounds for subproblems and
pruning suboptimal nodes of the tree in order to avoid enumerating exponentially many subproblems.
Upper bounds are generally computed with the help of Linear Programming (LP) relaxations
max {⟨c, x⟩ : x ∈ P }.

(LP)

Because the integrality constraints are relaxed, optimal solutions of (LP) provide an upper bound for
the original problem (IP).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

