Fast Optimal Transport through Sliced Wasserstein
Generalized Geodesics
Guillaume Mahey
INSA Rouen Normandie - Université Bretagne Sud
LITIS - IRISA
guillaume.mahey@insa-rouen.fr
Laetitia Chapel
Université Bretagne Sud - Institut Agro Rennes-Angers
IRISA
laetitia.chapel@irisa.fr
Clément Bonet
Université Bretagne Sud
LMBA
clement.bonet@univ-ubs.fr

Gilles Gasso
INSA Rouen Normandie
LITIS
gilles.gasso@insa-rouen.fr

Nicolas Courty
Université Bretagne Sud
IRISA
nicolas.courty@univ-ubs.fr

Abstract
Wasserstein distance (WD) and the associated optimal transport plan have proven
useful in many applications where probability measures are at stake. In this paper,
we propose a new proxy for the squared WD, coined min-SWGG, which relies on
the transport map induced by an optimal one-dimensional projection of the two
input distributions. We draw connections between min-SWGG and Wasserstein
generalized geodesics with a pivot measure supported on a line. We notably
provide a new closed form of the Wasserstein distance in the particular case
where one of the distributions is supported on a line, allowing us to derive a fast
computational scheme that is amenable to gradient descent optimization. We show
that min-SWGG is an upper bound of WD and that it has a complexity similar to
that of Sliced-Wasserstein, with the additional feature of providing an associated
transport plan. We also investigate some theoretical properties such as metricity,
weak convergence, computational and topological properties. Empirical evidences
support the benefits of min-SWGG in various contexts, from gradient flows, shape
matching and image colorization, among others.

1

Introduction

Gaspard Monge, in his seminal work on Optimal Transport (OT) [42], studied the following problem:
how to move with minimum cost the probability mass of a source measure to a target one, for a given
transfer cost function? At the heart of OT is the optimal map that describes the optimal displacement
as the Monge problem can be reformulated as an assignment problem. It has been relaxed by [33]
by finding a plan that describes the amount of mass moving from the source to the target. Beyond
this optimal plan, an interest of OT is that it defines a distance between probability measures: the
Wasserstein distance (WD).
Recently, OT has been successfully employed in a wide range of machine learning applications, in
which the Wasserstein distance is estimated from the data, such as supervised learning [30], natural
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

