The Rank-Reduced Kalman Filter: Approximate
Dynamical-Low-Rank Filtering In High Dimensions

Jonathan Schmidt
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
jonathan.schmidt@uni-tuebingen.de
Jörg Nick
University of Tübingen
nick@na.uni-tuebingen.de

Philipp Hennig
Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen
philipp.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de
Filip Tronarp
Lund University
filip.tronarp@matstat.lu.se

Abstract
Inference and simulation in the context of high-dimensional dynamical systems
remain computationally challenging problems. Some form of dimensionality reduction is required to make the problem tractable in general. In this paper, we
propose a novel approximate Gaussian filtering and smoothing method which propagates low-rank approximations of the covariance matrices. This is accomplished
by projecting the Lyapunov equations associated with the prediction step to a
manifold of low-rank matrices, which are then solved by a recently developed,
numerically stable, dynamical low-rank integrator. Meanwhile, the update steps
are made tractable by noting that the covariance update only transforms the column
space of the covariance matrix, which is low-rank by construction. The algorithm
differentiates itself from existing ensemble-based approaches in that the low-rank
approximations of the covariance matrices are deterministic, rather than stochastic.
Crucially, this enables the method to reproduce the exact Kalman filter as the lowrank dimension approaches the true dimensionality of the problem. Our method
reduces computational complexity from cubic (for the Kalman filter) to quadratic
in the state-space size in the worst-case, and can achieve linear complexity if the
state-space model satisfies certain criteria. Through a set of experiments in classical data-assimilation and spatio-temporal regression, we show that the proposed
method consistently outperforms the ensemble-based methods in terms of error in
the mean and covariance with respect to the exact Kalman filter. This comes at no
additional cost in terms of asymptotic computational complexity.

1

Introduction

Spatio-temporal dynamical systems have always played an important role in the applied sciences,
such as climate science, numerical weather prediction, or geophysics. In precisely these settings, one
is often faced with massive amounts of data to be processed. At the same time the interactions are
of such complex nature that it is imperative to include a notion of uncertainty in the model and in
its outputs. Both these requirements have a reputation as being computationally expensive. Hence,
sensible approximations are indispensable at a certain scale.
Concretely, we consider state-space models of the form
dx(t) = Ax(t) dt + B dw(t),
y(tl ) | x(tl ) ∼ N (Cx(tl ), R), l = 1, . . . , N
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

(1a)
(1b)

