Test-time Training for Matching-based
Video Object Segmentation

Juliette Bertrand∗1,2
1

Giorgos Kordopatis-Zilos∗1

Yannis Kalantidis2

VRG, FEE, Czech Technical University in Prague

2

Giorgos Tolias1

NAVER LABS Europe

Sim-to-real transfer

Corrupted test examples

Frames and ground-truth masks

Frames and ground-truth masks

STCN

STCN

STCN + tt-MCC (ours)

STCN + tt-MCC (ours)

Figure 1: Test-time training significantly improves performance in the presence of distribution shifts
for the task of video object segmentation (VOS). Left: Example using a model trained on synthetic
videos from BL-30K [8] and tested on a real video from DAVIS [38]. Right: Example using a model
trained on DAVIS [38] and YouTube-VOS [51] and tested on a cartoonized video from the corrupted
DAVIS-C benchmark which we introduce in this work. Second-to-bottom row: Results obtained
using the STCN [9] approach. Bottom row: Results after test-time training with the proposed mask
cycle consistency loss (tt-MCC) using the single ground-truth mask provided for the first video frame.

Abstract
The video object segmentation (VOS) task involves the segmentation of an object
over time based on a single initial mask. Current state-of-the-art approaches
use a memory of previously processed frames and rely on matching to estimate
segmentation masks of subsequent frames. Lacking any adaptation mechanism,
such methods are prone to test-time distribution shifts. This work focuses on
matching-based VOS under distribution shifts such as video corruptions, stylization,
and sim-to-real transfer. We explore test-time training strategies that are agnostic
to the specific task as well as strategies that are designed specifically for VOS. This
includes a variant based on mask cycle consistency tailored to matching-based
VOS methods. The experimental results on common benchmarks demonstrate that
the proposed test-time training yields significant improvements in performance. In
particular for the sim-to-real scenario and despite using only a single test video,
our approach manages to recover a substantial portion of the performance gain
achieved through training on real videos. Additionally, we introduce DAVIS-C, an
augmented version of the popular DAVIS test set, featuring extreme distribution
shifts like image-/video-level corruptions and stylizations. Our results illustrate that
test-time training enhances performance even in these challenging cases. Project
page: https://jbertrand89.github.io/test-time-training-vos/
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
∗

Equal contribution

