Experiment Planning with Function Approximation
Aldo Pacchiano
Broad Institute & Boston University
apacchia@broadinstitute.org

Jonathan N. Lee

Stanford University
jnl@stanford.edu

Emma Brunskill

Stanford University
ebrun@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of experiment planning with function approximation in
contextual bandit problems. In settings where there is a significant overhead
to deploying adaptive algorithms—for example, when the execution of the data
collection policies is required to be distributed, or a human in the loop is needed
to implement these policies—producing in advance a set of policies for data
collection is paramount. We study the setting where a large dataset of contexts
but not rewards is available and may be used by the learner to design an effective
data collection strategy. Although when rewards are linear this problem has been
well studied [53], results are still missing for more complex reward models. In
this work we propose two experiment planning strategies compatible with function
approximation. The first is an eluder planning and sampling procedure that can
recover optimality guarantees depending on the eluder dimension [42] of the
reward function class. For the second, we show that a uniform sampler achieves
competitive optimality rates in the setting where the number of actions is small.
We finalize our results introducing a statistical gap fleshing out the fundamental
differences between planning and adaptive learning and provide results for planning
with model selection.

1

Introduction

Data-driven decision-making algorithms have achieved impressive empirical success in various
domains such as online personalization [4, 48], games [36, 43], dialogue systems [32] and robotics [25,
35]. In many of these decision-making scenarios, it is often advantageous to consider contextual
information when making decisions. This recognition has sparked a growing interest in studying
adaptive learning algorithms in the setting of contextual bandits [26, 33, 6] and reinforcement learning
(RL) [46]. Adaptive learning scenarios involve the deployment of data collection policies, where
learners observe rewards or environment information and utilize this knowledge to shape subsequent
data collection strategies. Nonetheless, the practical implementation of adaptive policies in realworld experiments currently presents significant challenges. First, there is significant infrastructure
requirements and associated overheads which require skills and resources many organizations lack.
For example, while there are end-user services that enable organizations to automatically send
different text messages to different individuals, such services typically do not offer adaptive bandit
algorithms. Second, the resulting reward signal may be significantly delayed. As an example, the
effect of personalized health screening reminders on a patient making a doctors appointments may
take weeks. Therefore, while it is increasingly recognized that there exist other settings where contextspecific policies are likely to be beneficial, including behavioural science[8], many organizations
working in these settings may find it infeasible to run experiments with adaptive policies. To bridge
this gap, there is a need to explore the deployment of non-adaptive or static strategies that can
effectively collect data with minimal or no updates. Surprisingly, limited research has been conducted
to investigate this particular setting, highlighting the importance of further exploration in this area.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

