Benchmarking Encoder-Decoder Architectures for
Biplanar X-ray to 3D Shape Reconstruction

Mahesh Shakya
Bishesh Khanal
Nepal Applied Mathematics and Informatics Institute for research (NAAMII)
{mahesh.shakya,bishesh.khanal}@naamii.org.np

Abstract
Various deep learning models have been proposed for 3D bone shape reconstruction
from two orthogonal (biplanar) X-ray images. However, it is unclear how these
models compare against each other since they are evaluated on different anatomy,
cohort and (often privately held) datasets. Moreover, the impact of the commonly
optimized image-based segmentation metrics such as dice score on the estimation
of clinical parameters relevant in 2D-3D bone shape reconstruction is not well
known. To move closer toward clinical translation, we propose a benchmarking
framework that evaluates tasks relevant to real-world clinical scenarios, including
reconstruction of fractured bones, bones with implants, robustness to population
shift, and error in estimating clinical parameters. Our open-source platform provides reference implementations of 8 models (many of whose implementations
were not publicly available), APIs to easily collect and preprocess 6 public datasets,
and the implementation of automatic clinical parameter and landmark extraction
methods. We present an extensive evaluation of 8 2D-3D models on equal footing
using 6 public datasets comprising images for four different anatomies. Our results
show that attention-based methods that capture global spatial relationships tend
to perform better across all anatomies and datasets; performance on clinically
relevant subgroups may be overestimated without disaggregated reporting; ribs are
substantially more difficult to reconstruct compared to femur, hip and spine; and the
dice score improvement does not always bring a corresponding improvement in the
automatic estimation of clinically relevant parameters. Code and pretrained-models
are available at https://github.com/naamiinepal/xrayto3D-benchmark

1

Introduction

X-ray is the most common and widely used imaging modality for orthopaedics, trauma, and dentistry
as it has low radiation, low cost, and is portable. X-ray scanner projects 3D information of the
target body into a plane, resulting in a 2D image. This 2D representation is not ideal and sometimes
not enough for visualizing the 3D structure that can be important in diagnosis, prognosis, surgery
planning and navigation, and medical education. A CT scan captures X-ray-like images from several
angles covering 360 degrees and reconstructs a single volumetric image, providing detailed 3D
structural information of the target anatomy. However, CT scans have relatively high radiation, are
costly, and are not even available in many rural health centres across the globe. Hence, there has been
a longstanding interest in the scientific community to develop methods that can reconstruct 3D images
or structures of interest from few to a single X-ray images of various human bones [25, 47, 50],
teeth [49], and anatomies of other species [24].
From the early days of the stereo-correspondence point-based approach [8, 41], several methods have
been proposed for 3D reconstruction from biplanar radiographs: non-stereo-corresponding pointbased, contour-based, statistical shape model (SSM) based, parametric, and hybrid methods [26].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

