Effective Bayesian Heteroscedastic Regression
with Deep Neural Networks
Alexander Immer∗,1,2
2

Emanuele Palumbo∗,1,3

Alexander Marx†1,3

Julia E. Vogt†1

1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
AI Center, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Flexibly quantifying both irreducible aleatoric and model-dependent epistemic
uncertainties plays an important role for complex regression problems. While deep
neural networks in principle can provide this flexibility and learn heteroscedastic
aleatoric uncertainties through non-linear functions, recent works highlight that
maximizing the log likelihood objective parameterized by mean and variance can
lead to compromised mean fits since the gradient are scaled by the predictive
variance, and propose adjustments in line with this premise. We instead propose
to use the natural parametrization of the Gaussian, which has been shown to be
more stable for heteroscedastic regression based on non-linear feature maps and
Gaussian processes. Further, we emphasize the significance of principled regularization of the network parameters and prediction. We therefore propose an efficient
Laplace approximation for heteroscedastic neural networks that allows automatic
regularization through empirical Bayes and provides epistemic uncertainties, both
of which improve generalization. We showcase on a range of regression problems—
including a new heteroscedastic image regression benchmark—that our methods
are scalable, improve over previous approaches for heteroscedastic regression, and
provide epistemic uncertainty without requiring hyperparameter tuning.

1

Introduction

Capturing the epistemic (model uncertainty) and aleatoric uncertainty (observation noise) allows
for computing the predictive variance of a model, which is crucial for areas such as active learning [Houlsby et al., 2011, Kirsch, 2023], reinforcement learning [Osband et al., 2016, Yu et al., 2020]
and decision making. Bayesian neural networks allow for modelling both epistemic and aleatoric
uncertainty, as such, they lend themselves naturally to this task. Typically, they are applied under
the assumption of homoscedasticity, i.e., constant noise [MacKay, 1995, Foong et al., 2019, Kirsch,
2023, and others], but also adaptations of variational inference (VI) to model heteroscedasticity,
such as mean-field VI [Graves, 2011], deterministic VI [Wu et al., 2019, DVI], and Monte-Carlo
Dropout [Gal and Ghahramani, 2016], have been studied. In this paper, we are interested in learning
the epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty in heteroscedastic regression for potentially complex tasks
such as image regression, where we are given inputs x ∈ RD and a scalar response y ∈ R, and model
y | x = x as a conditional Gaussian distribution with mean µ(x) and standard deviation σ(x) being
dependent on input x. Inherently, the problem involves robustly modelling the aleatoric uncertainty,
corresponding to the variance, which is a relevant problem in econometrics, statistics [Harvey, 1976,
Amemiya, 1985], and causal discovery [Guyon et al., 2019, Xu et al., 2022].
∗
Equal contribution. † Shared last author. Correspondence to: alexander.immer@inf.ethz.ch
alexander.marx@inf.ethz.ch. Code at https://github.com/aleximmer/heteroscedastic-nn.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

