Monitor-Guided Decoding of Code LMs with Static
Analysis of Repository Context

Lakshya A Agrawal
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
t-lakagrawal@microsoft.com
Navin Goyal
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
navingo@microsoft.com

Aditya Kanade
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
kanadeaditya@microsoft.com
Shuvendu K. Lahiri
Microsoft Research
Redmond, United States
shuvendu.lahiri@microsoft.com

Sriram K. Rajamani
Microsoft Research
Bangalore, India
sriram@microsoft.com

Abstract
Language models of code (LMs) work well when the surrounding code provides
sufficient context. This is not true when it becomes necessary to use types, functionality or APIs defined elsewhere in the repository or a linked library, especially
those not seen during training. LMs suffer from limited awareness of such global
context and end up hallucinating.
Integrated development environments (IDEs) assist developers in understanding
repository context using static analysis. We extend this assistance, enjoyed by
developers, to LMs. We propose monitor-guided decoding (MGD) where a monitor
uses static analysis to guide the decoding. We construct a repository-level dataset
P RAGMATIC C ODE for method-completion in Java and evaluate MGD on it. On
models of varying parameter scale, by monitoring for type-consistent object dereferences, MGD consistently improves compilation rates and agreement with ground
truth. Further, LMs with fewer parameters, when augmented with MGD, can
outperform larger LMs. With MGD, SantaCoder-1.1B achieves better compilation
rate and next-identifier match than the much larger text-davinci-003 model.
We also conduct a generalizability study to evaluate the ability of MGD to generalize to multiple programming languages (Java, C# and Rust), coding scenarios
(e.g., correct number of arguments to method calls), and to enforce richer semantic
constraints (e.g., stateful API protocols). Our data and implementation are available
at https://github.com/microsoft/monitors4codegen.

1

Introduction

Language models of code (LMs), such as in Chen et al. (2021); Nijkamp et al. (2023); Allal et al.
(2023) and many others, are revolutionizing code generation. Many commercial offerings based
on LMs, like GitHub Copilot, Amazon Code Whisperer and Replit, are now available. The LMs
work well when the surrounding code in the vicinity of generation provides sufficient context. This
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

