Dynamic Pricing and Learning
with Bayesian Persuasion
Shipra Agrawal
Columbia University
sa3305@columbia.edu

Yiding Feng
University of Chicago
yidingfeng@uchicago.edu

Wei Tang
Columbia University
wt2359@columbia.edu

Abstract
We consider a novel dynamic pricing and learning setting where in addition to
setting prices of products in sequential rounds, the seller also ex-ante commits to
‘advertising schemes’. That is, in the beginning of each round the seller can decide
what kind of signal they will provide to the buyer about the product’s quality upon
realization. Using the popular Bayesian persuasion framework to model the effect
of these signals on the buyers’ valuation and purchase responses, we formulate
the problem of finding an optimal design of the advertising scheme along with a
pricing scheme that maximizes the seller’s expected revenue. Without any apriori
knowledge of the buyers’ demand function, our goal is to design an online algorithm that can use past purchase responses to adaptively learn the optimal pricing
and advertising strategy. We study the regret of the algorithm when compared to
the optimal clairvoyant price and advertising scheme.
Our main result is a computationally efficient online algorithm that achieves an
2
1
O(T /3 (m log T ) /3 ) regret bound when the valuation function is linear in the
product quality. Here m is the cardinality of the discrete product quality domain
and T is the time horizon. This result requires some natural monotonicity and
Lipschitz assumptions on the valuation function, but no Lipschitz or smoothness
assumption on the buyers’ demand function. For constant m, our result matches
the regret lower bound for dynamic pricing within logarithmic factors, which is
a special case of our problem. We also obtain several improved results for the
2
widely considered special case of additive valuations, including an Õ T /3 re1/3 1
gret bound independent of m when m  T .

1

Introduction

Dynamic pricing is a key strategy in revenue management that allows sellers to anticipate and influence demand in order to maximize revenue and/or utility. When the customer valuation and demand
response for a product is apriori unknown, price variation can also be used to observe and learn the
demand function in order to adaptively optimize price and revenue over time. This learning and
optimization problem has been a focus of much recent literature that uses exploration-exploitation
and multi-armed bandit techniques with dynamic pricing algorithms (e.g., see [43, 16, 41, 8]).
In practice, there is another important tool available to sellers in the form of advertising, using
which the sellers can inform and shape customers’ valuations of a product. It has been theoretically
[53, 54] and empirically [55, 49] shown that advertisements can serve as a credible signal of the
quality or characteristics of the advertised product. Sellers can use advertising to provide partial
information about a product in order to better position the product in the market and potentially
increase customers’ chances of purchasing the product. For example, as a common strategy to drive
1

A full version of this work is at https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14385.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

