Contrast, Attend and Diffuse to Decode
High-Resolution Images from Brain Activities

Jingyuan Sun†‡
KU Leuven
jingyuan.sun@kuleuven.be

Mingxiao Li†
KU Leuven
mingxiao.li@kuleuven.be

Zijiao Chen
National University of Singapore
zijiao.chen@u.nus.edu

Yunhao Zhang
Chinese Academy of Science
zhangyunhao2021@ia.ac.cn

Shaonan Wang
Chinese Academy of Science
shaonan.wang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Marie-Francine Moens
KU Leuven
sien.moens@kuleuven.be

Abstract
Decoding visual stimuli from neural responses recorded by functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) presents an intriguing intersection between cognitive
neuroscience and machine learning, promising advancements in understanding
human visual perception. However, the task is challenging due to the noisy nature of fMRI signals and the intricate pattern of brain visual representations. To
mitigate these challenges, we introduce a two-phase fMRI representation learning
framework. The first phase pre-trains an fMRI feature learner with a proposed
Double-contrastive Mask Auto-encoder to learn denoised representations. The
second phase tunes the feature learner to attend to neural activation patterns most
informative for visual reconstruction with guidance from an image auto-encoder.
The optimized fMRI feature learner then conditions a latent diffusion model to
reconstruct image stimuli from brain activities. Experimental results demonstrate
our model’s superiority in generating high-resolution and semantically accurate
images, substantially exceeding previous state-of-the-art methods by 39.34% in
the 50-way-top-1 semantic classification accuracy. The code implementations will
be available at https://github.com/soinx0629/vis_dec_neurips/.

1

Introduction

Reconstructing visual stimuli from neural imaging data represents a promising interdisciplinary area
between cognitive neuroscience and machine learning [1]. A system capable of accurately decoding
neural responses to visual input can help illuminate the complex mechanisms underlying the brain’s
visual perception [2, 3]. Furthermore, it can elucidate the relationships between human visual systems
and computational vision models [4, 5, 6]. Such a system also holds the potential to assist patients,
particularly those with motor disabilities, in expressing their thoughts and intentions through brain
signals.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), as a non-invasive method to measure brain activity,
has been extensively utilized to decipher perceptions from neural responses [5, 7, 8]. However,
†
‡

Equal Contribution
Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

