Theoretical and Practical Perspectives on what
Influence Functions Do
Andrea Schioppa1 Katja Filippova1 Ivan Titov2,3 Polina Zablotskaia1
1
Google DeepMind 2 University of Edinburgh 3 University of Amsterdam
{arischioppa, katjaf, polinaz}@google.com, ititov@inf.ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Influence functions (IF) have been seen as a technique for explaining model predictions through the lens of the training data. Their utility is assumed to be in
identifying training examples "responsible" for a prediction so that, for example,
correcting a prediction is possible by intervening on those examples (removing or
editing them) and retraining the model. However, recent empirical studies have
shown that the existing methods of estimating IF predict the leave-one-out-andretrain effect poorly. In order to understand the mismatch between the theoretical
promise and the practical results, we analyse five assumptions made by IF methods
which are problematic for modern-scale deep neural networks and which concern
convexity, numeric stability, training trajectory and parameter divergence. This
allows us to clarify what can be expected theoretically from IF. We show that while
most assumptions can be addressed successfully, the parameter divergence poses a
clear limitation on the predictive power of IF: influence fades over training time
even with deterministic training. We illustrate this theoretical result with BERT and
ResNet models. Another conclusion from the theoretical analysis is that IF are still
useful for model debugging and correcting even though some of the assumptions
made in prior work do not hold: using natural language processing and computer
vision tasks, we verify that mis-predictions can be successfully corrected by taking
only a few fine-tuning steps on influential examples.

1

Introduction and related work

Influence Functions (IF) [CS82] have been regarded as a tool that can trace model behavior on any
example to the training examples [KL17, PLKS20, GRH+ 21]. Their theoretical justification lies in
the ability to predict loss changes on a specific test point when training on a perturbed loss obtained
by removing or down-sampling a given training point. In the case of an undesired model behavior
on a test-point, the influential training examples for that test point have been assumed to be the
ones "responsible" for the prediction so that intervening on those – e.g., by removing them and then
retraining the model, or by taking additional fine-tuning steps [GRH+ 21] – would result in a change
in the loss or prediction. It has been confirmed that for linear models it is indeed the case [KATL19].
Recently, in their extensive experiments, [BPF21] and [KS21] could not find empirical support for the
claim that IF approximate the Leave-Some-Out Retraining (LSOR) effect on the loss in deep neural
networks. In particular, they show that the correlation between the ranking of training examples
produced by LSOR and the IF-based ranking is low and considerably affected by choice of hyperparameters. How can this discrepancy be explained? And, given that the theoretical justification
for IF lacks empirical support, does it mean that IF should be abandoned as an explainability and
debugging tool altogether?
In this work we clarify what question Influence Functions (IF) actually answer. We first identify
assumptions which are either implicit or not investigated in prior work: these concern convexity,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

