ClimateSet: A Large-Scale
Climate Model Dataset for Machine Learning

Julia Kaltenborn∗
Mila Quebec AI Institute
& McGill University

Charlotte Emilie Elektra Lange
Mila Quebec AI Institute
& University of Osnabrück

Philippe Brouillard
Mila Quebec AI Institute
& University of Montreal
Jakob Runge
German Aerospace Center
& Technische Universität Berlin

Venkatesh Ramesh
Mila Quebec AI Institute
& University of Montreal

Yaniv Gurwicz
Intel Labs

Chandni Nagda
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign

Peer Nowack
Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology

David Rolnick
Mila Quebec AI Institute
& McGill University

Abstract
Climate models have been key for assessing the impact of climate change and
simulating future climate scenarios. The machine learning (ML) community has
taken an increased interest in supporting climate scientists’ efforts on various tasks
such as climate model emulation, downscaling, and prediction tasks. Many of those
tasks have been addressed on datasets created with single climate models. However,
both the climate science and ML communities have suggested that to address those
tasks at scale, we need large, consistent, and ML-ready climate model datasets.
Here, we introduce ClimateSet, a dataset containing the inputs and outputs of
36 climate models from the Input4MIPs and CMIP6 archives. In addition, we
provide a modular dataset pipeline for retrieving and preprocessing additional
climate models and scenarios. We showcase the potential of our dataset by using
it as a benchmark for ML-based climate model emulation. We gain new insights
about the performance and generalization capabilities of the different ML models
by analyzing their performance across different climate models. Furthermore, the
dataset can be used to train an ML emulator on several climate models instead
of just one. Such a “super-emulator” can quickly project new climate change
scenarios, complementing existing scenarios already provided to policymakers. We
believe ClimateSet will create the basis needed for the ML community to tackle
climate-related tasks at scale.

1

Introduction

Climate change poses a significant and increasing threat to humans and the environment. Understanding and projecting future climate scenarios is essential to mitigating and adapting to climate change.
Those future climate scenarios - the “Shared Socioeconomic Pathways” (SSP) 2 are determined by
climate forcer emissions and depend on socioeconomic decisions made by humanity. Here, the term
“climate forcers” refers to greenhouse gases (GHG), aerosols, and aerosol precursors, among others.
∗
2

Address correspondence to julia.kaltenborn[at]mail.mcgill.ca
For readers who are new to climate modeling terminology, we recommend the glossary by IPCC (2022),
also available on https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/glossary/.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

