Unbiased Learning of Deep Generative Models
with Structured Discrete Representations

Harry Bendekgey, Gabriel Hope, Erik B. Sudderth
{hbendekg, hopej, sudderth}@uci.edu
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine

Abstract
By composing graphical models with deep learning architectures, we learn generative models with the strengths of both frameworks. The structured variational
autoencoder (SVAE) inherits structure and interpretability from graphical models,
and flexible likelihoods for high-dimensional data from deep learning, but poses
substantial optimization challenges. We propose novel algorithms for learning
SVAEs, and are the first to demonstrate the SVAE’s ability to handle multimodal
uncertainty when data is missing by incorporating discrete latent variables. Our
memory-efficient implicit differentiation scheme makes the SVAE tractable to learn
via gradient descent, while demonstrating robustness to incomplete optimization.
To more rapidly learn accurate graphical model parameters, we derive a method
for computing natural gradients without manual derivations, which avoids biases
found in prior work. These optimization innovations enable the first comparisons
of the SVAE to state-of-the-art time series models, where the SVAE performs competitively while learning interpretable and structured discrete data representations.

1

Introduction

Advances in deep learning have dramatically increased the expressivity of machine learning models at
great cost to their interpretability. This trade-off can be seen in deep generative models that produce
remarkably accurate synthetic data, but often fail to illuminate the data’s underlying factors of
variation, and cannot easily incorporate domain knowledge. The structured variational autoencoder
(SVAE, Johnson et al. [29]) aims to elegantly address these issues by combining probabilistic
graphical models [62] with the VAE [33], gaining both flexibility and interpretability. But since its
2016 introduction, SVAEs have seen few applications because their expressivity leads to optimization
challenges. This work proposes three key fixes that enable efficient training of general SVAEs.
SVAE inference requires iterative optimization [62, 20] of variational parameters for latent variables associated with every observation. Johnson et al. [29] backpropagate gradients through this
multi-stage optimization, incurring prohibitive memory cost. We resolve this issue via an implicit
differentiation scheme that shows empirical robustness even when inference has not fully converged.
Prior work [29] also identifies natural gradients [2, 23] as an important accelerator of optimization
convergence, but apply natural gradients in a manner that requires dropping parts of the SVAE loss,
yielding biased learning updates. We instead derive unbiased natural gradient updates that are easily
and efficiently implemented for any SVAE model via automatic differentiation.
Basic VAEs require carefully tuned continuous relaxations [27, 44] for discrete latent variables, but
SVAEs can utilize them seamlessly. We incorporate adaptive variational inference algorithms [24, 25]
to robustly avoid local optima when learning SVAEs with discrete structure, enabling data clustering.
SVAE inference easily accommodates missing data, leading to accurate and multimodal imputations.
We further improve training speed by generalizing prior work on parallel Kalman smoothers [56].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

