OpenSTL: A Comprehensive Benchmark of
Spatio-Temporal Predictive Learning
Cheng Tan1,2⇤

Siyuan Li1,2⇤ Zhangyang Gao1,2 Wenfei Guan3 Zedong Wang2
Zicheng Liu1,2 Lirong Wu1,2 Stan Z. Li2†
1
3
Zhejiang University;
Xidian University;
2
AI Lab, Research Center for Industries of the Future, Westlake University
{tancheng; lisiyuan; gaozhangyang; guanwenfei; wangzedong; liuzicheng;
wulirong; stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn;

Abstract
Spatio-temporal predictive learning is a learning paradigm that enables models to
learn spatial and temporal patterns by predicting future frames from given past
frames in an unsupervised manner. Despite remarkable progress in recent years,
a lack of systematic understanding persists due to the diverse settings, complex
implementation, and difficult reproducibility. Without standardization, comparisons
can be unfair and insights inconclusive. To address this dilemma, we propose
OpenSTL, a comprehensive benchmark for spatio-temporal predictive learning that
categorizes prevalent approaches into recurrent-based and recurrent-free models.
OpenSTL provides a modular and extensible framework implementing various
state-of-the-art methods. We conduct standard evaluations on datasets across
various domains, including synthetic moving object trajectory, human motion,
driving scenes, traffic flow, and weather forecasting. Based on our observations,
we provide a detailed analysis of how model architecture and dataset properties
affect spatio-temporal predictive learning performance. Surprisingly, we find that
recurrent-free models achieve a good balance between efficiency and performance
than recurrent models. Thus, we further extend the common MetaFormers to boost
recurrent-free spatial-temporal predictive learning. We open-source the code and
models at https://github.com/chengtan9907/OpenSTL.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed rapid and remarkable progress in spatio-temporal predictive learning [38,
29, 10, 41]. This burgeoning field aims to learn latent spatial and temporal patterns through the
challenging task of forecasting future frames based solely on given past frames in an unsupervised
manner [40, 55, 56, 54]. By ingesting raw sequential data, these self-supervised models [4, 14, 24]
can uncover intricate spatial and temporal interdependencies without the need for tedious manual
annotation, enabling them to extrapolate coherently into the future in a realistic fashion [29, 12].
Spatio-temporal predictive learning benefits a wide range of applications with its ability to anticipate
the future from the past in a data-driven way, including modeling the devastating impacts of climate
change [38, 35], predicting human movement [61, 45], forecasting traffic flow in transportation
systems [8, 51], and learning expressive representations from video [32, 19]. By learning to predict
the future without supervision from massive datasets, these techniques have the potential to transform
domains where anticipation and planning are crucial but limited labeled data exists [9, 2, 44, 31].
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

