Robust low-rank training via approximate
orthonormal constraints
Dayana Savostianova
Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila (Italy)
dayana.savostianova@gssi.it

Emanuele Zangrando
Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila (Italy)
emanuele.zangrando@gssi.it

Gianluca Ceruti
University of Innsbruck
6020 Innsbruck (Austria)
gianluca.ceruti@uibk.ac.at

Francesco Tudisco
Gran Sasso Science Institute
67100 L’Aquila (Italy)
francesco.tudisco@gssi.it

Abstract
With the growth of model and data sizes, a broad effort has been made to design
pruning techniques that reduce the resource demand of deep learning pipelines,
while retaining model performance. In order to reduce both inference and training
costs, a prominent line of work uses low-rank matrix factorizations to represent
the network weights. Although able to retain accuracy, we observe that low-rank
methods tend to compromise model robustness against adversarial perturbations.
By modeling robustness in terms of the condition number of the neural network,
we argue that this loss of robustness is due to the exploding singular values of
the low-rank weight matrices. Thus, we introduce a robust low-rank training
algorithm that maintains the network’s weights on the low-rank matrix manifold
while simultaneously enforcing approximate orthonormal constraints. The resulting
model reduces both training and inference costs while ensuring well-conditioning
and thus better adversarial robustness, without compromising model accuracy. This
is shown by extensive numerical evidence and by our main approximation theorem
that shows the computed robust low-rank network well-approximates the ideal full
model, provided a highly performing low-rank sub-network exists.

1

Introduction

Deep learning and neural networks have achieved great success in a variety of applications in computer
vision, signal processing, and scientific computing, to name a few. However, their robustness with
respect to perturbations of the input data may considerably impact security and trustworthiness and
poses a major drawback to their real-world application. Moreover, the memory and computational
requirements for both training and inferring phases render them impractical in application settings
with limited resources. While a broad literature on pruning methods and adversarial robustness has
been developed to address these two issues in isolation, much less has been done to design neural
networks that are both energy-saving and robust. Actually, in many approaches the two problems
seem to compete against each other as most adversarial robustness improving-techniques require
even larger networks [36, 41, 46, 47, 79] or computationally more demanding loss functions, and
thus more expensive training phases [13, 23, 34, 44, 66].
The limited work available so far on robust pruned networks is mostly focused on reducing memory
and computational costs of the inference phase, while retaining adversarial robustness [20, 28, 42,
56, 72, 76]. However, the inference phase amounts to only a very limited fraction of the cost of the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

