Implicit Variational Inference
for High-Dimensional Posteriors

Anshuk Uppal
Technical University of Denmark
ansup@dtu.dk
Wouter Boomsma
University of Copenhagen
wb@di.ku.dk

Kristoffer Stensbo-Smidt
Technical University of Denmark
krss@dtu.dk
Jes Frellsen
Technical University of Denmark
jefr@dtu.dk

Abstract
In variational inference, the benefits of Bayesian models rely on accurately capturing the true posterior distribution. We propose using neural samplers that
specify implicit distributions, which are well-suited for approximating complex
multimodal and correlated posteriors in high-dimensional spaces. Our approach
advances inference using implicit distributions by introducing novel approximate
bounds by locally linearising the neural sampler. This is distinct from existing
methods that rely on additional discriminator networks and unstable adversarial
objectives. Furthermore, we present a new sampler architecture that, for the first
time, enables implicit distributions over tens of millions of latent variables, addressing computational concerns by using differentiable numerical approximations.
Our empirical analysis indicates our method is capable of recovering correlations
across layers in large Bayesian neural networks, a property that is crucial for a
network’s performance but notoriously challenging to achieve. To the best of our
knowledge, no other method has been shown to accomplish this task for such
large models. Through experiments on downstream tasks, we demonstrate that
our expressive posteriors outperform state-of-the-art uncertainty quantification
methods, validating the effectiveness of our training algorithm and the quality of
the learned implicit distribution.

1

Introduction

In the Bayesian approach to statistical inference, information about the data is captured by the posterior
distribution over a model’s latent variables. By marginalising (averaging) over the variables weighted
by the posterior, Bayesian inference can provide excellent generalisation and model calibration.
This is particularly compelling for complex models, such as modern deep models, where extreme
overparametrisation makes overfitting inevitable unless precaution is taken (Wilson et al., 2020).
Exact Bayesian inference is, however, intractable for all but the simplest models. Practitioners,
therefore, rely on approximate inference frameworks, which can be broadly categorised as either
sampling-based approaches or variational inference (VI, Saul et al., 1996; Peterson, 1987), the latter
being the preferred approach for high-dimensional problems. VI seeks a tractable approximation to
the intractable true posterior, limiting us to simple approximations like the isotropic Gaussian, which
are often far too crude to satisfactorily cover the posterior, either only narrowly covering a single
posterior mode or placing excessive mass in low-probability regions of the posterior (Foong et al.,
2019, 2020).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

