GLEMOS: Benchmark for Instantaneous
Graph Learning Model Selection

Namyong Park1∗, Ryan Rossi2 , Xing Wang1 , Antoine Simoulin1 ,
Nesreen Ahmed3 , Christos Faloutsos4
1
Meta AI 2 Adobe Research 3 Intel Labs 4 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
The choice of a graph learning (GL) model (i.e., a GL algorithm and its hyperparameter settings) has a significant impact on the performance of downstream tasks.
However, selecting the right GL model becomes increasingly difficult and time
consuming as more and more GL models are developed. Accordingly, it is of great
significance and practical value to equip users of GL with the ability to perform a
near-instantaneous selection of an effective GL model without manual intervention. Despite the recent attempts to tackle this important problem, there has been
no comprehensive benchmark environment to evaluate the performance of GL
model selection methods. To bridge this gap, we present GLEMOS in this work,
a comprehensive benchmark for instantaneous GL model selection that makes
the following contributions. (i) GLEMOS provides extensive benchmark data for
fundamental GL tasks, i.e., link prediction and node classification, including the
performances of 366 models on 457 graphs on these tasks. (ii) GLEMOS designs
multiple evaluation settings, and assesses how effectively representative model
selection techniques perform in these different settings. (iii) GLEMOS is designed
to be easily extended with new models, new graphs, and new performance records.
(iv) Based on the experimental results, we discuss the limitations of existing approaches and highlight future research directions. To promote research on this
significant problem, we make the benchmark data and code publicly available at
https://namyongpark.github.io/glemos.

1

Introduction

...

...

Graph learning (GL) methods [43, 48] have achieved great success across multiple domains and applications that involve graph-structured data [4, 10, 17, 21, 28, 29, 31, 34]. At the same time, previous
studies [30, 40, 46] have shown that there is no universally good GL model that performs best across
all graphs and graph learning tasks. Therefore,
Instantaneous Graph Learning Model Selection
to effectively employ GL given a wide array of
train
evaluate
available models, it is important to select the
models
models
𝐌∗
right GL model (i.e., a GL algorithm and its
best
model
𝑀!
𝐸!
hyperparameter settings) that will perform well
for the given graph data and GL task.
...

...

𝑀

𝐸

...

...

model

"
"
performances
Ideally, we would want to be able to select
new graph 𝑮
test
the best GL model for the given graph nearSkip model training
graph 𝑮!
instantaneously, that is, without having to train
and evaluations
or evaluate different models multiple times on
Figure 1: Via instantaneous graph learning model
the new graph, since even a few such trainselection, the best model can be found without pering and evaluations might take a considerable
forming computationally expensive model training
∗
and evaluations.
Correspondence: namyongp@meta.com

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

