Koopa: Learning Non-stationary Time Series
Dynamics with Koopman Predictors

Yong Liu∗, Chenyu Li∗, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng LongB
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{liuyong21,lichenyu20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world time series are characterized by intrinsic non-stationarity that poses
a principal challenge for deep forecasting models. While previous models suffer
from complicated series variations induced by changing temporal distribution, we
tackle non-stationary time series with modern Koopman theory that fundamentally
considers the underlying time-variant dynamics. Inspired by Koopman theory
that portrays complex dynamical systems, we disentangle time-variant and timeinvariant components from intricate non-stationary series by Fourier Filter and
design Koopman Predictor to advance respective dynamics forward. Technically,
we propose Koopa as a novel Koopman forecaster composed of stackable blocks
that learn hierarchical dynamics. Koopa seeks measurement functions for Koopman embedding and utilizes Koopman operators as linear portraits of implicit
transition. To cope with time-variant dynamics that exhibits strong locality, Koopa
calculates context-aware operators in the temporal neighborhood and is able to
utilize incoming ground truth to scale up forecast horizon. Besides, by integrating
Koopman Predictors into deep residual structure, we ravel out the binding reconstruction loss in previous Koopman forecasters and achieve end-to-end forecasting
objective optimization. Compared with the state-of-the-art model, Koopa achieves
competitive performance while saving 77.3% training time and 76.0% memory.
Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/Koopa.

1

Introduction

Time series forecasting has become an essential part of real-world applications, such as weather
forecasting, energy consumption, and financial assessment. With numerous available observations,
deep learning approaches exhibit superior performance and bring the boom of deep forecasting
models. TCNs [4, 43, 47] utilize convolutional kernels and RNNs [12, 22, 37] leverage the recurrent
structure to capture underlying temporal patterns. Afterward, attention mechanism [42] becomes the
mainstream of sequence modeling and Transformers [31, 48, 53] show great predictive power with the
capability of learning point-wise temporal dependencies. And the recent revival of MLPs [32, 51, 52]
presents a simple but effective approach to exhibit temporal dependencies by dense weighting.
In spite of elaboratively designed models, it is a fundamental problem for deep models to generalize
on varying distribution [1, 25, 33], which is widely reflected in real-world time series because of
inherent non-stationarity. Non-stationary time series is characterized by time-variant statistics and
temporal dependencies in different periods [2, 14], inducing a huge distribution gap between training
and inference and even among each lookback window. While previous methods [16, 28] tailor
existing architectural design to attenuate the adverse effect of non-stationarity, few works research on
the theoretical basis that can be applied to deal with time-variant temporal patterns naturally.
∗

Equal Contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

