Distributionally Robust Linear Quadratic Control

Bahar Taşkesen
EPFL
bahar.taskesen@epfl.ch

Dan A. Iancu
Stanford University
daniancu@stanford.edu

Çağıl Koçyiğit
University of Luxembourg
cagil.kocyigit@uni.lu

Daniel Kuhn
EPFL
daniel.kuhn@epfl.ch

Abstract
Linear-Quadratic-Gaussian (LQG) control is a fundamental control paradigm that
has been studied and applied in various fields such as engineering, computer
science, economics, and neuroscience. It involves controlling a system with linear
dynamics and imperfect observations, subject to additive noise, with the goal of
minimizing a quadratic cost function depending on the state and control variables.
In this work, we consider a generalization of the discrete-time, finite-horizon LQG
problem, where the noise distributions are unknown and belong to Wasserstein
ambiguity sets centered at nominal (Gaussian) distributions. The objective is to
minimize a worst-case cost across all distributions in the ambiguity set, including
non-Gaussian distributions. Despite the added complexity, we prove that a control
policy that is linear in the observations is optimal, as in the classic LQG problem.
We propose a numerical solution method that efficiently characterizes this optimal
control policy. Our method uses the Frank-Wolfe algorithm to identify the leastfavorable distributions within the Wasserstein ambiguity sets and computes the
controller’s optimal policy using Kalman filter estimation under these distributions.

1. Introduction
The Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) is a classic control problem that has served as a building
block for numerous applications in engineering and computer science [3, 12], economics [29], or
neuroscience [47]. It involves controlling a system with linear dynamics and imperfect observations
affected by additive noise, with the goal of minimizing a quadratic state and control cost. Under
the assumption that noise terms are independent and normally distributed (a case referred to as
Linear-Quadratic-Gaussian, or LQG), it is well known that the optimal control policy depends linearly
on the observations and can be obtained efficiently by using the Kalman filtering procedure and
dynamic programming [8].
Motivated by practical settings where noise distributions may not be readily available or may not be
Gaussian, this paper considers a discrete-time, finite-horizon generalization of the LQG setting where
noise distributions are unknown and are chosen adversarially from ambiguity sets characterized by a
Wasserstein distance and centered around nominal (Gaussian) distributions.
We show that, even under distributional ambiguity, the optimal control policy remains linear in
the system’s observations. Our proof is novel and does not rely on traditional recursive dynamic
programming arguments. Instead, we re-parametrize the control policy in terms of the purified state
observations and we derive an upper bound for the resulting minimax formulation by relaxing the
ambiguity set (from a Wasserstein ball into a Gelbrich ball) while simultaneously restricting the
controller to linear dependencies. We then use convex duality to prove that this upper bound matches
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

