First- and Second-Order Bounds for Adversarial
Linear Contextual Bandits
Julia Olkhovskaya1

Jack Mayo2

Tim van Erven2

Gergely Neu3

Chen-Yu Wei4

Department of Intelligent Systems, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands∗
Korteweg-de Vries Institute for Mathematics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
3
AI group, DTIC, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
4
MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA
1

2

Abstract
We consider the adversarial linear contextual bandit setting, which allows for
the loss functions associated with each of K arms to change over time without
restriction. Assuming the d-dimensional contexts are drawn from a fixed known
distribution, the
√worst-case expected regret over the course of T rounds is known
to scale as Õ( KdT ). Under the additional assumption that the density
√ of the
contexts is log-concave, we obtain a second-order bound of order Õ(K dVT ) in
terms of the cumulative second moment
learner’s losses VT , and a closely
pof the
∗
related first-order bound of order Õ(K dLT ) in terms of the cumulative loss of
the best policy L∗T . Since VT or L∗T may be significantly smaller than T , these
improve over the worst-case regret whenever the environment is relatively benign.
Our results are obtained using a truncated version of the continuous exponential
weights algorithm over the probability simplex, which we analyse by exploiting a
novel connection to the linear bandit setting without contexts.

1

Introduction

The contextual bandit problem is a generalization of the multi-armed bandit setting in which a
learner observes relevant contextual information before choosing an arm. The goal of the learner is to
minimize the excess cumulative loss of the chosen arms compared to the best fixed policy for mapping
contexts to arms. This framework addresses a broad range of important real-world problems like
sequential treatment allocation (Tewari and Murphy, 2017), online recommendation (Beygelzimer
et al., 2011) or online advertising (Li et al., 2010), and is actively used in practice (Agarwal et al.,
2016). Numerous variants of the setting have been studied, which differ in the assumptions they
make about the losses and the contexts. In this paper, we focus on the recently introduced setting of
Neu and Olkhovskaya (2020) where the contexts are finite-dimensional i.i.d. random vectors, and
the losses are time-varying linear functions of the context that may potentially be generated
by an
√
adversary. In this setting, the worst-case rate for the expected regret is known to be Õ( T ) for time
horizon T (Neu and Olkhovskaya, 2020).
Our main contribution
is to replace the worst-case rate by adaptive bounds. Specifically, we obtain a
√
bound of Õ( p
VT ) in terms of a quadratic measure of variance VT for the losses of the algorithm, and
a bound of Õ( L∗T ), where L∗T is the cumulative loss incurred by the optimal policy. Such bounds
in terms of L∗T or VT are generally referred to as first-order and second-order bounds, respectively,
∗

Work was done when the author was affiliated with Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

