Asynchronous Proportional Response Dynamics:
Convergence in Markets with Adversarial Scheduling

Yoav Kolumbus
Cornell University
yoav.kolumbus@cornell.edu

Menahem Levy
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
menahem.levy@mail.huji.ac.il

Noam Nisan
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
noam@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
We study Proportional Response Dynamics (PRD) in linear Fisher markets, where
participants act asynchronously. We model this scenario as a sequential process in
which at each step, an adversary selects a subset of the players to update their bids,
subject to liveness constraints. We show that if every bidder individually applies the
PRD update rule whenever they are included in the group of bidders selected by the
adversary, then, in the generic case, the entire dynamic converges to a competitive
equilibrium of the market. Our proof technique reveals additional properties of
linear Fisher markets, such as the uniqueness of the market equilibrium for generic
parameters and the convergence of associated no swap regret dynamics and best
response dynamics under certain conditions.

1

Introduction

A central notion in the study of markets is the equilibrium: a state of affairs where no single party
wishes to unilaterally deviate from it. The main benefit of focusing on the notion of equilibria lies in
what it ignores: how the market can reach an equilibrium (if at all). This latter question is obviously of
much interest as well, especially when considering computational aspects,1 and a significant amount
of research has been dedicated to the study of “market dynamics” and their possible convergence to
an equilibrium. Almost all works that study market dynamics consider synchronous dynamics.
Synchronous Dynamics: At each time step t, all participants simultaneously update their behavior
based on the state at time t − 1.
Such synchronization is clearly difficult to achieve in real markets, and so one might naturally wonder
to what extent full synchrony is needed or whether convergence of market dynamics occurs even
asynchronously. There are various possible levels of generality of asynchrony to consider. The
simplest model considers a sequential scenario in which, at every time step t, an adversary chooses a
single participant, and only this participant updates their behavior based on the state at time t − 1. The
adversary is constrained to adhere to some liveness condition, such as scheduling every participant
infinitely often or at least once every T steps. In the most general model [59], the adversary may
also introduce message delays, leading players to respond to dated information. In this paper, we
focus on an intermediate level of permissible asynchrony where updates may occur in an arbitrary
asynchronous manner, but message delays are always shorter than the granularity of activation. In
our proofs, the adversary’s goal is to select the schedule of strategy updates by the players in a way
that prevents the dynamic from converging to a market equilibrium.
1

As we know that finding an equilibrium may be computationally intractable in general.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

