DinoSR: Self-Distillation and Online Clustering
for Self-supervised Speech Representation Learning

Alexander H. Liu†

Heng-Jui Chang†
†

Michael Auli‡∗

MIT CSAIL

‡

Wei-Ning Hsu‡∗

James Glass†∗

Meta AI

alexhliu@mit.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce self-distillation and online clustering for self-supervised
speech representation learning (DinoSR) which combines masked language modeling, self-distillation, and online clustering. We show that these concepts complement each other and result in a strong representation learning model for
speech. DinoSR first extracts contextualized embeddings from the input audio
with a teacher network, then runs an online clustering system on the embeddings to yield a machine-discovered phone inventory, and finally uses the discretized tokens to guide a student network. We show that DinoSR surpasses
previous state-of-the-art performance in several downstream tasks, and provide a
detailed analysis of the model and the learned discrete units. Code available at
https://github.com/Alexander-H-Liu/dinosr.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised speech representation learning techniques have been a game changer in recent years.
Learning from unlabeled data has been shown to be effective for many downstream tasks such as
speech recognition, translation, and language modeling [1, 2]. Among the flourishing self-supervised
learning techniques, we are particularly interested in three methods: masked language modeling,
self-distillation, and clustering.
Masked language modeling (MLM; [3]) predicts the masked part of a sentence based on the unmasked context and was first developed for training language models with bidirectional self-attention
models [4]. The strong performance in various natural language processing tasks has enabled representation learning with MLM to quickly succeed in the field. Unsurprisingly, the MLM concept also
applies to speech [5, 6] as it shares a similar structure to text in a more complex form.
Self-distillation representation learning has recently come into the spotlight with outstanding results
for computer vision [7, 8] and speech tasks [9]. In contrast to the conventional supervised knowledge
distillation method [10], self-supervised distillation does not require labeled data to train a teacher
model to guide the student model. Instead, both models are trained with unlabeled data using paired
relations augmented by data augmentation [7] or masking [9].
Clustering algorithms like K-means have been well-known unsupervised techniques long before deep
learning methods arose. In the deep learning era, researchers have found clustering mechanisms
beneficial to self-supervised models in a differentiable form known as vector quantization [11].
Driven by the nature of speech, which is a continuous signal containing a spoken form of discrete
text, vector quantization is an ideal match for representation learning as many studies [12, 13, 5]
∗

Equal advising

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

