Fast Approximation of Similarity Graphs
with Kernel Density Estimation

Peter Macgregor
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom

He Sun
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom

Abstract
Constructing a similarity graph from a set X of data points in Rd is the first step of
many modern clustering algorithms. However, typical constructions of a similarity
graph have high time complexity, and a quadratic space dependency with respect
to |X|. We address this limitation and present a new algorithmic framework that
constructs a sparse approximation of the fully connected similarity graph while
preserving its cluster structure. Our presented algorithm is based on the kernel
density estimation problem, and is applicable for arbitrary kernel functions. We
compare our designed algorithm with the well-known implementations from the
scikit-learn library and the FAISS library, and find that our method significantly
outperforms the implementation from both libraries on a variety of datasets.

1

Introduction

Given a set X = {x1 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd of data points and a similarity function k : Rd × Rd → R≥0
for any pair of data points xi and xj , the objective of clustering is to partition these n data points into
clusters such that similar points are in the same cluster. As a fundamental data analysis technique,
clustering has been extensively studied in different disciplines ranging from algorithms and machine
learning, social network analysis, to data science and statistics.
One prominent approach for clustering data points in Euclidean space consists of two simple steps:
the first step is to construct a similarity graph K = (V, E, w) from X, where every vertex vi of
G corresponds to xi ∈ X, and different vertices vi and vj are connected by an edge with weight
w(vi , vj ) if their similarity k(xi , xj ) is positive, or higher than some threshold. Secondly, we apply
spectral clustering on G, and its output naturally corresponds to some clustering on X [19]. Because
of its out-performance over traditional clustering algorithms like k-means, this approach has become
one of the most popular modern clustering algorithms.
On the other side, different constructions of similarity graphs have significant impact on the quality
and time complexity of spectral clustering, which is clearly acknowledged and appropriately discussed
by von Luxburg [31]. Generally speaking, there are two types of similarity graphs:
• the first one is the k-nearest neighbour graph (k-NN graph), in which every vertex vi
connects to vj if vj is among the k-nearest neighbours of vi . A k-NN graph is sparse by
construction, but loses some of the structural information in the dataset since k is usually
small and the added edges are unweighted.
• the second one is the fully connected graph, in which different vertices vi and vj are
connected with weight w(vi , vj ) = k(xi , xj ). While a fully connected graph maintains
most of the distance information about X, this graph is dense and storing such graphs
requires quadratic memory in n.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

