Constructing Non-isotropic Gaussian Diffusion
Model Using Isotropic Gaussian Diffusion Model
for Image Editing

Xi Yu* , Xiang Gu* , Haozhi Liu, Jian Sun ( )
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
{ericayu,xianggu,liuhzh}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn {jiansun}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Score-based diffusion models (SBDMs) have achieved state-of-the-art results in
image generation. In this paper, we propose a Non-isotropic Gaussian Diffusion
Model (NGDM) for image editing, which requires editing the source image while
preserving the image regions irrelevant to the editing task. We construct NGDM
by adding independent Gaussian noises with different variances to different image
pixels. Instead of specifically training the NGDM, we rectify the NGDM into an
isotropic Gaussian diffusion model with different pixels having different total forward diffusion time. We propose to reverse the diffusion by designing a sampling
method that starts at different time for different pixels for denoising to generate images using the pre-trained isotropic Gaussian diffusion model. Experimental results
show that NGDM achieves state-of-the-art performance for image editing tasks,
considering the trade-off between the fidelity to the source image and alignment
with the desired editing target.

1

Introduction

Score-based diffusion models (SBDMs) [1–6] demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on image
synthesis quality and sample diversity. SBDMs are widely applied to applications such as text-toimage synthesis [7–9], image editing [10–15], deblurring [16, 17], etc. SBDMs consist of a forward
diffusion stage that adds random noise to data and a reverse stage that generates desired data from
noise. The introduced noise in the forward process is commonly isotropic Gaussian noise [1, 6], i.e.,
independently and identically distributed noise in a normal distribution.
Non-isotropic diffusion model, by adding non-isotropic noises in the forward diffusion process has
been investigated in [18–22]. The blurring diffusion model in [18] adds blur and noise to samples
which is a Gaussian diffusion process with non-isotropic noise in the frequency space. [19] employs
auxiliary velocity variables to augment the data variables as Hamiltonian dynamics, and performs the
diffusion process in this expanded joint space by adding different noises to the auxiliary and the data
variables. [20] formulates the diffusion model using non-isotropic noise with a positive semi-definite
covariance matrix, and carries out a comparative analysis of the non-isotropic and isotropic diffusion
models. These works have shown better performance for data generation.
This paper focuses on image editing tasks that commonly require editing specific object/thing of an
image while preserving the remaining parts of the image. For image editing, [11] produces a mask
that allows the preservation of context while editing the remaining part. [23–25] use the learned text
embedding for the object that needs to be preserved in the image to ensure the object is unchanged
during editing. It is empirically known that the diffusion model can generate more diverse novel
* Equal contribution.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

