Accountability in Offline Reinforcement Learning:
Explaining Decisions with a Corpus of Examples

Hao Sun∗, Alihan Hüyük, Daniel Jarrett, Mihaela van der Schaar
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge

Abstract
Learning controllers with offline data in decision-making systems is an essential
area of research due to its potential to reduce the risk of applications in real-world
systems. However, in responsibility-sensitive settings such as healthcare, decision
accountability is of paramount importance, yet has not been adequately addressed
by the literature. This paper introduces the Accountable Offline Controller (AOC)
that employs the offline dataset as the Decision Corpus and performs accountable
control based on a tailored selection of examples, referred to as the Corpus Subset.
AOC operates effectively in low-data scenarios, can be extended to the strictly
offline imitation setting, and displays qualities of both conservation and adaptability. We assess AOC’s performance in both simulated and real-world healthcare
scenarios, emphasizing its capability to manage offline control tasks with high
levels of performance while maintaining accountability.

1

Introduction

In recent years, offline control that uses pre-collected data to generate control policies has gained
attention due to its potential to reduce the costs and risks associated with applying control algorithms
in real-world systems [1], which are especially advantageous in situations where real-time feedback
is challenging or expensive to obtain [2–5]. However, existing literature has primarily focused on
enhancing learning performance, leaving the need for accountable and reliable control policies in
offline settings largely unaddressed, particularly for high-stakes, responsibility-sensitive applications.
However, in many critical real-world applications such as healthcare, the challenge is beyond
enhancing policy performance. It requires the decisions made by learned policies to be transparent,
traceable, and justifiable. Yet those essential properties, summarized as Accountability, are left largely
unaddressed by existing literature.
In our context, we use Accountability to indicate the existence of a supportive basis for decisionmaking. For instance, in tumor treatment using high-risk options like radiotherapy and chemotherapy,
the treatment decisions should be based on the successful outcomes experienced by previous patients
who share similar conditions and were given the same medication. Another concrete illustrative
example is the allocation decisions of ventilator machines. The decision to allocate a ventilator
should be accountable, in the way that it juxtaposes the potential consequences of both utilization
and non-utilization and provides a reasonable decision on those bases. In those examples, the ability
to refer to existing cases that support current decisions can enhance reliability and facilitate reasoning
or debugging of the policy. To advance offline control towards real-world responsibility-sensitive
applications, five properties are desirable: (P1) controllable conservation: this ensures the policy
learning performance by avoiding aggressive extrapolation. (P2) accountability: as underscored by
our prior examples, there is a need for a clear basis upon which decisions are made. (P3) suitability
∗

hs789@cam.ac.uk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

