Weakly Supervised 3D Open-vocabulary Segmentation

Kunhao Liu1 Fangneng Zhan2 Jiahui Zhang1 Muyu Xu1 Yingchen Yu1
Abdulmotaleb El Saddik3,5 Christian Theobalt2 Eric Xing4,5 Shijian Lu1∗
1

Nanyang Technological University 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
University of Ottawa 4 Carnegie Mellon University 5 MBZUAI

Abstract
Open-vocabulary segmentation of 3D scenes is a fundamental function of human
perception and thus a crucial objective in computer vision research. However, this
task is heavily impeded by the lack of large-scale and diverse 3D open-vocabulary
segmentation datasets for training robust and generalizable models. Distilling
knowledge from pre-trained 2D open-vocabulary segmentation models helps but it
compromises the open-vocabulary feature as the 2D models are mostly finetuned
with close-vocabulary datasets. We tackle the challenges in 3D open-vocabulary
segmentation by exploiting pre-trained foundation models CLIP and DINO in
a weakly supervised manner. Specifically, given only the open-vocabulary text
descriptions of the objects in a scene, we distill the open-vocabulary multimodal
knowledge and object reasoning capability of CLIP and DINO into a neural radiance field (NeRF), which effectively lifts 2D features into view-consistent 3D segmentation. A notable aspect of our approach is that it does not require any manual
segmentation annotations for either the foundation models or the distillation process.
Extensive experiments show that our method even outperforms fully supervised
models trained with segmentation annotations in certain scenes, suggesting that 3D
open-vocabulary segmentation can be effectively learned from 2D images and textimage pairs. Code is available at https://github.com/Kunhao-Liu/3D-OVS.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation of 3D scenes holds significant research value due to its broad range of
applications such as robot navigation [1], object localization [2], autonomous driving [3], 3D scene
editing [4], augmented/virtual reality, etc. Given the super-rich semantics in 3D scenes, a crucial
aspect of this task is achieving open-vocabulary segmentation that can handle regions and objects
of various semantics including those with long-tail distributions. This is a grand challenge as it
necessitates a comprehensive understanding of natural language and the corresponding objects in the
3D world.
The main challenge in open-vocabulary 3D scene segmentation is the lack of large-scale and diverse
3D segmentation datasets. Existing 3D segmentation datasets like ScanNet [5] primarily focus on
restricted scenes with limited object classes, making them unsuitable for training open-vocabulary
models. An alternative is to distill knowledge from pre-trained 2D open-vocabulary segmentation
models to 3D representations as learned with NeRF [6] or point clouds, by fitting the feature maps or
segmentation probability outputs from the 2D models [4, 7]. Though this approach circumvents the
need for the 3D datasets, it inherits the limitations of the 2D models which are usually finetuned with
close-vocabulary datasets of limited text labels [8, 9], thereby compromising the open-vocabulary
property, especially for text labels with long-tail distributions [2, 3].
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

