Understanding the Detrimental Class-level
Effects of Data Augmentation

Polina Kirichenko1,2 Mark Ibrahim2 Randall Balestriero2 Diane Bouchacourt2
Ramakrishna Vedantam2 Hamed Firooz2 Andrew Gordon Wilson1
1

Ṅew York University

2

Ṁeta AI

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) encodes invariance and provides implicit regularization
critical to a model’s performance in image classification tasks. However, while
DA improves average accuracy, recent studies have shown that its impact can be
highly class dependent: achieving optimal average accuracy comes at the cost of
significantly hurting individual class accuracy by as much as 20% on ImageNet.
There has been little progress in resolving class-level accuracy drops due to a
limited understanding of these effects. In this work, we present a framework for
understanding how DA interacts with class-level learning dynamics. Using higherquality multi-label annotations on ImageNet, we systematically categorize the
affected classes and find that the majority are inherently ambiguous, co-occur, or
involve fine-grained distinctions, while DA controls the model’s bias towards one
of the closely related classes. While many of the previously reported performance
drops are explained by multi-label annotations, our analysis of class confusions reveals other sources of accuracy degradation. We show that simple class-conditional
augmentation strategies informed by our framework improve performance on the
negatively affected classes.

1

Introduction

Data augmentation (DA) provides numerous benefits for training of deep neural networks including
promoting invariance and providing regularization. In particular, DA significantly improves the
generalization performance in image classification problems when measured by average accuracy
[24, 19, 2, 18]. However, Balestriero et al. [1] and Bouchacourt et al. [9] showed that strong DA, in
particular, Random Resized Crop (RRC) used in training of most modern computer vision models,
may disproportionately hurt accuracies on some classes, e.g. with up to 20% class-level degradation
on ImageNet compared to milder augmentation settings (see Figure 1 left). Performance degradation
even on a small set of classes might result in poor generalization on downstream tasks related to the
affected classes [55], while in other applications it would be unethical to sacrifice accuracy on some
classes for improvements in average accuracy [28, 7, 63, 10].
Balestriero et al. [1] attempted to address class-level performance degradation by applying DA
selectively to the classes where the accuracy improves with DA strength. Surprisingly, they found that
this augmentation policy did not address the issue and the performance on non-augmented classes
still degraded with augmentation strength. In this work we perform detailed analysis and explore
the mechanisms causing the class-level performance degradation. In particular, we identify the
interactions between class-conditional data distributions as the cause of the class-level performance
degradation with augmentation: DA creates an overlap between the data distributions associated with
different classes. As a simple illustrative example, in Figure 1 (right) we show that the standard RRC
operation creates an overlap between the “car” and “wheel” classes. As a result, the model learns to
predict label “car” on “wheel” images, and the performance on the “wheel” class drops. Importantly,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

