PPi: Pretraining Brain Signal Model for
Patient-independent Seizure Detection

Zhizhang Yuan*
Zhejiang University
zhizhangyuan@zju.edu.cn

Daoze Zhang*
Zhejiang University
zhangdz@zju.edu.cn

Junru Chen
Zhejiang University
jrchen_cali@zju.edu.cn

Yang Yang†
Zhejiang University
yangya@zju.edu.cn

Yafeng Li
Nuozhu Technology Co., Ltd.
yafeng.li@neurox.cn

Abstract
Automated seizure detection is of great importance to epilepsy diagnosis and treatment. An emerging method used in seizure detection, stereoelectroencephalography
(SEEG), can provide detailed and stereoscopic brainwave information. However,
modeling SEEG in clinical scenarios will face challenges like huge domain shift
between different patients and dramatic pattern evolution among different brain
areas. In this study, we propose a Pretraining-based model for Patient-independent
seizure detection (PPi) to address these challenges. Firstly, we design two novel
self-supervised tasks which can extract rich information from abundant SEEG
data while preserving the unique characteristics between brain signals recorded
from different brain areas. Then two techniques, channel background subtraction
and brain region enhancement, are proposed to effectively tackle the domain shift
problem. Extensive experiments show that PPi outperforms the SOTA baselines
on two public datasets and a real-world clinical dataset collected by us, which
demonstrates the effectiveness and practicability of PPi. Finally, visualization
analysis illustrates the rationality of the two domain generalization techniques.

1

Introduction

Epilepsy is a chronic disease of brain that affects more than 50 million people worldwide, and a large
proportion of patients have drug resistant epilepsy (DRE) which cannot be controlled by medication.
Actually 70% of them can live seizure-free only if the seizure onset zone (SOZ) can be located and
surgically removed [1].
To diagnose epilepsy, the most direct quantitive data to reflect brain function is the electrical activity
of the patient’s brain. One of the methods to monitor the brain activity is EEG, in which small
sensors are attached to the scalp to pick up the electrical signals produced by the brain. Although
EEG is widely adopted in brain activity recordings due to its simplicity and relatively low cost, as
a non-invasive method, EEG fails to pinpoint the exact seizure focus when the SOZ is located in
the deep structure of the brain. In view of the importance of SOZ localization in the treatment of
patients with DRE [2], an emerging method called SEEG [3] is applied to locate foci by implanting
electrodes in the deep brain. The contacts (also called channels) on the electrodes distribute around
the suspected lesion across several brain areas, which provide stereoscopic recordings of the brain
from both cortical and subcortical structures simultaneously [4].
*
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

