Provable Guarantees for Generative Behavior
Cloning: Bridging Low-Level Stability and
High-Level Behavior

Adam Block
MIT
Cambridge, MA
ablock@mit.edu

Ali Jadbabaie
MIT
Cambridge, MA
jadbabai@mit.edu

Max Simchowitz
MIT
Cambridge, MA
msimchow@csail.mit.edu

Daniel Pfrommer
MIT
Cambridge, MA
dpfrom@mit.edu
Russ Tedrake
MIT
Cambridge, MA
russt@mit.edu

Abstract
We propose a theoretical framework for studying behavior cloning of complex expert demonstrations using generative modeling. Our framework invokes low-level
controllers - either learned or implicit in position-command control - to stabilize
imitation around expert demonstrations. We show that with (a) a suitable low-level
stability guarantee and (b) a powerful enough generative model as our imitation
learner, pure supervised behavior cloning can generate trajectories matching the
per-time step distribution of essentially arbitrary expert trajectories in an optimal transport cost. Our analysis relies on a stochastic continuity property of the
learned policy we call “total variation continuity" (TVC). We then show that TVC
can be ensured with minimal degradation of accuracy by combining a popular
data-augmentation regimen with a novel algorithmic trick: adding augmentation
noise at execution time. We instantiate our guarantees for policies parameterized
by diffusion models and prove that if the learner accurately estimates the score of
the (noise-augmented) expert policy, then the distribution of imitator trajectories
is close to the demonstrator distribution in a natural optimal transport distance.
Our analysis constructs intricate couplings between noise-augmented trajectories,
a technique that may be of independent interest. We conclude by empirically validating our algorithmic recommendations, and discussing implications for future
research directions for better behavior cloning with generative modeling.

1

Introduction

Training dynamic agents from datasets of expert examples, known as imitation learning, promises
to take advantage of the plentiful demonstrations available in the modern data environment, in an
analogous manner to the recent successes of language models conducting unsupervised learning on
enormous corpora of text [67, 70]. Imitation learning is especially exciting in robotics, where mass
stores of pre-recorded demonstrations on Youtube [1] or cheaply collected simulated trajectories
[42, 20] can be converted into learned robotic policies.
For imitation learning to be a viable path toward generalist robotic behavior, it needs to be able to
both represent and execute the complex behaviors exhibited in the demonstrated data. An approach
that has shown tremendous promise is generative behavior cloning: fitting generative models, such
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

