Deep Gaussian Markov Random Fields for
Graph-Structured Dynamical Systems

Fiona Lippert
University of Amsterdam
f.lippert@uva.nl

Bart Kranstauber
University of Amsterdam
b.kranstauber@uva.nl

E. Emiel van Loon
University of Amsterdam
e.e.vanloon@uva.nl

Patrick Forré
University of Amsterdam
p.d.forre@uva.nl

Abstract
Probabilistic inference in high-dimensional state-space models is computationally
challenging. For many spatiotemporal systems, however, prior knowledge about
the dependency structure of state variables is available. We leverage this structure
to develop a computationally efficient approach to state estimation and learning
in graph-structured state-space models with (partially) unknown dynamics and
limited historical data. Building on recent methods that combine ideas from deep
learning with principled inference in Gaussian Markov random fields (GMRF),
we reformulate graph-structured state-space models as Deep GMRFs defined by
simple spatial and temporal graph layers. This results in a flexible spatiotemporal
prior that can be learned efficiently from a single time sequence via variational
inference. Under linear Gaussian assumptions, we retain a closed-form posterior,
which can be sampled efficiently using the conjugate gradient method, scaling
favourably compared to classical Kalman filter based approaches.

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of monitoring air pollution, the leading environmental risk factor for mortality
worldwide [11, 42]. In the past years, sensor networks have been installed across major metropolitan
areas, measuring the concentration of pollutants across time and space [27, 38]. These measurements
are, however, prone to noise or might be missing completely due to hardware failures or limited
sensor coverage. To identify sources of pollution or travel routes with limited exposure, it is essential
to recover pollution levels and provide principled uncertainty estimates for unobserved times and
locations. Similar problems occur also in the geosciences, ecology, neuroscience, epidemiology,
or transportation systems, where animal movements, the spread of diseases, or traffic load need
to be estimated from imperfect data to facilitate scientific discovery and decision-making. From a
probabilistic inference perspective, all these problems amount to estimating the posterior distribution
over the latent states of a spatiotemporal system given partial and noisy multivariate time series data.
To make inference in these systems feasible, it is common to assume a state-space model, where
the latent states evolve according to a Markov chain. Then, the classical Kalman filter (KF) [29]
or its variants [47, 37] can be used for efficient inference, scaling linearly with the time series
length. However, the complexity with respect to the state dimension remains cubic due to matrixmatrix multiplications and inversions. Thus, as the spatial coverage of available measurements and
thereby the dimensionality of the state variables increase, KF-based approaches quickly become
computationally prohibitive. This is especially problematic in cases where the underlying dynamics
are (partially) unknown and need to be learned from data, requiring repeated inference during the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

