Feature Selection in the Contrastive Analysis Setting

Ethan Weinberger
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
ewein@cs.washington.edu

Ian C. Covert
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
icovert@stanford.edu

Su-In Lee
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
suinlee@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Contrastive analysis (CA) refers to the exploration of variations uniquely enriched
in a target dataset as compared to a corresponding background dataset generated
from sources of variation that are irrelevant to a given task. For example, a biomedical data analyst may wish to find a small set of genes to use as a proxy for variations
in genomic data only present among patients with a given disease (target) as opposed to healthy control subjects (background). However, as of yet the problem of
feature selection in the CA setting has received little attention from the machine
learning community. In this work we present contrastive feature selection (CFS),
a method for performing feature selection in the CA setting. We motivate our approach with a novel information-theoretic analysis of representation learning in the
CA setting, and we empirically validate CFS on a semi-synthetic dataset and four
real-world biomedical datasets. We find that our method consistently outperforms
previously proposed state-of-the-art supervised and fully unsupervised feature
selection methods not designed for the CA setting. An open-source implementation
of our method is available at https://github.com/suinleelab/CFS.

1

Introduction

In many scientific domains, it is increasingly common to analyze high-dimensional datasets consisting
of observations with many features [1, 2, 3]. However, not all features are created equal: noisy,
information-poor features can obscure important structures in a dataset and impair the performance
of machine learning algorithms on downstream tasks. As such, it is often desired to select a small
number of informative features to consider in subsequent analyses. For example, biologists may
seek to measure the expression levels of a small number of genes and use these in a variety of future
prediction tasks, such as disease subtype prediction or cell type classification. Measuring only a
subset of features may also yield other benefits, including reduced experimental costs, enhanced
interpretability, and better generalization for models trained with limited data.
While feature selection is relatively straightforward when supervision guides the process (e.g., class
labels), such information is often unavailable in practice. In the unsupervised setting, we can select
features for specific objectives like preserving clusters [4, 5] or local structure in the data [6, 7], or we
can aim to simply reconstruct the full feature vector [8, 3]. However, these approaches are likely to
focus on factors that dominate in the dataset, even if these structures are uninteresting for a specific
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

