Fast and Simple Spectral Clustering
in Theory and Practice

Peter Macgregor
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
peter.macgregor@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Spectral clustering is a popular and effective algorithm designed to find k clusters
in a graph G. In the classical spectral clustering algorithm, the vertices of G are
embedded into Rk using k eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix. However,
computing this embedding is computationally expensive and dominates the running
time of the algorithm. In this paper, we present a simple spectral clustering
algorithm based on a vertex embedding with O(log(k)) vectors computed by
the power method. The vertex embedding is computed in nearly-linear time
with respect to the size of the graph, and the algorithm provably recovers the
ground truth clusters under natural assumptions on the input graph. We evaluate
the new algorithm on several synthetic and real-world datasets, finding that it is
significantly faster than alternative clustering algorithms, while producing results
with approximately the same clustering accuracy.

1

Introduction

Graph clustering is an important problem with numerous applications in machine learning, data
science, and theoretical computer science. Spectral clustering is a popular graph clustering algorithm
with strong theoretical guarantees and excellent empirical performance. Given a graph G with n
vertices and k clusters, the classical spectral clustering algorithm consists of the following two
high-level steps [26, 33].
1. Embed the vertices of G into Rk according to k eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix.
2. Apply a k-means clustering algorithm to partition the vertices into k clusters.
Recent work shows that if the graph has a well-defined cluster structure, then the clusters are wellseparated in the spectral embedding and the k-means algorithm will return clusters which are close to
optimal [21, 28].
The main downside of this algorithm is the high computational cost of computing k eigenvectors of
the graph Laplacian matrix. In this paper, we address this computational bottleneck and propose a new
fast spectral clustering algorithm which avoids the need to compute eigenvectors while maintaining
excellent theoretical guarantees. Moreover, our proposed algorithm is simple, fast, and effective in
practice.
1.1

Sketch of Our Approach

In this section, we introduce the high-level idea of this paper, which is also illustrated in Figure 1. We
begin by considering a recent result of Makarychev et al. [23] who show that a random projection
of data into O(log(k)) dimensions preserves the k-means objective function for all partitions of the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

