VRA: Variational Rectified Activation for
Out-of-distribution Detection
Mingyu Xu1,2 , Zheng Lian1∗, Bin Liu1,2 , Jianhua Tao3,4
The State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
4
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
{xumingyu2021, lianzheng2016}@ia.ac.cn
1

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical to building reliable machine learning
systems in the open world. Researchers have proposed various strategies to reduce
model overconfidence on OOD data. Among them, ReAct is a typical and effective
technique to deal with model overconfidence, which truncates high activations to
increase the gap between in-distribution and OOD. Despite its promising results, is
this technique the best choice? To answer this question, we leverage the variational
method to find the optimal operation and verify the necessity of suppressing abnormally low and high activations and amplifying intermediate activations in OOD
detection, rather than focusing only on high activations like ReAct. This motivates
us to propose a novel technique called “Variational Rectified Activation (VRA)”,
which simulates these suppression and amplification operations using piecewise
functions. Experimental results on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our method outperforms existing post-hoc strategies. Meanwhile, VRA is compatible with different scoring functions and network architectures. Our code is
available at https://github.com/zeroQiaoba/VRA.

1

Introduction

Systems deployed in the real world often encounter out-of-distribution (OOD) data, i.e., samples
from an irrelevant distribution whose label set has no interaction with the training data. Most of
the existing systems tend to generate overconfident estimations for OOD data, seriously affecting
their reliability [1]. Therefore, researchers propose the OOD detection task, which aims to determine
whether a sample comes from in-distribution (ID) or OOD. This task allows the model to reject
recognition when faced with unfamiliar samples. Considering its importance, OOD detection has
attracted increasing attention from researchers and has been applied to many fields with high-safety
requirements such as autonomous driving [2] and medical diagnosis [3].
In OOD detection, existing methods can be roughly divided into two categories: methods requiring
training and post-hoc strategies. The first category identifies OOD data by training-time regularization
[4, 5] or external OOD samples [6, 7]. But they require more computational resources and are
inconvenient in practical applications. To this end, researchers propose post-hoc strategies that
directly use pretrained models for OOD detection. Due to their ease of implementation, these
methods have attracted increasing attention in recent years. Among them, React [8] is a typical
post-hoc strategy that truncates abnormally high activations to increase the gap between ID and OOD,
thereby improving detection performance. But is this operation the best choice for widening the gap?
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

