Hierarchical Open-vocabulary Universal Image
Segmentation
Xudong Wang1∗ Shufan Li1∗ Konstantinos Kallidromitis2∗
Yusuke Kato2 Kazuki Kozuka2 Trevor Darrell1
2
1
Berkeley AI Research, UC Berkeley
Panasonic AI Research
project page: http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/∼xdwang/projects/HIPIE

Abstract
Open-vocabulary image segmentation aims to partition an image into semantic
regions according to arbitrary text descriptions. However, complex visual scenes
can be naturally decomposed into simpler parts and abstracted at multiple levels of granularity, introducing inherent segmentation ambiguity. Unlike existing
methods that typically sidestep this ambiguity and treat it as an external factor,
our approach actively incorporates a hierarchical representation encompassing
different semantic-levels into the learning process. We also propose a decoupled
text-image fusion mechanism and representation learning modules for both ªthingsº
and ªstuffº.1 Additionally, we systematically examine the differences that exist
in the textual and visual features between these types of categories. Our resulting
model, named HIPIE, tackles HIerarchical, oPen-vocabulary, and unIvErsal segmentation tasks within a unified framework. Benchmarked on over 40 datasets, e.g.,
ADE20K, COCO, Pascal-VOC Part, RefCOCO/RefCOCOg, ODinW and SeginW,
HIPIE achieves the state-of-the-art results at various levels of image comprehension, including semantic-level (e.g., semantic segmentation), instance-level (e.g.,
panoptic/referring segmentation and object detection), as well as part-level (e.g.,
part/subpart segmentation) tasks.

1

Introduction

Image segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision, enabling a wide range of applications
such as object recognition, scene understanding, and image manipulation [50, 14, 42, 7, 37]. Recent
advancements in large language models pave the way for open-vocabulary image segmentation,
where models can handle a wide variety of object classes using text prompts. However, there is no
single ªcorrectº way to segment an image. The inherent ambiguity in segmentation stems from the
fact that the interpretations of boundaries and regions within an image depend on the specific tasks.
Existing methods for open-vocabulary image segmentation typically address the ambiguity in image
segmentation by considering it as an external factor beyond the modeling process. In contrast,
we adopt a different approach by embracing this ambiguity and present HIPIE, as illustrated in
Fig. 1, a novel HIerarchical, oPen-vocabulary and unIvErsal image segmentation and detection
model. This includes semantic-level segmentation, which focuses on segmenting objects based
on their semantic meaning, as well as instance-level segmentation, which involves segmenting
individual instances of objects or groups of objects (e.g., instance and referring segmentation).
1
The terms things (countable objects, typically foreground) and stuff (non-object, non-countable, typically
background) [1] are commonly used to distinguish between objects that have a well-defined geometry and are
countable, e.g. people, cars, and animals, and surfaces or regions that lack a fixed geometry and are primarily
identified by their texture and/or material, e.g. the sky, road, and water body.
*: equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

