Langevin Quasi-Monte Carlo

Sifan Liu
Department of Statistics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
sfliu@stanford.edu

Abstract
Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) and its stochastic gradient versions are powerful
algorithms for sampling from complex high-dimensional distributions. To sample
from a distribution with density π(θ) ∝ exp(−U (θ)), LMC iteratively generates
the next sample by taking a step in the gradient direction ∇U with added Gaussian perturbations. Expectations w.r.t. the target distribution π are estimated by
averaging over LMC samples. In ordinary Monte Carlo, it is well known that the
estimation error can be substantially reduced by replacing independent random
samples by quasi-random samples like low-discrepancy sequences. In this work,
we show that the estimation error of LMC can also be reduced by using quasirandom samples. Specifically, we propose to use completely uniformly distributed
(CUD) sequences with certain low-discrepancy property to generate the Gaussian
perturbations. Under smoothness and convexity conditions, we prove that LMC
with a low-discrepancy CUD sequence achieves smaller error than standard LMC.
The theoretical analysis is supported by compelling numerical experiments, which
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1

Introduction

Sampling from probability distributions is a crucial task in both statistics and machine learning.
However, when the target distribution does not permit exact sampling, researchers often rely on
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. These techniques simulate a Markov chain that
converges to the target distribution as its stationary distribution. Recently, MCMC samplers based
on discretizing the continuous-time Langevin diffusion have become popular, due to its ease of
implementation and ability to handle stochastic gradients (Welling and Teh, 2011).
The primary focus of this work is on the quality of samples generated by Langevin Monte Carlo
(LMC) algorithms in terms of estimating the expectation Eθ∼π [f (θ)] for some integrand f by sample
averages. In the context of Bayesian inference, the target distribution π is typically the posterior
distribution, and computing the posterior expectation, posterior variance, or confidence intervals are
of great interest. In the context of post-selection inference, the target distribution π is the probability
distribution conditioned on the selection event, and computing the selection-adjusted p-value is the
main task. LMC has been widely used in this problem as well (Markovic and Taylor, 2016; Shi et al.,
2022). In all these situations, the accuracy of the sample average estimator is critical and affects the
downstream data analysis.
In traditional Monte Carlo sampling, it is well known that using quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) samples,
instead of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random samples, can lead to significant
error reduction. So it is natural to ask whether we can apply QMC techniques to improve Langevin
Monte Carlo sampling as well. In this work, we introduce the Langevin quasi-Monte Carlo (LQMC)
algorithm, which replaces the i.i.d. random inputs in the LMC algorithm with quasi-random numbers.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

