Data Augmentations for Improved (Large) Language
Model Generalization
Amir Feder ∗1,2 , Yoav Wald ∗ 3 , Claudia Shi 1 , Suchi Saria 3 and David Blei 1
1
Columbia University, 2 Google Research, 3 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
The reliance of text classifiers on spurious correlations can lead to poor generalization at deployment, raising concerns about their use in safety-critical domains
such as healthcare. In this work, we propose to use counterfactual data augmentation, guided by knowledge of the causal structure of the data, to simulate interventions on spurious features and to learn more robust text classifiers. We show that
this strategy is appropriate in prediction problems where the label is spuriously
correlated with an attribute. Under the assumptions of such problems, we discuss
the favorable sample complexity of counterfactual data augmentation, compared
to importance re-weighting. Pragmatically, we match examples using auxiliary
data, based on diff-in-diff methodology, and use a large language model (LLM)
to represent a conditional probability of text. Through extensive experimentation
on learning caregiver-invariant predictors of clinical diagnoses from medical narratives and on semi-synthetic data, we demonstrate that our method for simulating
interventions improves out-of-distribution (OOD) accuracy compared to baseline
invariant learning algorithms.

1

Introduction

The reliance on spurious correlations is a significant challenge for Machine Learning (ML) safety as
it can lead to performance degradation of deployed models. Spurious correlations are prevalent in
various applications such as medical imaging [1, 2], text classification [3], and risk prediction systems [4]. Failures due to spurious correlations occur under distribution shift [5–7], which may result
from differences in data recording protocols, shifts in the underlying population being monitored, or
the way the ML tool is being used. In this paper, we focus on text classification and explore how using language models in a domain-informed way can help us avoid reliance on spurious correlations.
Consider a scenario where we want to make robust predictions about patients’ conditions, probability of readmission, etc., using clinical narratives written in hospitals [8–10]. In this setting, a
common issue arises due to clinical practice, where patients with certain conditions are directed to
specific caregivers in the hospital. When we train a predictor from a single dataset that exhibits some
correlation between caregiver-specific style and clinical outcomes, the predictor may unintentionally rely on the style to make predictions. This leads to poor generalization on unseen hospitals, i.e.
failure to generalize out of distribution(OOD), due to changes in clinical practice [7]. However, collecting a dataset that is large enough to avoid such spurious associations is infeasible due to various
reasons such as rare conditions, privacy concerns, etc. To tackle this problem, we propose leveraging available auxiliary data (e.g., time, document type, demographics) and incorporating knowledge
about the causal structure of the problem to build a more robust classifier. For example, in the note
classification task, we can use our knowledge that some auxiliary data, such as the patient’s current
state, can affect doctor assignment, to improve the classifier’s robustness.
∗

Equal Contribution. Correspondence to amir.feder@columbia.edu

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

