Can semi-supervised learning use all the data
effectively? A lower bound perspective

Alexandru ,Tifrea∗
ETH Zurich
alexandru.tifrea@inf.ethz.ch
Amartya Sanyal
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
amsa@di.ku.dk

Gizem Yüce∗
EPFL
gizem.yuce@epfl.ch
Fanny Yang
ETH Zurich
fan.yan@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Prior theoretical and empirical works have established that semi-supervised learning
algorithms can leverage the unlabeled data to improve over the labeled sample
complexity of supervised learning (SL) algorithms. However, existing theoretical
work focuses on regimes where the unlabeled data is sufficient to learn a good
decision boundary using unsupervised learning (UL) alone. This begs the question:
Can SSL algorithms simultaneously improve upon both UL and SL? To this end, we
derive a tight lower bound for 2-Gaussian mixture models that explicitly depends
on the labeled and the unlabeled dataset size as well as the signal-to-noise ratio
of the mixture distribution. Surprisingly, our result implies that no SSL algorithm
improves upon the minimax-optimal statistical error rates of SL or UL algorithms
for these distributions. Nevertheless, in our real-world experiments, SSL algorithms
can often outperform UL and SL algorithms. In summary, our work suggests that
while it is possible to prove the performance gains of SSL algorithms, this would
require careful tracking of constants in the theoretical analysis.1

1

Introduction

Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) has recently garnered significant attention, often surpassing traditional supervised learning (SL) methods in practical applications [5, 10, 22]. Within this framework,
the learning algorithm leverages both labeled and unlabeled datasets sampled from the same distribution. Numerous empirical studies suggest that SSL can effectively harness the information from both
datasets, outperforming both SL and unsupervised learning (UL) approaches [21, 42, 17, 25]. This
observation prompts the question: how fundamental is the improvement of SSL over SL and UL? 2
Prior theoretical results do not provide a consensus on this topic. One line of work demonstrates that
under certain settings, SSL is capable of lowering the labeled sample complexity. In these settings,
the unlabeled data possesses a significant amount of information about the conditional distribution
(up to permutation). Some examples of this setting include distributions where unlabeled samples are
enough to obtain small estimation error in mixture models [30, 18] or when the data is clusterable [31].
Therefore, despite SSL performing provably better than SL in these settings, it is only as good as UL
(up to permutation). Another line of work challenges the above literature by identifying scenarios
where SSL achieves the same error rate as SL. In these scenarios, even oracle knowledge about the
1

Please consult the arxiv version of the paper for an updated manuscript.
By error of UL we mean the prediction error up to sign. We formalize this paradigm of using UL first and
then identifying the correct sign as UL+ in Section 2.2.
2

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

