Adversarial Attacks on Online Learning to Rank with
Click Feedback
Jinhang Zuo1,2 Zhiyao Zhang3 Zhiyong Wang4 Shuai Li5∗
Mohammad Hajiesmaili1 Adam Wierman2
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 California Institute of Technology
3
Southeast University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jhzuo,hajiesmaili}@cs.umass.edu muirheadzhang@gmail.com
zywang21@cse.cuhk.edu.hk shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn adamw@caltech.edu

Abstract
Online learning to rank (OLTR) is a sequential decision-making problem where a
learning agent selects an ordered list of items and receives feedback through user
clicks. Although potential attacks against OLTR algorithms may cause serious
losses in real-world applications, there is limited knowledge about adversarial
attacks on OLTR. This paper studies attack strategies against multiple variants
of OLTR. Our first result provides an attack strategy against the UCB algorithm
on classical stochastic bandits with binary feedback, which solves the key issues
caused by bounded and discrete feedback that previous works cannot handle.
Building on this result, we design attack algorithms against UCB-based OLTR
algorithms in position-based and cascade models. Finally, we propose a general
attack strategy against any algorithm under the general click model. Each attack
algorithm manipulates the learning agent into choosing the target attack item
T − o(T ) times, incurring a cumulative cost of o(T ). Experiments on synthetic
and real data further validate the effectiveness of our proposed attack algorithms.

1

Introduction

Online learning to rank (OLTR) has been extensively studied [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] as a sequential decisionmaking problem where, in each round, a learning agent presents a list of items to users and receives
implicit feedback from user interactions. One of the most common forms of feedback considered in
literature is in the form of user clicks [1, 4, 5]. OLTR with such click feedback can lead to major
improvements over traditional supervised learning to rank methods [6, 7, 8]. However, there is a
security concern that user-generated click feedback might be generated by malicious users with the
goal of manipulating the learning agent. Understanding the vulnerability of OLTR under adversarial
attacks plays an essential role in developing effective defense mechanisms for trustworthy OLTR.
There has been a surge of interest in adversarial attacks on multi-armed bandits [9, 10, 11]. For
example, [9] shows that, for stochastic bandits, it is possible to manipulate the bandit algorithm
into pulling a target arm very often with sublinear cumulative cost. Though it generally follows the
bandit formulation, it differs from stochastic bandits in the action space and feedback model. More
specifically, OLTR chooses a list of K out of L arms, instead of just one arm, to play in each round;
the realized rewards of the chosen arms are usually censored by a click model, e.g., position-based [4]
or cascade model [5]. Thus, it is nontrivial to design efficient adversarial attacks on the censored
feedback of the chosen arms for OLTR.
Moreover, previous works [9, 10] can only handle unbounded and continuous reward feedback, while
the (binary) click feedback of OLTR is bounded and discrete. Such binary feedback brings new
∗

Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

