Characteristic Circuits
Zhongjie Yu
TU Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany

Martin Trapp
Aalto University
Espoo, Finland

Kristian Kersting
TU Darmstadt/Hessian.AI/DFKI
Darmstadt, Germany

{yu,kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de, martin.trapp@aalto.fi

Abstract
In many real-world scenarios, it is crucial to be able to reliably and efficiently
reason under uncertainty while capturing complex relationships in data. Probabilistic circuits (PCs), a prominent family of tractable probabilistic models, offer
a remedy to this challenge by composing simple, tractable distributions into a highdimensional probability distribution. However, learning PCs on heterogeneous
data is challenging and densities of some parametric distributions are not available
in closed form, limiting their potential use. We introduce characteristic circuits
(CCs), a family of tractable probabilistic models providing a unified formalization
of distributions over heterogeneous data in the spectral domain. The one-to-one
relationship between characteristic functions and probability measures enables
us to learn high-dimensional distributions on heterogeneous data domains and
facilitates efficient probabilistic inference even when no closed-form density function is available. We show that the structure and parameters of CCs can be learned
efficiently from the data and find that CCs outperform state-of-the-art density
estimators for heterogeneous data domains on common benchmark data sets.

1

Introduction

Probabilistic circuits (PCs [Choi et al., 2020]) have characteristic circuits
gained increasing attention in the machine learning
community as a promising modelling family that renmeasures
CF
ders many probabilistic inferences tractable with litunique relationship
µ
φ
tle compromise in their expressivity. Their beneficial
properties have prompted many successful applicaintegration
tions in density estimation [e.g., Peharz et al., 2020,
Di Mauro et al., 2021, Dang et al., 2022, Correia et al.,
continuous
discrete
2023] and in areas where probabilistic reasoning is
dists.
dists.
key, for example, neuro-symbolic reasoning [Ahmed
intractable
et al., 2022], certified fairness [Selvam et al., 2023],
or causality [Zečević et al., 2021]. Moreover, recent works have explored ways of specifying PCs for
probabilistic circuits
more complex modelling scenarios, such as time series [Trapp et al., 2020, Yu et al., 2021b,a] or tractable Figure 1: Characteristic circuits provide a
unified, tractable specification of joint continrepresentation of graphs [Wang et al., 2022].
uous and discrete distributions in the spectral
However, while density estimation is at the very core domain of probability measures.
of many machine learning techniques (e.g., approximate Bayesian inference [Murphy, 2012]) and a fundamental tool in statistics to identify characteristics of the data such as k th order moments or
multimodality [Silverman, 2018], even in the case of parametric families, densities are sometimes
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

