StyleDrop: Text-to-Image Generation in Any Style
Kihyuk Sohn

Nataniel Ruiz

Kimin Lee⇤ Daniel Castro Chin

Irina Blok

Huiwen Chang Jarred Barber Lu Jiang Glenn Entis Yuanzhen Li
Yuan Hao Irfan Essa Michael Rubinstein Dilip Krishnan
Google Research
†

Figure 1: Visualization of StyleDrop outputs for 18 different styles. Each model is tuned on a single style
reference image, which is shown in the white insert box of each image. The per-style text descriptor is appended
to the content text prompt: “A fluffy baby sloth with a knitted hat trying to figure out a laptop, close up”.
Generated images capture many nuances such as colors, shading, textures and 3D appearance.

Abstract
Pre-trained large text-to-image models synthesize impressive images with an appropriate use of text prompts. However, ambiguities inherent in natural language and
out-of-distribution effects make it hard to synthesize image styles, that leverage a
specific design pattern, texture or material. In this paper, we introduce StyleDrop, a
method that enables the synthesis of images that faithfully follow a specific style using a text-to-image model. The proposed method is extremely versatile and captures
nuances and details of a user-provided style, such as color schemes, shading, design
patterns, and local and global effects. It efficiently learns a new style by fine-tuning
very few trainable parameters (less than 1% of total model parameters) and improving the quality via iterative training with either human or automated feedback.
Better yet, StyleDrop is able to deliver impressive results even when the user supplies only a single image that specifies the desired style. An extensive study shows
that, for the task of style tuning text-to-image models, StyleDrop implemented on
Muse [5] convincingly outperforms other methods, including DreamBooth [34]
and textual inversion [11] on Imagen [35] or Stable Diffusion [33]. More results
are available at our project website: https://styledrop.github.io.
⇤
†

Now at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST).
Now at OpenAI.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

