Recaptured Raw Screen Image and Video Demoiréing
via Channel and Spatial Modulations

Huanjing Yue
Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
huanjing.yue@tju.edu.cn

Yijia Cheng
Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
yijia_cheng@tju.edu.cn

Xin Liu
Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology LUT
Lappeenranta, Finland
linuxsino@gmail.com

Jingyu Yang ∗
Tianjin University
Tianjin, China
yjy@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Capturing screen contents by smartphone cameras has become a common way for
information sharing. However, these images and videos are often degraded by moiré
patterns, which are caused by frequency aliasing between the camera filter array and
digital display grids. We observe that the moiré patterns in raw domain is simpler
than those in sRGB domain, and the moiré patterns in raw color channels have
different properties. Therefore, we propose an image and video demoiréing network
tailored for raw inputs. We introduce a color-separated feature branch, and it is
fused with the traditional feature-mixed branch via channel and spatial modulations.
Specifically, the channel modulation utilizes modulated color-separated features to
enhance the color-mixed features. The spatial modulation utilizes the feature with
large receptive field to modulate the feature with small receptive field. In addition,
we build the first well-aligned raw video demoiréing (RawVDemoiré) dataset and
propose an efficient temporal alignment method by inserting alternating patterns.
Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
for both image and video demoriéing. We have released the code and dataset in
https://github.com/tju-chengyijia/VD_raw.

1

Introduction

With the popularity of mobile phone cameras, the way of information transmission has gradually
evolved from text to images and videos. However, when capture the contents displayed on digital
screens, the recaptured images and videos are heavily influenced by the moiré patterns (i.e., colored
stripes, as shown in Fig. 1) due to the frequency aliasing, and the visual contrast are also degraded.
Therefore, the task of image and video demoiréing is emerging.
In recent years, image demoiréing has attained growing attention and the demoiréing performance has
been greatly improved with the development of deep learning networks and the constructed paired
demoiréing datasets. Since the moiré patterns are of various scales and is distinguishable in frequency
domain, they are removed by constructing multi-scale fusion networks [19; 6; 28; 14], frequency
∗
Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62072331, Grant 62231018, and Grant 62171309.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

