Reading Relevant Feature from Global Representation
Memory for Visual Object Tracking

Xinyu Zhou1

Pinxue Guo2

Lingyi Hong1

Jinglun Li2

Wei Zhang1

Weifeng Ge1∗ Wenqiang Zhang1,2∗
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
zhouxinyu20@fudan.edu.cn, pxguo21@m.fudan.edu.cn,lyhong22@m.fudan.edu.cn,
jingli960423@gmail.com, weizhang@fudan.edu.cn,
weifeng.ge.ic@gmail.com,wqzhang@fudan.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Reference features from a template or historical frames are crucial for visual
object tracking. Prior works utilize all features from a fixed template or memory
for visual object tracking. However, due to the dynamic nature of videos, the
required reference historical information for different search regions at different
time steps is also inconsistent. Therefore, using all features in the template and
memory can lead to redundancy and impair tracking performance. To alleviate this
issue, we propose a novel tracking paradigm, consisting of a relevance attention
mechanism and a global representation memory, which can adaptively assist the
search region in selecting the most relevant historical information from reference
features. Specifically, the proposed relevance attention mechanism in this work
differs from previous approaches in that it can dynamically choose and build the
optimal global representation memory for the current frame by accessing crossframe information globally. Moreover, it can flexibly read the relevant historical
information from the constructed memory to reduce redundancy and counteract
the negative effects of harmful information. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of the proposed method, achieving competitive performance on five
challenging datasets with 71 FPS.

1

Introduction

Visual object tracking (VOT) is a fundamental task in computer vision, which provides only the
location of an object in the first frame and then accomplishes continuous predictions of the object’s
position in subsequent video frames. At present, visual object tracking is widely used in autonomous
vehicle [25], video surveillance[48], and other scenes. As video frames are dynamic and continuously
changing, it presents a significant challenge in addressing the appearance variation of the target and
the changes in the environment. The current mainstream approach to addressing this problem is
in two perspectives: the first type[47, 5, 54, 41, 32, 49, 26], as shown in Fig. 1(a), is to perform
interactive computations on all patches of a fixed template and the search region. The second
type[15, 51, 52, 9, 14, 43], as shown in Fig.1(b), is to perform the interactive computation of template
memory and the search region. Despite their great success, they neglect the appearance variation of
the target and the changes in the environment. In other words, the relevant reference information
for the search region at different time steps should be diverse. Retrieving all information from the
∗

corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

