DiPlomat:
A Dialogue Dataset for Situated Pragmatic Reasoning

Hengli Li1,2
lihengli@stu.pku.edu.cn

Song-Chun Zhu1,3,4,5
s.c.zhu@pku.edu.cn

Zilong Zheng1
zlzheng@bigai.ai

1

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
Yuanpei College, PKU 3 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, PKU
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, PKU 5 Department of Automation, THU
Corresponding author.
2

https://diplomat-dataset.github.io

Which turn of the conversation has a pragmatic meaning?
I choose

If we are negotiating in public, we’re not really
negotiating at all.
That’s correct. I’m out of the Senate three years and a
half, but I was there for 36 years.
Much of my work was budgeting. You would have
had me on the TV so many times, and you would have
said I don’t want to see you anymore.
Well, I doubt that, Senator.

“

Well, I doubt that, Senator.

Because

”

a. [A] is being polite and respectful towards [B].
b. [A]’s mind, political figures always tell lies, therefore he
questions [B]’s words.
c. [A] doubts whether he would have had the senator on the TV.
d. [A] thinks that he will not only be tired of [B]’s words but
also of the [B]’s face.

Figure 1: Illustration of DiPlomat dataset. Left: Example of a pragmatic conversation. Right: Pragmatic Identification and Reasoning task.

Abstract
The ability to discern and comprehend pragmatic meanings is a cornerstone of
social and emotional intelligence, referred to as pragmatic reasoning. Despite the
strides made in the development of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, these models grapple with capturing the nuanced and ambiguous facets of
language, falling short of the aspiration to build human-like conversational agents.
In this work, we introduce a novel benchmark, the DiPlomat, which delves into
the fundamental components of conversational pragmatic reasoning, encompassing situational context reasoning, open-world knowledge acquisition, and unified
figurative language understanding. We start by collecting a new human-annotated
dialogue dataset, composed of 4,177 multi-turn dialogues and a vocabulary of
48,900 words. Along with the dataset, two tasks are proposed to evaluate machines’
pragmatic reasoning capabilities, namely, Pragmatic Reasoning and Identification(PIR) and Conversational Question Answering (CQA). Furthermore, we probe
into a zero-shot natural language inference task, where the significance of context
in pragmatic reasoning is underscored. Experimental findings illustrate the existing
limitations of current prevailing LLMs in the realm of pragmatic reasoning, shedding light on the pressing need for further research to facilitate the emergence of
emotional intelligence within human-like conversational agents.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

