Dynamic Sparsity Is Channel-Level Sparsity Learner

Lu Yin1 , Gen Li2 , Meng Fang3 , Li Shen4 , Tianjin Huang1 , Zhangyang Wang5 ,
Vlado Menkovski1 , Xiaolong Ma2 , Mykola Pechenizkiy1 , Shiwei Liu1,5
1
Eindhoven University of Technology, 2 Clemson University
3
University of Liverpool, 4 JD Explore Academy, 5 University of Texas at Austin,
{l.yin,t.huang,m.pechenizkiy,v.menkovski,s.liu3}@tue.nl
gen@g.clemson.edu, xiaolom@clemson.edu, Meng.Fang@liverpool.ac.uk
mathshenli@gmail.com, atlaswang@utexas.edu

Abstract
Sparse training has received an upsurging interest in machine learning due to its
tantalizing saving potential for the entire training process as well as inference.
Dynamic sparse training (DST), as a leading sparse training approach, can train
deep neural networks at high sparsity from scratch to match the performance of
their dense counterparts. However, most if not all DST prior arts demonstrate their
effectiveness on unstructured sparsity with highly irregular sparse patterns, which
receives limited support in common hardware. This limitation hinders the usage of
DST in practice. In this paper, we propose Channel-aware dynamic sparse (Chase),
which for the first time seamlessly translates the promise of unstructured dynamic
sparsity to GPU-friendly channel-level sparsity (not fine-grained N:M or group
sparsity) during one end-to-end training process, without any ad-hoc operations.
The resulting small sparse networks can be directly accelerated by commodity
hardware, without using any particularly sparsity-aware hardware accelerators.
This appealing outcome is partially motivated by a hidden phenomenon of dynamic
sparsity: off-the-shelf unstructured DST implicitly involves biased parameter reallocation across channels, with a large fraction of channels (up to 60%) being sparser
than others. By progressively identifying and removing these channels during
training, our approach translates unstructured sparsity to channel-wise sparsity. Our
experimental results demonstrate that Chase achieves 1.7× inference throughput
speedup on common GPU devices without compromising accuracy with ResNet-50
on ImageNet. We release our codes in https://github.com/luuyin/chase.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have recently demonstrated impressive breakthroughs with increasing
scales [2; 8; 36]. Besides the well-known scaling, i.e., test accuracy scales as a power law regarding
model size and training data size in quantity [18; 26], recent work has observed that massive increases
in quantity can imbue models with qualitatively new behavior [49]. However, the memory and
computation required to train and deploy these large models can be a heavy burden on the environment
and finance [13; 43]. Therefore, people start to probe the possibility of training sparse neural networks
from scratch without involving any dense training steps (dubbed sparse training [39; 35]). As the
memory requirement and multiplications (which dominate neural network computation) associated
with zero weights can be skipped, sparse training is becoming a promising direction due to their
“end-to-end” saving potentials for both efficient training and efficient inference.
Sparse training can be categorized into two groups, static sparse training and dynamic sparse
training according to the dynamics of the sparse pattern during training. Static sparse training
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

