NIS3D: A Completely Annotated Benchmark for
Dense 3D Nuclei Image Segmentation

Wei Zheng1 , James Cheng Peng1 , Zeyuan Hou1 ,
Boyu Lyu1 , Mengfan Wang1 , Xuelong Mi1
Shuoxuan Qiao1 , Yinan Wan2 , Guoqiang Yu1
1
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech
2
Biozentrum, University of Basel
1
{zhengw,jameschengpeng,stanhou,boyu93,mengfanw,mixl18,kevinqiao,yug}@vt.edu
2
{yinan.wan}@unibas.ch

Abstract
3D segmentation of nuclei images is a fundamental task for many biological studies.
Despite the rapid advances of large-volume 3D imaging acquisition methods and
the emergence of sophisticated algorithms to segment the nuclei in recent years,
a benchmark with all cells completely annotated is still missing, making it hard
to accurately assess and further improve the performance of the algorithms. The
existing nuclei segmentation benchmarks either worked on 2D only or annotated
a small number of 3D cells, perhaps due to the high cost of 3D annotation for
large-scale data. To fulfill the critical need, we constructed NIS3D, a 3D, high
cell density, large-volume, and completely annotated Nuclei Image Segmentation
benchmark, assisted by our newly designed semi-automatic annotation software.
NIS3D provides more than 22,000 cells across multiple most-used species in this
area. Each cell is labeled by three independent annotators, so we can measure the
variability of each annotation. A confidence score is computed for each cell, allowing more nuanced testing and performance comparison. A comprehensive review
on the methods of segmenting 3D dense nuclei was conducted. The benchmark was
used to evaluate the performance of several selected state-of-the-art segmentation
algorithms. The best of current methods is still far away from human-level accuracy,
corroborating the necessity of generating such a benchmark. The testing results
also demonstrated the strength and weakness of each method and pointed out the
directions of further methodological development. The dataset can be downloaded
here https://github.com/yu-lab-vt/NIS3D.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

22

23
24
25
26
27
28
29

1

Introduction

With the rapid development of live-cell microscopic imaging and genetic fluorescent reporters,
researchers are able to record the time-lapse 3D images of cell nuclei during the embryogenesis
process[1]. Such data are valuable for a wide range of biological research, for instance, the mechanisms and patterns of cell differentiation, the origin and diversity of cell types, and the causes and
consequences of developmental defects [2–7]. In these studies, a critical step is 3D embryonic cell
nuclei image segmentation, which is the foundation of subsequent analyses including cell tracking,
lineaging analysis, morphogenesis analysis, and morphodynamic analysis [8–10].
Submitted to the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks. Do not distribute.

