Permutation Equivariant Neural Functionals

Allan Zhou1

Kaien Yang1 Kaylee Burns1 Adriano Cardace2 Yiding Jiang3
Samuel Sokota3 J. Zico Kolter3 Chelsea Finn1
1
Stanford University 2 University of Bologna 3 Carnegie Mellon University
ayz@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
This work studies the design of neural networks that can process the weights or
gradients of other neural networks, which we refer to as neural functional networks
(NFNs). Despite a wide range of potential applications, including learned optimization, processing implicit neural representations, network editing, and policy
evaluation, there are few unifying principles for designing effective architectures
that process the weights of other networks. We approach the design of neural
functionals through the lens of symmetry, in particular by focusing on the permutation symmetries that arise in the weights of deep feedforward networks because
hidden layer neurons have no inherent order. We introduce a framework for building permutation equivariant neural functionals, whose architectures encode these
symmetries as an inductive bias. The key building blocks of this framework are
NF-Layers (neural functional layers) that we constrain to be permutation equivariant through an appropriate parameter sharing scheme. In our experiments, we
find that permutation equivariant neural functionals are effective on a diverse set of
tasks that require processing the weights of MLPs and CNNs, such as predicting
classifier generalization, producing “winning ticket” sparsity masks for initializations, and classifying or editing implicit neural representations (INRs). In addition,
we provide code for our models and experiments1 .

1

Introduction

As deep neural networks have become increasingly prevalent across various domains, there has
been a growing interest in techniques for processing their weights and gradients as data. Example
applications include learnable optimizers for neural network training [3, 56, 2, 44], extracting
information from implicit neural representations of data [61, 45, 58], corrective editing of network
weights [57, 11, 46], policy evaluation [24], and Bayesian inference given networks as evidence [60].
We refer to functions of a neural network’s weight-space (such as weights, gradients, or sparsity
masks) as neural functionals; when these functions are themselves neural networks, we call them
neural functional networks (NFNs).
In this work, we design neural functional networks by incorporating relevant symmetries directly
into the architecture, following a general line of work in “geometric deep learning” [8, 54, 34, 5].
For neural functionals, the symmetries of interest are transformations of a network’s weights that
preserve the network’s behavior. In particular, we focus on neuron permutation symmetries, which
are those that arise from the fact that the neurons of hidden layers have no inherent order.
Neuron permutation symmetries are simplest in feedforward networks, such as multilayer perceptrons
(MLPs) and basic convolutional neural networks (CNNs). These symmetries are induced by the
fact that the neurons in each hidden layer of a feedforward network can be arbitrarily permuted
without changing its behavior [27]. In MLPs, permuting the neurons in hidden layer i corresponds to
1

https://github.com/AllanYangZhou/nfn

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

