Binary Classification with Confidence Difference

Wei Wang1,2 , Lei Feng3,2 , Yuchen Jiang4 , Gang Niu2 , Min-Ling Zhang5 , Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
3
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
5
Southeast University, Nanjing, China
wangw@g.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp lfengqaq@gmail.com
jiangyuchen.jyc@alibaba-inc.com gang.niu.ml@gmail.com
zhangml@seu.edu.cn sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Recently, learning with soft labels has been shown to achieve better performance
than learning with hard labels in terms of model generalization, calibration, and
robustness. However, collecting pointwise labeling confidence for all training
examples can be challenging and time-consuming in real-world scenarios. This
paper delves into a novel weakly supervised binary classification problem called
confidence-difference (ConfDiff) classification. Instead of pointwise labeling confidence, we are given only unlabeled data pairs with confidence difference that
specifies the difference in the probabilities of being positive. We propose a riskconsistent approach to tackle this problem and show that the estimation error bound
achieves the optimal convergence rate. We also introduce a risk correction approach to mitigate overfitting problems, whose consistency and convergence rate
are also proven. Extensive experiments on benchmark data sets and a real-world
recommender system data set validate the effectiveness of our proposed approaches
in exploiting the supervision information of the confidence difference.

1

Introduction

Recent years have witnessed the prevalence of deep learning and its successful applications. However,
the success is built on the basis of the collection of large amounts of data with unique and accurate
labels. However, in many real-world scenarios, it is often difficult to satisfy such requirements.
To circumvent the difficulty, various weakly supervised learning problems have been investigated
accordingly, including but not limited to semi-supervised learning [1, 2, 3, 4], label-noise learning [5,
6, 7, 8, 9], positive-unlabeled learning [10, 11, 12], partial-label learning [13, 14, 15, 16, 17],
unlabeled-unlabeled learning [18, 19], and similarity-based classification [20, 21, 22].
Learning with soft labels has been shown to achieve better performance than learning with hard
labels in the context of supervised learning [23, 24], where each example is equipped with pointwise
labeling confidence indicating the degree to which the labels describe the example. The advantages
have been validated in many aspects, including model generalization [25, 26], calibration [27, 28], and
robustness [29, 30]. For example, with the help of soft labels, knowledge distillation [25, 31] transfers
knowledge from a large teacher network to a small student network. The student network can be
trained more efficiently and reliably with the soft labels generated by the teacher network [32, 33, 34].
However, collecting a large number of training examples with pointwise labeling confidence may be
demanding under many circumstances since it is challenging to describe the labeling confidence for
each training example exactly [35, 36, 37]. Different annotators may give different values of pointwise
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

