CEIL: Generalized Contextual Imitation Learning

Jinxin Liu1,2∗ Li He1∗

Yachen Kang1,2

Donglin Wang1,4

Zifeng Zhuang1,2

Huazhe Xu3,5,6

1

4

Westlake University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tsinghua University
Westlake Institute for Advanced Study 5 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute 6 Shanghai AI Lab

Abstract
In this paper, we present ContExtual Imitation Learning (CEIL), a general and
broadly applicable algorithm for imitation learning (IL). Inspired by the formulation of hindsight information matching, we derive CEIL by explicitly learning a
hindsight embedding function together with a contextual policy using the hindsight
embeddings. To achieve the expert matching objective for IL, we advocate for
optimizing a contextual variable such that it biases the contextual policy towards
mimicking expert behaviors. Beyond the typical learning from demonstrations
(LfD) setting, CEIL is a generalist that can be effectively applied to multiple settings
including: 1) learning from observations (LfO), 2) offline IL, 3) cross-domain IL
(mismatched experts), and 4) one-shot IL settings. Empirically, we evaluate CEIL
on the popular MuJoCo tasks (online) and the D4RL dataset (offline). Compared to
prior state-of-the-art baselines, we show that CEIL is more sample-efficient in most
online IL tasks and achieves better or competitive performances in offline tasks.

1

Introduction

Imitation learning (IL) allows agents to learn from expert demonstrations. Initially developed with a
supervised learning paradigm [58, 63], IL can be extended and reformulated with a general expert
matching objective, which aims to generate policies that produce trajectories with low distributional
distances to expert demonstrations [30]. This formulation allows IL to be extended to various
new settings: 1) online IL where interactions with the environment are allowed, 2) learning from
observations (LfO) where expert actions are absent, 3) offline IL where agents learn from limited
expert data and a fixed dataset of sub-optimal and reward-free experience, 4) cross-domain IL where
the expert demonstrations come from another domain (i.e., environment) that has different transition
dynamics, and 5) one-shot IL which expects to recover the expert behaviors when only one expert
trajectory is observed for a new IL task.
Modern IL algorithms introduce various designs or mathematical principles to cater to the expert
matching objective in a specific scenario. For example, the LfO setting requires particular considerations regarding the absent expert actions, e.g., learning an inverse dynamics function [5, 65]. Besides,
out-of-distribution issues in offline IL require specialized modifications to the learning objective,
such as introducing additional policy/value regularization [32, 72]. However, such a methodology,
designing an individual formulation for each IL setting, makes it difficult to scale up a specific IL
algorithm to more complex tasks beyond its original IL setting, e.g., online IL methods often suffer
severe performance degradation in offline IL settings. Furthermore, realistic IL tasks are often not
subject to a particular IL setting but consist of a mixture of them. For example, we may have access
∗

Equal contributions. Corresponding author: Donglin Wang <wangdonglin@westlake.edu.cn>

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

