Maximum Independent Set:
Self-Training through Dynamic Programming

Lorenzo Brusca∗ Lars C.P.M. Quaedvlieg∗ Stratis Skoulakis∗
Grigorios G Chrysos† Volkan Cevher
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
{[first name].[last name]}@epfl.ch

Abstract
This work presents a graph neural network (GNN) framework for solving the
maximum independent set (MIS) problem, inspired by dynamic programming
(DP). Specifically, given a graph, we propose a DP-like recursive algorithm based
on GNNs that firstly constructs two smaller sub-graphs, predicts the one with the
larger MIS, and then uses it in the next recursive call. To train our algorithm,
we require annotated comparisons of different graphs concerning their MIS size.
Annotating the comparisons with the output of our algorithm leads to a self-training
process that results in more accurate self-annotation of the comparisons and vice
versa. We provide numerical evidence showing the superiority of our method vs
prior methods in multiple synthetic and real-world datasets.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved unprecedented success in extracting intricate patterns
directly from data without the need for handcrafted rules, while still generalizing well to new and
previously unseen instances [He et al., 2016, Vaswani et al., 2017]. Among other applications,
this success has led to the development of frameworks that utilize DNNs to solve combinatorial
optimization (CO) problems, such as the Traveling Salesman Problem [Xing and Tu, 2020, Hu et al.,
2020, Prates et al., 2019], the Job-Shop Scheduling Problem [Zhang et al., 2020, Park et al., 2021],
and the Quadratic Assignment Problem [Nowak et al., 2017].
A core challenge for deep learning approaches on CO is the lack of training data. Annotating
such data requires the solution of a huge number of instances of the CO, hence such supervised
learning approaches are computationally infeasible for NP-hard problems [Yehuda et al., 2020].
Circumventing this difficulty is key to unlocking the full potential of otherwise broadly applicable
DNNs for CO.
Our work demonstrates how classical ideas in CO together with DNNs can lead to a scalable selfsupervised learning approach, mitigating the lack of training data. Concretely, we focus on the
Maximum Independent Set (MIS) problem: Given a graph G(V, E), MIS asks for a set of nodes of
maximum cardinality such that no two nodes in the selected set are connected with an edge. MIS
is an NP-hard problem with several hand-crafted heuristics (e.g., greedy heuristic, local search).
More recently, several deep learning approaches have been proposed [Karalias and Loukas, 2020,
Toenshoff et al., 2019, Schuetz et al., 2022a].
Our approach involves the following steps to determine an MIS in a graph. We use graph neural
networks (GNNs) [Wu et al., 2020] to enable a model to generate approximate maximum independent
sets after training on data that was annotated by the model itself. For this purpose, we draw inspiration
*
†

These authors contributed equally to this work.
Work done while at EPFL. Currently at University of Wisconsin-Madison; [surname]@wisc.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

