Robust and Actively Secure
Serverless Collaborative Learning

Olive Franzese∗ † 1 , Adam Dziedzic∗‡ 5 , Christopher A. Choquette-Choo3 ,
Mark R. Thomas2 , Muhammad Ahmad Kaleem2 , Stephan Rabanser2 , Congyu Fang2
Somesh Jha3,4 , Nicolas Papernot2 , Xiao Wang1
1
Northwestern University, 2 University of Toronto and Vector Institute, 3 Google,
4
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 5 CISPA

Abstract
Collaborative machine learning (ML) is widely used to enable institutions to learn
better models from distributed data. While collaborative approaches to learning
intuitively protect user data, they remain vulnerable to either the server, the clients,
or both, deviating from the protocol. Indeed, because the protocol is asymmetric, a
malicious server can abuse its power to reconstruct client data points. Conversely,
malicious clients can corrupt learning with malicious updates. Thus, both clients
and servers require a guarantee when the other cannot be trusted to fully cooperate.
In this work, we propose a peer-to-peer (P2P) learning scheme that is secure against
malicious servers and robust to malicious clients. Our core contribution is a generic
framework that transforms any (compatible) algorithm for robust aggregation of
model updates to the setting where servers and clients can act maliciously. Finally,
we demonstrate the computational efficiency of our approach even with 1-million
parameter models trained by 100s of peers on standard datasets.

1

Introduction

To leverage data that is located across different clients, service providers increasingly resort to
collaborative forms of distributed machine learning. Rather than centralize the data on a single server,
data remains on the owner’s (client’s) device(s), which could be a consumer’s phone or bank/hospital’s
local data center. Take the canonical example of federated learning (FL) [34]. Rather than share data,
clients instead send model updates to the server. Our work caters to settings where neither clients nor
servers can be entirely trusted to faithfully participate in the Collaborative Learning (CL) protocol.
For example, consider if a group of banks wished to learn a better fraud detection model. Banks may
not be able to directly share data [15] and further because banking is a competitive industry, it must
be assumed that banks will deviate from the protocol if it serves their interest. On one hand, malicious
server banks may breach the intuitive confidentiality of CL. A long line of work [9, 10, 24, 37, 43,
49, 50, 52] has shown that when the server acts maliciously, it can, for instance, construct model
parameter values that exactly extract client data from (even aggregated) model updates. To protect
client data from servers acting maliciously, it is thus paramount to design approaches to CL where no
single server can have full control over the orchestration of the protocol. On the other hand, malicious
client banks may entirely prevent learning by submitting poor updates. This may be intentional as
in model poisoning attacks [2, 6, 45, 46] or unintentional if their dataset contained malformed data.
Though a separate line of work [25, 26, 29, 30, 32, 38, 48] has studied how to robustly learn in the face
of malicious updates (or data), there are none that have studied how to integrate such robust learning
algorithms within a protocol that is secure to malicious servers. In this work, we design the first
scheme that is robust to the harms of both malicious server(s) and clients, which are shown in Figure 1.
∗

Equal Contribution.
Correspondence to: nicholasfranzese2026@u.northwestern.edu and adam.dziedzic@cispa.de
‡
Project Lead. Work done while the author was at the University of Toronto and Vector Institute.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

