On the Powerfulness of Textual Outlier Exposure
for Visual OoD Detection
Sangha Park1 , Jisoo Mok1 , Dahuin Jung1 , Saehyung Lee1 , Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
{wiarae, magicshop1118, annajung0625, halo8218, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Successful detection of Out-of-Distribution (OoD) data is becoming increasingly
important to ensure safe deployment of neural networks. One of the main challenges in OoD detection is that neural networks output overconfident predictions on
OoD data, make it difficult to determine OoD-ness of data solely based on their predictions. Outlier exposure addresses this issue by introducing an additional loss that
encourages low-confidence predictions on OoD data during training. While outlier
exposure has shown promising potential in improving OoD detection performance,
all previous studies on outlier exposure have been limited to utilizing visual outliers.
Drawing inspiration from the recent advancements in vision-language pre-training,
this paper venture out to the uncharted territory of textual outlier exposure. First,
we uncover the benefits of using textual outliers by replacing real or virtual outliers
in the image-domain with textual equivalents. Then, we propose various ways
of generating preferable textual outliers. Our extensive experiments demonstrate
that generated textual outliers achieve competitive performance on large-scale
OoD and hard OoD benchmarks. Furthermore, we conduct empirical analyses
of textual outliers to provide primary criteria for designing advantageous textual
outliers: near-distribution, descriptiveness, and inclusion of visual semantics. Code
is available at https://github.com/wiarae/TOE

1

Introduction

The standard assumption when deploying neural networks is that both the train and test data will
fall under the same distribution, in which case, test data are considered to be in-distribution (ID).
However, in the real world, they often encounter out-of-distribution (OoD) data, which refers to data
that are distant from the training data distribution. Because the generalization capacity of neural
networks does not extend outside the distribution of observed train data, OoD data can cause them to
perform poorly or even fail [11]. Therefore, it is important for neural networks to not only achieve
high accuracy on ID data but also successfully detect OoD data to preclude them from the inference
process. Unfortunately, neural networks yield highly over-confident predictions on OoD data, making
OoD detection a non-trivial research problem [39, 43].
One promising approach to OoD detection is “outlier exposure,” which modifies the training procedure
of neural networks [23, 18], such that they can accurately classify ID data while also reliably detecting
OoD data. To simultaneously accomplish the two training objectives, outlier exposure utilizes proxy
data that can emulate actual OoD data that the neural network may confront at test time. Outlier
exposure then defines a regularization term that encourages low-confidence predictions on those
proxy data. Finally, the neural network is optimized to minimize the regularization term in addition
*Corresponding author
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

