Epidemic Learning: Boosting Decentralized Learning
with Randomized Communication
Martijn de Vos ∗
Sadegh Farhadkhani †
Anne-Marie Kermarrec
Rafael Pires

Rachid Guerraoui
Rishi Sharma

EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
We present Epidemic Learning (EL), a simple yet powerful decentralized learning
(DL) algorithm that leverages changing communication topologies to achieve faster
model convergence compared to conventional DL approaches. At each round of EL,
each node sends its model updates to a random sample of s other nodes (in a system
of n nodes). We provide an extensive theoretical analysis of EL, demonstrating
that its changing topology culminates in superior convergence properties compared
to the state-of-the-art (static and dynamic) topologies. Considering smooth nonconvex loss functions, the number of transient iterations for EL, i.e., the rounds
3
required to achieve asymptotic linear speedup, is in O(n /s2 ) which outperforms
3
2
the best-known bound O(n ) by a factor of s , indicating the benefit of randomized
communication for DL. We empirically evaluate EL in a 96-node network and
compare its performance with state-of-the-art DL approaches. Our results illustrate
that EL converges up to 1.7× quicker than baseline DL algorithms and attains 2.2%
higher accuracy for the same communication volume.

1

Introduction

In Decentralized Learning (DL), multiple machines (or nodes) collaboratively train a machine learning
model without any central server [32, 37, 42]. Periodically, each node updates the model using its
local data, sends its model updates to other nodes, and averages the received model updates, all
without sharing raw data. Compared to centralized approaches [28], DL circumvents the need for
centralized control, ensures scalability [21, 32], and avoids imposing substantial communication
costs on a central server [58]. However, DL comes with its own challenges. The exchange of model
updates with all nodes can become prohibitively expensive in terms of communication costs as the
network size grows [25]. For this reason, nodes in DL algorithms usually exchange model updates
with only a small number of other nodes in a particular round, i.e., they perform partial averaging
instead of an All-Reduce (network-wide) averaging of local model updates [57].
A key element of DL algorithms is the communication topology, governing how model updates
are exchanged between nodes. The properties of the communication topology are critical for the
performance of DL approaches as it directly influences the speed of convergence [27, 54, 56, 52].
The seminal decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent (D-PSGD) algorithm and many of
its proposed variants rely on a static topology, i.e., each node exchanges its model with a set of
neighboring nodes that remain fixed throughout the training process [32]. More recent approaches
study changing topologies, i.e., topologies that change during training, with notable examples being
time-varying graphs [24, 36, 51], one-peer exponential graphs [57], EquiTopo [53], and Gossip
Learning [16, 17, 20]. We discuss these works in more detail in Section 5.
∗
†

Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Corresponding author <sadegh.farhadkhani@epfl.ch>.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

