Finding Order in Chaos: A Novel Data Augmentation
Method for Time Series in Contrastive Learning

Berken Utku Demirel
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
berken.demirel@inf.ethz.ch

Christian Holz
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
christian.holz@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The success of contrastive learning is well known to be dependent on data augmentation. Although the degree of data augmentations has been well controlled
by utilizing pre-defined techniques in some domains like vision, time-series data
augmentation is less explored and remains a challenging problem due to the complexity of the data generation mechanism, such as the intricate mechanism involved
in the cardiovascular system. Moreover, there is no widely recognized and general time-series augmentation method that can be applied across different tasks.
In this paper, we propose a novel data augmentation method for quasi-periodic
time-series tasks that aims to connect intra-class samples together, and thereby
find order in the latent space. Our method builds upon the well-known mixup
technique by incorporating a novel approach that accounts for the periodic nature of non-stationary time-series. Furthermore, by controlling the degree of
chaos created by data augmentation, our method leads to improved feature representations and performance on downstream tasks. We evaluate our proposed
method on three time-series tasks, including heart rate estimation, human activity recognition, and cardiovascular disease detection. Extensive experiments
against state-of-the-art methods show that the proposed approach outperforms prior
works on optimal data generation and known data augmentation techniques in
the three tasks, reflecting the effectiveness of the presented method. Source code:
https://github.com/eth-siplab/Finding_Order_in_Chaos.

1

Introduction

Self-supervised learning methods have gained significant attention as they enable the discovery of
meaningful representations from raw data without explicit annotations. These self-supervised methods
learn representations without labels by designing pretext tasks that transform the unsupervised
representation learning problem into a supervised one such as predicting the rotation of images [1],
or contexts [2, 3]. Among these methods, contrastive learning (CL), which learns to distinguish
semantically similar examples over dissimilar ones, stands out as a powerful approach in selfsupervised learning across various domains including computer vision [4–6], speech recognition [7–
10], and natural language processing [11–14].
The success of contrastive learning relies on the creation of similar and dissimilar examples, which
is typically achieved through the use of data augmentations [15, 16]. Recently, it was shown that
data augmentations have a role to create a “chaos” between different intra-class samples such
that they become more alike. For example, two different cars become very similar when they
are both cropped to the wheels. [17]. However, in time-series data, creating similar samples with
augmentation techniques is more challenging due to the complexity of the dynamical data generation
mechanisms [18]. Moreover, research on contrastive learning for time series has demonstrated the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

