Identifiable Contrastive Learning with
Automatic Feature Importance Discovery

Qi Zhang1∗
Yifei Wang2∗
Yisen Wang1,3†
National Key Lab of General Artificial Intelligence,
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
1

Abstract
Existing contrastive learning methods rely on pairwise sample contrast zx⊤ zx′ to
learn data representations, but the learned features often lack clear interpretability
from a human perspective. Theoretically, it lacks feature identifiability and different
initialization may lead to totally different features. In this paper, we study a new
method named tri-factor contrastive learning (triCL) that involves a 3-factor contrast
in the form of zx⊤ Szx′ , where S = diag(s1 , . . . , sk ) is a learnable diagonal matrix
that automatically captures the importance of each feature. We show that by this
simple extension, triCL can not only obtain identifiable features that eliminate
randomness but also obtain more interpretable features that are ordered according
to the importance matrix S. We show that features with high importance have
nice interpretability by capturing common classwise features, and obtain superior
performance when evaluated for image retrieval using a few features. The proposed
triCL objective is general and can be applied to different contrastive learning
methods like SimCLR and CLIP. We believe that it is a better alternative to existing
2-factor contrastive learning by improving its identifiability and interpretability
with minimal overhead. Code is available at https://github.com/PKU-ML/
Tri-factor-Contrastive-Learning.

1

Introduction

As a representative self-supervised paradigm, contrastive learning obtains meaningful representations
and achieves state-of-the-art performance in various tasks by maximizing the feature similarity zx⊤ zx+
between samples augmented from the same images while minimizing the similarity zx⊤ zx− between
independent samples [4, 20, 15, 5, 18]. Besides the empirical success, recent works also discuss the
theoretical properties and the generalization performance of contrastive learning [32, 30, 18].
However, there still exist many properties of contrastive learning that are not guaranteed. In this paper,
we focus on a significant one: the feature identifiability. Feature identifiability in the representation
learning refers to the property there exists a single, global optimal solution to the learning objective.
Consequently, the learned representations can be reproducible regardless of the initialization and
the optimizing procedure is useful. As a well-studied topic, identifiability is a desirable property
for various tasks, including but not limited to, transfer learning [10], fair classification [26] and
causal inference [24]. The previous works propose that contrastive learning obtains the linear feature
identifiability while lacking exact feature identifiability, i.e., the optimal solutions obtain a freedom
of linear transformations [29]. As a result, the different features are coupled, which hurts the
interpretability and performance of learned representations.
∗
†

Equal Contribution.
Corresponding Author: Yisen Wang (yisen.wang@pku.edu.cn).

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

