M ODEL S PIDER: Learning to Rank
Pre-Trained Models Efficiently

Yi-Kai Zhang1 , Ting-Ji Huang1 , Yao-Xiang Ding2 , De-Chuan Zhan1 , Han-Jia Ye1,B
1
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
{zhangyk,huangtj,zhandc,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn yxding@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Figuring out which Pre-Trained Model (PTM) from a model zoo fits the target task
is essential to take advantage of plentiful model resources. With the availability of
numerous heterogeneous PTMs from diverse fields, efficiently selecting the most
suitable one is challenging due to the time-consuming costs of carrying out forward
or backward passes over all PTMs. In this paper, we propose M ODEL S PIDER,
which tokenizes both PTMs and tasks by summarizing their characteristics into vectors to enable efficient PTM selection. By leveraging the approximated performance
of PTMs on a separate set of training tasks, M ODEL S PIDER learns to construct
representation and measure the fitness score between a model-task pair via their
representation. The ability to rank relevant PTMs higher than others generalizes to
new tasks. With the top-ranked PTM candidates, we further learn to enrich task repr.
with their PTM-specific semantics to re-rank the PTMs for better selection. M ODEL
S PIDER balances efficiency and selection ability, making PTM selection like a
spider preying on a web. M ODEL S PIDER exhibits promising performance across
diverse model zoos, including visual models and Large Language Models (LLMs).
Code is available at https://github.com/zhangyikaii/Model-Spider.

1

Introduction

Fine-tuning Pre-Trained Models (PTMs) on downstream tasks has shown remarkable improvements
in various fields [35, 26, 75, 42, 16], making “pre-training → fine-tuning” the de-facto paradigm in
many real-world applications. A model zoo contains diverse PTMs in their architectures and functionalities [1, 12], but a randomly selected PTM makes their helpfulness for a particular downstream
task vary unpredictably [80, 70, 102]. One important step to take advantage of PTM resources is to
identify the most helpful PTM in a model zoo — estimating and ranking the transferabilities of PTMs
— with the downstream task’s data accurately and efficiently.
Which PTM is the most helpful? A direct answer is to enumerate all PTMs and evaluate the
performance of their corresponding fine-tuned models. However, the high computational cost of
the backward steps in fine-tuning makes this solution impractical. Some existing methods estimate
proxies of transferability with only forward passes based on the target task’s features extracted by
PTMs [9, 97, 66, 55, 113, 27, 71, 25, 93]. Nowadays, a public model zoo often contains hundreds
and thousands of PTMs [104]. Then, the computational burden of forward passes will be amplified,
let alone for the time-consuming forward passes of some complicated PTMs. Therefore, the efficiency
of searching helpful PTMs and estimating the transferability should be further emphasized.
In this paper, we propose M ODEL S PIDER, the SPecification InDuced Expression and Ranking of
PTMs, for accurate and efficient PTM selection. In detail, we tokenize all PTMs and tasks into
vectors that capture their general properties and their relationship with each other. For example,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

