Invariant Learning via Probability of Sufficient and
Necessary Causes

Mengyue Yang1 , Zhen Fang2 , Yonggang Zhang3∗ ,
Yali Du , Furui Liu5 , Jean-Francois Ton6 , Jianhong Wang7 , Jun Wang1∗
1
University College London, 2 University of Technology Sydney
3
Hong Kong Baptist University, 4 King’s College London
5
Zhejiang Lab, 6 ByteDance Research, 7 University of Manchester
mengyue.yang.20@ucl.ac.uk, zhen.fang@uts.edu.au,
csygzhang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, yali.du@kcl.ac.uk
liufurui@zhejianglab.com, jeanfrancois@bytedance.com
jianhong.wang@manchester.ac.uk,jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk
4

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is indispensable for learning models
in the wild, where testing distribution typically unknown and different from the
training. Recent methods derived from causality have shown great potential in
achieving OOD generalization. However, existing methods mainly focus on the
invariance property of causes, while largely overlooking the property of sufficiency
and necessity conditions. Namely, a necessary but insufficient cause (feature) is
invariant to distribution shift, yet it may not have required accuracy. By contrast,
a sufficient yet unnecessary cause (feature) tends to fit specific data well but may
have a risk of adapting to a new domain. To capture the information of sufficient
and necessary causes, we employ a classical concept, the probability of sufficiency
and necessary causes (PNS), which indicates the probability of whether one is the
necessary and sufficient cause. To associate PNS with OOD generalization, we
propose PNS risk and formulate an algorithm to learn representation with a high
PNS value. We theoretically analyze and prove the generalizability of the PNS
risk. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world benchmarks demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed method. The detailed implementation can be found
at the GitHub repository: https://github.com/ymy4323460/CaSN.

1

Introduction

The traditional supervised learning methods heavily depend on the in-distribution (ID) assumption,
where the training data and test data are sampled from the same data distribution (Shen et al., 2021;
Peters et al., 2016). However, the ID assumption may not be satisfied in some practical scenarios
like distribution shift (Zhang et al., 2013; Sagawa et al., 2019), which leads to the failure of these
traditional supervised learning methods. To relax the ID assumption, researchers have recently
started to study a different learning setting called out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. OOD
generalization aims to train a model using the ID data such that the model generalizes well in the
unseen test data that share the same semantics with ID data (Li et al., 2018b; Ahuja et al., 2021).
Recent works have proposed to solve the OOD generalization problem through the lens of causality
(Peters et al., 2016; Pfister et al., 2019; Rothenhäusler et al., 2018; Heinze-Deml et al., 2018; Gamella
∗

Corresponding Author: csygzhang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk; jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

