Online learning of long-range dependencies

Nicolas Zucchet∗ , Robert Meier∗ , Simon Schug∗
Asier Mujika, João Sacramento
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
{nzucchet,romeier,sschug,asierm,rjoao}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Online learning holds the promise of enabling efficient long-term credit assignment
in recurrent neural networks. However, current algorithms fall short of offline
backpropagation by either not being scalable or failing to learn long-range dependencies. Here we present a high-performance online learning algorithm that
merely doubles the memory and computational requirements of a single inference
pass. We achieve this by leveraging independent recurrent modules in multi-layer
networks, an architectural motif that has recently been shown to be particularly
powerful. Experiments on synthetic memory problems and on the challenging
long-range arena benchmark suite reveal that our algorithm performs competitively,
establishing a new standard for what can be achieved through online learning. This
ability to learn long-range dependencies offers a new perspective on learning in the
brain and opens a promising avenue in neuromorphic computing.

1

Introduction

How can the connections between neurons in a neural network be adjusted to improve behavior? This
question, known as the credit assignment problem, is central in both neuroscience [1] and machine
learning [2], owing to its fundamental importance for elucidating learning mechanisms in the brain
and constructing intelligent artificial systems. However, the complex and nonlinear nature of neural
network processing makes the precise allocation of credit an intricate task.
Deep learning provides a compelling solution to the credit assignment problem via gradient descent,
which refines network parameters along the locally most promising direction. For networks processing
temporal sequences, gradient computation is made possible by backpropagation-through-time [BPTT;
2–4]. BPTT stores and revisits neural activity in reverse-time order to understand how infinitesimal
changes to neural activity, and thus to network parameters, would have impacted the objective
function. One important drawback of this algorithm is its requirement to store the entire activity
trajectory in memory, which constrains the sequence length for exact gradient computation, impairing
the learning of long-term interactions. This constraint becomes a critical bottleneck when working
within memory-limited systems, such as neuromorphic hardware [5] and presumably the brain [6].
Alternatives to BPTT for gradient computation do exist. One such approach, forward-mode differentiation [7, 8], involves computing gradients online as the input sequence is processed, by keeping
track of the sensitivity of neural activity with respect to each of the network parameters. This marks a
qualitative departure from BPTT, as it prepares for all potential future trajectories simultaneously;
by contrast, BPTT focuses on improving the activity of a past trajectory. Importantly, the memory
footprint of this approach does not depend on sequence length. Still, it remains intractable for
real-world applications and likely infeasible in the brain due to its cubic memory scaling and quartic
computational complexity in the number of neurons. Recent research focused on approximation
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

