Energy Discrepancies: A Score-Independent Loss for
Energy-Based Models

Tobias Schröder1∗ Zijing Ou1† Jen Ning Lim2 ,
Yingzhen Li1 Sebastian J. Vollmer3 Andrew B. Duncan1,4
1
Imperial College London 2 University of Warwick 3 DFKI and RPTU Kaiserslautern
4
The Alan Turing Institute
{t.schroeder21, z.ou22, yingzhen.li, a.duncan}@imperial.ac.uk
jen-ning.lim@warwick.ac.uk sebastian.vollmer@dfki.de

Abstract
Energy-based models are a simple yet powerful class of probabilistic models, but
their widespread adoption has been limited by the computational burden of training
them. We propose a novel loss function called Energy Discrepancy (ED) which does
not rely on the computation of scores or expensive Markov chain Monte Carlo. We
show that energy discrepancy approaches the explicit score matching and negative
log-likelihood loss under different limits, effectively interpolating between both.
Consequently, minimum energy discrepancy estimation overcomes the problem
of nearsightedness encountered in score-based estimation methods, while also
enjoying theoretical guarantees. Through numerical experiments, we demonstrate
that ED learns low-dimensional data distributions faster and more accurately than
explicit score matching or contrastive divergence. For high-dimensional image
data, we describe how the manifold hypothesis puts limitations on our approach and
demonstrate the effectiveness of energy discrepancy by training the energy-based
model as a prior of a variational decoder model.

1

Introduction

Energy-Based Models (EBMs) are a class of parametric unnormalised probabilistic models of the
general form pebm ∝ exp(−U ) originally inspired by statistical physics. EBMs can be flexibly
modelled through a wide range of neural network functions which, in principle, permit the modelling
of any positive probability density. Through sampling and inference on the learned energy function,
the EBM can then be used as a generative model or in numerous other downstream tasks such as
improving robustness in classification or anomaly detection (Grathwohl et al., 2020), simulation-based
inference (Glaser et al., 2022), or learning neural set functions (Ou et al., 2022).
Despite their flexibility, EBMs are limited in machine learning applications by the difficulty of their
training. The normalisation constant of EBMs, also known as the partition function, is typically
intractable making standard techniques such as Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) infeasible.
For this reason, EBMs are commonly trained with an approximate maximum likelihood method called
Contrastive Divergence (CD) (Hinton, 2002) which approximates the gradient of the log-likelihood
using short runs of a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method. However, contrastive divergence
with short run MCMC leads to malformed estimators of the energy function (Nijkamp et al., 2020a),
even for relatively simple restricted Boltzmann-machines (Carreira-Perpiñán & Hinton, 2005). This
can, in part, be attributed to the fact that contrastive divergence is not the gradient of any fixed
∗
†

Correspondence to: Tobias Schröder, t.schroeder21@imperial.ac.uk
Code: https://github.com/J-zin/energy-discrepancy

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

