Controlling Text-to-Image Diffusion by Orthogonal Finetuning

Zeju Qiu1,*

Weiyang Liu1,2,*,† Haiwen Feng1 Yuxuan Xue3 Yao Feng1 Zhen Liu1,4
Dan Zhang3,5 Adrian Weller2,6 Bernhard Schölkopf1
1
MPI for Intelligent Systems - Tübingen 2 University of Cambridge 3 University of Tübingen
4
Mila, Université de Montréal 5 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 6 The Alan Turing Institute
*
Equal contribution † Project lead oft.wyliu.com

Abstract
Large text-to-image diffusion models have impressive capabilities in generating
photorealistic images from text prompts. How to effectively guide or control these
powerful models to perform different downstream tasks becomes an important open
problem. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a principled finetuning method
– Orthogonal Finetuning (OFT), for adapting text-to-image diffusion models to
downstream tasks. Unlike existing methods, OFT can provably preserve hyperspherical energy which characterizes the pairwise neuron relationship on the unit
hypersphere. We find that this property is crucial for preserving the semantic generation ability of text-to-image diffusion models. To improve finetuning stability,
we further propose Constrained Orthogonal Finetuning (COFT) which imposes
an additional radius constraint to the hypersphere. Specifically, we consider two
important finetuning text-to-image tasks: subject-driven generation where the goal
is to generate subject-specific images given a few images of a subject and a text
prompt, and controllable generation where the goal is to enable the model to
take in additional control signals. We empirically show that our OFT framework
outperforms existing methods in generation quality and convergence speed.

1

Introduction

Recent text-to-image diffusion models [45, 50, 53] achieve impressive performance in text-guided
control for high-fidelity image generation. Despite strong results, text guidance can still be ambiguous
and insufficient to provide fine-grained and accurate control to the generated images. To address this
shortcoming, we target two types of text-to-image generation tasks in this paper:
• Subject-driven generation [51]: Given just a few images of a subject, the task is to generate
images of the same subject in a different context using the guidance of a text prompt.
• Controllable generation [38, 68]: Given an additional control signal (e.g., canny edges, segmentation maps), the task is to generate images following such a control signal and a text prompt.
Both tasks essentially boil down to how to effectively finetune text-to-image diffusion models without
losing the pretraining generative performance. We summarize the desiderata for an effective finetuning
method as: (1) training efficiency: having fewer trainable parameters and number of training epochs,
and (2) generalizability preservation: preserving the high-fidelity and diverse generative performance.
To this end, finetuning is typically done either by updating the neuron weights by a small learning
rate (e.g., [51]) or by adding a small component with re-parameterized neuron weights (e.g., [22, 68]).
Despite simplicity, neither finetuning strategy is able to guarantee the preservation of pretraining
generative performance. There is also a lack of principled understanding towards designing a good
finetuning strategy and finding suitable hyperparameters such as the number of training epochs.
A key difficulty is the lack of a measure for quantifying the preservation of pretrained generative
ability. Existing finetuning methods implicitly assume that a smaller Euclidean distance between the
This work was finished when ZQ was a research intern hosted by WL at MPI for Intelligent Systems.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

