Bayesian Risk-Averse Q-Learning with Streaming
Observations
Yuhao Wang
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
yuhaowang@gatech.edu

Enlu Zhou
School of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332
enlu.zhou@isye.gatech.edu

Abstract
We consider a robust reinforcement learning problem, where a learning agent learns
from a simulated training environment. To account for the model misspecification
between this training environment and the real environment due to lack of data,
we adopt a formulation of Bayesian risk MDP (BRMDP) with infinite horizon,
which uses Bayesian posterior to estimate the transition model and impose a
risk measure to account for the model uncertainty. Observations from the real
environment that are out of the agent’s control arrive periodically and are utilized
by the agent to update the Bayesian posterior to reduce model uncertainty. We
theoretically demonstrate that BRMDP balances the trade-off between robustness
and conservativeness, and we further develop a multi-stage Bayesian risk-averse
Q-learning algorithm to solve BRMDP with streaming observations from real
environment. The proposed algorithm learns a risk-averse yet optimal policy that
depends on the availability of real-world observations. We provide a theoretical
guarantee of strong convergence for the proposed algorithm.

1

Introduction

Markov Decision Process (MDP) is widely applied in the Reinforcement Learning (RL) community
to model sequential decision-making, where the underlying transition process is a Markov Process
for a given policy. The Q-learning algorithm, which was first proposed in [28], learns the optimal
Q-function of the infinite-horizon MDP. The Q-function is a function in terms of the state and action
pair (s, a), which denotes the expected reward when action a is taken at the initial state s and optimal
action is taken at subsequent stages. In a Q-learning algorithm, the decision maker updates the value
of the Q-function by constantly interacting with the training environment and observing the reward
and transition each time. The training environment is often the estimate of the real environment
(where the policy is actually implemented) through past observed data. Implementing the policy
learned from the training environment in the real environment directly can be risky, because of model
misspecification, which is caused by the lack of historical data and possible environment shift. For
example, in an inventory management problem where the demand follows some unknown distribution,
we have limited observations of past demand realizations or only partially observed data if unfulfilled
lost orders are not observed.
One common approach is to consider a distributionally robust formulation, where one assumes the
embedding unknown distribution belongs to some ambiguity set. This ambiguity set is usually chosen
as a neighborhood of the reference distribution (estimated from data). For example, [23] considered
the distributionally robust policy learning for the contextual bandit problems, and [32, 17, 30] studied
the distributionally robust policy learning for the discounted RL setting. In particular, [14] and [15]
considered Q-learning methods for distributionally robust RL with a discounted reward, where [14]
constructed the ambiguity set using the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence whereas [15] used the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

