Riemannian stochastic optimization methods
avoid strict saddle points

Ya-Ping Hsieh,

Mohammad Reza Karimi, Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
{yaping.hsieh, mkarimi}@inf.ethz.ch, krausea@ethz.ch
Panayotis Mertikopoulos
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, LIG & Archimedes RU, NKUA
panayotis.mertikopoulos@imag.fr

Abstract
Many modern machine learning applications – from online principal component
analysis to covariance matrix identification and dictionary learning – can be formulated as minimization problems on Riemannian manifolds, typically solved with
a Riemannian stochastic gradient method (or some variant thereof). However, in
many cases of interest, the resulting minimization problem is not geodesically
convex, so the convergence of the chosen solver to a desirable solution - i.e., a
local minimizer - is by no means guaranteed. In this paper, we study precisely
this question, that is, whether stochastic Riemannian optimization algorithms are
guaranteed to avoid saddle points with probability 1. For generality, we study a
family of retraction-based methods which, in addition to having a potentially much
lower per-iteration cost relative to Riemannian gradient descent, include other
widely used algorithms, such as natural policy gradient methods and mirror descent
in ordinary convex spaces. In this general setting, we show that, under mild assumptions for the ambient manifold and the oracle providing gradient information,
the policies under study avoid strict saddle points / submanifolds with probability
1, from any initial condition. This result provides an important sanity check for
the use of gradient methods on manifolds as it shows that, almost always, the limit
state of a stochastic Riemannian algorithm can only be a local minimizer.

1

Introduction

Modern machine learning systems have achieved remarkable success in the efficient optimization
of highly non-convex functions using straightforward Euclidean techniques like stochastic gradient
descent. A widely accepted hypothesis to explain this phenomenon is that, when the learning system
under study – e.g., a neural network – is sufficiently expressive, local minimizers are essentially as
good as global ones [21, 35]; by this token, a training algorithm can attain satisfactory performance
by simply evading saddle points of the model’s loss surface.
This observation has sparked a far-reaching research thread examining the behavior of various
algorithms around saddle points in non-convex functions. Informally, these studies aim to tackle two
fundamental questions:
Q1 : When does a given scheme, like stochastic gradient descent, avoid saddle points?
Q2 : Can we augment a given scheme so that it efficiently escapes saddle points?
Of the above questions, Q1 focuses on explaining the empirical success of commonly used schemes,
while the resolution of Q2 usually revolves around proposing new schemes with desirable escape
guarantees. These complementary perspectives have been extensively studied over the past decade,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

