Learning Time-Invariant Representations for
Individual Neurons from Population Dynamics

Lu Mi1,2,∗, Trung Le2,∗ , Tianxing He2 , Eli Shlizerman2 , Uygar Sümbül1
1
Allen Institute for Brain Science
2
University of Washington
{lu.mi,uygars}@alleninstitute.org
{tle45, shlizee}@uw.edu
goosehe@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Neurons can display highly variable dynamics. While such variability presumably
supports the wide range of behaviors generated by the organism, their gene expressions are relatively stable in the adult brain. This suggests that neuronal activity is
a combination of its time-invariant identity and the inputs the neuron receives from
the rest of the circuit. Here, we propose a self-supervised learning based method to
assign time-invariant representations to individual neurons based on permutation-,
and population size-invariant summary of population recordings. We fit dynamical
models to neuronal activity to learn a representation by considering the activity of
both the individual and the neighboring population. Our self-supervised approach
and use of implicit representations enable robust inference against imperfections
such as partial overlap of neurons across sessions, trial-to-trial variability, and
limited availability of molecular (transcriptomic) labels for downstream supervised
tasks. We demonstrate our method on a public multimodal dataset of mouse cortical
neuronal activity and transcriptomic labels. We report > 35% improvement in predicting the transcriptomic subclass identity and > 20% improvement in predicting
class identity with respect to the state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Population recordings of neuronal activity enable relating behaviorally-relevant dynamics to the
summary activity of the recorded population. While this has produced numerous insights into
how the brain works [1], the activity and identity of individual neurons should be analyzed to
achieve a mechanistic understanding at the implementation level [2], which may hold the key to new
biologically-inspired algorithms [3, 4]. Moreover, emerging experimental evidence suggests that
neurons have diverse yet stable molecular identities, which can dictate their computational roles [5, 6].
Joint (i.e., multimodal) profiling and alignment of electrophysiological features and gene expression
of individual neurons suggest a good correspondence between these two modalities in slice experiments [7–11]. Recently, population recordings of calcium activity followed by spatially registered
single-cell transcriptomic recordings enabled similar joint profiling of in-vivo activity and molecular
identity [6]. Importantly, such activity depends on both the intrinsic physiological properties of
neurons and the exogenous inputs (synaptic and modulatory) to those neurons, which are themselves
a product of both sensory inputs to the organism and the recurrent activity in the brain.
While recording from molecularly defined neuron populations has been a popular method, these
experiments do not allow for studying the concurrent responses of different neuron types to stimuli.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

