Content-based Unrestricted Adversarial Attack
Zhaoyu Chen1,2,∗, Bo Li2,† , Shuang Wu2 , Kaixun Jiang1 , Shouhong Ding2 , Wenqiang Zhang1,3,†
1
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{zhaoyuchen20, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn,
njumagiclibo@gmail.com, {calvinwu, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
Unrestricted adversarial attacks typically manipulate the semantic content of an
image (e.g., color or texture) to create adversarial examples that are both effective and photorealistic, demonstrating their ability to deceive human perception
and deep neural networks with stealth and success. However, current works usually sacrifice unrestricted degrees and subjectively select some image content to
guarantee the photorealism of unrestricted adversarial examples, which limits
its attack performance. To ensure the photorealism of adversarial examples and
boost attack performance, we propose a novel unrestricted attack framework called
Content-based Unrestricted Adversarial Attack. By leveraging a low-dimensional
manifold that represents natural images, we map the images onto the manifold and
optimize them along its adversarial direction. Therefore, within this framework,
we implement Adversarial Content Attack (ACA) based on Stable Diffusion and
can generate high transferable unrestricted adversarial examples with various adversarial contents. Extensive experimentation and visualization demonstrate the
efficacy of ACA, particularly in surpassing state-of-the-art attacks by an average
of 13.3-50.4% and 16.8-48.0% in normally trained models and defense methods,
respectively.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have significantly progressed in many tasks [18, 7]. However, with
the rise of adversarial examples, the robustness of DNNs has been dramatically challenged [16].
Adversarial examples show the vulnerability of DNNs and expose security vulnerabilities in many
security-sensitive applications. To avoid potential risks and further research the robustness of DNNs,
it is of great value to expose as many “blind spots” of DNNs as possible at the current research stage.
Nowadays, various methods are proposed to generate adversarial examples [4, 5, 6]. To maintain
human visual imperceptibility and images’ photorealism, adversarial perturbations within the constraint of lp norm are generated by these adversarial attacks. However, it is well known that the
adversarial examples generated under lp norm have obvious limitations: firstly, they are not ideal in
terms of perceptual similarity and are still easily perceptible by humans [24, 23, 62]; secondly, these
adversarial perturbations are not natural enough and have an inevitable domain shift with the noise
in the natural world, resulting in the adversarial examples being different from the hard examples
that appear in the real world [64]. In addition, current defense methods against lp norm adversarial
examples overestimate their abilities, known as the Dunning-Kruger effect [28]. It can effectively
defend against lp norm adversarial examples but is not robust enough when facing new and unknown
attacks [25]. Therefore, unrestricted adversarial attacks are beginning to emerge, using unrestricted
but natural changes to replace small lp norm perturbations, which are more practically meaningful.
∗
†

This work was done when Zhaoyu Chen was an intern at Youtu Lab, Tencent.
indicates corresponding authors.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

