InfoPrompt: Information-Theoretic Soft Prompt
Tuning for Natural Language Understanding

Junda Wu1∗ Tong Yu2∗ Rui Wang3 Zhao Song2 Ruiyi Zhang2
Handong Zhao2 Chaochao Lu4† Shuai Li5‡ Ricardo Henao3,6
1
University of California, San Diego 2 Adobe Research 3 Duke University
4
University of Cambridge 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 6 KAUST
juw069@ucsd.edu
{tyu,zsong,ruizhang,hazhao}@adobe.com
{rw161,ricardo.henao}@duke.edu
cl641@cam.ac.uk shuaili8@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Soft prompt tuning achieves superior performances across a wide range of few-shot
tasks. However, the performances of prompt tuning can be highly sensitive to the
initialization of the prompts. We have also empirically observed that conventional
prompt tuning methods cannot encode and learn sufficient task-relevant information
from prompt tokens. In this work, we develop an information-theoretic framework
that formulates soft prompt tuning as maximizing the mutual information between
prompts and other model parameters (or encoded representations). This novel view
helps us to develop a more efficient, accurate and robust soft prompt tuning method,
InfoPrompt. With this framework, we develop two novel mutual information
based loss functions, to (i) explore proper prompt initialization for the downstream
tasks and learn sufficient task-relevant information from prompt tokens and (ii)
encourage the output representation from the pretrained language model to be more
aware of the task-relevant information captured in the learnt prompts. Extensive
experiments validate that InfoPrompt can significantly accelerate the convergence
of the prompt tuning and outperform traditional prompt tuning methods. Finally,
we provide a formal theoretical result to show that a gradient descent type algorithm
can be used to train our mutual information loss.

1

Introduction

Soft prompt tuning has shown great successes in a wide range of natural language processing tasks,
especially in low-resource scenarios [60, 37, 66]. With a relatively small size of prompt parameters
appended to the input of the context, the language model can be adapted to the downstream tasks
with the large scale pretrained parameters frozen. Compared with conventional fine tuning methods,
prompt tuning requires less memory and computational resources to update these significantly smaller
sized prompt parameters. In addition, in low-shot learning scenarios, prompt tuning can prevent the
language model from overfitting on the training data, thus maintaining the generalization ability of
pretrained language models.
However, recent works reveal that it is non-trivial to find a proper initialization of the prompt tokens.
Several works have investigated the effect of prompt initialization on the prompt tuning performances
*

These authors contributed equally to this work.
The work was done previously when this author was at the University of Cambridge. This author is now at
Shanghai AI Laboratory.
‡
Corresponding author.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

