When Do Transformers Shine in RL?
Decoupling Memory from Credit Assignment

Tianwei Ni
Mila, Université de Montréal
tianwei.ni@mila.quebec

Michel Ma
Mila, Université de Montréal
michel.ma@mila.quebec

Benjamin Eysenbach
Princeton University
eysenbach@princeton.edu

Pierre-Luc Bacon
Mila, Université de Montréal
pierre-luc.bacon@mila.quebec

Abstract
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms face two distinct challenges: learning
effective representations of past and present observations, and determining how
actions influence future returns. Both challenges involve modeling long-term dependencies. The Transformer architecture has been very successful to solve problems
that involve long-term dependencies, including in the RL domain. However, the
underlying reason for the strong performance of Transformer-based RL methods
remains unclear: is it because they learn effective memory, or because they perform
effective credit assignment? After introducing formal definitions of memory length
and credit assignment length, we design simple configurable tasks to measure these
distinct quantities. Our empirical results reveal that Transformers can enhance the
memory capability of RL algorithms, scaling up to tasks that require memorizing
observations 1500 steps ago. However, Transformers do not improve long-term
credit assignment. In summary, our results provide an explanation for the success
of Transformers in RL, while also highlighting an important area for future research
and benchmark design. Our code is open-sourced1 .

1

Introduction

In recent years, Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2019) have achieved remarkable
success in domains ranging from language modeling to computer vision. Within the RL community,
there has been excitement around the idea that large models with attention architectures, such as
Transformers, might enable rapid progress on challenging RL tasks. Indeed, prior works have shown
that Transformer-based methods can achieve excellent results in offline RL (Chen et al., 2021; Janner
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022), online RL (Parisotto et al., 2020; Lampinen et al., 2021; Zheng et al.,
2022; Melo, 2022; Micheli et al., 2022; Robine et al., 2023), and real-world tasks (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Ichter et al., 2022) (see Li et al. (2023); Agarwal et al. (2023) for the recent surveys).
However, the underlying reasons why Transformers achieve excellent results in the RL setting remain
a mystery. Is it because they learn better representations of sequences, akin to their success in
computer vision and NLP tasks? Alternatively, might they be internally implementing a learned
algorithm, one that performs better credit assignment than previously known RL algorithms? At the
core of these questions is the fact that RL, especially in partially observable tasks, requires two distinct
forms of temporal reasoning: (working) memory and (temporal) credit assignment. Memory refers
to the ability to recall a distant past event at the current time (Blankenship, 1938; Dempster, 1981),
1

https://github.com/twni2016/Memory-RL

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

