GloptiNets: Scalable Non-Convex Optimization
with Certificates
Gaspard Beugnot
gaspard.beugnot@inria.fr
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France
Julien Mairal
julien.mairal@inria.fr
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
Alessandro Rudi
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France

Abstract
We present a novel approach to non-convex optimization with certificates, which
handles smooth functions on the hypercube or on the torus. Unlike traditional
methods that rely on algebraic properties, our algorithm exploits the regularity of
the target function intrinsic in the decay of its Fourier spectrum. By defining a
tractable family of models, we allow at the same time to obtain precise certificates
and to leverage the advanced and powerful computational techniques developed to
optimize neural networks. In this way the scalability of our approach is naturally
enhanced by parallel computing with GPUs. Our approach, when applied to the
case of polynomials of moderate dimensions but with thousands of coefficients,
outperforms the state-of-the-art optimization methods with certificates, as the ones
based on Lasserre’s hierarchy, addressing problems intractable for the competitors.

1

Introduction

Non-convex optimization is a difficult and crucial task. In this paper, we aim at optimizing globally
a non-convex function defined on the hypercube, by providing a certificate of optimality on the
resulting solution. Let h be a smooth function on [−1, 1]d . Here we provide an algorithm that given
x
b, an estimate of the minimizer x? of h
x? = arg min h(x),
x∈[−1,1]d

produces an , that constitutes an explicit certificate for the quality of x
b, of the form
|h(x? ) − h(b
x)| ≤ δ ,
with probability 1 − δ. The literature abounds of algorithms to optimize non-convex functions. Typically they are either (a) heuristics, very smart, but with no guarantees of global convergence Moscato
et al. [1989], Horst and Pardalos [2013] (b) variation of algorithms used in convex optimization,
which can guarantee convergence only to local minima Boyd and Vandenberghe [2004] (c) algorithms
with only asymptotic guarantees of convergence to a global minimum, but no explicit certificates
Van Laarhoven et al. [1987]. In general, the methods recalled above are quite fast to produce some
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

