Random-Access Infinite Context Length
for Transformers
Amirkeivan Mohtashami
EPFL
amirkeivan.mohtashami@epfl.ch

Martin Jaggi
EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
While Transformers have shown remarkable success in natural language
processing, their attention mechanism’s large memory requirements have limited
their ability to handle longer contexts. Prior approaches, such as recurrent memory
or retrieval-based augmentation, have either compromised the random-access
flexibility of attention (i.e., the capability to select any token in the entire context)
or relied on separate mechanisms for relevant context retrieval, which may not be
compatible with the model’s attention. In this paper, we present a novel approach
that allows access to the complete context while retaining random-access flexibility,
closely resembling running attention on the entire context. Our method uses a
landmark token to represent each block of the input and trains the attention to use
it for selecting relevant blocks, enabling retrieval of blocks directly through the
attention mechanism instead of by relying on a separate mechanism. Our approach
seamlessly integrates with specialized data structures and the system’s memory
hierarchy, enabling processing of arbitrarily long context lengths. We demonstrate
that our method can obtain comparable performance with Transformer-XL while
significantly reducing the number of retrieved tokens in each step. Finally, we show
that fine-tuning LLaMA 7B with our method successfully extends its context length
capacity to over 32k tokens, allowing for inference at the context lengths of GPT-4.
We release the implementation of landmark attention and the code to reproduce
our experiments at https://github.com/epfml/landmark-attention/.

1

Introduction

Large transformers have revolutionized language modeling and demonstrated remarkable abilities
to perform various tasks with zero or few examples [4]. This success can be largely attributed to
the attention mechanism, which allows each token to access the representation of any other token in
each layer. However, this flexibility comes with quadratic computational cost and highly problematic
memory footprint, limiting the number of tokens that can be attended to, and thus the context length.
To overcome this limitation, researchers have proposed various solutions, including incorporating a
form of recurrent memory inside the Transformer architecture, such as Transformer-XL [9]. However,
these approaches often sacrifice the random-access flexibility of attention.
An alternative approach to overcome the context length limit is to use retrieval-based methods that
incorporate additional static knowledge by searching for relevant documents in a knowledge base
and adding them to the context. However, this approach requires a separate mechanism to identify
relevant documents, called a retriever. Such retrieval models can not easily be updated to work
on fresh long input data, and furthermore are also not fully compatible with the standard attention
mechanism itself, and thus may fail to mimic attention over long documents.
In this work, we propose a novel approach for overcoming the context length limit by allowing earlier
blocks of the input to be directly incorporated into the attention itself. We break the input into blocks
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

