Improving Diffusion-Based Image Synthesis with
Context Prediction
Ling Yang1∗ Jingwei Liu1† Shenda Hong1 Zhilong Zhang1
Zheming Cai1 Wentao Zhang1 Bin Cui1 ‡
1
Peking University 2 Tsinghua University

Zhilin Huang2

yangling0818@163.com, jingweiliu1996@163.com, zhilong.zhang@bjmu.edu.cn
{hongshenda, wentao.zhang, bin.cui}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffusion models are a new class of generative models, and have dramatically
promoted image generation with unprecedented quality and diversity. Existing
diffusion models mainly try to reconstruct input image from a corrupted one with a
pixel-wise or feature-wise constraint along spatial axes. However, such point-based
reconstruction may fail to make each predicted pixel/feature fully preserve its
neighborhood context, impairing diffusion-based image synthesis. As a powerful
source of automatic supervisory signal, context has been well studied for learning
representations. Inspired by this, we for the first time propose C ON P RE D IFF to
improve diffusion-based image synthesis with context prediction. We explicitly
reinforce each point to predict its neighborhood context (i.e., multi-stride features/tokens/pixels) with a context decoder at the end of diffusion denoising blocks
in training stage, and remove the decoder for inference. In this way, each point
can better reconstruct itself by preserving its semantic connections with neighborhood context. This new paradigm of C ON P RE D IFF can generalize to arbitrary
discrete and continuous diffusion backbones without introducing extra parameters
in sampling procedure. Extensive experiments are conducted on unconditional
image generation, text-to-image generation and image inpainting tasks. Our C ON P RE D IFF consistently outperforms previous methods and achieves a new SOTA
text-to-image generation results on MS-COCO, with a zero-shot FID score of 6.21.

1

Introduction

Recent diffusion models [99, 5, 63, 4, 47, 10, 22] have made remarkable progress in image generation.
They are first introduced by Sohl-Dickstein et al. [76] and then improved by Song & Ermon [78]
and Ho et al. [28], and can now generate image samples with unprecedented quality and diversity
[24, 68, 67]. Numerous methods have been proposed to develop diffusion models by improving
their empirical generation results [53, 77, 79] or extending the capacity of diffusion models from a
theoretical perspective [80, 81, 47, 46, 108]. We revisit existing diffusion models for image generation
and break them into two categories, pixel- and latent-based diffusion models, according to their
diffusing spaces. Pixel-based diffusion models directly conduct continuous diffusion process in
the pixel space, they incorporate various conditions (e.g., class, text, image, and semantic map)
[29, 70, 51, 2, 66] or auxiliary classifiers [80, 14, 27, 54, 40] for conditional image generation.
On the other hand, latent-based diffusion models [65] conduct continuous or discrete diffusion process
[87, 30, 1] on the semantic latent space. Such diffusion paradigm not only significantly reduces the
∗

Contact: Ling Yang, yangling0818@163.com.
Contributed equally.
‡
Corresponding Authors: Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

