Learning from Active Human Involvement through
Proxy Value Propagation

Zhenghao Peng§ , Wenjie Mo§ , Chenda Duan§ , Quanyi Li† , Bolei Zhou§
§
University of California, Los Angeles, † University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Learning from active human involvement enables the human subject to actively
intervene and demonstrate to the AI agent during training. The interaction and
corrective feedback from human brings safety and AI alignment to the learning
process. In this work, we propose a new reward-free active human involvement
method called Proxy Value Propagation for policy optimization. Our key insight is
that a proxy value function can be designed to express human intents, wherein stateaction pairs in the human demonstration are labeled with high values, while those
agents’ actions that are intervened receive low values. Through the TD-learning
framework, labeled values of demonstrated state-action pairs are further propagated
to other unlabeled data generated from agents’ exploration. The proxy value
function thus induces a policy that faithfully emulates human behaviors. Humanin-the-loop experiments show the generality and efficiency of our method. With
minimal modification to existing reinforcement learning algorithms, our method
can learn to solve continuous and discrete control tasks with various human control
devices, including the challenging task of driving in Grand Theft Auto V. Demo
video and code are available at: https://metadriverse.github.io/pvp.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been successfully applied in many domains, ranging from board
game Go [46], strategy game StarCraft II [42], autonomous driving [18], and even nuclear fusion [7].
Existing RL methods assume the manually designed reward functions can fully express human
intents and preferences. However, the resulting agents might exhibit biased, misguided, or undesired
behaviors due to faulty reward functions [23, 40, 20]. Moreover, the poor sample efficiency as well
as the safety concern due to the trial-and-error exploration prevent the real-world deployment of RL.
Human-in-the-loop methods are promising to achieve alignment, learning efficiency, and safety.
Human-in-the-loop policy learning relies on human subjects to oversee the learning process of the
autonomous agents, thus it can better align the learned behaviors with the preferences of humans
compared with handcrafted reward functions. Different forms of human involvement in human-inthe-loop policy learning have been studied over the years. Human subjects can advise actions upon
the requests of the robots [28] or provide preference-based feedback to assess the relative value
of the collected trajectories [53, 5, 38, 52, 36, 11, 34]. These methods learn from passive human
involvement, where the human subjects do not provide real-time feedback and intervention during
data collection. For safety-critical tasks such as autonomous driving, safety is undoubtedly the first
priority in human preference and the passive involvement methods yield unbounded risks in such
settings. An increasing body of works focuses on active human involvement, where human subjects
actively intervene and provide demonstrations during the execution time [17, 47, 29, 26]. With online
correction and demonstration from human subjects, AI alignment and training-time safety of the
system can be substantially enhanced.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

