PDE-Refiner: Achieving Accurate Long Rollouts with
Neural PDE Solvers
Phillip Lippe
Microsoft Research AI4Science∗
phillip.lippe@googlemail.com

Bastiaan S. Veeling
Microsoft Research AI4Science

Paris Perdikaris
Microsoft Research AI4Science

Richard E. Turner
Microsoft Research AI4Science

Johannes Brandstetter
Microsoft Research AI4Science
brandstetter@ml.jku.at

Abstract
Time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs) are ubiquitous in science and
engineering. Recently, mostly due to the high computational cost of traditional
solution techniques, deep neural network based surrogates have gained increased
interest. The practical utility of such neural PDE solvers relies on their ability to
provide accurate, stable predictions over long time horizons, which is a notoriously
hard problem. In this work, we present a large-scale analysis of common temporal
rollout strategies, identifying the neglect of non-dominant spatial frequency information, often associated with high frequencies in PDE solutions, as the primary pitfall limiting stable, accurate rollout performance. Based on these insights, we draw
inspiration from recent advances in diffusion models to introduce PDE-Refiner; a
novel model class that enables more accurate modeling of all frequency components
via a multistep refinement process. We validate PDE-Refiner on challenging benchmarks of complex fluid dynamics, demonstrating stable and accurate rollouts that
consistently outperform state-of-the-art models, including neural, numerical, and
hybrid neural-numerical architectures. We further demonstrate that PDE-Refiner
greatly enhances data efficiency, since the denoising objective implicitly induces a
novel form of spectral data augmentation. Finally, PDE-Refiner’s connection to diffusion models enables an accurate and efficient assessment of the model’s predictive uncertainty, allowing us to estimate when the surrogate becomes inaccurate.

1

Introduction

In recent years, mostly due to a rapidly growing interest in modeling partial differential equations
(PDEs), deep neural network based PDE surrogates have gained significant momentum as a more
computationally efficient solution methodology [10, 81]. Recent approaches can be broadly classified
into three categories: (i) neural approaches that approximate the solution function of the underlying
PDE [24, 66]; (ii) hybrid approaches, where neural networks either augment numerical solvers or
replace parts of them [1, 2, 18, 33, 43, 79]; (iii) neural approaches in which the learned evolution
operator maps the current state to a future state of the system [4, 7, 9, 21, 49, 54, 68, 87].
∗

Work done during internship at Microsoft Research; on leave from University of Amsterdam.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

