On the Implicit Bias of Linear Equivariant Steerable
Networks
Ziyu Chen
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
ziyuchen@umass.edu

Wei Zhu
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, MA 01003
weizhu@umass.edu

Abstract
We study the implicit bias of gradient flow on linear equivariant steerable networks
in group-invariant binary classification. Our findings reveal that the parameterized
predictor converges in direction to the unique group-invariant classifier with a
maximum margin defined by the input group action. Under a unitary assumption on
the input representation, we establish the equivalence between steerable networks
and data augmentation. Furthermore, we demonstrate the improved margin and
generalization bound of steerable networks over their non-invariant counterparts.

1

Introduction

Despite recent theoretical breakthroughs in deep learning, it is still largely unknown why overparameterized deep neural networks (DNNs) with infinitely many solutions achieving near-zero training
error can effectively generalize on new data. However, the consistently impressive results of DNNs
trained with first-order optimization methods, e.g., gradient descent (GD), suggest that the training
algorithm is implicitly guiding the model towards a solution with strong generalization performance.
Indeed, recent studies have shown that gradient-based training methods effectively regularize the
solution by implicitly minimizing a certain complexity measure of the model [Vardi, 2022]. For
example, Gunasekar et al. [2018b] showed that in separable binary classification, the linear predictor
parameterized by a linear fully-connected network trained under GD converges in the direction of
a max-margin support vector machine (SVM), while linear convolutional networks are implicitly
regularized by a depth-related bridge penalty in the Fourier domain. Yun et al. [2021] extended this
finding to linear tensor networks. Lyu and Li [2020] and Ji and Telgarsky [2020] established the
implicit max-margin regularization for (nonlinear) homogeneous DNNs in the parameter space.
On the other hand, another line of research aims to explicitly regularize DNNs through architectural
design to exploit the inherent structure of the learning problem. In recent years, there has been
a growing interest in leveraging group symmetry for this purpose, given its prevalence in both
scientific and engineering domains. A significant body of literature has been devoted to designing
group-equivariant DNNs that ensure outputs transform covariantly to input symmetry transformations.
Group-equivariant steerable networks represent a general class of symmetry-preserving models that
achieve equivariance with respect to any pair of input-output group actions [Cohen et al., 2019, Weiler
and Cesa, 2019, Cohen and Welling, 2017]. Empirical evidence suggests that equivariant steerable
networks yield substantial improvements in generalization performance for learning tasks with group
symmetry, especially when working with limited amounts of data.
There have been several recent attempts to account for the empirical success of equivariant steerable
networks through establishing a tighter upper bound on the test risk for these models. This is
typically accomplished by evaluating the complexity measures of equivariant and non-equivariant
models under the same norm constraint on the network parameters [Sokolic et al., 2017, Sannai
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

