Structure of universal formulas
Dmitry Yarotsky
Skoltech
d.yarotsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
By universal formulas we understand parameterized analytic expressions that have
a fixed complexity, but nevertheless can approximate any continuous function on a
compact set. There exist various examples of such formulas, including some in the
form of neural networks. In this paper we analyze the essential structural elements
of these highly expressive models. We introduce a hierarchy of expressiveness
classes connecting the global approximability property to the weaker property
of infinite VC dimension, and prove a series of classification results for several
increasingly complex functional families. In particular, we introduce a general
family of polynomially-exponentially-algebraic functions that, as we prove, is
subject to polynomial constraints. As a consequence, we show that fixed-size neural
networks with not more than one layer of neurons having transcendental activations
(e.g., sine or standard sigmoid) cannot in general approximate functions on arbitrary
finite sets. On the other hand, we give examples of functional families, including
two-hidden-layer neural networks, that approximate functions on arbitrary finite
sets, but fail to do that on the whole domain of definition.

1

Introduction

By universal formulas we broadly (informally) understand parameterized explicit analytic expressions
that have a fixed complexity (as expressions) but nevertheless can approximate any continuous
function on a compact set. An example of such formula, given by Boshernitzan [1], is
Z x+a
bd
cos(et )dt + c,
(1)
y(x) =
2 − cos(bt)
1
+
d
0
where d > 0, a, b and c are parameters. [1] proves that, by varying the parameters, functions (1) can
uniformly approximate any continuous function on any compact interval in R.
Expression (1) involves integration. Laczkovich and Ruzsa [13] prove existence of universal formulas
representable as elementary functions without integration (moreover, their formulas can uniformly
approximate continuous functions on the whole R under a mild growth assumption).
One can further restrict the types of operations and show that universal formulas can be realized by
fixed-size classical neural networks with suitable activation functions [29]. By a classical neural
network we mean a computational
model consisting of units (“hidden neurons”), each computing
Pn
a map z1 , . . . , zn 7→ σ( k=1 wk zk + h), where z1 , . . . , zn (signals) are outputs of some previous
neurons, and wk and h are weights (parameters) of the neuron. In addition to hidden neurons, one
distinguishes “input neurons” that just represent the scalar components of the network input, and
“output neuron(s)” that represent the scalar component(s) of thePoutput. The output neurons work as
n
hidden neurons but without activations, i.e. as z1 , . . . , zn 7→ k=1 wk zk + h. As defined, neural
networks are fairly restrictive in terms of used operations: for example, they contain multiplications
of signals z by constants (weights) w, but not multiplications between signals, z1 z2 . However, this
and some other extra operations can be implemented with any accuracy using suitable combinations
of neurons. The universal network in [29] uses a fixed architecture graph, activations sin and arcsin,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

