Generalizable Lightweight Proxy for Robust NAS
against Diverse Perturbations

1

Hyeonjeong Ha1∗ , Minseon Kim1∗, Sung Ju Hwang1,2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 2 DeepAuto.ai
{hyeonjeongha, minseonkim, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent neural architecture search (NAS) frameworks have been successful in
finding optimal architectures for given conditions (e.g., performance or latency).
However, they search for optimal architectures in terms of their performance on
clean images only, while robustness against various types of perturbations or corruptions is crucial in practice. Although there exist several robust NAS frameworks
that tackle this issue by integrating adversarial training into one-shot NAS, however,
they are limited in that they only consider robustness against adversarial attacks
and require significant computational resources to discover optimal architectures
for a single task, which makes them impractical in real-world scenarios. To address these challenges, we propose a novel lightweight robust zero-cost proxy
that considers the consistency across features, parameters, and gradients of both
clean and perturbed images at the initialization state. Our approach facilitates an
efficient and rapid search for neural architectures capable of learning generalizable
features that exhibit robustness across diverse perturbations. The experimental
results demonstrate that our proxy can rapidly and efficiently search for neural
architectures that are consistently robust against various perturbations on multiple
benchmark datasets and diverse search spaces, largely outperforming existing clean
zero-shot NAS and robust NAS with reduced search cost. Code is available at
https://github.com/HyeonjeongHa/CRoZe.

1

Introduction

Neural architecture search (NAS) techniques have achieved remarkable success in optimizing neural
networks for given tasks and constraints, yielding networks that outperform handcrafted neural
architectures [2, 24, 28, 33, 42]. However, previous NAS approaches have primarily aimed to search
for architectures with optimal performance and efficiency on clean inputs, while paying less attention
to robustness against adversarial perturbations [16, 29] or common types of corruptions [20]. This can
result in finding unsafe and vulnerable architectures with erroneous and high-confidence predictions
on input examples even with small perturbations [31, 22], limiting the practical deployment of NAS
in real-world safety-critical applications.
To address the gap between robustness and NAS, previous robust NAS works [31, 18] have proposed
to search for adversarially robust architectures by integrating adversarial training into NAS. Yet,
they are computationally inefficient as they utilize costly adversarial training on top of the one-shot
NAS methods [26, 4], requiring up to 33× larger computational cost than clean one-shot NAS [42].
Especially, Guo et al. [18] takes almost 4 GPU days on NVIDIA 3090 RTX GPU to train the supernet,
as it requires performing adversarial training on subnets with perturbed examples (Figure 2, RobNet).
Furthermore, they only target a single type of perturbation, i.e., adversarial perturbation [16, 29],
thus, failing to generalize to diverse perturbations. In order to deploy NAS to real-world applications
∗

Equal contribution. Author ordering is determined by coin flip.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

