Renku: a platform for sustainable data science

Rok Roškar1 , Chandrasekhar Ramakrishnan1 , Michele Volpi1 ,
Fernando Perez-Cruz1 , Mohammad Alisafaee2 , Philipp Fischer3 , Lilian Gasser1 ,
Eliza Jean Harris1 , Firat Ozdemir1 , Patrick Paitz3 , Carl Remlinger2 ,
Luis Salamanca1 , Ralf Grubenmann1 , Tasko Olevski1 , Elisabet Capón García1 ,
Lorenzo Cavazzi1 , Jakub Chrobasik2 , Andrea Cordoba1 , Alessandro Degano2 ,
Jimena Dupré1 , Wesley Johnson1 , Eike Kettner1 , Laura Kinkead1 ,
Seán Murphy1 , Flora Thiebaut1 , Olivier Verscheure1,2
1. Swiss Data Science Center, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
2. Swiss Data Science Center, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
3. Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow, and Landscape Research, WSL, Birmensdorf, Switzerland

Abstract
Data and code working together is fundamental to machine learning (ML), but
the context around datasets and interactions between datasets and code are in
general captured only rudimentarily. Context such as how the dataset was prepared
and created, what source data were used, what code was used in processing, how
the dataset evolved, and where it has been used and reused can provide much
insight, but this information is often poorly documented. That is unfortunate
since it makes datasets into black-boxes with potentially hidden characteristics that
have downstream consequences. We argue that making dataset preparation more
accessible and dataset usage easier to record and document would have significant
benefits for the ML community: it would allow for greater diversity in datasets
by inviting modification to published sources, simplify use of alternative datasets
and, in doing so, make results more transparent and robust, while allowing for all
contributions to be adequately credited. We present a platform, Renku, designed
to support and encourage such sustainable development and use of data, datasets,
and code, and we demonstrate its benefits through a few illustrative projects which
span the spectrum from dataset creation to dataset consumption and showcasing.

1

Introduction

Datasets are key to all aspects of machine learning (ML) and data science, from the development
of novel algorithms to training of production models. Unfortunately, a variety of problems plague
the generation, use, and dissemination of datasets [2, 39, 32]. The negative downstream effects of
issues related to dataset preparation on model performance and application are well-documented [39].
Less well-documented are the difficulties in understanding and managing the deficiencies on the
less technical aspects: the issues of attribution, reuse, dissemination, and replicability. Because ML
research is so heavily dependent on datasets, [32] highlight the lacking and insufficiently robust
mechanisms for dataset citation and usage tracking as core missing pieces needed to improve the
health of the community as a whole. The lack of diverse datasets on which to advance the field has
also recently been raised as a point of serious concern [22], and the lack of dataset provenance is a
barrier to trustworthy AI systems [19].
Furthermore, beyond requiring planning and design [15], dataset creation requires a significant computational effort, which implies code, pipelines and compute resources. However, in the majority of
cases, because dataset creation pipelines are treated as one-offs and are not recorded or published [12],
researchers who want to augment a dataset or repeat its construction with different data cannot do so.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

