The Learnability of In-Context Learning

Noam Wies, Yoav Levine & Amnon Shashua
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
{noam.wies,yoav.levine,shashua}@cs.huji.ac.il

Abstract
In-context learning is a surprising and important phenomenon that emerged when
modern language models were scaled to billions of learned parameters. Without
modifying a large language model’s weights, it can be tuned to perform various
downstream natural language tasks simply by including concatenated training examples of these tasks in its input. Though disruptive for many practical applications
of large language models, this emergent learning paradigm is not well understood
from a theoretical perspective. In this paper, we propose a first-of-its-kind PAC
based framework for in-context learnability, and use it to provide the first finite sample complexity results for the in-context learning setup. Our framework includes
an initial pretraining phase, which fits a function to the pretraining distribution, and
then a second in-context learning phase, which keeps this function constant and
concatenates training examples of the downstream task in its input. We use our
framework in order to prove that, under mild assumptions, when the pretraining distribution is a mixture of latent tasks (a model often considered for natural language
pretraining), these tasks can be efficiently learned via in-context learning, even
though the model’s weights are unchanged and the input significantly diverges from
the pretraining distribution. Our theoretical analysis reveals that in this setting,
in-context learning is more about identifying the task than about learning it, a
result which is in line with a series of recent empirical findings. We hope that
the in-context learnability framework presented in this paper will facilitate future
progress towards a deeper understanding of this important new learning paradigm.

1

Introduction

The practice of pretraining language models (LMs) over massive general purpose text corpora has
revolutionized natural language processing in recent years (Radford et al., 2019; Devlin et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020). After an LM has been pretrained, the common approach for applying it to a
specific downstream natural language task is to further train it on task-specific data, in a procedure
referred to as fine-tuning (Howard & Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019). In
their influential GPT3 paper, Brown et al. (2020) showed that a non-trivial alternative to fine-tuning
emerges when the LM is large enough: an LM can be specialized to a downstream natural language
task by simply receiving in its input a string composed of concatenated training examples of this
task. Importantly, while the LM’s weights are unchanged in this procedure, some form of learning
evidently takes place; the performance on the downstream task was shown to significantly improve
with the number of concatenated training examples, for a disparate variety of natural language tasks.
This phenomenon, referred to as in-context learning, has had a profound practical impact on the
applicability of large LMs: one does not need to have any access to the model weights in order to
specialize the model for a certain task. Instead, a string of training examples provided even via
API access to the model is enough, and often not many examples are required (Brown et al., 2020).
However, despite its growing popularity in a multitude of use-cases (Bommasani et al., 2021), the
reasons for the effectiveness of in-context learning in pretrained LMs are not well understood from
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

