GNNEvaluator: Evaluating GNN Performance On
Unseen Graphs Without Labels

Xin Zheng1 , Miao Zhang2 , Chunyang Chen1 , Soheila Molaei3 , Chuan Zhou4 , Shirui Pan5∗
1
Monash University, Australia, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China
3
University of Oxford, UK, 4 Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, 5 Griffith University, Australia
xin.zheng@monash.edu, zhangmiao@hit.edu.cn, chunyang.chen@monash.edu
soheila.molaei@eng.ox.ac.uk, zhouchuan@amss.ac.cn, s.pan@griffith.edu.au

Abstract
Evaluating the performance of graph neural networks (GNNs) is an essential task
for practical GNN model deployment and serving, as deployed GNNs face significant performance uncertainty when inferring on unseen and unlabeled test graphs,
due to mismatched training-test graph distributions. In this paper, we study a new
problem, GNN model evaluation, that aims to assess the performance of a specific
GNN model trained on labeled and observed graphs, by precisely estimating its
performance (e.g., node classification accuracy) on unseen graphs without labels.
Concretely, we propose a two-stage GNN model evaluation framework, including
(1) DiscGraph set construction and (2) GNNEvaluator training and inference. The
DiscGraph set captures wide-range and diverse graph data distribution discrepancies through a discrepancy measurement function, which exploits the outputs
of GNNs related to latent node embeddings and node class predictions. Under
the effective training supervision from the DiscGraph set, GNNEvaluator learns
to precisely estimate node classification accuracy of the to-be-evaluated GNN
model and makes an accurate inference for evaluating GNN model performance.
Extensive experiments on real-world unseen and unlabeled test graphs demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method for GNN model evaluation.

1

Introduction

As prevalent graph data learning models, graph neural networks (GNNs) have attracted much
attention and achieved great success for various graph structural data related applications in the real
world [36, 38, 35, 41, 42, 14, 21, 46, 44]. In practical scenarios of GNN model deployment and
serving [37, 40, 43], understanding and evaluating GNN models’ performance is a vital step [3, 13, 22],
where model designers need to determine if well-trained GNN models will perform well in practical
serving, and users want to know how the in-service GNN models will perform when inferring on their
own test graphs [10]. Conventionally, model evaluation utilizes well-annotated datasets for testing to
calculate certain model performance metrics (e.g., accuracy and F1-score) [3, 24, 23, 20]. However, it
may fail to work well in real-world GNN model deployment and serving, where the unseen test graphs
are usually not annotated, making it difficult to obtain essential model performance metrics without
ground-truth labels [4, 5]. As shown in Fig. 1 (a-1), taking node classification accuracy metric as
an example, it is typically calculated as the percentage of correctly predicted node labels. However,
when ground-truth node class labels are unavailable, we can not verify whether the predictions of
GNNs are correct, and thus cannot get the overall accuracy of the model.
In light of this, a natural question, referred to GNN model evaluation problem, arises: in the absence
of labels in an unseen test graph, can we estimate the performance of a well-trained GNN model?
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

