Learning Better with Less: Effective Augmentation for
Sample-Efficient Visual Reinforcement Learning

Guozheng Ma1 Linrui Zhang1 Haoyu Wang1 Lu Li1 Zilin Wang1
Zhen Wang2 Li Shen3∗ Xueqian Wang1∗ Dacheng Tao2
1

Tsinghua University

2

The University of Sydney

3

JD Explore Academy

{mgz21,haoyuwa22,lilu21,wangzl21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
zwan4121@uni.sydney.edu.au; wang.xq@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zhanglr.auto,mathshenli,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) is a crucial technique for enhancing the sample efficiency
of visual reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms. Notably, employing simple
observation transformations alone can yield outstanding performance without extra
auxiliary representation tasks or pre-trained encoders. However, it remains unclear
which attributes of DA account for its effectiveness in achieving sample-efficient
visual RL. To investigate this issue and further explore the potential of DA, this work
conducts comprehensive experiments to assess the impact of DA’s attributes on its
efficacy and provides the following insights and improvements: (1) For individual
DA operations, we reveal that both ample spatial diversity and slight hardness
are indispensable. Building on this finding, we introduce Random PadResize
(Rand PR), a new DA operation that offers abundant spatial diversity with minimal
hardness. (2) For multi-type DA fusion schemes, the increased DA hardness and
unstable data distribution result in the current fusion schemes being unable to
achieve higher sample efficiency than their corresponding individual operations.
Taking the non-stationary nature of RL into account, we propose a RL-tailored
multi-type DA fusion scheme called Cycling Augmentation (CycAug), which
performs periodic cycles of different DA operations to increase type diversity while
maintaining data distribution consistency. Extensive evaluations on the DeepMind
Control suite and CARLA driving simulator demonstrate that our methods achieve
superior sample efficiency compared with the prior state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Visual reinforcement learning (RL) has shown great potential in various
Walker Run
domains, enabling decision-making directly from high-dimensional visual
inputs [1]. However, the dual requirements of simultaneously learning
compact state representations and optimizing task-specific policies lead
to prohibitive sample complexity and massive environment interactions,
Amazing improvement
in sample efficiency
hindering its practical deployment [2]. Enhancing sample efficiency is a
benefited from DA
critical and inevitable challenge faced by the entire visual RL community,
and data augmentation (DA) has emerged as a remarkably effective approach to tackle this issue [3–7]. As illustrated in Figure 1, even simple
random shift transformations applied to input observations can lead to
significant performance improvements in previously unsuccessful algo- Figure 1: Benefit of DA
rithm [5]. Moreover, it has been proven that DA alone can lead to more in visual RL.
with Data Augmentation
w/o Data Augmentation

700
600
500
400

300
200
100

0

0.0

∗

Corresponding authors: Li Shen and Xueqian Wang

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

