New Bounds for Hyperparameter Tuning of
Regression Problems Across Instances

Maria-Florina Balcan
Carnegie Mellon University
ninamf@cs.cmu.edu

Anh Tuan Nguyen
Carnegie Mellon University
atnguyen@cs.cmu.edu

Dravyansh Sharma
Carnegie Mellon University
dravyans@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
The task of tuning regularization coefficients in regularized regression models with
provable guarantees across problem instances still poses a significant challenge
in the literature. This paper investigates the sample complexity of tuning regularization parameters in linear and logistic regressions under ℓ1 and ℓ2 -constraints
in the data-driven setting. For the linear regression problem, by more carefully
exploiting the structure of the dual function class, we provide a new upper bound
for the pseudo-dimension of the validation loss function class, which significantly
improves the best-known results on the problem. Remarkably, we also instantiate
the first matching lower bound, proving our results are tight. For tuning the regularization parameters of logistic regression, we introduce a new approach to studying
the learning guarantee via an approximation of the validation loss function class.
We examine the pseudo-dimension of the approximation class and construct a uniform error bound between the validation loss function class and its approximation,
which allows us to instantiate the first learning guarantee for the problem of tuning
logistic regression regularization coefficients.

1

Introduction

Regularized linear models, including the Elastic Net [1], and Regularized Logistic Regression
[2, 3, 4], as well as their variants [5, 6, 7], have found widespread use in diverse fields and numerous
application domains. Thanks to their simplicity and interpretability, those methods are popular
choices for controlling model complexity, improving robustness, and preventing overfitting by
selecting relevant features [4, 8, 9]. Moreover, regularized linear models can be adapted to the
non-linear regime using kernel methods [10, 11], significantly expanding their applicability to a wide
range of problems. In typical applications, one needs to solve not only a single regression problem
instance, but several related problems from the same domain. Can we learn how to regularize with
good generalization across the related problem instances?
Suppose we have a regression dataset (X, y) ∈ Rm×p × Y m , where X is a design matrix with
m samples and p features, and y is a target vector. Regularized linear models aim to compute an
estimator β̂ (X,y) (λ) by solving the optimization problem

2
β̂ (X,y) (λ) = argmin l(β, (X, y)) + λ1 ∥β∥1 + λ2 ∥β∥2 ,
(1)
β∈Rp

where (λ1 , λ2 ) ∈ R2≥0 are the regularization coefficients. For instance, if λ ∈ R2>0 , y ∈ Rm ,
and l(β, (X, y)) = 21 ∥y − Xβ∥22 (squared-loss function), we get the well-known Elastic Net [1].
OnP
the other hand, if λ ∈ {(λ1 , 0), (0, λ2 )} for λ1 , λ2 > 0, y ∈ {±1}m , and l(β, (X, y)) =
m
1
⊤
i=1 log(1 + exp(−yi xi β)), we obtain regularized logistic regression.
m
Correspondence: atnguyen@cs.cmu.edu.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

