LoRA: A Logical Reasoning Augmented Dataset for
Visual Question Answering

Jingying Gao
School of Computer Science & Engineering
The University of New South Wales
jingying.gao@unsw.edu.au

Qi Wu
School of Computer & Mathematical Sciences
The University of Adelaide
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Alan Blair
School of Computer Science & Engineering
The University of New South Wales
a.blair@unsw.edu.au

Maurice Pagnucco
School of Computer Science & Engineering
The University of New South Wales
morri@cse.unsw.edu.au

Abstract
The capacity to reason logically is a hallmark of human cognition. Humans excel
at integrating multimodal information for logical reasoning, as exemplified by the
Visual Question Answering (VQA) task, which is a challenging multimodal task.
VQA tasks and large vision-and-language models aim to tackle reasoning problems,
but the accuracy, consistency and integrity of the generated answers is hard to
evaluate in the absence of a VQA dataset that can offer formal, comprehensive
and systematic complex logical reasoning questions. To address this gap, we
present LoRA, a novel Logical Reasoning Augmented VQA dataset that requires
formal and complex description logic reasoning based on a food-and-kitchen
knowledge base. Our main objective in creating LoRA is to enhance the complex
and formal logical reasoning capabilities of VQA models, which are not adequately
measured by existing VQA datasets. We devise strong and flexible programs to
automatically generate 200,000 diverse description logic reasoning questions based
on the SROIQ Description Logic, along with realistic kitchen scenes and ground
truth answers. We fine-tune the latest transformer VQA models and evaluate the
zero-shot performance of the state-of-the-art large vision-and-language models
on LoRA. The results reveal that LoRA presents a unique challenge in logical
reasoning, setting a systematic and comprehensive evaluation standard.1 2

1

Introduction

Logical reasoning is a fundamental hallmark of human cognition that enables us to understand
and solve various problems, from everyday life to scientific research. Logical reasoning is the
ability to analyze and identify logical relationships and derive conclusions or solutions based on
known information or conditions [6, 3]. Humans are adept at integrating multimodal data for
logical reasoning, such as visual, linguistic, or auditory information. A challenging task in artificial
intelligence that requires such multimodal logical reasoning is Visual Question Answering (VQA)[1].
However, existing VQA datasets lack questions with complex logical structure, limiting the ability of
these models to perform complex inference and multi-step reasoning. In this work, we introduce a
new VQA dataset LoRA (Logical Reasoning Augmented Dataset), to address these challenges and
1
2

LoRA Dataset Project page: https://lora-vqa.github.io/
The LoRA Dataset code is available at: https://github.com/CarolineGao/LoRA-Dataset.git

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

