AlpacaFarm: A Simulation Framework for
Methods that Learn from Human Feedback
Yann Dubois∗
Stanford

Xuechen Li∗
Stanford

Jimmy Ba
University of Toronto

Rohan Taori∗
Stanford

Carlos Guestrin
Stanford

Tianyi Zhang∗
Stanford

Percy Liang
Stanford

Ishaan Gulrajani
Stanford

Tatsunori B. Hashimoto
Stanford

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT have seen widespread adoption
due to their ability to follow user instructions well. Developing these LLMs
involves a complex yet poorly understood workflow requiring training with human
feedback. Replicating and understanding this instruction-following process faces
three major challenges: the high cost of data collection, the lack of trustworthy
evaluation, and the absence of reference method implementations. We address these
challenges with AlpacaFarm, a simulator that enables research and development
for learning from feedback at a low cost. First, we design LLM prompts to
simulate human feedback that are 45x cheaper than crowd-workers and display
high agreement with humans. Second, we propose an automatic evaluation and
validate it against human instructions obtained on real-world interactions. Third, we
contribute reference implementations for several methods (PPO, best-of-n, expert
iteration, and more) that learn from pairwise feedback. Finally, as an end-to-end
validation of AlpacaFarm, we train and evaluate eleven models on 10k pairs of
real human feedback and show that the rankings of models trained in AlpacaFarm
match the rankings of models trained on human data. As a demonstration of the
research possible in AlpacaFarm, we find that methods that use a reward model
can substantially improve over supervised fine-tuning and that our reference PPO
implementation leads to a +10% improvement in win-rate against Davinci003. We
release AlpacaFarm at https://github.com/tatsu-lab/alpaca_farm.

1

Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [10, 13, 48] have demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in following diverse and open-ended instructions [49, 5, 40]. These achievements have often been attributed to
the fine-tuning of pretrained LLMs using human feedback, but this process remains poorly understood
due to the lack of published information on the training methods from LLM vendors. For example, it
was recently revealed that only the Davinci003 model in the instruct series of OpenAI models used
reinforcement learning (RL) with the PPO algorithm [47], leading some to question the importance of
RL in the training process. Understanding and improving these methods requires open and transparent
replications of the training process, but this remains challenging due to the cost and complexity
associated with methods that learn from human feedback.
Our goal is to facilitate research and development on instruction following models and methods that
learn from human feedback. We identify three main challenges: the high cost of data annotation, the
lack of automated evaluation for model development, and the absence of validated implementations
∗

Equal contribution; random order. Contact {yanndubs, lxuechen, rtaori, tz58}@stanford.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

