Complexity Matters: Rethinking the Latent Space
for Generative Modeling

Tianyang Hu1 , Fei Chen1 , Haonan Wang2 , Jiawei Li1 ,
Wenjia Wang3 , Jiacheng Sun1∗, Zhenguo Li1
1
3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 National University of Singapore
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)

Abstract
In generative modeling, numerous successful approaches leverage a lowdimensional latent space, e.g., Stable Diffusion [68] models the latent space induced
by an encoder and generates images through a paired decoder. Although the selection of the latent space is empirically pivotal, determining the optimal choice
and the process of identifying it remain unclear. In this study, we aim to shed light
on this under-explored topic by rethinking the latent space from the perspective
of model complexity. Our investigation starts with the classic generative adversarial networks (GANs). Inspired by the GAN training objective, we propose a
novel "distance" between the latent and data distributions, whose minimization
coincides with that of the generator complexity. The minimizer of this distance is
characterized as the optimal data-dependent latent that most effectively capitalizes
on the generator’s capacity. Then, we consider parameterizing such a latent distribution by an encoder network and propose a two-stage training strategy called
Decoupled Autoencoder (DAE), where the encoder is only updated in the first
stage with an auxiliary decoder and then frozen in the second stage while the actual
decoder is being trained. DAE can improve the latent distribution and as a result,
improve the generative performance. Our theoretical analyses are corroborated by
comprehensive experiments on various models such as VQGAN [21] and Diffusion Transformer [60], where our modifications yield significant improvements in
sample quality with decreased model complexity.

1

Introduction

In the past decade, deep generative models have achieved great success across various domains
such as images, audio, videos, and graphs [32, 59, 33, 34]. The advances are epitomized by recent
breakthroughs in text-driven image generation [69, 66, 65, 68]. Behind the empirical success are
fruitful developments of a wide variety of deep generative models, among which, many can be
associated with a latent space, e.g., generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23, 6, 40], Variational
Autoencoders (VAEs) [44], and latent diffusion models [79, 68, 60]. It is commonly believed that
for structured data such as images, the intrinsic dimension is much lower than the actual dimension
[4, 62]. By utilizing a proper low-dimensional latent space, generative modeling can be more efficient
[79, 50, 78]. Take text-to-image generation as an example, state-of-the-art models such as DALL-E
[65], Parti [88], Stable Diffusion [68] all utilized discrete Autoencoders to alleviate the computation
cost by downsampling images, e.g., from 256×256 to 32×32.
In practice, the choice of the latent plays a critical role. Stable Diffusion [68] employs the Autoencoder
from VQGAN [21], which is an improvement over VQVAE [80] by incorporating adversarial training.
∗

Corresponding to: Jiacheng Sun (sunjiacheng1@huawei.com)

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

