Continuous-time Analysis of Anchor Acceleration

Jaewook J. Suh
Seoul National University
jacksuhkr@snu.ac.kr

Jisun Park
Seoul National University
colleenp0515@snu.ac.kr

Ernest K. Ryu
Seoul National University
ernestryu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, the anchor acceleration, an acceleration mechanism distinct from Nesterov’s, has been discovered for minimax optimization and fixed-point problems,
but its mechanism is not understood well, much less so than Nesterov acceleration. In this work, we analyze continuous-time models of anchor acceleration.
We provide tight, unified analyses for characterizing the convergence rate as a
function of the anchor coefficient β(t), thereby providing insight into the anchor
acceleration mechanism and its accelerated O(1/k 2 )-convergence rate. Finally, we
present an adaptive method inspired by the continuous-time analyses and establish
its effectiveness through theoretical analyses and experiments.

1

Introduction

Nesterov acceleration [51] is foundational to first-order optimization theory, but the mechanism
and its convergence proof are not transparent. One approach to better understand the mechanism is
the continuous-time analysis: derive an ODE model of the discrete-time algorithm and analyze the
continuous-time dynamics [65, 66]. This approach provides insight into the accelerated dynamics
and has led to a series of follow-up work [71, 62, 29].
Recently, a new acceleration mechanism, distinct from Nesterov’s, has been discovered. This
anchor acceleration for minimax optimization and fixed-point problems [35, 75, 54] has been an
intense subject of study, but its mechanism is understood much less than Nesterov acceleration. The
various analytic techniques developed to understand Nesterov acceleration, including continuous-time
analyses, have only been applied in a very limited manner [59].
Contribution. In this work, we present continuous-time analyses of anchor acceleration. The
continuous-time model is the differential inclusion
Ẋ ∈ −𝔸(X) − β(t)(X − X0 )
with initial condition X(0) = X0 ∈ dom 𝔸, maximal monotone operator 𝔸, and scalar-valued
function β(t). The case β(t) = 1t corresponds to the prior anchor-accelerated methods APPM [35],
EAG [75], and FEG [42].
We first establish that the differential inclusion is well-posed, despite the anchor coefficient β(t)
blowing up at t = 0. We then provide tight, unified analyses for characterizing the convergence rate
as a function of the anchor coefficient β(t). This is the first formal and rigorous treatment of this
anchored dynamics, and it provides insight into the anchor acceleration mechanism and its accelerated
O(1/k 2 )-convergence rate. Finally, we present an adaptive method inspired by the continuous-time
analyses and establish its effectiveness through theoretical analyses and experiments.
1.1

Preliminaries and notation

We provide the organization for prior works in Appendix A. Here, we review standard definitions and
set up the notation.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

