Addressing Negative Transfer in Diffusion Models

Hyojun Go1∗ JinYoung Kim1∗ Yunsung Lee2∗ Seunghyun Lee3∗
Shinhyeok Oh3 Hyeongdon Moon4 Seungtaek Choi5†
Twelvelabs1 Wrtn Technologies2 Riiid3 EPFL4 Yanolja5
{gohyojun15, seago0828}@gmail.com1 , sung@wrtn.io2 , {seunghyun.lee
shinhyeok.oh}@riiid.co3 , hyeongdon.moon@epfl.ch4 , seungtaek.choi@yanolja.com5

Abstract
Diffusion-based generative models have achieved remarkable success in various
domains. It trains a shared model on denoising tasks that encompass different noise
levels simultaneously, representing a form of multi-task learning (MTL). However,
analyzing and improving diffusion models from an MTL perspective remains underexplored. In particular, MTL can sometimes lead to the well-known phenomenon
of negative transfer, which results in the performance degradation of certain tasks
due to conflicts between tasks. In this paper, we first aim to analyze diffusion
training from an MTL standpoint, presenting two key observations: (O1) the task
affinity between denoising tasks diminishes as the gap between noise levels widens,
and (O2) negative transfer can arise even in diffusion training. Building upon these
observations, we aim to enhance diffusion training by mitigating negative transfer.
To achieve this, we propose leveraging existing MTL methods, but the presence
of a huge number of denoising tasks makes this computationally expensive to
calculate the necessary per-task loss or gradient. To address this challenge, we
propose clustering the denoising tasks into small task clusters and applying MTL
methods to them. Specifically, based on (O2), we employ interval clustering to
enforce temporal proximity among denoising tasks within clusters. We show that
interval clustering can be solved using dynamic programming, utilizing signal-tonoise ratio, timestep, and task affinity for clustering objectives. Through this, our
approach addresses the issue of negative transfer in diffusion models by allowing
for efficient computation of MTL methods. We validate the efficacy of proposed
clustering and its integration with MTL methods through various experiments,
demonstrating 1) improved generation quality and 2) faster training convergence of
diffusion models. Our project page is available at https://gohyojun15.github.
io/ANT_diffusion/.

1

Introduction

Diffusion-based generative models [20, 66, 71] have accomplished remarkable achievements in various generative tasks, including image [8], video [21, 23], 3D shape [44, 54], and text generation [38].
In particular, they have shown excellent performance and flexibility in a wide range of image generation settings, including unconditional [28, 47], class-conditional [22], and text-conditional image
generation [1, 48, 55]. Consequently, improving diffusion models has garnered significant interest.
The framework of diffusion models [20, 66, 71] comprises gradually corrupting the data towards a
given noise distribution and its subsequent reverse process. A model is optimized by minimizing the
weighted sum of denoising score-matching losses across various noise levels [20, 69] for learning the
reverse process. This can be interpreted as diffusion training aiming to train a single shared model to
∗

Co-first author

1,2,4,5

Work done while at Riiid

†

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

