Does a sparse ReLU network training problem
always admit an optimum?

Quoc-Tung Le

Elisa Riccietti

Rémi Gribonval

Univ. Lyon, Inria, CNRS, ENS de Lyon, UCB Lyon 1, LIP UMR 5668, F-69342 Lyon, France

Abstract
Given a training set, a loss function, and a neural network architecture, it is often
taken for granted that optimal network parameters exist, and a common practice
is to apply available optimization algorithms to search for them. In this work, we
show that the existence of an optimal solution is not always guaranteed, especially
in the context of sparse ReLU neural networks. In particular, we first show that
optimization problems involving deep networks with certain sparsity patterns do
not always have optimal parameters, and that optimization algorithms may then
diverge. Via a new topological relation between sparse ReLU neural networks
and their linear counterparts, we derive –using existing tools from real algebraic
geometry– an algorithm to verify that a given sparsity pattern suffers from this
issue. Then, the existence of a global optimum is proved for every concrete
optimization problem involving a one-hidden-layer sparse ReLU neural network of
output dimension one. Overall, the analysis is based on the investigation of two
topological properties of the space of functions implementable as sparse ReLU
neural networks: a best approximation property, and a closedness property, both
in the uniform norm. This is studied both for (finite) domains corresponding to
practical training on finite training sets, and for more general domains such as the
unit cube. This allows us to provide conditions for the guaranteed existence of an
optimum given a sparsity pattern. The results apply not only to several sparsity
patterns proposed in recent works on network pruning/sparsification, but also to
classical dense neural networks, including architectures not covered by existing
results.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

23

24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

1

Introduction

The optimization phase in deep learning consists in minimizing an objective function w.r.t. the set of
parameters θ of a neural network (NN). While it is arguably sufficient for optimization algorithms to
find local minima in practice, training is also expected to achieve the infimum in many situations (for
example, in overparameterized regimes networks are trained to zero learning error).
In this work, we take a step back and study a rather fundamental question: Given a deep learning
architecture possibly with sparsity constraints, does its corresponding optimization problem actually
admit an optimal θ∗ ? The question is important for at least two reasons:
1. Practical viewpoint: If the problem does not admit an optimal solution, optimized parameters
necessarily diverge to infinity to approximate the infimum (which always exists). This phenomenon
has been studied thoroughly in previous works in other contexts such as tensor decomposition [7],
robust principal component analysis [30], sparse matrix factorization [18] and also deep learning
itself [26, 23, 12] . It causes inherent numerical instability for optimization algorithms. Moreover,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

