Tanimoto Random Features for Scalable Molecular
Machine Learning

Austin Tripp
Unversity of Cambridge
ajt212@cam.ac.uk
Sukriti Singh
University of Cambridge
ss2971@cam.ac.uk

Sergio Bacallado
Unversity of Cambridge
sb2116@cam.ac.uk
José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
University of Cambridge
jmh233@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
The Tanimoto coefficient is commonly used to measure the similarity between
molecules represented as discrete fingerprints, either as a distance metric or a
positive definite kernel. While many kernel methods can be accelerated using
random feature approximations, at present there is a lack of such approximations
for the Tanimoto kernel. In this paper we propose two kinds of novel random
features to allow this kernel to scale to large datasets, and in the process discover a
novel extension of the kernel to real-valued vectors. We theoretically characterize
these random features, and provide error bounds on the spectral norm of the
Gram matrix. Experimentally, we show that these random features are effective at
approximating the Tanimoto coefficient of real-world datasets and are useful for
molecular property prediction and optimization tasks. Future updates to this work
will be available at http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.14809.

1

Introduction

In recent years there have been notable advances in the use of machine learning (ML) for drug
discovery, including molecule generation and property prediction (Dara et al., 2022). Despite
ceaseless progress in deep learning, conventional methods such as support vector machines or random
forest trained on molecular fingerprints are still competitive in the low-data regime (Walters and
Barzilay, 2020; Stanley et al., 2021). These fingerprints essentially encode fragments from a molecule
into a sparse vector, thereby compactly representing a large number of molecular substructures (David
et al., 2020). They are extensively used in virtual screening for substructure and similarity searches
as well as an input for ML models (Cereto-Massagué et al., 2015; Granda et al., 2018).
The Tanimoto coefficient (also known as the Jaccard index) stands out as a natural way to compare
such fingerprints. This coefficient is most commonly expressed as a function on sets TS or as a
function of non-negative vectors TM M (Jaccard, 1912; Tanimoto, 1958; Ralaivola et al., 2005; Costa,
2021; Tan et al., 2016):
P
′
|X ∩ X ′ |
′
′
′
′
d
i min(xi , xi )
P
TS (X, X ) =
,
X,
X
⊆
Ω,
T
(x,
x
)
=
M
M
′ , x, x ∈ R≥0 . (1)
|X ∪ X ′ |
i max(xi , xi )
If a and b are binary indicator vectors representing sets A and B respectively, then TS (A, B) =
TM M (a, b). Therefore TM M can be viewed as a generalization of TS ; for this reason it is sometimes
called the “weighted Jaccard coefficient” or min-max coefficient.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

