GenImage: A Million-Scale Benchmark for Detecting
AI-Generated Image

Mingjian Zhu, Hanting Chen, Qiangyu Yan, Xudong Huang,
Guanyu Lin, Wei Li, Zhijun Tu, Hailin Hu, Jie Hu, Yunhe Wang∗
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{zhumingjian, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
The extraordinary ability of generative models to generate photographic images
has intensified concerns about the spread of disinformation, thereby leading to
the demand for detectors capable of distinguishing between AI-generated fake
images and real images. However, the lack of large datasets containing images
from the most advanced image generators poses an obstacle to the development
of such detectors. In this paper, we introduce the GenImage dataset, which has
the following advantages: 1) Plenty of Images, including over one million pairs
of AI-generated fake images and collected real images. 2) Rich Image Content,
encompassing a broad range of image classes. 3) State-of-the-art Generators,
synthesizing images with advanced diffusion models and GANs. The aforementioned advantages allow the detectors trained on GenImage to undergo a thorough
evaluation and demonstrate strong applicability to diverse images. We conduct
a comprehensive analysis of the dataset and propose two tasks for evaluating the
detection method in resembling real-world scenarios. The cross-generator image
classification task measures the performance of a detector trained on one generator
when tested on the others. The degraded image classification task assesses the capability of the detectors in handling degraded images such as low-resolution, blurred,
and compressed images. With the GenImage dataset, researchers can effectively
expedite the development and evaluation of superior AI-generated image detectors
in comparison to prevailing methodologies.

1

Introduction

The advancement of generative models has yielded remarkable progress in synthesizing photorealistic
images, drastically reducing the requisite expertise and effort to generate fake images. This unprecedented accessibility has evoked concerns regarding the ubiquitous dissemination of disinformation.
Fake images are particularly convincing because of visual comprehensibility. Therefore they enable
a negative impact on social areas such as politics and economics by manipulating public opinion.
For example, AI-generated photos of the Pentagon on fire are widely shared on Twitter [22]. This
image fools several major news outlets and causes a significant drop in the US stock market. Current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) generative models have exhibited the ability to generate images that pose a
significant challenge to human perception and discrimination. Humans can only achieve an accuracy
rate of 61.3% when discriminating between real images and AI-generated fake images [19]. To this
end, it is of utmost urgency to prioritize the development of an effective detector capable of accurately
identifying fake images generated by these advanced generative models.
To aid in the development of detectors, early fake image detection dataset [30, 3] primarily concentrate
on face forgery, utilizing generative models to manipulate the human face, thereby replacing a person’s
∗

Corresponding Author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

