Compositional Foundation Models for
Hierarchical Planning

Anurag Ajay∗ †§ , Seungwook Han * †‡§ Yilun Du * § , Shuang Li § ,
Abhi Gupta § , Tommi Jaakkola § , Josh Tenenbaum § , Leslie Kaelbling § ,
Akash Srivastava ‡ , Pulkit Agrawal †§
Improbable AI Lab† MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab‡ Massachusetts Institute Technology§
https://hierarchical-planning-foundation-model.github.io/

Abstract
To make effective decisions in novel environments with long-horizon goals, it is
crucial to engage in hierarchical reasoning across spatial and temporal scales. This
entails planning abstract subgoal sequences, visually reasoning about the underlying plans, and executing actions in accordance with the devised plan through
visual-motor control. We propose Compositional Foundation Models for Hierarchical Planning (HiP), a foundation model which leverages multiple expert foundation
model trained on language, vision and action data individually jointly together to
solve long-horizon tasks. We use a large language model to construct symbolic
plans that are grounded in the environment through a large video diffusion model.
Generated video plans are then grounded to visual-motor control, through an inverse dynamics model that infers actions from generated videos. To enable effective
reasoning within this hierarchy, we enforce consistency between the models via
iterative refinement. We illustrate the efficacy and adaptability of our approach in
three different long-horizon table-top manipulation tasks.

1

Introduction

Consider the task of making a cup of tea in an unfamiliar house. To successfully execute this task, an
effective approach is to reason hierarchically at multiple levels: an abstract level, e.g. the high level
steps needed to heat up the tea, a concrete geometric level e.g., how we should physically navigate
to and in the kitchen, and at a control level e.g. how we should actuate our joints to lift a cup. It is
further important that reasoning at each level is self-consistent with each other – an abstract plan to
look in cabinets for tea kettles must also be physically plausible at the geometric level and executable
given the actuations we are capable of. In this paper, we explore how we can create agents capable of
solving novel long-horizon tasks which require hierarchical reasoning.
Large “foundation models" have become a dominant paradigm in solving tasks in natural language
processing [36, 47, 7], computer vision [26], and mathematical reasoning [27]. In line with this
paradigm, a question of broad interest is to develop a “foundation model” that can solve novel and
long-horizon decision-making tasks. Some prior works [39, 6] collected paired visual, language
and action data and trained a monolithic neural network for solving long-horizon tasks. However,
collecting paired visual, language and action data is expensive and hard to scale up. Another line
of prior works [10, 28] finetune large language models (LLM) on both visual and language inputs
using task-specific robot demonstrations. This is problematic because, unlike the abundance of
text on the Internet, paired vision and language robotics demonstrations are not readily available
and are expensive to collect. Furthermore, finetuning high-performing language models, such as
GPT3.5/4 [37, 36] and PaLM [7], is currently impossible, as the model weights are not open-sourced.
∗

denotes equal contribution. Authors are also affiliated with Computer Science and Artificial Laboratory
(CSAIL). Correspondence to aajay@mit.edu, swhan@mit.edu and yilundu@mit.edu.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

