UE4-NeRF:Neural Radiance Field for Real-Time
Rendering of Large-Scale Scene

Jiaming Gu1,2∗ Minchao Jiang1∗ Hongsheng Li1 Xiaoyuan Lu2 Guangming Zhu1
Syed Afaq Ali Shah3 Liang Zhang1† Mohammed Bennamoun4
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
2
Algorithm R&D Center, Qing Yi (Shanghai)
3
Edith Cowan University
4
The University of Western Australia
jiaming_gu_xidian@outlook.com, {jamchaos, hsli}@stu.xidian.edu.cn
xylu@bnc.org.cn, {gmzhu, liangzhang}@xidian.edu.cn
afaq.shah@ecu.edu.au, mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) is an implicit 3D reconstruction method that has
shown immense potential and has gained significant attention for its ability to
reconstruct 3D scenes solely from a set of photographs. However, its real-time
rendering capability, especially for interactive real-time rendering of large-scale
scenes, has significant limitations. To address this challenge, we propose a novel
neural rendering system called UE4-NeRF that is designed for real-time rendering
of large-scale scenes. Our proposed approach partitions large scenes into subNeRFs, and uses polygonal meshes to represent them. In order to represent the
partitioned independent scene, we initialize polygonal meshes by constructing
multiple regular octahedra within the scene and the vertices of the polygonal faces
are continuously optimized during the training process. Drawing inspiration from
the Level of Detail (LOD) techniques, we train meshes with varying levels of detail
for different observation levels. Our approach combines with the rasterization
pipeline in Unreal Engine 4 (UE4), achieving real-time rendering of large-scale
scenes at 4K resolution with a frame rate of up to 43 FPS. Our experimental results
demonstrate that our method attains rendering quality on par with state-of-the-art
approaches, while additionally offering the advantage of real-time performance.
Furthermore, rendering within UE4 facilitates scene editing in subsequent stages.
Project page: https://jamchaos.github.io/UE4-NeRF/.

1

Introduction

Real-time interactive rendering capability for 3D large-scale scenes is a crucial tool in creating digital
worlds for applications such as virtual reality (VR), computer games, and the Metaverse. Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] is a pioneering method for 3D reconstruction and synthesis of novel
views, which is different from traditional 3D reconstruction techniques that represent scenes using
explicit expressions such as point clouds, grids, and voxels [5, 4, 14, 1]. NeRF samples each ray and
retrieves the 3D location of each sampling point and the 2D viewing direction of the ray. Subsequently,
these 5D vector values are fed into a neural network to determine the color and volume density of
each sampling point. NeRF constructs a field parameterized by an MLP neural network [16, 34] to
continuously optimize parameters and reconstruct the scene. NeRF has demonstrated remarkable
∗
†

Contribute equally
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

