Make Pre-trained Model Reversible:
From Parameter to Memory Efficient Fine-Tuning

Baohao Liao
Shaomu Tan
Christof Monz
Language Technology Lab, University of Amsterdam
{b.liao, s.tan, c.monz}@uva.nl

Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) of pre-trained language models (PLMs) has
emerged as a highly successful approach, with training only a small number of
parameters without sacrificing performance and becoming the de-facto learning
paradigm with the increasing size of PLMs. However, existing PEFT methods are
not memory-efficient, because they still require caching most of the intermediate
activations for the gradient calculation, akin to fine-tuning. One effective way to
reduce the activation memory is to apply a reversible model, so the intermediate
activations are not necessary to be cached and can be recomputed. Nevertheless,
modifying a PLM to its reversible variant is not straightforward, since the reversible
model has a distinct architecture from the currently released PLMs. In this paper,
we first investigate what is a key factor for the success of existing PEFT methods,
and realize that it’s essential to preserve the PLM’s starting point when initializing a
PEFT method. With this finding, we propose memory-efficient fine-tuning (MEFT)
that inserts adapters into a PLM, preserving the PLM’s starting point and making
it reversible without additional pre-training. We evaluate MEFT on the GLUE
benchmark and five question-answering tasks with various backbones, BERT,
RoBERTa, BART and OPT. MEFT significantly reduces the activation memory
up to 84% of full fine-tuning with a negligible amount of trainable parameters.
Moreover, MEFT achieves the same score on GLUE and a comparable score on
the question-answering tasks as full fine-tuning. A similar finding is also observed
for the image classification task.1

Introduction

Large-scale pre-trained models have achieved great success
across various domains and applications [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
As their capabilities continue to evolve, the released pre-trained
language models (PLMs) have grown exponentially in size,
even reaching a scale of 100 billion parameters [3, 9, 10, 11,
12]. Consequently, it presents unprecedented challenges in
effectively leveraging these models for downstream tasks due
to limited computing resources.
A historically common approach to adapting PLMs to downstream tasks is updating all pre-trained parameters, full finetuning. Although full fine-tuning has yielded numerous state-ofthe-art results, its applicability is limited in storage-constrained
environments. This constraint arises from maintaining a complete copy of the fine-tuned model for each task. An alternative
1

90

BERT
RoBERTa
BART
OPT
Full FT
Prefix-Tuning
LoRA
MAM

85

Score (%)

1

80
75
70

AdapterH

65
60
20

40

60

80

Activation Memory (%)

100

AdapterP
LST
our MEFT1

Figure 1: Average performance of
different tasks vs. activation memory. The memory usage for full finetuning is denoted as 100%.

Code at https://github.com/baohaoliao/mefts. Up-to-date version at https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00477.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

