Approximation-Generalization Trade-offs under
(Approximate) Group Equivariance

Mircea Petrache∗

Shubhendu Trivedi†

Abstract
The explicit incorporation of task-specific inductive biases through symmetry has emerged as a general design precept in the development of
high-performance machine learning models. For example, group equivariant
neural networks have demonstrated impressive performance across various
domains and applications such as protein and drug design. A prevalent
intuition about such models is that the integration of relevant symmetry
results in enhanced generalization. Moreover, it is posited that when the
data and/or the model may only exhibit approximate or partial symmetry,
the optimal or best-performing model is one where the model symmetry
aligns with the data symmetry. In this paper, we conduct a formal unified
investigation of these intuitions. To begin, we present general quantitative
bounds that demonstrate how models capturing task-specific symmetries
lead to improved generalization. In fact, our results do not require the transformations to be finite or even form a group and can work with partial or
approximate equivariance. Utilizing this quantification, we examine the more
general question of model mis-specification i.e. when the model symmetries
don’t align with the data symmetries. We establish, for a given symmetry
group, a quantitative comparison between the approximate/partial equivariance of the model and that of the data distribution, precisely connecting
model equivariance error and data equivariance error. Our result delineates
conditions under which the model equivariance error is optimal, thereby
yielding the best-performing model for the given task and data. Our results
are the most general results of their type in the literature.

1

Introduction

It is a common intuition that machine learning models that explicitly incorporate task-specific
symmetries tend to exhibit superior generalization. The rationale is simple: if aspects of
the task remain unchanged or change predictably when subject to certain transformations,
then, a model without knowledge of them would require additional training samples to
learn to disregard them. While the general idea is by no means new in machine learning, it
has experienced a revival in interest due to the remarkable successes of group equivariant
convolutional neural networks (GCNNs) [14, 38, 29, 16, 13, 60, 8, 34, 24, 66]. Such networks
hard-code equivariance to the action of an algebraic group on the inputs and have shown
promise in a variety of domains [55, 5, 42, 2, 28, 62, 25, 52, 18, 61, 68], in particular in
those where data is scarce, but exhibits clear symmetries. Further, the benefits of encoding
symmetries in this manner extend beyond merely enhancing generalization. Indeed, in
∗

UC Chile, Fac. de Matemáticas, & Inst. de Ingeniería Matematica y Computacional, Av. Vicuña
Mackenna 4860, Santiago, 6904441, Chile. mpetrache@mat.uc.cl.
†
shubhendu@csail.mit.edu.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

