GeoPhy: Differentiable Phylogenetic Inference via
Geometric Gradients of Tree Topologies

Takahiro Mimori
Waseda University
RIKEN AIP
takahiro.mimori@aoni.waseda.jp

Michiaki Hamada
Waseda University
AIST-Waseda CBBD-OIL
Nippon Medical School
mhamada@waseda.jp

Abstract
Phylogenetic inference, grounded in molecular evolution models, is essential for
understanding the evolutionary relationships in biological data. Accounting for
the uncertainty of phylogenetic tree variables, which include tree topologies and
evolutionary distances on branches, is crucial for accurately inferring species relationships from molecular data and tasks requiring variable marginalization. Variational Bayesian methods are key to developing scalable, practical models; however,
it remains challenging to conduct phylogenetic inference without restricting the
combinatorially vast number of possible tree topologies. In this work, we introduce
a novel, fully differentiable formulation of phylogenetic inference that leverages a
unique representation of topological distributions in continuous geometric spaces.
Through practical considerations on design spaces and control variates for gradient
estimations, our approach, GeoPhy, enables variational inference without limiting
the topological candidates. In experiments using real benchmark datasets, GeoPhy
significantly outperformed other approximate Bayesian methods that considered
whole topologies.

1

Introduction

Phylogenetic inference, the reconstruction of tree-structured evolutionary relationships between biological units, such as genes, cells, individuals, and species ranging from viruses to macro-organisms,
is a fundamental problem in biology. As the phylogenetic relationships are often indirectly inferred
from molecular observations, including DNA, RNA and protein sequences, Bayesian inference has
been an essential tool to quantify the uncertainty of phylogeny. However, due to the complex nature
of the phylogenetic tree object, which involve both a discrete topology and dependent continuous
variables for branch lengths, the default approach for the phylogenetic inference has typically been
an Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method [29], enhanced with domain-specific techniques
such as a mixed strategy for efficient exploration of tree topologies.
As an alternative approach to the conventional MCMCs, a variational Bayesian approach for phylogenetic inference was proposed in [42] (VBPI), which has subsequently been improved in the expressive
powers of topology-dependent branch length distributions [39, 40]. Although these methods have
presented accurate joint posterior distributions of topology and branch lengths for real datasets, they
required reasonable preselection of candidate tree topologies to avoid a combinatorial explosion in
the number of weight parameters beforehand. There have also been proposed variational approaches
[24, 16] on top of the combinatorial sequential Monte Carlo method (CSMC[34]), which iteratively
updated weighted topologies without the need for the preselection steps. However, the fidelity of the
joint posterior distributions was still largely behind that of MCMC and VBPI as reported in [16].
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

