Intervention Generalization:
A View from Factor Graph Models
Gecia Bravo-Hermsdorff⇤ David S. Watson† Jialin Yu⇤ Jakob Zeitler‡ Ricardo Silva⇤

Abstract
One of the goals of causal inference is to generalize from past experiments and
observational data to novel conditions. While it is in principle possible to eventually
learn a mapping from a novel experimental condition to an outcome of interest,
provided a sufficient variety of experiments is available in the training data, coping
with a large combinatorial space of possible interventions is hard. Under a typical
sparse experimental design, this mapping is ill-posed without relying on heavy
regularization or prior distributions. Such assumptions may or may not be reliable,
and can be hard to defend or test. In this paper, we take a close look at how
to warrant a leap from past experiments to novel conditions based on minimal
assumptions about the factorization of the distribution of the manipulated system,
communicated in the well-understood language of factor graph models. A postulated interventional factor model (IFM) may not always be informative, but it
conveniently abstracts away a need for explicitly modeling unmeasured confounding and feedback mechanisms, leading to directly testable claims. Given an IFM
and datasets from a collection of experimental regimes, we derive conditions for
identifiability of the expected outcomes of new regimes never observed in these
training data. We implement our framework using several efficient algorithms, and
apply them on a range of semi-synthetic experiments.

1

Introduction

Causal inference is a fundamental problem in many sciences, such as clinical medicine [8, 73, 69]
and molecular biology [66, 41, 29]. For example, causal inference can be used to identify the effects
of chemical compounds on cell types [73] or determine the underlying mechanisms of disease [52].
One particular challenge in causal inference is generalization — the ability to extrapolate knowledge
gained from past experiments and observational data to previously unseen scenarios. Consider a
laboratory that has performed several gene knockouts and recorded subsequent outcomes. Do they
have sufficient information to predict how the system will behave under some new combination(s) of
knockouts? Conducting all possible experiments in this setting would be prohibitively expensive and
time consuming. A supervised learning method could, in principle, map a vector representation of the
design to outcome variables of interest. However, past experimental conditions may be too sparsely
distributed in the set of all possible assignments, and such a direct supervised mapping would require
leaps of faith about how assignment decisions interact with the outcome, even if under the guise of
formal assumptions such as linearity.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to the task of intervention generalization, i.e., predicting
the effect of unseen treatment regimes. We rely on little more than a postulated factorization of the
⇤

Department of Statistical Science, University College London.
Department of Informatics, King’s College London.
‡
Department of Computer Science, University College London.
†

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

