Language Quantized AutoEncoders:
Towards Unsupervised Text-Image Alignment

Hao Liu
UC Berkeley
hao.liu@cs.berkeley.edu

Wilson Yan
UC Berkeley
wilson1.yan@berkeley.edu

Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley
pabbeel@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in scaling up large language models has shown impressive capabilities in performing few-shot learning across a wide range of natural language
tasks. However, a key limitation is that these language models fundamentally lack
grounding to visual perception - a crucial attribute needed to extend to real world
tasks such as in visual-question answering and robotics. While prior works have
largely connected image to text through pretraining or fine-tuning, learning such
alignments are generally costly due to a combination of curating massive datasets
and large computational burdens. In order to resolve these limitations, we propose
a simple yet effective approach called Language-Quantized AutoEncoder (LQAE),
a modification of VQ-VAE that learns to align text-image data in an unsupervised
manner by leveraging pretrained language model denoisers (e.g.BERT). Our main
idea is to encode images as sequences of text tokens by directly quantizing image
embeddings using a pretrained language codebook. We then feed a masked version
of the quantized embeddings into a BERT to reconstruct the original input. By doing so, LQAE learns to represent similar images with similar clusters of text tokens,
thereby aligning these two modalities without the use of aligned text-image pairs.
We show LQAE learns text-aligned image tokens that enable few-shot multi-modal
learning with large language models, outperforming baseline methods in tasks such
as image classification and VQA while requiring as few as 1-10 image-text pairs1 .

1

Introduction

Large language models powered by transformers [25] have shown impressive capabilities in modeling
natural language [see e.g. 2, 17, 6, 30], demonstrated through their abilities to quickly learn novel
tasks such as question answering, chatbots, and machine translation from just a few examples without
finetuning. This so called few-shot learning turns out to be competitive with conventional task
specific methods in various NLP tasks and is being rapidly adapted to more new tasks and styles of
generations.
Despite these impressive capabilities, a key limitation of such large language models is that they
cannot ‘see’ the visual world. Being able to ‘see’ the world is crucial for many real world applications
where processing abundant complex sensory data is a must, such as robotics, visual question answering, and grounding. Such a limitation severely hinders further applicability of large transformer
models to a variety of downstream tasks.
Driven by these impressive results for large language models, much of recent work has started
to bring text and image together, and leverage these aligned modalities to perform a variety of
applications, such as text to image generation [29, 3], open ended classification [23, 18, 1], and image
1

Code: https://github.com/lhao499/language-quantized-autoencoders

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

