Robust Concept Erasure via Kernelized
Rate-Distortion Maximization
Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury
UNC Chapel Hill

Nicholas Monath
Google DeepMind

Avinava Dubey
Google Research

Amr Ahmed
Google Research

Snigdha Chaturvedi
UNC Chapel Hill
{somnath, snigdha}@cs.unc.edu
{nmonath, avinavadubey, amra}@google.com

Abstract
Distributed representations provide a vector space that captures meaningful relationships between data instances. The distributed nature of these representations,
however, entangles together multiple attributes or concepts of data instances (e.g.,
the topic or sentiment of a text, characteristics of the author (age, gender, etc), etc).
Recent work has proposed the task of concept erasure [50, 52], in which rather than
making a concept predictable, the goal is to remove an attribute from distributed
representations while retaining other information from the original representation
space as much as possible. In this paper, we propose a new distance metric learningbased objective, the Kernelized Rate-Distortion Maximizer (KRaM), for performing
concept erasure. KRaM fits a transformation of representations to match a specified
distance measure (defined by a labeled concept to erase) using a modified ratedistortion function. Specifically, KRaM’s objective function aims to make instances
with similar concept labels dissimilar in the learned representation space while
retaining other information. We find that optimizing KRaM effectively erases various
types of concepts—categorical, continuous, and vector-valued variables—from
data representations across diverse domains. We also provide a theoretical analysis
of several properties of KRaM’s objective. To assess the quality of the learned
representations, we propose an alignment score to evaluate their similarity with the
original representation space. Additionally, we conduct experiments to showcase
KRaM’s efficacy in various settings, from erasing binary gender variables in word
embeddings to vector-valued variables in GPT-3 representations.

1

Introduction

Learned representations, particularly distributed representations [30], are at the core of machine
learning with applications in natural language [39], images [21], biology [4], physics [3], and several
other domains [40, 48]. These vector-based representations of data instances create an inner product
space where similarities and nearest-neighbor relationships are “meaningful”. However, due to
the distributed nature of these representations, the definition of “meaningful” is often not easily
discernible. In other words, shared properties of data instances nearby in the vector space are
not always evident. These shared properties are often referred to as concepts [31]. For instance,
concepts in representations of images include objects in the image, whether it is indoor or outdoor, etc.
Similarly, concepts in text representations include the topics, and characteristics of the author (e.g.,
geographic location, gender, etc.). For applications that necessitate conditioning on specific attributes
to make or explain predictions, these distributed representations can pose challenges. Consequently,
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

