Learning Invariant Representations of Graph Neural
Networks via Cluster Generalization
Donglin Xia1 , Xiao Wang2∗ , Nian Liu1 , Chuan Shi1∗
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beihang University
{donglin.xia, nianliu, shichuan}@bupt.edu.cn, xiao_wang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have become increasingly popular in modeling
graph-structured data due to their ability to learn node representations by aggregating local structure information. However, it is widely acknowledged that the test
graph structure may differ from the training graph structure, resulting in a structure
shift. In this paper, we experimentally find that the performance of GNNs drops significantly when the structure shift happens, suggesting that the learned models may
be biased towards specific structure patterns. To address this challenge, we propose
the Cluster Information Transfer (CIT) mechanism2 , which can learn invariant
representations for GNNs, thereby improving their generalization ability to various
and unknown test graphs with structure shift. The CIT mechanism achieves this
by combining different cluster information with the nodes while preserving their
cluster-independent information. By generating nodes across different clusters,
the mechanism significantly enhances the diversity of the nodes and helps GNNs
learn the invariant representations. We provide a theoretical analysis of the CIT
mechanism, showing that the impact of changing clusters during structure shift
can be mitigated after transfer. Additionally, the proposed mechanism is a plug-in
that can be easily used to improve existing GNNs. We comprehensively evaluate
our proposed method on three typical structure shift scenarios, demonstrating its
effectiveness in enhancing GNNs’ performance.

1

Introduction

Graphs are often easily used to model individual properties and inter-individual relationships, which
are ubiquitous in the real world, including social networks, e-commerce networks, citation networks.
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs), which are able to effectively employ deep learning on graphs
to learn the node representations, have attracted considerable attention in dealing with graph data
[13, 24, 32, 36, 9, 5]. So far, GNNs have been applied to various applications and achieved remarkable
performance, e.g., node classification [13, 32], link prediction [33, 14] and graph classification [6, 34].
Message-passing mechanism forms the basis of most graph neural networks (GNNs) [13, 24, 5, 9].
That is, the node representations are learned by aggregating feature information from the neighbors
in each convolutional layer. So it can be seen that the trained GNNs are highly dependent on the local
structure. However, it is well known that the graph structure in the real world always changes. For
instance, the paper citations and areas would go through significant change as time goes by in citation
network [11]. In social networks, nodes represent users and edges represent activity between users,
because they will be changed dynamically, the test graph structure may also change [7]. This change
in the graph structure is a form of distribution shift, which we refer to as graph structure shift. So
∗
2

Corresponding authors.
Code available at https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/CITGNN

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

