Greatness in Simplicity: Unified Self-Cycle
Consistency for Parser-Free Virtual Try-On

Chenghu Du1 Junyin Wang1 Shuqin Liu4 Shengwu Xiong1,2,3,5,∗
1
Wuhan University of Technology, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Sanya Science and Education Innovation Park, Wuhan University of Technology
4
Wuhan Textile University, 5 Qiongtai Normal University
{duch, wjy199708, xiongsw}@whut.edu.cn, liushuqingwtu@foxmail.com
https://du-chenghu.github.io/USC-PFN/

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on tasks remain challenging, primarily due to inherent
complexities associated with non-rigid garment deformation modeling and strong
feature entanglement of clothing within human body. Recent groundbreaking formulations, such as in-painting, cycle consistency, and knowledge distillation, have
facilitated self-supervised generation of try-on images. However, these paradigms
necessitate the disentanglement of garment features within human body features
through auxiliary tasks, such as leveraging ’teacher knowledge’ and dual generators. The potential presence of irresponsible prior knowledge in the auxiliary
task can serve as a significant bottleneck for the main generator (e.g., ’student
model’) in the downstream task. Moreover, existing garment deformation methods
lack the ability to perceive the correlation between the garment and the human
body in the real world, leading to unrealistic alignment effects. To tackle these
limitations, we present a new parser-free virtual try-on network based on unified
self-cycle consistency (USC-PFN), which enables robust translation between different garments using just a single generator, faithfully replicating non-rigid geometric
deformation of garments in real-life scenarios. Specifically, we first propose a
self-cycle consistency architecture with a circular mode. It utilizes real unpaired
garment-person images exclusively as input for training, effectively eliminating
the impact of irresponsible prior knowledge at the model input end. Additionally,
we formulate a Markov Random Field to simulate a more natural and realistic
garment deformation. Furthermore, USC-PFN can leverage a general generator for
self-supervised cycle training. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a popular virtual try-on benchmark.

1

Introduction

To provide consumers with an online try-on experience similar to physical stores, researchers have
focused on image-based virtual try-on (VTON), allowing individuals to virtually try on garments
available in online shops. The mainstream image-based approach of VTON involves the replacement
of a person’s clothing area with an in-shop garment image. However, all current datasets are paired,
meaning one person corresponds to only one piece of clothing they are wearing. To capture underlying
correlations between unpaired images from random combinations in the dataset, three architectures
have been used: in-painting methods [8, 3, 9, 10, 4, 11–14], knowledge distillation methods [11, 6, 7],
and cycle consistency methods[15, 2] (see Figure 1).
∗

Shengwu Xiong is corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

