CLIP4HOI: Towards Adapting CLIP for
Practical Zero-Shot HOI Detection
Yunyao Mao1 Jiajun Deng2 Wengang Zhou1† Li Li1 Yao Fang3 Houqiang Li1†
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Technology in GIPAS, EEIS Department,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
The University of Adelaide, AIML 3 Merchants Union Consumer Finance Company Limited
myy2016@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jiajun.deng@adelaide.edu.au, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn
lil1@ustc.edu.cn, fangyao@mucfc.com, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to identify both seen
and unseen HOI categories. A strong zero-shot HOI detector is supposed to be
not only capable of discriminating novel interactions but also robust to positional
distribution discrepancy between seen and unseen categories when locating humanobject pairs. However, top-performing zero-shot HOI detectors rely on seen and
predefined unseen categories to distill knowledge from CLIP and jointly locate
human-object pairs without considering the potential positional distribution discrepancy, leading to impaired transferability. In this paper, we introduce CLIP4HOI,
a novel framework for zero-shot HOI detection. CLIP4HOI is developed on the
vision-language model CLIP and ameliorates the above issues in the following two
aspects. First, to avoid the model from overfitting to the joint positional distribution of seen human-object pairs, we seek to tackle the problem of zero-shot HOI
detection in a disentangled two-stage paradigm. To be specific, humans and objects
are independently identified and all feasible human-object pairs are processed by
Human-Object interactor for pairwise proposal generation. Second, to facilitate
better transferability, the CLIP model is elaborately adapted into a fine-grained
HOI classifier for proposal discrimination, avoiding data-sensitive knowledge distillation. Finally, experiments on prevalent benchmarks show that our CLIP4HOI
outperforms previous approaches on both rare and unseen categories, and sets a
series of state-of-the-art records under a variety of zero-shot settings.

1

Introduction

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims at locating paired humans and objects and identifying
their interactions. It finds applications in several downstream tasks, including surveillance, robotics,
and human-computer interaction. Despite significant progress in recent years, in most previous
works, the task of HOI detection has been conventionally restricted to predefined HOI categories.
Given the flexibility of verb-object combinations in human-object interaction scenarios, obtaining
a comprehensive dataset is laborious and time-consuming. Moreover, the obtained detectors also
struggle to generalize to unseen HOI categories, even if both verb and object in the novel category
are present (but never composed together) in the training set. These facts motivate and highlight the
exploration of zero-shot HOI detection, which targets to development of transferable HOI detectors.
Latest zero-shot HOI detectors [31, 44, 46, 48] seek to harness the general visual and linguistic
knowledge of CLIP [38] for identifying novel HOIs. Despite notable advancements over conventional
compositional learning approaches [2, 15, 17–19, 34, 36], these methods exhibit certain limitations.
†

Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

