Leave No Stone Unturned: Mine Extra Knowledge for
Imbalanced Facial Expression Recognition

Yuhang Zhang, Yaqi Li, Lixiong Qin, Xuannan Liu, Weihong Deng
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{zyhzyh, yaqili, lixiongqin, xuannanliu, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial expression data is characterized by a significant imbalance, with most
collected data showing happy or neutral expressions and fewer instances of fear or
disgust. This imbalance poses challenges to facial expression recognition (FER)
models, hindering their ability to fully understand various human emotional states.
Existing FER methods typically report overall accuracy on highly imbalanced
test sets but exhibit low performance in terms of the mean accuracy across all
expression classes. In this paper, our aim is to address the imbalanced FER
problem. Existing methods primarily focus on learning knowledge of minor classes
solely from minor-class samples. However, we propose a novel approach to extract
extra knowledge related to the minor classes from both major and minor class
samples. Our motivation stems from the belief that FER resembles a distribution
learning task, wherein a sample may contain information about multiple classes.
For instance, a sample from the major class surprise might also contain useful
features of the minor class fear. Inspired by that, we propose a novel method that
leverages re-balanced attention maps to regularize the model, enabling it to extract
transformation invariant information about the minor classes from all training
samples. Additionally, we introduce re-balanced smooth labels to regulate the
cross-entropy loss, guiding the model to pay more attention to the minor classes by
utilizing the extra information regarding the label distribution of the imbalanced
training data. Extensive experiments on different datasets and backbones show
that the two proposed modules work together to regularize the model and achieve
state-of-the-art performance under the imbalanced FER task. Code is available at
https://github.com/zyh-uaiaaaa.

1

Introduction

Facial expression recognition (FER) plays a crucial role in enabling machines to understand human
emotional states, thus facilitating the realization of machine intelligence [18, 11, 25]. Recent research
efforts [42, 35, 49] have employed in-the-wild datasets to train FER models, resulting in impressive
performance in terms of overall classification accuracy. However, these FER datasets suffer from a
significant imbalance, with a higher abundance of happy and neutral expression faces, which are easily
obtainable from the internet and daily life, compared to faces displaying negative expressions such as
fear or disgust [6, 32]. This imbalance can have adverse effects on human-computer interaction when
FER models misinterpret infrequently occurring negative emotions as frequently occurring positive
emotions.
In this paper, our objective is to investigate imbalanced learning in the context of FER. We observe
that existing FER methods [34, 43, 42, 29] yield relatively low performance in terms of the mean
accuracy across all classes, mainly due to the highly imbalanced nature of the training data. While
imbalanced (long-tailed) learning methods in the image classification domain have shown some
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

