Dynamo-Depth: Fixing Unsupervised Depth
Estimation for Dynamical Scenes

Yihong Sun
Cornell University
yihong@cs.cornell.edu

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University
bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised monocular depth estimation techniques have demonstrated encouraging results but typically assume that the scene is static. These techniques suffer
when trained on dynamical scenes, where apparent object motion can equally be explained by hypothesizing the object’s independent motion, or by altering its depth.
This ambiguity causes depth estimators to predict erroneous depth for moving
objects. To resolve this issue, we introduce Dynamo-Depth, an unifying approach
that disambiguates dynamical motion by jointly learning monocular depth, 3D
independent flow field, and motion segmentation from unlabeled monocular videos.
Specifically, we offer our key insight that a good initial estimation of motion segmentation is sufficient for jointly learning depth and independent motion despite the
fundamental underlying ambiguity. Our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on monocular depth estimation on Waymo Open [34] and nuScenes
[3] Dataset with significant improvement in the depth of moving objects. Code and
additional results are available at https://dynamo-depth.github.io.

1

Introduction

Embodied agents acting in the real world need to perceive both the 3D scene around them as well as
how objects around them might behave. For instance, a self-driving car executing a lane change will
need to know where the nearby cars are and how fast they are moving. Instead of relying on expensive
sensors such as LiDAR to estimate this structure, a promising alternative is to use commodity cameras.
This has motivated a long line of work on monocular depth estimation using neural networks.
While neural networks can learn to estimate depth, the dominant training approach requires expensive
3D sensors in the training phase. This limits the amount of training data we can capture, resulting
in downstream generalization challenges. One would prefer to train these depth estimators without
supervision, for e.g., using unlabeled videos captured from a driving car. This is possible to do if the
videos are produced by a camera moving in a static scene, since the apparent motion (i.e., optical
flow) of each pixel is then inversely proportional to the depth of the pixel. This provides a useful
supervisory signal for learning depth estimation and has been used effectively in the past [48, 36].
However, for unsupervised approaches to learn depth, dynamic scenes with moving objects pose
a challenge. Here, the apparent pixels motion on the image plane is a combined effect of camera
ego-motion (or rigid scene motion) and the independent motion of objects in the scene. Methods that
ignore the presence of moving objects and treat the scene as static will then learn erroneous depth,
where the depths of moving objects are altered to match their observed motion, as shown in Figure 1
(b). Past works have tried to overcome this issue by having another module predict independent
object motion [31, 24, 15], but the presence of multiple equivalent solutions makes training difficult:
even with sophisticated regularizers, the training can converge to the degenerate solution of either
predicting the whole scene as static with incorrect depth, or predicting the entire scene as moving on a
flat canvas. This results in depth error on moving objects at least 4 times as large as the error on static
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

