Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning via
Training-Free Prototype Calibration

Qi-Wei Wang, Da-Wei Zhou, Yi-Kai Zhang, De-Chuan Zhan, Han-Jia Ye∗
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China
{wangqiwei,zhoudw,zhangyk,zhandc,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Real-world scenarios are usually accompanied by continuously appearing classes
with scarce labeled samples, which require the machine learning model to incrementally learn new classes and maintain the knowledge of base classes. In
this Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) scenario, existing methods
either introduce extra learnable components or rely on a frozen feature extractor
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and overfitting problems. However, we find a
tendency for existing methods to misclassify the samples of new classes into base
classes, which leads to the poor performance of new classes. In other words, the
strong discriminability of base classes distracts the classification of new classes.
To figure out this intriguing phenomenon, we observe that although the feature
extractor is only trained on base classes, it can surprisingly represent the semantic
similarity between the base and unseen new classes. Building upon these analyses,
we propose a simple yet effective Training-frEE calibratioN (TEEN) strategy to
enhance the discriminability of new classes by fusing the new prototypes (i.e.,
mean features of a class) with weighted base prototypes. In addition to standard
benchmarks in FSCIL, TEEN demonstrates remarkable performance and consistent improvements over baseline methods in the few-shot learning scenario. Code
is available at: https://github.com/wangkiw/TEEN

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (i.e., DNNs) have achieved impressive success in various applications [16,
19, 36, 55, 54, 5], but they usually rely heavily on static and pre-collected large-scale datasets
(e.g., ImageNet [11]) to achieve this success. However, the data in real-world scenarios usually
arrive continuously. For example, the face recognition system is required to authenticate existing
users, and meanwhile, new users are continually added [30]. The scene where the model is required
to continually learn new knowledge and maintain the ability on old tasks is referred to as ClassIncremental Learning (CIL) [41]. The main challenge of CIL is the notorious catastrophic forgetting
problem [14], where the model forgets old knowledge as it learns new ones.
Many methods have been designed to overcome catastrophic forgetting in CIL from different
perspectives, e.g., knowledge distillation [35], parameter regularization [22, 53], and network expansion [50, 47, 46]. These methods require new tasks to contain sufficient labeled data for supervised
training. However, collecting enough labeled data in some scenarios is challenging, making the
conventional CIL methods hard to deploy [30]. For example, the face recognition system can only
collect very few facial images of a new user due to privacy reasons. Therefore, a more realistic and
practical incremental learning paradigm, Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL) [42], is
∗

Han-Jia Ye is the corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

