Topological Obstructions and How to Avoid Them

Babak Esmaeili∗
Generative AI Group
Eindhoven University of Technology
b.esmaeili@tue.nl

Robin Walters∗
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
r.walters@northeastern.edu

Heiko Zimmermann
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
h.zimmermann@uva.nl

Jan-Willem van de Meent
Amsterdam Machine Learning Lab
University of Amsterdam
j.w.vandemeent@uva.nl

Abstract
Incorporating geometric inductive biases into models can aid interpretability and
generalization, but encoding to a specific geometric structure can be challenging
due to the imposed topological constraints. In this paper, we theoretically and empirically characterize obstructions to training encoders with geometric latent spaces.
We show that local optima can arise due to singularities (e.g. self-intersection) or
due to an incorrect degree or winding number. We then discuss how normalizing
flows can potentially circumvent these obstructions by defining multimodal variational distributions. Inspired by this observation, we propose a new flow-based
model that maps data points to multimodal distributions over geometric spaces and
empirically evaluate our model on 2 domains. We observe improved stability during training and a higher chance of converging to a homeomorphic encoder.

1

Introduction

A well-established idea in machine learning research is that geometric inductive biases can help us
learn representations that reflect the underlying structure of a dataset [Bronstein et al., 2021, Higgins
et al., 2022]. A key intuition behind this line of research is that such representations make it easier to
reason about the similarities of different instances in the dataset, for example by relating inputs using
a rotation or translation, which in turn aids interpretability and data-efficiency. Geometric inductive
biases have been explored in a wide variety of forms, including models that are defined on hyperbolic
or spherical Riemannian manifolds [Lezcano-Casado and Martınez-Rubio, 2019, Ganea et al., 2018],
models that are equivariant or invariant with respect to particular symmetry groups [Kondor and
Trivedi, 2018, Cohen and Welling, 2016], and work that leverages symmetries to learn disentangled
representations that factorize into distinct axes of variation [Higgins et al., 2018].
In this paper, we consider symmetry-based approaches to learning representations in an unsupervised
manner by imposing geometric inductive biases on the representation space. In this context, our
notion of a representation that “reflects the underlying structure of the data” is a representation that
is homeomorphic to the true generative factors. We are specifically interested in the optimization
challenges that arise when encoding to geometric spaces such as Lie groups. While a common
intuition is that an inductive bias that matches the underlying topology of the data will guide a model
towards a homeomorphic representation, there are also indications that certain inductive biases can
make a model more difficult to train in practice [Park et al., 2022, Falorsi et al., 2018, Batson et al.,
2021], which limits their practical utility.
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

