Spectral Co-Distillation for Personalized Federated
Learning

Zihan Chen1 , Howard H. Yang2 , Tony Q.S. Quek1 , and Kai Fong Ernest Chong1∗
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
2
Zhejiang University/University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Institute, Zhejiang University
zihan_chen@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Personalized federated learning (PFL) has been widely investigated to address
the challenge of data heterogeneity, especially when a single generic model is
inadequate in satisfying the diverse performance requirements of local clients
simultaneously. Existing PFL methods are inherently based on the idea that the
relations between the generic global and personalized local models are captured
by the similarity of model weights. Such a similarity is primarily based on either
partitioning the model architecture into generic versus personalized components,
or modeling client relationships via model weights. To better capture similar (yet
distinct) generic versus personalized model representations, we propose spectral
distillation, a novel distillation method based on model spectrum information.
Building upon spectral distillation, we also introduce a co-distillation framework
that establishes a two-way bridge between generic and personalized model training.
Moreover, to utilize the local idle time in conventional PFL, we propose a waitfree local training protocol. Through extensive experiments on multiple datasets
over diverse heterogeneous data settings, we demonstrate the outperformance and
efficacy of our proposed spectral co-distillation method, as well as our wait-free
training protocol.

1

Introduction

With the rapid rise in mainstream popularity of artificial intelligence (AI) models such as ChatGPT [1]
and LoRA [2], there has been an increasing shift towards the development of personalized AI
assistants [3]. Hence, in a future where personalized AI services become mainstream, training AI
models on personal data while preserving data privacy would become increasingly important [4],
and maintaining the quality for such models would require collaborative training across multiple
models. Personalized federated learning (PFL) emerges as a promising privacy-preserving distributed
learning paradigm that is well-equipped to meet such requirements [3]. As an extension of federated
learning (FL), PFL aims to train a customized machine learning model for each client or each group
of clients with similar preferences [5]. When faced with inconsistencies in the objective functions of
different clients, conventional FL fails to generalize well with just a single model, while in contrast
PFL promises to generalize well across all clients, even in the presence of data heterogeneity (e.g.,
label distribution skew and label quantity skew) [6–14].
To tackle the challenges of personalization, numerous works have focused on designing new PFL
systems, or enhancing the performance of personalized models from different aspects, such robustness,
fairness, and model convergence[15–18]. Under federated settings, personalization is achieved
through capturing the (dis-)similarity of the local versus globally shared model representations. In
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

