Cross-modal Prompts: Adapting Large Pre-trained
Models for Audio-Visual Downstream Tasks

1

Haoyi Duan1∗ Yan Xia1∗ Mingze Zhou1 Li Tang1 Jieming Zhu3 Zhou Zhao1,2†
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{haoyiduan075, xiayan.zju}@gmail.com
{3200102572, tanglzju, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn jiemingzhu@ieee.org

Abstract
In recent years, the deployment of large-scale pre-trained models in audio-visual
downstream tasks has yielded remarkable outcomes. However, these models, primarily trained on single-modality unconstrained datasets, still encounter challenges
in feature extraction for multi-modal tasks, leading to suboptimal performance.
This limitation arises due to the introduction of irrelevant modality-specific information during encoding, which adversely affects the performance of downstream
tasks. To address this challenge, this paper proposes a novel Dual-Guided SpatialChannel-Temporal (DG-SCT) attention mechanism. This mechanism leverages
audio and visual modalities as soft prompts to dynamically adjust the parameters
of pre-trained models based on the current multi-modal input features. Specifically,
the DG-SCT module incorporates trainable cross-modal interaction layers into
pre-trained audio-visual encoders, allowing adaptive extraction of crucial information from the current modality across spatial, channel, and temporal dimensions,
while preserving the frozen parameters of large-scale pre-trained models. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that our proposed model achieves state-of-the-art
results across multiple downstream tasks, including AVE, AVVP, AVS, and AVQA.
Furthermore, our model exhibits promising performance in challenging few-shot
and zero-shot scenarios. The source code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/haoyi-duan/DG-SCT.

1

Introduction

With the increasing availability of hardware resources, large-scale models [20, 4, 3] pre-trained
on extensive data have achieved significant advancements in various multi-modal tasks [26, 5].
Nonetheless, since these models are primarily pre-trained on single modality, they may not be
optimally suited for current multi-modal downstream tasks [33, 32, 43, 14]. As depicted in Fig 1 (a),
the pre-trained model equally extracts visual features and directly passes them to downstream tasks.
However, when perceiving the roaring sound of an engine, the visual region depicting a "car" should
receive more attention than the region of "trees". Simultaneously, when observing the car, it is crucial
to concentrate on the audio segments of the engine sound. Therefore, the encoder should not only
equally extract modal-specific information from the current modality, but also highlight information
related to other modalities to enhance feature fusion across diverse modalities in downstream tasks.
Retraining these large models based on downstream tasks would impose an unaffordable burden [41,
22, 39], leading recent works to explore methods for fine-tuning pre-trained models on downstream
tasks without full retraining, showing promising progress. However, these CLIP-based methods
have primarily focused on text-image tasks [46, 45, 7, 12] , while overlooking another important
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

