High Precision Causal Model Evaluation with
Conditional Randomization
Chao Ma
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
chao.ma@microsoft.com

Cheng Zhang
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
cheng.zhang@microsoft.com

Abstract
The gold standard for causal model evaluation involves comparing model predictions with true effects estimated from randomized controlled trials (RCT). However,
RCTs are not always feasible or ethical to perform. In contrast, conditionally randomized experiments based on inverse probability weighting (IPW) offer a more
realistic approach but may suffer from high estimation variance. To tackle this challenge and enhance causal model evaluation in real-world conditional randomization
settings, we introduce a novel low-variance estimator for causal error, dubbed as
the pairs estimator. By applying the same IPW estimator to both the model and
true experimental effects, our estimator effectively cancels out the variance due to
IPW and achieves a smaller asymptotic variance. Empirical studies demonstrate
the improved of our estimator, highlighting its potential on achieving near-RCT
performance. Our method offers a simple yet powerful solution to evaluate causal
inference models in conditional randomization settings without complicated modification of the IPW estimator itself, paving the way for more robust and reliable
model assessments.

1

Introduction

Experimental approaches for causal model evaluation Causal inference models aim to estimate
the causal effects of treatments or interventions on outcomes of interest, given observational (sometimes experimental) data. A crucial step in developing and validating such models is to evaluate
their prediction quality, that is, how well they can approximate the true treatment effects that would
have been observed under different scenarios. A common approach for causal model evaluation is to
launching a new randomized controlled trial (RCT) separately, which provides a reliable estimate of
the true treatment effects by randomly assigning units to treatments. By comparing the RCT estimate
with the prediction of the causal model, one can assess the causal error (Equation 1), a key metric to
measure how well the model reflects the true effects.
Nevertheless, RCTs are not always accessible or preferable, as random manipulation of treatments
might be impractical, ethically questionable, or excessively expensive. For instance, it may be
impossible or inappropriate to randomly assign individuals to different lifestyles, environmental
exposures, or social policies, as these may involve personal choices, preferences, or constraints
that affect the willingness or ability to participate in the experiment. In such cases, causal machine
learning researchers may resort to or augment their analyses with conditionally randomized designs,
in which the allocation of participants into treatment and control groups is not purely random, but is
instead based on a predetermined condition or factor.
Conditionally randomized experiments can vary in the level and unit of treatment assignment, such as
individual, group, or setting. They also depend on different assumptions and methods to account for
the potential confounding, selection, or measurement biases that arise from the lack of randomization.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

