SwapPrompt: Test-Time Prompt Adaptation for
Vision-Language Models

Xiaosong Ma
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
xiaosong16.ma@connect.polyu.hk

Jie Zhang ∗
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
jie-comp.zhang@polyu.edu.hk

Song Guo
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong, China
songguo@cse.ust.hk

Wenchao Xu
Department of Computing
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hong Kong, China
wenchao.xu@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) is a special and practical setting in unsupervised domain adaptation, which allows a pre-trained model in a source domain to adapt to
unlabeled test data in another target domain. To avoid the computation-intensive
backbone fine-tuning process, the zero-shot generalization potentials of the emerging pre-trained vision-language models (e.g., CLIP, CoOp) are leveraged to only
tune the run-time prompt for unseen test domains. However, existing solutions
have yet to fully exploit the representation capabilities of pre-trained models as
they only focus on the entropy-based optimization and the performance is far below
the supervised prompt adaptation methods, e.g., CoOp. In this paper, we propose
SwapPrompt, a novel framework that can effectively leverage the self-supervised
contrastive learning to facilitate the test-time prompt adaptation. SwapPrompt
employs a dual prompts paradigm, i.e., an online prompt and a target prompt
that averaged from the online prompt to retain historical information. In addition,
SwapPrompt applies a swapped prediction mechanism, which takes advantage of
the representation capabilities of pre-trained models to enhance the online prompt
via contrastive learning. Specifically, we use the online prompt together with an
augmented view of the input image to predict the class assignment generated by the
target prompt together with an alternative augmented view of the same image. The
proposed SwapPrompt can be easily deployed on vision-language models without
additional requirement, and experimental results show that it achieves state-ofthe-art test-time adaptation performance on ImageNet and nine other datasets. It
is also shown that SwapPrompt can even achieve comparable performance with
supervised prompt adaptation methods.

1

Introduction

When there is a discrepancy between the distribution of the training data and the testing data, the
generalization performance of deep neural networks can be compromised [1, 2, 3]. The focus
of domain adaptation is to construct models that can adapt to variations in data distribution by
∗

Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

