Hardness of Low Rank Approximation of Entrywise
Transformed Matrix Products
Tamas Sarlos
Google Research
stamas@google.com

Xingyou Song
Google Deepmind
xingyousong@google.com

David P. Woodruff
Carnegie Mellon University
dwoodruf@cs.cmu.edu

Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang
Google Deepmind
qiuyiz@google.com

Abstract
Inspired by fast algorithms in natural language processing, we study low rank
approximation in the entrywise transformed setting where we want to find a good
rank k approximation to f (U ·V ), where U, V ⊤ ∈ Rn×r are given, r = O(log(n)),
and f (x) is a general scalar function. Previous work in sublinear low rank approximation has shown that if both (1) U = V ⊤ and (2) f (x) is a PSD kernel
function, then there is an O(nk ω−1 ) time constant relative error approximation
algorithm, where ω ≈ 2.376 is the exponent of matrix multiplication. We give the
first conditional time hardness results for this problem, demonstrating that both
conditions (1) and (2) are in fact necessary for getting better than n2−o(1) time for
a relative error low rank approximation for a wide class of functions. We give novel
reductions from the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH) that rely on lower
bounding the leverage scores of flat sparse vectors and hold even when the rank of
the transformed matrix f (U V ) and the target rank are no(1) , and when U = V ⊤ .
Furthermore, even when f (x) = xp is a simple polynomial, we give runtime lower
bounds in the case when U ̸= V ⊤ of the form Ω(min(n2−o(1) , Ω(2p ))). Lastly,
we demonstrate that our lower bounds are tight by giving an O(n · poly(k, 2p , 1/ϵ))
time relative error approximation algorithm and a fast O(n · poly(k, p, 1/ϵ)) additive error approximation using fast tensor-based sketching. Additionally, since our
low rank algorithms rely on matrix-vector product subroutines, our lower bounds
extend to show that computing f (U V )W , for even a small matrix W , requires
Ω(n2−o(1) ) time.

1

Introduction

The central idea behind the classic problem of low rank approximation (LRA) is to approximate
a given matrix with a rank k matrix that preserves the important features of the original matrix,
while being computationally more efficient and statistically more stable. One particular area of
interest in LRA is the low rank decomposition of entrywise transformed matrices, where the entries
of the original matrix are transformed through a non-linear function before being approximated, with
various applications in kernel methods, self-attention, and likelihood computations [Choromanski
et al., 2021, Levy and Goldberg, 2014]. In these settings, the Gram matrix of a dot-product kernel,
the attention module’s product operator, or even the non-linear computation of activation in a deep
network can all be represented as f (U V ), where the inputs are low dimensional matrices U, V . Note
that while U V is low rank, f (U V ) may not be, with the rank blowup dependent on the choice of the
transformation f .
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

