Near Optimal Reconstruction
of Spherical Harmonic Expansions

Amir Zandieh
Independent Researcher
amir@zed512.gmail.com

Insu Han
Yale University
insu.han@yale.edu

Haim Avron
Tel Aviv University
haimav@tauex.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We propose an algorithm for robust recovery of the spherical harmonic expansion
of functions defined on the d-dimensional unit sphere Sd−1 using a near-optimal
number of function evaluations. We show that for any f ∈ L2 (Sd−1 ), the number
of evaluations of f needed to recover its degree-q spherical harmonic expansion
equals the dimension of the space of spherical harmonics of degree at most q, up to
a logarithmic factor. Moreover, we develop a simple yet efficient kernel regressionbased algorithm to recover degree-q expansion of f by only evaluating the function
on uniformly sampled points on Sd−1 . Our algorithm is built upon the connections
between spherical harmonics and Gegenbauer polynomials. Unlike the prior results
on fast spherical harmonic transform, our proposed algorithm works efficiently
using a nearly optimal number of samples in any dimension d. Furthermore, we
illustrate the empirical performance of our algorithm on numerical examples.

1

Introduction

We consider the fundamental problem of recovering a function from a finite number of (noisy)
observations. To provide accurate and reliable predictions at unobserved points we need to avoid
overfitting which is typically achieved through restricting our estimator or interpolant to a family of
smooth or structured functions. In this paper, we focus on interpolating square-integrable functions
on the d-dimensional unit sphere, with low-degree spherical harmonics, a critical task in scenarios
where rotational invariance is a fundamental property. Spherical harmonics are essential in various
theoretical and practical applications, including the representation of electromagnetic fields [Wei95],
gravitational potential [Wer97], cosmic microwave background radiation [KKS97] and medical
imaging [CLL15], as well as modelling of 3D shapes in computer graphics [KFR03] and computer
vision [GCL+ 22]. Further notable real-life applications include molecular/atom systems, where
understanding the underlying functions within a spherical context can significantly enhance predictive
modeling and simulation accuracy [EEHM17, LWL+ 21, ZDK+ 22].
We begin by observing that any function f in L2 (Sd−1 ), i.e., the family of square-integrable functions
on the sphere Sd−1 , can be uniquely decomposed into orthogonal spherical harmonic components.
Specifically, if we denote the space of spherical harmonicsP
of degree ` in dimension d by H` (Sd−1 ),
∞
2 d−1
any f ∈ L (S ) has a unique orthogonal expansion f = `=0 f` with f` ∈ H` (Sd−1 ) (Lemma 2).
With this observation, we aim to find the best spherical harmonic approximation of degree ≤ q to f
using minimal number of samples (essentially treating higher order terms in f ’s expansion as noise).
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

