Query-based Temporal Fusion with Explicit Motion
for 3D Object Detection
Jinghua Hou1∗, Zhe Liu1∗ , Dingkang Liang1 , Zhikang Zou2 , Xiaoqing Ye2 ,
Xiang Bai1†
1

Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
Baidu Inc.

{jhhou,zheliu1994,dkliang,xbai}@hust.edu.cn
{zhikangzou001}@gmail.com
{yexiaoqing}@baidu.com

Abstract
Effectively utilizing temporal information to improve 3D detection performance
is vital for autonomous driving vehicles. Existing methods either conduct temporal fusion based on the dense BEV features or sparse 3D proposal features.
However, the former does not pay more attention to foreground objects, leading
to more computation costs and sub-optimal performance. The latter implements
time-consuming operations to generate sparse 3D proposal features, and the performance is limited by the quality of 3D proposals. In this paper, we propose a simple
and effective Query-based Temporal Fusion Network (QTNet). The main idea is
to exploit the object queries in previous frames to enhance the representation of
current object queries by the proposed Motion-guided Temporal Modeling (MTM)
module, which utilizes the spatial position information of object queries along
the temporal dimension to construct their relevance between adjacent frames reliably. Experimental results show our proposed QTNet outperforms BEV-based
or proposal-based manners on the nuScenes dataset. Besides, the MTM is a plugand-play module, which can be integrated into some advanced LiDAR-only or
multi-modality 3D detectors and even brings new SOTA performance with negligible computation cost and latency on the nuScenes dataset. These experiments
powerfully illustrate the superiority and generalization of our method. The code is
available at https://github.com/AlmoonYsl/QTNet.

1

Introduction

3D object detection is the fundamental task of autonomous driving, which consumes data from
sensors (e.g., LiDAR, Camera) to localize and recognize objects in the 3D world. Recent studies have
explored utilizing temporal information to improve the detection performance. According to different
manners of temporal fusion, we divide them into two categories, including BEV-based (Figure 1(a))
and proposal-based (Figure 1(b)).
BEV-based methods [16, 49, 55, 43, 57] conduct temporal fusion on the dense bird’s-eye-view (BEV)
feature by applying an affine transformation to align BEV features in previous frames to enhance
the current BEV features. However, not all pixel-wise BEV features are beneficial for boosting
the detection performance of foreground objects. To alleviate this problem, the proposal-based
approaches [46, 34, 5] usually adopt a region proposal network (RPN) to obtain many 3D proposals
∗
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

