A U-turn on Double Descent: Rethinking Parameter
Counting in Statistical Learning

Alicia Curth∗
University of Cambridge
amc253@cam.ac.uk

Alan Jeffares∗
University of Cambridge
aj659@cam.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
University of Cambridge
mv472@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Conventional statistical wisdom established a well-understood relationship between
model complexity and prediction error, typically presented as a U-shaped curve
reflecting a transition between under- and overfitting regimes. However, motivated
by the success of overparametrized neural networks, recent influential work has suggested this theory to be generally incomplete, introducing an additional regime that
exhibits a second descent in test error as the parameter count p grows past sample
size n – a phenomenon dubbed double descent. While most attention has naturally
been given to the deep-learning setting, double descent was shown to emerge more
generally across non-neural models: known cases include linear regression, trees,
and boosting. In this work, we take a closer look at the evidence surrounding these
more classical statistical machine learning methods and challenge the claim that
observed cases of double descent truly extend the limits of a traditional U-shaped
complexity-generalization curve therein. We show that once careful consideration
is given to what is being plotted on the x-axes of their double descent plots, it
becomes apparent that there are implicitly multiple, distinct complexity axes along
which the parameter count grows. We demonstrate that the second descent appears
exactly (and only) when and where the transition between these underlying axes
occurs, and that its location is thus not inherently tied to the interpolation threshold
p = n. We then gain further insight by adopting a classical nonparametric statistics
perspective. We interpret the investigated methods as smoothers and propose a
generalized measure for the effective number of parameters they use on unseen
examples, using which we find that their apparent double descent curves do indeed fold back into more traditional convex shapes – providing a resolution to the
ostensible tension between double descent and traditional statistical intuition.

1

Introduction

Historically, throughout the statistical learning literature, the relationship between model complexity
and prediction error has been well-understood as a careful balancing act between underfitting,
associated with models of high bias, and overfitting, associated with high model variability. This
implied tradeoff, with optimal performance achieved between extremes, gives rise to a U-shaped
curve, illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 1. It has been a fundamental tenet of learning from data,
omnipresent in introductions to statistical learning [HT90, Vap95, HTF09], and is also practically
reflected in numerous classical model selection criteria that explicitly trade off training error with
model complexity [Mal73, Aka74, Sch78]. Importantly, much of the intuition relating to this Ushaped curve was originally developed in the context of the earlier statistics literature (see e.g.
the historical note in [Nea19]), which focussed on conceptually simple learning methods such as
linear regression, splines or nearest neighbor methods [WW75, HT90, GBD92] and their expected
in-sample prediction error, which fixes inputs and resamples noisy outcomes [Mal73, HT90, RT19].
∗

Equal contribution

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

