Visual Explanations of Image-Text Representations via
Multi-Modal Information Bottleneck Attribution
Ying Wang∗
New York University

Tim G. J. Rudner∗
New York University

Andrew Gordon Wilson
New York University

Abstract
Vision-language pretrained models have seen remarkable success, but their application to safety-critical settings is limited by their lack of interpretability. To improve
the interpretability of vision-language models such as CLIP, we propose a multimodal information bottleneck (M2IB) approach that learns latent representations
that compress irrelevant information while preserving relevant visual and textual
features. We demonstrate how M2IB can be applied to attribution analysis of
vision-language pretrained models, increasing attribution accuracy and improving
the interpretability of such models when applied to safety-critical domains such as
healthcare. Crucially, unlike commonly used unimodal attribution methods, M2IB
does not require ground truth labels, making it possible to audit representations of
vision-language pretrained models when multiple modalities but no ground-truth
data is available. Using CLIP as an example, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
M2IB attribution and show that it outperforms gradient-based, perturbation-based,
and attention-based attribution methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1

Introduction

Vision-Language Pretrained Models (VLPMs) have become the de facto standard for solving a broad
range of vision-language problems [15]. They are pre-trained on large-scale multimodal data to
learn complex associations between images and text and then fine-tuned on a given downstream
task. For example, the widely used CLIP model [21], which uses image and text encoders trained on
400 million image-text pairs, has demonstrated remarkable performance when used for challenging
vision-language tasks, such as Visual Question Answering and Visual Entailment [27].
VLPMs are highly overparameterized black-box models, enabling them to represent complex relationships in data. For example, Vision Transformers [ViTs; 7] are a state-of-the-art transformer-based
vision model and are used as the image encoder of CLIP [21], containing 12 layers and 86 million parameters for ViT-Base and 24 layers and 307 million parameters for ViT-Large. Unfortunately, VLPMs
like CLIP are difficult to interpret. However, model interpretability is essential in safety-critical
real-world applications where VLPMs could be applied successfully, such as clinical decision-making
or image captioning for the visually impaired. Improved interpretability and understanding of VLPMs
would help us identify errors and unintended biases in VLP and improve the safety, reliability, and
trustworthiness of VLPMs, thereby allowing us to deploy them in such safety-critical settings.
To tackle this lack of transparency in deep neural networks, attribution methods, which aim to explain
a model’s predictions by attributing contribution scores to each input feature, have been proposed for
post-hoc interpretability. For example, for vision models, attribution methods can be used to create
heatmaps that highlight features that are most responsible for a model’s prediction. Similarly, for
language models, scores are assigned to each input token. While the requirements for interpretability
vary depending on the task, dataset, and model architecture, accurate and reliable attribution is an
important tool for making emerging and state-of-the-art models more trustworthy.
∗

Equal contribution.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

