Efficient Symbolic Policy Learning with Differentiable
Symbolic Expression

Jiaming Guo1 Rui Zhang1 Shaohui Peng2 Qi Yi1,3,4 Xing Hu1,5
Ruizhi Chen2 Zidong Du1,5 Xishan Zhang1,4 Ling Li2,6 Qi Guo1 Yunji Chen1,6 ∗
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
Intelligent Software Research Center, Institute of Software, CAS, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, USTC, Hefei, China
4
Cambricon Technologies
5
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC, Shanghai, China
6
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, UCAS, Beijing, China
{guojiaming, zhangrui}@ict.ac.cn, pengshaohui@iscas.ac.cn, yiqi@mail.ustc.edu.cn
huxing@ict.ac.cn, ruizhi@iscas.ac.cn {duzidong,zhangxishan}@ict.ac.cn
liling@iscas.ac.cn, {guoqi,cyj}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has led to a wide range of advances in sequential decision-making tasks. However, the complexity of neural network policies
makes it difficult to understand and deploy with limited computational resources.
Currently, employing compact symbolic expressions as symbolic policies is a
promising strategy to obtain simple and interpretable policies. Previous symbolic
policy methods usually involve complex training processes and pre-trained neural
network policies, which are inefficient and limit the application of symbolic policies. In this paper, we propose an efficient gradient-based learning method named
Efficient Symbolic Policy Learning (ESPL) that learns the symbolic policy from
scratch in an end-to-end way. We introduce a symbolic network as the search space
and employ a path selector to find the compact symbolic policy. By doing so we
represent the policy with a differentiable symbolic expression and train it in an
off-policy manner which further improves the efficiency. In addition, in contrast
with previous symbolic policies which only work in single-task RL because of
complexity, we expand ESPL on meta-RL to generate symbolic policies for unseen
tasks. Experimentally, we show that our approach generates symbolic policies
with higher performance and greatly improves data efficiency for single-task RL.
In meta-RL, we demonstrate that compared with neural network policies the proposed symbolic policy achieves higher performance and efficiency and shows the
potential to be interpretable.

1

Introduction

With the development of deep neural networks as general-purpose function approximators, deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) has achieved impressive results in solving sequential decision-making
tasks [1, 2]. In DRL, the policies are commonly implemented as deep neural networks which
involve tremendous parameters and thousands of nested non-linear operators. Despite the excellent
representation ability, the neural network (NN) is very complex, making it difficult to understand,
predict the behavior and deploy with limited computational resources.
∗

Corresponding Author.

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

