Evolving Connectivity for Recurrent Spiking Neural
Networks
Guan Wang1, 2∗, Yuhao Sun2, 3∗, Sijie Cheng1, 4 , Sen Song2, 3†
Deptartment of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence, Tsinghua University
3
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University
4
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
imonenext@gmail.com, {syh18,csj23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
songsen@tsinghua.edu.cn

1

Abstract
Recurrent spiking neural networks (RSNNs) hold great potential for advancing
artificial general intelligence, as they draw inspiration from the biological nervous system and show promise in modeling complex dynamics. However, the
widely-used surrogate gradient-based training methods for RSNNs are inherently
inaccurate and unfriendly to neuromorphic hardware. To address these limitations,
we propose the evolving connectivity (EC) framework, an inference-only method
for training RSNNs. The EC framework reformulates weight-tuning as a search
into parameterized connection probability distributions, and employs Natural Evolution Strategies (NES) for optimizing these distributions. Our EC framework
circumvents the need for gradients and features hardware-friendly characteristics,
including sparse boolean connections and high scalability. We evaluate EC on
a series of standard robotic locomotion tasks, where it achieves comparable performance with deep neural networks and outperforms gradient-trained RSNNs,
even solving the complex 17-DoF humanoid task. Additionally, the EC framework
demonstrates a two to three fold speedup in efficiency compared to directly evolving
parameters. By providing a performant and hardware-friendly alternative, the EC
framework lays the groundwork for further energy-efficient applications of RSNNs
and advances the development of neuromorphic devices. Our code is publicly
available at https://github.com/imoneoi/EvolvingConnectivity .

1

Introduction

Inspired by the remarkable information processing power of the human brain, neuromorphic computing aims to design and implement computational systems that mimic the architecture and functionality
of biological neural networks, paving the way for a new era of intelligent machines. Specifically,
the highly recurrently connected and spike-emitting brain network inspired recurrent spiking neural
networks (RSNNs), which employ discrete, spike-based signals for transmitting information through
recurrent connections in an event-driven manner. RSNNs can serve as realistic models of the brain
incorporating the latest anatomical and neuro-physiological data [Billeh et al., 2020], leading to the
discovery of general principles of computing, e.g., noise robustness [Chen et al., 2022]. Furthermore,
RSNNs can exhibit self-organized critical properties [Poil et al., 2012] and serve as a reservoir for
complex temporal dynamics [Jaeger, 2001, Maass et al., 2002], making them suitable for sequential
tasks like robotics [Lele et al., 2020], path-finding [Rueckert et al., 2016], and others.
∗
†

Equal contribution
Corresponding author

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

