Performance Scaling via Optimal Transport: Enabling
Data Selection from Partially Revealed Sources

Feiyang Kang∗
Bradley Department of ECE
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
fyk@vt.edu

Hoang Anh Just∗
Bradley Department of ECE
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
just@vt.edu

Anit Kumar Sahu
Alexa AI
Amazon
Seattle, WA 98121
anit.sahu@gmail.com

Ruoxi Jia
Bradley Department of ECE
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061
ruoxijia@vt.edu

Abstract
Traditionally, data selection has been studied in settings where all samples from
prospective sources are fully revealed to a machine learning developer. However,
in practical data exchange scenarios, data providers often reveal only a limited
subset of samples before an acquisition decision is made. Recently, there have
been efforts to fit scaling functions that predict model performance at any size
and data source composition using the limited available samples. However, these
scaling functions are usually black-box, computationally expensive to fit, highly
susceptible to overfitting, or/and difficult to optimize for data selection. This paper
proposes a framework called projektor , which predicts model performance
and supports data selection decisions based on partial samples of prospective data
sources. Our approach distinguishes itself from existing work by introducing a
novel two-stage performance inference process. In the first stage, we leverage the
Optimal Transport distance to predict the model’s performance for any data mixture
ratio within the range of disclosed data sizes. In the second stage, we extrapolate
the performance to larger undisclosed data sizes based on a novel parameterfree mapping technique inspired by neural scaling laws. We further derive an
efficient gradient-based method to select data sources based on the projected model
performance. Evaluation over a diverse range of applications (e.g., vision, text,
fine-tuning, noisy data sources, etc.) demonstrates that projektor significantly
improves existing performance scaling approaches in terms of both the accuracy of
performance inference and the computation costs associated with constructing the
performance predictor. Also, projektor outperforms by a wide margin in data
selection effectiveness compared to a range of other off-the-shelf solutions. We
provide projektor as an open-source toolkit.

1

Introduction

The choice of training data is one of the most crucial components when it comes to extracting the best
performance out of a model. Since data is typically acquired from various sources, such as different
organizations or vendors, machine learning practitioners often encounter a central question: how to
select and combine samples from these data sources?
∗
Equal contribution. This work also appears at Data-centric Machine Learning Research (DMLR) Workshop@ICML 2023. Code Repository: https://github.com/ruoxi-jia-group/projektor.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

