Inserting Anybody in Diffusion Models via Celeb Basis
Ge Yuan1,2,3,4∗ Xiaodong Cun4 Yong Zhang4 Maomao Li4† Chenyang Qi5
Xintao Wang4 Ying Shan4 Huicheng Zheng1,2,3†
1

2

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
4
Tencent AI Lab 5 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Manga drawing of v1

Ukiyo-e painting of v1

Cubism painting of v1

Banksy art of v1

Cave mural depicting v1

v1 in a comic book

v1

v1 is playing the guitar

v1 eats bread in front
of the Effiel Tower

v1 as a knight in plate
armor

v1 wears a scifi
spacesuit in space

v1 and Barack Obama
cooks in a kitchen

v1 and Anne Hathaway are
baking a birthday cake

v2

v1 and v2 cook
together in a kitchen

v1 and v2 play the
piano together

v1 and v2 sit on a sofa

v1 and v2 enjoy a delicate
candlelight dinner

v1 and v2 enjoy a day at
an amusement park

v1 shakes hands with
v2

Single Input

Genearted Image

Figure 1: Given a single facial photo (v1 or v2) as a tunable sample, the proposed method can
insert this identity into the trained text-to-image model, e.g., Stable Diffusion [1], where the new
person (v1) can act like the original concept in the trained model and interact with another newly
trained concept (v2). Note that the input images are randomly generated from StyleGAN [2].

Abstract
Exquisite demand exists for customizing the pretrained large text-to-image model,
e.g. Stable Diffusion, to generate innovative concepts, such as the users themselves.
However, the newly-added concept from previous customization methods often
shows weaker combination abilities than the original ones even given several
images during training. We thus propose a new personalization method that allows
for the seamless integration of a unique individual into the pre-trained diffusion
model using just one facial photograph and only 1024 learnable parameters under
3 minutes. So we can effortlessly generate stunning images of this person in any
pose or position, interacting with anyone and doing anything imaginable from text
prompts. To achieve this, we first analyze and build a well-defined celeb basis
from the embedding space of the pre-trained large text encoder. Then, given one
facial photo as the target identity, we generate its own embedding by optimizing the
∗
†

This work was done when the first author was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
Corresponding authors

37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

