H2 O: Heavy-Hitter Oracle for Efficient Generative
Inference of Large Language Models

Zhenyu Zhang1 , Ying Sheng2 , Tianyi Zhou3 , Tianlong Chen1 , Lianmin Zheng4 , Ruisi Cai1 ,
Zhao Song5 , Yuandong Tian6 , Christopher Ré2 , Clark Barrett2 , Zhangyang Wang1 , Beidi Chen6,7
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Stanford University, 3 University of California, San Diego,
4
University of California, Berkeley, 5 Adobe Research, 6 Meta AI (FAIR), 7 Carnegie Mellon University
{zhenyu.zhang,tianlong.chen,ruisi.cai,atlaswang}@utexas.edu, ying1123@stanford.edu,
{chrismre,barrett}@cs.stanford.edu, t8zhou@ucsd.edu, lianminzheng@gmail.com,
zsong@adobe.com, yuandong@meta.com, beidic@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs), despite their recent impressive accomplishments,
are notably cost-prohibitive to deploy, particularly for applications involving longcontent generation, such as dialogue systems and story writing. Often, a large
amount of transient state information, referred to as the KV cache, is stored in GPU
memory in addition to model parameters, scaling linearly with the sequence length
and batch size. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach for implementing the
KV cache which significantly reduces its memory footprint. Our approach is based
on the noteworthy observation that a small portion of tokens contributes most of
the value when computing attention scores. We call these tokens Heavy Hitters
(H2 ). Through a comprehensive investigation, we find that (i) the emergence of H2
is natural and strongly correlates with the frequent co-occurrence of tokens in the
text, and (ii) removing them results in significant performance degradation. Based
on these insights, we propose Heavy Hitter Oracle (H2 O), a KV cache eviction
policy that dynamically retains a balance of recent and H2 tokens. We formulate
the KV cache eviction as a dynamic submodular problem and prove (under mild
assumptions) a theoretical guarantee for our novel eviction algorithm which could
help guide future work. We validate the accuracy of our algorithm with OPT,
LLaMA, and GPT-NeoX across a wide range of tasks. Our implementation of
H2 O with 20% heavy hitters improves the throughput over three leading inference
systems DeepSpeed Zero-Inference, Hugging Face Accelerate, and FlexGen by
up to 29×, 29×, and 3× on OPT-6.7B and OPT-30B. With the same batch size,
H2 O can reduce the latency by up to 1.9×. The code is available at https:
//github.com/FMInference/H2O.

1

Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in a wide range of
natural language processing applications such as content creation, summarization, and dialogue
systems [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, their deployment is very costly. In addition to the widely-studied
bottlenecks of model size and the quadratic cost of attention layers, the problem of the size of
the KV cache, which stores the intermediate attention key and values during generation to avoid
re-computation, is becoming increasingly prominent [5]. For instance, a 30 billion-parameter model
with an input batch size of 128 and a sequence length of 1024 results in 180GB of KV cache. A
natural approach is to limit its maximum size as is done in classical software or hardware caches [6].
However, it is challenging to reduce KV cache memory footprints in LLMs without accuracy drops.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

