Selectivity Drives Productivity: Efficient Dataset
Pruning for Enhanced Transfer Learning

Yihua Zhang1,*

Yimeng Zhang1,*

Gaowen Liu2
3

Aochuan Chen1,*

Mingyi Hong3

Jinghan Jia1

Shiyu Chang4

Jiancheng Liu1
Sijia Liu1

1
Michigan State University, 2 Cisco Research,
University of Minnesota, Twin City, 4 UC Santa Barbara
*
Equal Contribution

Abstract
Massive data is often considered essential for deep learning applications, but it
also incurs significant computational and infrastructural costs. Therefore, dataset
pruning (DP) has emerged as an effective way to improve data efficiency by identifying and removing redundant training samples without sacrificing performance.
In this work, we aim to address the problem of DP for transfer learning, i.e., how to
prune a source dataset for improved pretraining efficiency and lossless finetuning
accuracy on downstream target tasks. To our best knowledge, the problem of DP
for transfer learning remains open, as previous studies have primarily addressed
DP and transfer learning as separate problems. By contrast, we establish a unified
viewpoint to integrate DP with transfer learning and find that existing DP methods
are not suitable for the transfer learning paradigm. We then propose two new DP
methods, label mapping and feature mapping, for supervised and self-supervised
pretraining settings respectively, by revisiting the DP problem through the lens of
source-target domain mapping. Furthermore, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on numerous transfer learning tasks. We show that source data classes
can be pruned by up to 40% ∼ 80% without sacrificing downstream performance,
resulting in a significant 2 ∼ 5× speed-up during the pretraining stage. Besides,
our proposal exhibits broad applicability and can improve other computationally
intensive transfer learning techniques, such as adversarial pretraining. Codes are
available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/DP4TL.

1

Introduction

The abundance of the training data has long been regarded as the key driver of the contemporary
machine learning (ML) algorithms [1–3]. However, the untrimmed, ever-growing training dataset
could not only introduce training biases that compromise the model performance [4–6], but also
poses an almost insurmountable obstacle to high training efficiency [1, 2]. Therefore, understanding
the impact of the training data and selecting the most critical samples has emerged as an important
goal, collectively referred to as the problem of dataset pruning (DP).
Although the feasibility and the promise of DP have been unveiled in numerous applications, such as
noisy data cleansing [7–9], continue learning [10–13] and active learning [14], greater emphasis is
placed on the in-domain training setting, i.e., the pruned training set share the similar distribution as
the evaluation set. Examples of methods to condense the training dataset with lossless generalization
(on the in-distribution testing dataset) include data influence functions [10, 15–23], model training
dynamics [11–14, 24–28], and coreset selection [29–36]. In contrast, our work investigates the
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

